FURTHER Considerations Concerning Raising the Value OF MONEY. WHEREIN Mr.
Lowndes's Arguments for it in his late Report concerning An Essay for the
Amendment of the Silver Coins, are particularly Examined.

LONDON, Printed for A. and I. Churchil at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
MDCXCV.

TO THE Right Honorable Sr John Summers, Knight. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
THE Papers I here present your Lordship, are in Substance the same with one
which I delivered to you, in Obedience to the Commands I received by your
Lordship, from their Excellencies, the Lords Justices; and with another, which
I writ in Answer to some Questions your Lordship was pleased to propose to me
concerning our Coin. The Approbation your Lordship was pleased to give them
then, has been an Encouragement to me, to revise them now, and put them in an
Order; fitter to comply with their Desires, who will needs have me print
something at this time, on this Subject: And could any thing of this Nature be
received with Indifferency in this Age; the Allowance they have had from your
Lordship, whose great and clear Judgment is, with general Consent and Applause,
acknowledged to be the just Measure of Right and Wrong amongst us, might make
me hope that they might pass in the World without any great Dislike.

However, since your Lordship thought they might be of use to clear some
Difficulties, and rectify some wrong Notions that are taken up about Money, I
have ventured them into the World, desiring no Mercy to any erroneous Positions
or wrong Reasonings, which shall be found in them. I shall never knowingly be
of any, but Truths and my Countrey's side; the former I shall always gladly
embrace and own, whoever shows it me: And in these Papers, I am sure, I have no
other Aim, but to do what little I can, for the Service of my Country. Your
Lordship's so evidently preferring that to all other Considerations, does, in
the Eyes of all Men, sit so well upon you, that my Ambition will not be blamed;
if I in this, propose to my self so great an Example; and in my little sphere
am moved by the same Principle.

I have a long time foreseen the Mischief and Ruin coming upon us by clipped
Money, if it were not timely stopped: And had Concern enough for the Public,
to make me print some Thoughts touching our Coin some Years since. The
Principles I there went on, I see no reason to alter: They have, if I mistake
not, their Foundation in Nature, and will stand: They have their Foundation in
Nature, and are clear; and will be so, in all the Train of their Consequences
throughout this whole (as it is thought) mysterious Business of Money, to all
those, who will but be at the easy Trouble of stripping this Subject of hard,
obscure and doubtful Words, wherewith Men are often mislead and mislead others.
And now the Disorder is come to Extremity, and can no longer be played with, I
wish it may find a sudden and effectual Cure; not a Remedy in Sound and
Appearance, which may flatter us on to Ruin in the Continuation of a growing
Mischief, that calls for present Help.

I wish too, that the Remedy may be as easy as possible; and that the Cure of
this Evil be not ordered so as to lay a great Part of the Burden unequally on
those, who have had no particular Hand in it. Westminster Hall is so great a
Witness of your Lordship's unbiassed Justice, and steady Care to preserve to
every one their Right; that the World will not wonder you should not be for
such a lessening our Coin, as will, without any Reason, deprive great Numbers
of blameless Men of a Fifth Part of their Estates, beyond the Relief of
Chancery. I hope this Age will escape so great a Blemish. I doubt not but there
are many, who, for the Service of their Country, and for the Support of the
Government, would gladly part with, not only one Fifth, but a much larger
Portion of their Estates. But when it shall be taken from them, only to be
bestowed on Men in their, and the common Opinion, no better deserving of their
Country than themselves, unless growing exceedingly rich by the public
Necessities, whilst every body else finds his Fortune straightened by them, be a
public Merit, that deserves a public and signal Reward, this Loss, of one
Fifth of their Debts and Income, will sit heavy on them, who shall feel it
without the Alleviation of any Profit or Credit, that will thereby accrue to
the Nation, by such a lessening of our Coin.

If any one ask, how I, a retired private Man, come at this time to meddle with
Money and Trade: For they are inseparable; I reply, that your Lorship, and the
other great Men that put me upon it, are answerable for it: Whether what I say
be to the purpose or no, that I my self am answerable for. This I can answer to
all the World, that I have not said any thing here, without a full Persuasion
of its Truth; nor with any other Motive or Purpose than the clearing of this
artificially perplexed, rather in it self mysterious Subject, as far as my poor
Talent reaches. That which perhaps I shall not be so well able to answer, to
your Lordship and my self, is the Liberty I have taken, in such an Address as
this, to profess that I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most Obedient Servant JOHN LOCK.

THE PREFACE.
THough Mr. Lowndes and I differ in the Way, yet I assure my self, our End is
the same; and that we both propose to our selves the Service of our Country. He
is a Man known so able in the Post he is in; to which the business of Money
peculiarly belongs: And has showed himself so learned in the Records, and
Matters of the Mint; and so exact in Calculations and Combinations of Numbers
relating to our Coin, either already in use, or designed by him, that I think I
should have troubled the Public no more on this Subject, had not he himself
engaged me in it; and brought it to that pass, that either I must be thought to
renounce my own Opinion, or must publicly oppose his.

Whilst his Treatise was yet a Manuscript, and before it was laid before those
great Persons, to whom it was afterward submitted, he did me the Favor to
show it to me; and made me the Compliment, to ask me my Opinion of it. Though
we had some short Discourse on the Subject, yet the multiplicity of his
business, whilst I staid in Town; and my Health, which soon after forced me out
of it, allowed us not an occasion to debate any one point thoroughly, and bring
it to an issue Before I returned to Town, his Book was in the Press; and
finished before I had the opportunity to see Mr. Lowndes again. And here he
laid a new Obligation on me, not only in giving me one of them; but testing me,
when I received it from his Hands, that it was the first he had parted with to
any Body. I then went it over a second time, and having more leisure to
consider it, I found there were a great many Particulars in it drawn out of
Ancient Records, not commonly known, wherewith he had obliged the World. These,
which very pleasingly entertained me, though they prevailed not on me to be of
his Opinion every where, yet joined with the great Civilities he had shown me,
left me in a disposition so little inclined to oppose any thing in it, that I
should rather have chosen to acknowledge my self in Print, to be his Convert,
if his Arguments had convinced me; than to troubled the World with the Reasons,
why I Dissent from him.

In this Disposition my Pen rested, from meddling any farther with this Subject
whilst I was in Town, soon after my own Health, and the Death of a Friend,
forced me into the Country: And the business occasioned thereby, and my own
private Affairs, took up all my time, at my first coming thither; and had
continued on to do so, had not several repeated intimations and instances from
London, not without some reproaches of my backwardness, made me see, that the
World concerned me particularly in M. Lowndes's Postscript, and expected
something from me on that occasion.

Though possibly I was not wholly out of his mind when Mr. Lowndes writ that
Invitation, yet I shall not make my self the Compliment, to think I alone am
concerned in it. The great importance of the matter made him desire every one
to contribute what he could to the clearing of it, and setting it in a true
light. And I must do him this Right, to think, that he prefers the public Good
to his private Opinion; and therefore is willing his Proposals and Arguments
should be with freedom examined to the bottom, that if there be any mistake in
them, no body may be misled by his Reputation and Authority, to the prejudice
of his Country. Thus I understand his Postscript, and thus I shall endeavor to
comply with it. I shall to the best of my skill, examine his Arguments with all
Respect to him, and Fidelity to Truth, as far as I can discover it. The
frankness of his proceeding in particular with me, assures me he is so great a
Lover of Truth and Right, that he will not think himself injured when that is
defended; and will be glad, when it is made plain, by whose Hand soever it be.

This is what has made me publish these Papers, without any derogation to Mr.
Lowndes, or so much as a suspicion that he will take it amiss. I judge of him
by my self. For I shall think my self obliged to any one, who shall show me, or
the Public, any material mistake in any thing I have here said, whereon any
part of the Question turns.

Books lately Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchill, at the Black-Swan
in Paternoster Row.
A View of Universal History, from the Creation, to the Year of Christ 1695. By
Francis Tallents, sometimes Fellow of Magdalen-College, Cambridge. The whole
graven in 16 Copper Plates, each 15 inches deep, and 12 broad; bound up into
Books, the Sheets lined. A Work of great Exactness and Curiosity. Price 16 s.
Cambden's Britannia, newly Translated into English, with large Additions and
Improvements. By Edmund Gibson, of Queens College in Oxford. The General
History of the Air. By Robert Boil, Esquire Quarto. A Complete Journal of the
Votes, Speeches, and Debates, both of the House of Lords and House of Commons,
throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Collected by Sir Simonds Dewes,
Baronet, and Published by Paul Bows, of the Middle Temple, Esquire The 2d Edition.
Fol. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machivael, Citizen and Secretary of
Florence. Written Originally in Italian, and from thence faithfully Translated
into English. Fol. Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Understanding. The Third
Edition with large Additions. Fol. -- His Thoughts of Education. Octavo. The
Fables of Aesop and other Mithologists; made English by Sir Roger L'Estrange,
Knight. Fol. Two Treatises of Government: The first an Answer to Filmer's
Patriarcha. The latter an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent, and End
of Civil Government. Octavo. Notitia Monastica: Or, A short History of the
Religious Houses in England and Wales, etc. By Thomas Tanner. A. B. Octavo. The
Resurrection of the (same) Body, asserted from the Tradition of the Heathens,
the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the Objections
brought against it. By Humphrey Hody, D. D. Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and
Preaching: Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and Dr. Williams. 8o.
Considerations about lowering the Interest and raising the Value of Money.
Octav. Short Observations on a Printed Paper, Entitled, For encouraging the
Coining Silver Money in England, and after for keeping it here. Octavo. Sir W.
Temple's Hist. of the Netherlands. 8o. -- Miscellanea. Octavo. Dr. Gibson's
Anatomy of humane Bodies, with Figures. Octavo. Dr. Patrick's New Version of
all the Psalms of David in Meter. Twelves. Two Treatises of Natural Religion
Oct. Gentleman's Religion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it. The Novels and
Tales of the Renowned John Boccacio, The first Refiner of Italian Prose;
containing an Hundred Curious Novels: By seven Honorable Ladies, and three
Noble Gentlemen, Framed in Ten Days. The Fifth Edition much Corrected and
Amended. Logica: Sive, Ars Ratiocinandi. Ontologia: Sive, De Ente in Genere.
Pneumatologia, seu Despiritibus. Auctore Ioanne Clerico. 12o. The Lives of the
Popes, from the time of our Savior Jesus Christ, to the Reign of Sixtus IV. By
Sir Paul Rycaut, Knight. The Second Edition corrected. The Meditations of Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor, concerning Himself. To which is added,
The Life of Antoninus, with some Remarks upon the whole: By Monsieur and Mad.
Dacier. Never before in English. Octavo. Sermons Preached by Dr. R. Leighton,
late Arch-Bp. of Glasgow. The Second Edition. Octavo. The Roman History,
written in Latin by Titus Livius, with the Supplements of the Learned John
Freinshemius, and John Dujatius: Faithfully done into English. Fol. A^icius
Manlius Severinus Boethius, of the Consolation of Philosophy. In Five Books.
Made English by the Right Honorable Richard Lord Viscount Preston. Octavo. Sir
Richard Baker's Chronicle of the K. of England, continued down to this Time.
The Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures. Octavo.
Prince Arthur; an Heroic Poem. In Ten Books. By R. Blackmore, M. D. Fellow of
the College of Physicians, London. Fol. The Christians defense against the fear
of Death, with seasonable Directions how to prepare themselves to Dye well.
Written originally in French, by Charte Drilincourt, of Paris, and Translated
into English by M. D. Assigny, B. D. Third Edition. The Royal Grammar,
containing a new and easy Method for the speedy attaining the Latin Tongue.
FURTHER Considerations Concerning Raising the Value OF MONEY.
SIlver is the Instrument and Measure of Commerce in all the Civilized and
Trading parts of the World.

It is the Instrument of Commerce by its intrinsic value.

The intrinsic value of Silver considered as Money, is that estimate which
common consent has placed on it, whereby it is made Equivalent to all other
things, and consequently is the universal Barter or Exchange which Men give and
receive for other things they would purchase or part with for a valuable
consideration.: And thus as the Wife Man tells us, Money answers all things.

Silver is the Measure of Commerce by its quantity, which is the Measure also
of its intrinsic value. If one grain of Silver has an intrinsic value in it,
two grains of Silver have double that intrinsic value, and three grains
treble, and so on proportionably. This we have daily Experience of, in common
buying and selling. For if one Ounce of Silver will buy, i. e. is of equal
value to one Bushel of Wheat, two Ounces of Silver will buy two Bushels of the
same Wheat, i. e. has double the value.

Hence it is evident, that an equal quantity of Silver is always of equal value
to an equal quantity of Silver.

This common sense, as well as the Market, teaches us. For Silver being all of
the same nature and goodness, having all the same quantities, it is impossible
but it should in the same quantity have the same value. For if a less quantity
of any Commodity be allowed to be equal in value to a greater quantity of the
same sort of Commodity, it must be for some good quality it has which the other
wants. But Silver to Silver has no such difference.

Here it will be asked, is not some Silver finer than other?

I answer, one mass of mixed Metal not discerned by the Eye to be any thing but
Silver, and therefore called Silver, may have a less mixture of baser Metal in
it than another, and so in common speech is said to be finer Silver. So
Ducatoons having a less mixture of Copper in them than our English Coin has,
are said to be finer Silver. But the truth is, the Silver that is in each is
equally fine, as will appear when the baser Metal is separate from it. And it is
of this pure or fine silver I must be understood when I mention silver; not
regarding the Copper or Lead which may chance to be mixed with it. For example:
Take an Ounce of fine silver, and of an Ounce of Copper, and melt them
together, one may say of the whole mass, that it is not fine silver, but it is
true there is an Ounce of fine silver in it; and though this mass weighing 1
Ounce be not of equal value to 1 Ounce of fine silver, yet the Ounce of fine
silver in it is, when separate from the Copper, of equal value to any other
Ounce of silver.

By this Measure of Commerce, viz. the quantity of silver, Men measure the
value of all other things. Thus to measure what the value of Lead is to Wheat,
and of either of them to a c^^tain sort of Linen Cloth, the quantity of Silver
that each is valued at or sells for, needs only be known. For if a Yard of
Cloth be sold for Ounce of Silver, a Bushel of Wheat for one Ounce, and an
hundred weight of Lead for two Ounces, any one presently sees and says that a
Bushel of Wheat is double the value of a Yard of that Cloth, and but half the
value of an hundred weight of Lead.

Some are of opinion that this measure of Commerce, like all other measures, is
Arbitrary, and may at pleasure be varied; by putting more or fewer grains of
Silver in pieces of a known denomination, v. g. by making a penny or a shilling
lighter or heavier, in Silver, in a Country where these are known denominations
of pieces of silver money. But they will be of another mind, when they consider
that Silver is a measure of a nature quite different from all other. The Yard
or Quart Men measure by, may rest indifferently in the Buyers and Sellers, or a
third persons hands, it matters not whose it is. But it is not so in Silver. It
is the thing bargained for, as well as the measure of the bargain; and in
Commerce passes from the buyer to the seller, as being in such a quantity
equivalent to the thing sold: And so it not only measures the value of the
Commodity it is applied to, but is given in Exchange for it, as of equal value
But this it does, (as is visible) only by its quantity, and nothing else. For
it must be remembered, that Silver is the Instrument as well as Measure of
Commerce, and is given in Exchange for the things traded for: And every one
desiring to get as much as he can of it for any Commodity he sells, it is by the
quantity of Silver he gets for it in Exchange, and by nothing else, that he
measures the value of the Commodity he sells.

The Coining of Silver, or making Money of it, is the ascertaining of its
quantity by a public mark, the better to fit it for Commerce.

In Coined Silver or Money there are these three things, which are wanting in
other Silver. 1. Pieces of exactly the same weight and fineness. 2. A stamp set
on those pieces by the public Authority of that Country. 3. A known
denomination given to these pieces by the same Authority.

The Stamp is a mark, and as it were a public voucher that a piece of such a
denomination is of such a weight, and such a fineness, i. e. has so much Silver
in it.

That precise weight and fineness, by Law appropriated to the pieces of each
denomination, is called the Standard.

Fine Silver is Silver without the mixture of any baser Metal.

Allay is baser Metal mixed with it.

The Fineness of any Metal appearing to be Silver, and so called, is the
proportion of Silver is in it, compared with what there is in it of baser
Metals.

The Fineness of Standard Silver in England is eleven parts Silver, and one
part Copper, near: Or to speak more exactly, the proportion of Silver to Copper
is as an hundred and eleven to nine. Whatever piece or mass has in it of baser
Metal above the proportion of 9 to 111, is worse or courser than Standard.
Whatever mass of Metal has a less proportion than 9 to 111, of baser Metal in
it, is better or finer than Standard.

Since Silver is the thing sought, and would better serve for the measure of
Commerce if it were unmixt, it will possibly be asked why any mixture of baser
Metal is allowed in Money, and what use there is of such Allay, which serves to
make the quantity of Silver less known in the several Coins of different
Countries?

Perhaps it would have been better for Commerce in general, and more convenient
for all their Subjects, if the Princes every where, or at least in this part of
the World, would at first have agreed on the fineness of the Standard to have
been just 1/12 Allay, in round numbers; without those minuter Fractions which
are to be found in the Allay of most of the Coin in the several distinct
Dominions of this part of the World: Which broken proportion of baser Metal to
Silver, in the Standard of the several Mints, seems to have been introduced by
the Skill of Men employed in Coining, to keep that Art (as all Trades are
called) a Mystery; rather than for any use or necessity there was of such
broken numbers. But be that it as it will, the Standard in our Mint being now
settled by Authority, and established by Custom, known at home and abroad, and
the rules and methods of Essaying suited to it; and all the wrought Plate as
well as Coin of England being made by that measure; it is of great concernment
that it should remain unvariable.

But to the question; What need is there of any mixture of baser Metal with
Silver in Money or Plate? I answer, there is great reason for it. For,

1. Copper mixed with Silver makes it harder, and so it wears and wastes less in
use than if it were fine Silver. 2. It melts easier. 3. Silver as it is drawn
and melted from the Mine, being seldom perfectly fine, it would be a great
charge by refining, to separate all the baser Metals from it, and reduce it to
perfectly unmixt Silver.

The use of Coined Silver or Money is, that every Man in the Country where, it
is current by public Authority, may, without the trouble of refining, essaying
or weighing, be assured what quantity of Silver he gives, receives, or
contracts for, under such and such denominations.

If this Security goes not along with the public Stamp, Coining is labor to
no purpose, and puts no difference between coined Money and uncoin'd Bullion.
This is so obvious, that I think no Government, where Money is Coined, ever
overlooks it. And therefore the Laws every where, when the quantity of silver
has been lessened in any piece carrying the public Stamp, by Clipping,
Washing, Rounding, etc. have taken off the Authority of the public Stamp, and
declared it not to be lawful Money. This is known to be so in England, and
every one may not only refuse any Money bearing the public Stamp, if it be
clipped, or any ways robbed of the due weight of its Silver; but he that offers it
in payment is liable to Indictment, Fine and Imprisonment. From whence we may
see, that the use and end of the public Stamp is only to be a guard and
voucher of the quantity of Silver which Men contract for. And the injury done
to the public Faith, in this point, is that which in Clipping and false
Coining hightens the Robbery into Treason.

Men in their bargains contract not for denominations or sounds, but for the
intrinsic value; which is the quantity of Silver by public Authority
warranted to be in pieces of such denominations. And it is by having a greater
quantity of Silver, that men thrive and grow richer, and not by having a
greater number of denominations; Which when they come to have need of their
Money will prove but empty sounds, if they do not carry with them the real
quantity of Silver is expected.

The Standard once settled by public Authority, the quantity of Silver
established under the several denominations, (I humbly conceive, should not be
altered) till there were an absolute necessity shown of such a change, which I
think can never be.

The reason why it should not be changed is this; Because the public Authority
is Guarantee for the performance of all legal Contracts. But men are absolved
from the performance of their legal contracts, if the quantity of Silver, under
settled and legal denomination, be altered: As is evident, if borrowing 100 l. or
400 Ounces of Silver to repay the same quantity of Silver (for that is
understood by the same sum, and so the Law warrants it) or taking a Lease of
Land for years to come, at the like Rent of 100 l. they shall pay both the one
and the other in Money Coined under the same denominations with less Silver in
it, than at the time of the bargain. The Landlord here and Creditor are each
defrauded of 20 per Cent. of what they contracted for, and is their due. And I
ask, How much juster it would be thus to dissolve the Contracts they had made;
than to make a Law, that from henceforth all Landlords and Creditors should be
paid their past Debts and the Rents for Leases ready made, in clipped Money,
twenty per Cent. lighter than it should be? Both ways they lose twenty per
Cent. of their due, and with equal Justice.

The case would be the same, and legal Contracts be voided, if the Standard
should be altered on the otherside, and each species of our Coin be made
heavier. For then he that had borrowed or contracted for any Sum, could not be
discharged by paying the quantity he agreed for, but be liable to be forced to
pay 20 per Cent. more than he bargained for, that is, more than he ought.

On the other side; Whether the Creditor be forced to receive less, or the
Debtor forced to pay more than his Contract, the damage and injury is the same,
whenever a Man is defrauded of his due. And whether this will not be a public
failure of Justice, thus arbitrarily to give one Man's Right and Possession to
another, without any fault on the suffering Man's side, and without any the
least advantage to the public, I shall leave to be considered.

Raising of Coin is but a specious word to deceive the unwary. It only gives
the usual denomination of a greater quantity of Silver to a less, ( v. g.
calling Four Grains of Silver a Penny to day, when Five Grains of Silver made a
Penny yesterday) but adds no worth or real value to the Silver Coin, to make
amends for its want of Silver. That is impossible to be done. For it is only
the quantity of the Silver in it that is, and eternally will be, the measure of
its value. And to convince any one of this, I ask, whether he that is forced to
receive but 320 Ounces of Silver under the denomination of 100 l. (for 400
Ounces of Silver which he lent under the like denomination of 100 l.) will
think these 320 Ounces of Silver, however denominated, worth those 400 Ounces
he lent? If any one can be supposed so silly, he need but go to the next Market
or Shop to be convinced, that Men value not Money by the denomination, but by
the quantity of Silver that is in it. One may as rationally hope to lengthen a
foot by dividing it into Fifteen parts, instead of Twelve; and calling them
Inches; as to increase the value of the Silver that is in a Shilling, by
dividing it into Fifteen parts instead of Twelve, and calling them Pence. This
is all that is done when a Shilling is raised from Twelve to Fifteen Pence.

Clipping of Money is raising it without public Authority; the same
denomination remaining to the piece, that has now less Silver in it, than it
had before.

Altering the Standard, by Coining pieces under the same denomination with less
Silver in them than they formerly had, is doing the same thing by public
Authority. The only odds is, that by Clipping the loss is not forced on any one
(for no body is obliged to receive Clipped Money;) By altering the Standard it
is.

Altering the Standard, by raising the Money, will not get to the Public or
bring to the Mint to be Coined one Ounce of Silver: But will defraud the King,
the Church, the Universities and Hospitals, etc. of so much of their settled
Revenue, as the Money is raised v. g. 20 per Cent. if the Money (as is
proposed) be raised. It will weaken, if not totally destroy the public Faith,
when all that have trusted the Public, and assisted our present necessities,
upon Acts of Parliament, in the Million Lottery, Bank Act, and other Loans,
shall be defrauded of 20 per Cent. of what those Acts of Parliament were
security for. And to conclude, this raising our Money will defraud all private
Men of 20 per Cent. in all their Debts and ^etled Revenues.

Clipping by English Men is robbing the honest Man who receives clipped Money,
and transferring the Silver, i. e. the value is pared off from it into the
Clippers pocket. Clipping by Foreigners is robbing England it self. And thus
the Spaniards lately robbed Portugal of a great part of its Treasure or
Commodities (which is the same thing) by importing upon them clipped Money of
the Portugal stamp.

Clipping, and clipped Money, have besides this robbery of the Public other
great inconveniences: As the disordering of Trade, raising Foreign Exchange,
and a general disturbance which every one feels thereby in his private Affairs.

Clipping is so gainful, and so secret a Robbery, that penalties cannot
restrain it, as we see by experience.

Nothing, I humbly conceive, can put a stop to Clipping, now it is grown so
universal, and Men become so skilful in it, but making it unprofitable.

Nothing can make Clipping unprofitable, but making all light Money go only for
its weight. This stops Clipping in a moment, brings out all the milled and
weighty Money, deprives us not of any part of our clipped Money for the use of
Trade. And brings it orderly, and by degrees, and without force into the Mint
to be recoin'd.

If clipped Money be called in all at once, and stopped from passing by weight, I
fear it will stop Trade, put our Affairs all at a stand, and introduce
confusion. Whereas, if it be permitted to pass by its weight, till it can by
degrees be Coined, (the stamp securing its fineness as well then as now, and
the Scales determining its weight) it will serve for the paying of great Sums
as commodiously almost as weighty Money, and the weighty Money being then
brought out will serve for the Market Trade, and less Payments, and also to
weigh the clipped Money by.

On the other side; If clipped Money be allowed to pass current by tale, till it
be all recoin'd, one of these two effects will apparently follow: Either that
we shall want Money for Trade, as the clipped Money decreases by being Coined
into weighty; (For very few, if any body, who get weighty Money into their
hands, will part with it, whilst clipped Money, not of half the value is
current) Or if they do, the Coiners and Clippers will pick it up, and new Coin
and Clip it; whereby clipped Money will be increased. So that, by this way,
either Money will be wanting to trade, or clipped Money continued. If clipped
Money be stopped all at once, there is immediately a stop of Trade. If it be
permitted to pass in tale, as if it were lawful weighty Money whilst it is
recoining, and till all be recoin'd, that way also there will be an end of
Trade, or no end of clipped Money. But if it be made to pass for its weight till
it be all recoin'd, both these evils are avoided, and the weighty Money which
we want will be brought out to boot.

Money is necessary to the carrying on of Trade. For where Money fails, men
cannot buy, and Trade stops.

Credit will supply the defect of it to some small degree for a little while.
But Credit being nothing but the expectation of Money within some limited time,
Money must be had or Credit will fail.

Money also is necessary to us, in a certain proportion to the plenty of it
amongst our Neighbors. For if any of our Neighbors have it in a much greater
abundance than we, we are many ways obnoxious to them. 1. They can maintain a
greater force. 2. They can tempt away our People, by greater wages, to serve
them by Land or Sea, or in any Labor. 3. They can command the Markets, and
thereby break our Trade, and make us poor. 4. They can on any occasion ingross
Naval and Warlike Stores, and thereby endanger us.

In Countries where Domestic Mines do not supply it, nothing can bring in
Silver but Tribute or Trade. Tribute is the effect of Conquest: Trade, of Skill
and Industry.

By Commerce Silver is brought in only by an overbalance of Trade.

An Overbalance of Trade, is when the quantity of Commodities which we send
to any Country do more than pay for those we bring from thence: For then the
overplus is brought home in Bullion.

Bullion is Silver whose workmanship has no value. And thus Foreign Coin has
no value here for its stamp, and our Coin is Bullion in Foreign Dominions.

It Is useless, and labor in vain, to Coin Silver imported into any Country
where it is not to stay.

Silver imported cannot stay in any Country in which, by an overbalance of
their whole Trade, it is not made theirs, and does not become a real increase
of their Wealth.

If by a general Balance of its Trade, England yearly sends out Commodities to
the value of 400.000 Ounces of Silver more than the Commodities we bring home
from abroad cost us; there is 100000 l. every year clear gain: Which will come
home in Money, be a real increase of our Wealth, and will stay here.

On the other side, if upon a general balance of our whole Trade, we yearly
import Commodities from other parts to the value of 100.000 l. more than our
Commodities exported pay for, we every year grow 100000 l. poorer. And if we
should import a Million in Bullion from Spain every year, yet it is not ours;
it is no increase to our Wealth, nor can it stay here; but must be Exported
again every grain of it, with 100.000 l. of our own Money to boot.

I have heard it proposed as a way to keep our Money here, that we should pay
our Debts contracted beyond Seas, by Bills of Exchange.

The Idleness of such a Proposition will appear, when the nature of Exchange is
a little considered.

Foreign Exchange is the paying of Money in one Country, to receive it in
another

The Exchange is High, when a Man pays for Bills of Exchange above the Par. It
is Low when he pays less than the Par.

The Par is a certain number of pieces of the Coin of one Country, containing
in them an equal quantity of Silver to that in another number of pieces of the
Coin of another Country: v. g. supposing 36 Skillings of Holland to have just
as much Silver in them as 20 English Shillings. Bills of Exchange drawn from
England to Holland at the rate of 36 Skillings Dutch for each pound Sterling,
is according to the Par. He that pays the Money here, and receives it there,
neither gets nor loses by the Exchange; but receives just the same quantity of
Silver in the one place, that he parts with in the other. But if he pays one
pound Sterling to receive but 30 Skillings in Holland, he pays more than the
Par, and so pays more Silver for the Exchange, let the Sum be what it will.

The reason of High Exchange, is the buying much Commodities in any Foreign
Country, beyond the value of what that Country takes of ours. This makes
English Men have need of great Sums there, and this raises the Exchange or
Price of Bills. For what grows more into demand, increases presently in price.

Returning Money by Exchange into Foreign parts, keeps not one Farthing from
going out: It only prevents the more troublesome and hazardous way of sending
Money in specie forwards and backwards. Bills of Exchange more commodiously, by
Scrips of Paper, even the Accounts between particular Debtors and Creditors in
different Countries, as far as the Commerce between those two places is
equivalent: But where the overbalance, on either side, demands payment, there
Bills of Exchange can do nothing; But Bullion, or money in specie must be sent.
For in a Country where we owe Money, and have no Debts owing to us, Bills will
not find Credit; but for a short time, till Money can be sent to reimburse
those that paid them; unless we can think Men beyond Sea will part with their
Money for nothing. If the Traders of England owe their Correspondents of
Holland 100.000 l. their Accounts with all the rest of the World standing
equal, and remaining so, one Farthing of this 100.000 l. cannot be paid by
Bills of Exchange. For example, I owe 1000 l. of it; And to pay that, buy a
Bill of N. here, drawn on John de Wit of Amsterdam, to pay P. van Lore my
Correspondent there. The Money is paid accordingly, and thereby I am out of Van
Lores Debt; but one Farthing of the Debt of England to Holland is not thereby
paid; for N. of whom I bought the Bill of Exchange, is now as much indebted to
John de Wit, as I was before to P. van Lore. Particular Debtors and Creditors
are only changed by Bills of Exchange; but the Debt owing from one Country to
the other, cannot be paid without real Effects sent thither to that value,
either in Commodities, or Money. Where the balance of Trade barely pays for
Commodities with Commodities, there Money must be sent, or else the Debt cannot
be paid.

I have spoke of Silver Coin alone, because that makes the Money of Account,
and measure of Trade, all through the World. For all Contracts are, I think,
every where made, and Accounts kept in Silver Coin. I am sure they are so in
England, and the Neighboring Countries.

Silver therefore, and Silver alone, is the Measure of Commerce. Two Metals, as
Gold and Silver, cannot be the Measure of Commerce both together, in any
Country: Because the Measure of Commerce must be perpetually the same,
invariable, and keeping the same proportion of value in all its parts. But so
only one Metal does, or can do to it self: So Silver is to Silver, and Gold to
Gold. An Ounce of Silver is always of equal value to an Ounce of Silver, and an
Ounce of Gold to an Ounce of Gold; and two Ounces of the one, or the other, of
double the value to an Ounce of the same. But Gold and Silver change their
value one to another: For supposing them to be in value as sixteen to one now;
perhaps the next Month they may be as fifteen and three quarters, or 15 and to
one. And one may as well make a measure, v. g. a Yard, whose parts lengthen and
shrink, as a Measure of Trade of Materials, that have not always a settled
unvariable value to one another.

One Metal therefore alone can be the Money of Account and Contract, and the
Measure of Commerce in any Country. The fittest for this use, of all other, is
Silver, for many reasons, which need not here be mentioned. It is enough that
the World has agreed in it, and made it their common Money; and as the Indians
rightly call it, Measure. All other Metals, Gold, as well as Lead, are but
Commodities.

Commodities are Movables, valuable by Money, the common measure.

Gold, though not the Money of the World, and the Measure of Commerce, nor fit
to be so, yet may, and ought to be coined, to ascertain its Weight and
Fineness; And such Coin may safely have a Price as well as Stamp set upon it by
public Authority; so the value set be under the Market price. For then such
pieces Coined, will be a Commodity as passable as Silver Money, very little
varying in their price: As Guineas which were Coined at the value of 20 s. but
passed usually for between 21 or 22 shillings, according to the current rate;
But not having so high a value put upon them by the Law, no body could be
forced to take them to their loss at 21 s. 6 d. if the price of Gold should
happen at any time to be cheaper.

From what has been said, I think it appears: 1. That Silver is that which
mankind have agreed on to take, and give in Exchange for all other Commodities,
as an Equivalent. 2. That it is by the quantity of Silver they give or take, or
contract for, that they estimate the value of other things, and satisfy for
them; and thus by its quantity Silver becomes the Measure of Commerce. 3. Hence
it necessarily follows, that a greater quantity of Silver has a greater value;
a less quantity of Silver has a less value; and an equal quantity an equal
value. 4. That Money differs from uncoin'd Silver only in this, that the
quantity of Silver in each piece of Money, is ascertained by the Stamp it
bears; which is set there to be a public Voucher of its weight and fineness.
5. That Gold is Treasure as well as Silver, because it decays not in keeping,
and never sinks much in its value. 6. That Gold is fit to be Coined as well as
Silver, to ascertain its quantity to those who have a mind to Traffic in it;
but not fit to be joined with Silver, as a Measure of Commerce. 7. That Jewels
too are Treasure, because they keep without decay; and have constantly a great
value, in proportion to their Bulk: But cannot be used for Money, because their
value is not measured by their quantity; nor can they, as Gold and Silver, be
divided, and keep their value. 8. The other Metals are not Treasure, because
they decay in keeping, and because of their plenty; which makes their value
little, in a great bulk; and so unfit for Money, Commerce, and Carriage. 9.
That the only way to bring Treasure into England, is the well-ordering our
Trade. 10. That the only way to bring Silver and Gold to the Mint, for the
increase of our Stock of Money and Treasure, which shall stay here, is an
overbalance of our whole Trade. All other ways to increase our Money and
Riches, are but Projects that will fail us.


These things premised, I shall now proceed to show wherein I differ from Mr.
Lowndes, and upon what grounds I do so.

Mr. Lowndes proposes, that our Money should be raised (as it is called) one
fifth: that is, That all our present denominations of Money, as Penny,
Shilling, Half-crown, Crown, etc. should each have less Silver in it, or be
answered with Coin of less value. How he proposes to have it done I shall
consider hereafter. I shall at present only examine the Reasons he gives for it.

His first reason, p. 68. he gives us in these words, The value of the Silver
in the Coin ought to be raised to the foot of Six Shillings three Pence in
every Crown; because the price of Standard Silver in Bullion is risen to Six
Shillings five pence an Ounce.

This reason seems to me to labor under several great mistakes, as

1. That Standard Silver can rise in respect of it self.

2. That Standard Bullion is now, or ever was worth, or sold to the Traders in
it for 6 s. 5 d. the Ounce, of lawful Money of England. For if that matter of
fact holds not to be so, that an Ounce of Sterling Bullion is worth 6 s. 5 d.
of our milled weighty Money, this reason ceases; And our weighty Crown pieces
ought not to be raised to 6 s. 3 d; because our light clipped Money will not
purchase an Ounce of Standard Bullion, under the rate of 6 s. 5 d. of that
light Money. And let me add here, nor for that rate neither. If therefore the
Author means here, that an Ounce of Standard Silver is risen to 6 s. 5 d. of
our clipped Money, I grant it him, and higher too. But then that has nothing to
do with the raising our Lawful Coin, which remains unclip'd; unless he will say
too, that Standard Bullion is so risen, as to be worth, and actually to sell
for 6 s. 5 d. the Ounce of our weighty milled Money. This I not only deny, but
farther add, that it is impossible to be so. For six shillings and five pence
of milled Money, weighs an Ounce and a Quarter near. Can it therefore be
possible, that one Ounce of any Commodity, should be worth an Ounce and Quarter
of the self-same Commodity, and of exactly the same goodness? For so is
Standard Silver to Standard Silver. Indeed one has a mark upon it, which the
other has not: But it is a mark that makes it rather more, than less valuable:
Or if the mark, by hindering its Exportation, makes it less valuable for that
purpose, the Melting-pot can easily take it off.

The complaint made of melting down our weighty Money, answers this reason
evidently. For can it be supposed, that a Goldsmith will give 1 Ounce of Coined
Silver, for One Ounce of Bullion; when by putting it into his Melting-pot, he
can for less than a Penny charge make it Bullion? (For it is always to be
remembered, what I think is made clear, that the value of Silver, considered as
it is Money, and the measure of Commerce, is nothing but its quantity.) And
thus a milled Shilling, which has double the weight of Silver in it to a
current Shilling, whereof half the Silver is clipped away, has double the value.
And to show that this is so, I will undertake, that any Merchant, who has
Bullion to sell, shall sell it for a great deal less number of Shillings in
tale, to any one, who will contract to pay him in milled Money, than if he be
paid in the current clipped Money.

Those who say Bullion is Risen, I desire to tell me; What they mean by Risen?
Any Commodity, I think, is properly said to be Risen, when the same quantity
will exchange for a greater quantity of another thing; but more particularly of
that thing which is the measure of Commerce in the Country. And thus Corn is
said to be Risen amongst the English in Virginia, when a Bushel of it will
sell, or exchange for more pounds of Tobacco; Amongst the Indians, when it will
sell for more yards of Wampompeal, which ^s their Money; and amongst the
English ^here, when it will exchange for a greater quantity of Silver, than it
would before. Rising and falling of Commodities is always between several
Commodities of distinct worths. But no body can say that Tobacco (of the same
goodness) is risen in respect of it self. One Pound of the same goodness will
never exchange for a Pound and a Quarter of the same goodness. And so it is in
Silver: An Ounce of Silver will always be of equal value to an Ounce of Silver;
nor can it ever rise or fall in respect of it self: An Ounce of Standard Silver
can never be worth 1 Ounce of Standard Silver; nor one Ounce of uncoin'd
Silver, exchange for 1 Ounce of Coined Silver: The stamp cannot so much debase
its value. Indeed the stamp hindering its free exportation, may make the
Goldsmith (who profits by the return of Money) give 1/120, or 1/60 or perhaps
sometimes 1/30 more (that is 5 s. 2 d. 5 s. 3 d. or 5 s. 4 d. the Ounce) of
Coined Silver for uncoin'd, when there is need of sending Silver beyond Seas;
as there always is when the balance of Trade will not supply our wants, and
pay our debts there. But much beyond this, the Goldsmith wi^ never give for
Bullion; since he can make it out of Coined Money at a cheaper rate.

It Is said Bullion is risen to 6 s. 5 d. the Ounce, i. e. that an Ounce of
uncoin'd Silver will exchange for 1 Ounce o^ Coined Silver. If any one can
believe this I will put this short Case to him. He ha^ of Bullion or Standard
uncoin'd Silver two round plates, each of exact size and weight of a Crown
piece: He has besides of the same Bullion, a round plate of the weight and size
of a Shilling, and another yet less, of the exact weight and size of ^
Threepence. The two great Plates being of equal weight, and fineness, I
suppose he will allow to be of equal value, and that the two less, joined to
either of them make it more worth than the other is by it self, they having all
three together more Silver in them. Let us suppose then, one of the greater,
and the two less plates to have received the next moment (by Miracle, or by the
Mill, it matters not how) the mark or stamp of our Crown, our Shilling, and our
Threepence: Can any body say, that now they have got the stamp of our Mint
upon them, they are so fallen in value, or the other unstamp'd piece so Risen,
that that unstamp'd piece which a moment before was worth only one of the other
pieces, is now worth them all three? Which is to say, that an Ounce of uncoin'd
Silver is worth an Ounce and a Quarter of Coined. This is what men would
persuade us, when they say, that Bul^ion is raised to 6 s. 5 d. [of lawful
Money] the Ounce, which I say is utterly impossible. Let us consider this a
little farther in an other instance. The present Milled Crown piece, say they,
will not exchange for an Once of Bullion, without the addition of a Shilling
and a Threepence of weighty Coin added to it. Coin but that Crown piece into 6
s. and 3 d. and then they say it will buy an Ounce of Bullion, or else they
give up their reason and measure of raising the Money. Do that which is allowed
to be equivalent to Coining of a present Milled Crown piece unto 6 s. 3 d. (
viz.) call it 75 Pence, and then also it must by this Rule of raising any an
Ounce of Bullion. If this be so, the self-same milled Crown piece will and will
not exchange for an Ounce of Bullion. Call ^t 60 pence, and it will not: The
very next moment call it 75 pence, and it will. I am afraid no body can think
change of denomination has such a power.

Mr. Lowndes supports this his first reason with these words, p. 68. This
reason, which I humbly conceive will appear irrefragable, is grounded upon a
Truth so Apparent that it may well be compared to an Axiom, even in
Mathematical reasoning; to wit, the Whenever the intrinsic value of Silver
in the Coin, has been, or shall be less than the price of Silver in Bullion,
the Coin has and will be melted down.

This I think, though it be allowed Mr. Lowndes for as Apparent a Truth, and as
certain a Maxim as he could wish, yet serve^ not at all to his purpose of
lessening the Coin. For when the Coin, is as it should be, according to the
Standard (let the Standard be what it will) weighty an^ unclip'd, it is
impossible that the value o^ Coined Silver should be less than the valu^ or
price of Uncoin'd; Because, as I have shown, the value and quantity of Silve^
are the same: And where the quantitie^ are equal, the values are equal;
excepting only the odds that may be between Bullio^ that may be freely
exported, and Coined Silver that may not; The odds whereo^ scarce ever amounts
to above 2 d. per Ounce and rarely to above a penny or an halfpenny And this
odds (whatever it be) will equally belong to his raised milled Money which
cannot be exported, as it will to our present milled Money, which can not be
Exported; As I shall have occasion to show more particularly here after. All
this disorder, and a thousand others, comes from light and unlawful Money being
current. For then it is no wonder that Bullion should be kept up to the value
of your clipped Money; that is, that Bullion should not be sold by the Ounce for
less than 6 s. 5 d. when that 6 s. 5 d. clipped Money paid for it, does not
Weigh above an Ounce. This instance therefore of the present price of Bullion,
proves nothing but that the quantity of Silver in Money governs the value of
it, and not the denomination; as appears when clipped Money is brought to buy
Bullion. This is a fair Trial: Silver is set against Silver, and by that is
seen whether clipped Money be of the same value with weighty of the same
denomination, or whether it be not the quanquantity of Silver in it that
regulates its value.

I cannot but wonder that Mr. Lowndes, a Man so well skilled in the Law,
especially of the Mint, the Exchequer, and of our Money, should all along in
this Argument speak of clipped Money, as if it were the lawful Money of England;
and should propose by that (which is in effect by the Clippers Sheers) to
regulate a new sort of Coin to be introduced into England. And if he will stand
to that measure, and lessen the new Coined to the rate of Bullion sold in
exchange for present current clipped Money, to prevent its being melted down; he
must make it yet much lighter than he proposes, and the raising it, or to give
it its due name the lessening of it will not serve the turn: For I will be bold
to say, that Bullion now in England is no where to be bought by the Ounce for 6
s. 5 d. of our present current clipped Money. So that if his Rule be true, and
nothing can save the weighty Coin from melting down, but reducing it to the
weight that clipped Money is brought to, he must lessen the Money in his new
Coin much more than; for an Ounce of Standard Bullion will always be worth an
Ounce of clipped Money, whether that in tale amount to 6 s. 5 d. 6 s. 6 d. Ten
Shillings, or any other number of Shillings or Pence of the nicknamed clipped
Money. For a piece of Silver that was Coined for a Shilling, but has half the
Silver clipped off, in the Law and in propriety of speech is no more a Shilling,
Than a piece of Wood, which was once a sealed Yard, is still a Yard when one
half of it is broke off.

Let us consider this Maxim a little further; which out of the language of the
Mint in plain English, I think, amounts to thus much, viz. That when an Ounce
of Standard Bullion costs a greater number of Pence in tale, than an Ounce of
that Bullion can be Coined into by the Standard of the Mint, the Coin will be
melted down. I grant it, if Bullion should rise to 15 Pence the Ounce above 5
s. 2 d. as is now pretended; which is to say, that an Ounce of Bullion cannot
be bought for less than an Ounce and a quarter of the like Silver Coined. But
that, as I have showed, is impossible to be: And every one would be convinced
of the contrary, if we had none now but lawful Money current. But it is no
wonder if the price and value of things be confounded and uncertain, when the
Measure it self is lost. For we have now no lawful Silver Money current among
us: And therefore cannot talk nor judge right, by our present uncertain clipped
Money, of the value and price of things, in reference to our lawful regular
Coin, adjusted and kept to the unvarying Standard of the Mint. The price of
Silver in Bullion above the value of Silver in Coin, when Clipping has not
defaced our current Cash (for then the odds is very rarely above a penny or two
pence the Ounce) is so far from being a cause of melting down our Coin, that
this price given above the value of the Silver in our Coin, is given only to
preserve our Coin from being melted down: For no body buys Bullion at above 5
s. 2 d. the Ounce, (which is just the value) for any other reason, but to avoid
the crime and hazard of melting down our Coin.

I think it will be agreed on all hands, that no body will melt down our Money,
but for profit. Now profit can be made by melting down our Money, but only in
two cases.

First, When the current Pieces of the same denomination are unequal, and of
different Weights; some heavier, some lighter: For then the Traders in Money,
cull out the heavier, and melt them down with profit. This is the ordinary
fault of Coining by the Hammer; wherein it usually sufficed, That a Bar of
Silver was cut into as many Half-crowns, or Shillings, as answered its due
weight; without being very exact in making each particular piece of its due
weight; whereby some pieces came to be heavier, and some lighter, than by the
Standard they should; and then the heavier pieces were culled out, and there
was profit to be made (as one easily perceives) in melting them down. But this
cause of melting down our Money is easily prevented, by the exacter way of
Coining by the Mill, in which each single piece is brought to its just weight.
This inequality of pieces of the same denomination, is to be found in our
Money, more than ever, since Clipping has been in fashion; and therefore it is
no wonder, that in this irregular State of our Money, one complaint is, that
the heavy Money is melted down. But this also the making clipped Money go at
present for its Weight, (which is a sudden reducing it to the Standard) and
then, by degrees, recoining it into milled Money (which is the ultimate and
more complete reducing it to the Standard) perfectly cures.

The other case wherein our Money comes to be melted down, is a losing Trade,
or which is the same thing in other words, an overgreat Consumption of Foreign
Commodities. Whenever the overbalance of Foreign Trade makes it difficult for
our Merchants to get Bills of Exchange, the Exchange presently rises, and the
Returns of Money raise them in proportion to the want of money English men have
in any parts beyond Seas. They who thus furnish them with Bills, not being able
to satisfy their Correspondents on whom those Bills are drawn, with the
product of our Commodities there, must send Silver from hence to reimburse
them, and repay the money they have drawn out of their hands. Whilst Bullion
may be had for a small price more than the weight of our current Cash, these
Exchangers generally choose rather to buy Bullion, than run the risque of
melting down our Coin, which is Criminal by the Law. And thus the matter for
the most part went, whilst milled and clipped Money passed promiscuously in
payment: For so long a clipped Half-crown was as good here as a milled one, since
one passed, and could be had as freely as the other. But as soon as there began
to be a distinction between clipped and unclipt Money, and weighty Money could no
longer be had for the light, Bullion (as was natural) rose; And it would fall
again to morrow to the price it was at before, if there were none but weighty
Money to pay for it. In short, whenever the whole of our Foreign Trade and
Consumption exceeds our Exportation of Commodities, our Money must go to pay
our Debts so contracted, whether melted, or not melted down. If the Law makes
the Exportation of our Coin Penal, it will be melted down; if it leaves the
Exportation of our Coin free, as in Holland, it will be carried out in specie.
One way or other go it must, as we see in Spain; but whether melted down, or
unmelted down, it matters little: Our Coin and Treasure will be both ways
equally diminished, and can be restored only by an overbalance of our whole
Exportation, to our whole Importation of consumable Commodities. Laws made
against Exportation of Money or Bullion, will be all in vain. Restraint, or
Liberty in that matter, makes no Country Rich or Poor: As we see in Holland;
which had plenty of Money under the free liberty of its Exportation; and Spain,
in great want of Money under the severest penalties against carrying of it out.
But the Coining, or not Coining our Money, on the same foot it was before, or
in bigger or less pieces, and under whatsoever denominations you please,
contributes nothing to, or against its melting down or Exportation, so our
Money be all kept each species in its full weight of Silver, according to the
Standard: For if some be heavier, and some lighter allowed to be current, so,
under the same denomination the heavier will be melted down, where the
temptation of profit is considerable, which in well regulated Coin kept to the
Standard, cannot be. But this melting down carries not away one Grain of our
Treasure out of England. The coming and going of that depends wholly upon the
Balance of our Trade; and therefore it is a wrong Conclusion which we find, p.
71. That continuing either old or new Coins on the present foot, will be
nothing else but furnishing a Species to melt down at an extravagant profit,
and will encourage a violent Exportation of our Silver for sake of the gain
only, till we shall have little or none left. For example; Let us suppose all
our light Money new Coined, upon the foot that this Gentleman would have it,
and all our old milled Crowns going for 75 pence, as he proposes, and the rest
of the old milled Money proportionably, I desire it to be showed how this would
hinder the Exportation of one Ounce of Silver, whilst our Affairs are in the
present posture. Again, on the other side, supposing all our Money were now
milled Coin upon the present foot, and our Balance of Trade changing our
Exportation of Commodities were a Million more than our Importation, and like
to continue so yearly, whereof one was to Holland, and the other to Flanders,
there being an equal Balance between England, and all other parts of the World
we Trade to, I ask, what possible gain could any English Man make, by melting
down and carrying out our Money to Holland and Flanders, when a Million was to
come thence hither, and English Men had more there already than they knew how
to use there, and could not get home without paying dear there for Bills of
Exchange? If that were the case of our Trade, the Exchange would presently fall
here, and rise there beyond the Par of their Money to ours, i. e. An English
Merchant must give in Holland more Silver for the Bills he bought there, than
he should receive upon those Bills here, if the two Sums were weighed one
against the other, or run the risque of bringing it home in specie: And what
then could any English man get by Exporting of our Money or Silver thither?

These are the only two Cases, wherein our Coin can be melted down with profit;
and I challenge any one living to show me any other. The one of them is removed
only by a regular just Coin kept equal to the Standard; be that what it will,
it matters not, as to the point of melting down of the Money. The other is to
be removed only by the Balance of our Trade kept from running us behind-hand,
and contracting Debts in Foreign Countries by an over-consumption of their
Commodities.

To those who say that the Exportation of our Money, whether melted down, or
not melted down, depends wholly upon our Consumption of Foreign Commodities,
and not at all upon the Sizes of the several Species of our Money, which will
be equally Exported, or not Exported, whether Coined upon the old, or the
proposed new Foot: Mr. Lowndes replies, p. 72.

First, That the necessity of Foreign expense and Exportation to answer the
Balance of Trade, may be diminished, but cannot in any sense be augmented by
raising the Value of our Money.

I beg his pardon, if I cannot assent to this. Because the necessity of our
Exportation of Money depending wholly upon the Debts which we contract in
Foreign Parts, beyond what our Commodities Exported can pay; the Coining our
Money in bigger or less pieces under the same or different denominations, or on
the present or proposed Foot, in itself neither increasing those Debts, nor the
Expenses that make them, can neither augment nor diminish the Exportation of
our Money.

2. He replies P. 72. That Melters of the Coin will have less profit by
Fourteen pence halfpenny in the Crown when the Money is Coined upon the new
Foot.

To this I take liberty to say, that there will not be a farthing more profit
in melting down the Money, if it were all new milled Money upon the present
Foot, than if it were all new Coined, as is proposed lighter. For whence should
the profit arise more in the one, than the other? But Mr. Lowndes goes upon
this supposition; That Standard Bullion is now worth six Shillings and five
Pence an Ounce, of milled Money, and would continue to sell for six Shillings
five Pence the Ounce, if our Money were all weighty milled Money: Both which I
take to be mistakes, and think I have proved them to be so.

3. He says, It Is hoped that the Exchange to Holland may be kept at a stand, or
at least from falling much lower. I hope so too. But how that concerns this
Argument, or the Coining of the Money upon a new Foot, I do not see.

4. He says, P. 73. There is a great difference with regard to the service and
disservice of the Public, between carrying out Bullion or Coin, for necessary
uses, or for prohibited Commodities. The gain to the Exporters, which is that
which makes them melt it down and Export it, is the same in both Cases. And the
necessity of Exporting it is the same, For it is to pay Debts, which there is an
equal necessity of paying, when once contracted, though for useful things. They
are the Goldsmiths and Dealers in Silver that usually Export what Silver is
sent beyond Sea, to pay the Debts they have contracted by their Bills of
Exchange. But those Dealers in Exchange seldom know, or consider, how they to
whom they give their Bills, have or will employ the Money they receive upon
those Bills. Prohibited Commodities, it is true, should be kept out, and useless
ones Impoverish us by being brought in; but that is the fault of our
Importation, and there the mischief should be cured by Laws, and our way of
Living. For the Exportation of our Treasure is not the cause of their
Importation, but the consequence. Vanity and Luxury spends them, that gives
them vent here, that vent causes their Importation, and when our Merchants have
brought them, if our Commodities will not be enough, our Money must go to pay
for them. But what this Paragraph has in it against continuing our Coin upon
the present Foot, or for making our Coin lighter, I confess here again, I do
not see.

It Is true what Mr. Lowndes observes here, the Importation of Gold, of the
going of Guineas at 30 s. has been a great prejudice and loss to the Kingdom.
But that has been wholly owing to our clipped Money, and not at all to our Money
being Coined at five Shillings two Pence the Ounce; nor is the Coining our
Money lighter, the cure of it. The only remedy for that mischief, as well as a
great many others, is the putting an end to the passing of clipped Money by
tale, as if it were lawful Coin.

5. His fifth Head P. 74. is to answer those, who hold, that by the lessening
our Money one fifth, all People who are to receive Money upon Contracts already
made, will be defrauded of 20 Per. Cent. of their due: And thus all men will
lose one fifth of their settled Revenues, and all men that have lent Money of
their Principal and Use. To remove this Objection, Mr. Lowndes says, that
Silver in England is grown scarce, and consequently dearer, and so is of higher
price. Let us grant for the present, it is of higher price (which how he makes
out I shall examine by and by.) This, if it were so, ought not to annul any
man's Bargain, nor make him receive less in quantity than he lent. He was to
receive again the same Sum, and the Public Authority was Guarantee that the
same Sum should have the same quantity of Silver under the same denomination:
And the reason is plain, why in justice he ought to have the same quantity of
Silver again, notwithstanding any pretended rise of its value. For if Silver
had grown more plentiful, and by consequence by our Authors rule cheaper, his
Debtor would not have been compelled by the Public Authority to have paid him
in consideration of its cheapness, a greater quantity of Silver than they
Contracted for. Cacao Nuts were the Money of a part of America, when we first
came thither. Suppose then you had lent me last Year 300, or fifteen-score
Cacao Nuts, to be repaid this year: Would you be satisfied and think your self
paid your due, if I should tell you, Cacao Nuts were scarce this year, and that
fourscore were of as much value this year as an hundred the last; and that
therefore you were well and fully paid if I restored to you only 1200 for the
1500 I borrowed? Would you not think your self defrauded of of your Right, by
such a payment? nor would it make any amends for this to justice, or reparation
to you, that the Public had (after your contract, which was made for fifteen
Score) altered the denomination of Score, and applied it to sixteen instead of
twenty. Examine it, and you will find this just the Case, and the loss
proportionable in them both: That is, a real loss of 20 Per. Cent. And
therefore a man has Right done him, if he receive less Silver than his
Contract. As to Mr. Lowndes's proofs, that Silver is now more value than it
was, I fear none of them will reach Mr. Lowndes's point. He says P. 77 By daily
experience, nineteen penny weight, and three tenths of a penny weight of
Sterling Silver, which is just the weight of a Crown piece, will purchase more
Coined Money than five unclip'd Shillings. I wish he had told us where this
daily experience, he speaks of, is to be found: For I dare say no body has
seen a Sum of unclip'd Shillings paid for Bullion any where this twelve months,
to go no further back.

In the next place, I wish he had told us how much more than five lawful milled
Shillings, Bullion of the weight of a Crown piece will purchase. If he had said
it would purchase six Shillings and three pence weighty Money, he had proved
the matter in question. And whoever has the weight of a Crown in Silver paid
him in Mr. Lowndes's new Coin, instead of six Shillings and three Pence of our
present Money, has no injury done him, if it will certainly purchase him six
Shillings and three Pence all unclip'd of our present Money. But every one at
first sight perceives this to be impossible, as I have already proved it. And I
have in this the concurrence of Mr. Lowndes's new Scheme, to prove it to be so.
For P. 62 he proposes that his Silver Unite having the weight and fineness of a
present unclip'd Crown piece, should go for 75 pence; and that the present
Shilling should go for 15 pence; by which establishment there will be 75 pence
in his Unite, and 93 pence three farthings in six Shillings three pence,
weighty Money of the present Coin; which is an undeniable confession, that it
is as impossible for his Silver Unite, (having no more Silver in it than a
present unclip'd Crown, to be worth, and so to purchase six unclip'd Shillings
and three pence of our present Money, as it is for 75 pence to be worth 93 of
the same pence, or 75 to be equal to 93.

If he means by more, that his Sterling Silver of the weight of a Crown piece
will purchase a penny, or two pence more than five unclip'd Shillings, which is
the most, and which is but accidental too; what is this rise of its value to 15
pence, and what amends will one 1/60 a little more or less, rise in value, make
for diminished in weight and lost in the quantity? which is all one as to say,
that a penny, or thereabouts, shall make amends for fifteen pence taken away.

Another way to recommend his New Coin to those who shall receive it instead of
the present weightier Coin, he tells him, p. 77. it will pay as much debt and
purchase as much Commodities as our present Money, which is heavier. What he
says of debts is true; but yet I would have it well considered by our English
Gentlemen, that though Creditors will lose of their Principal and Use, and
Landlords will lose of their Income, yet the Debtors and Tenants will not get
it. It will be asked, Who then will get it? These, I say, and those only who
have great Sums of weighty Money (whereof one fees not a piece now in Payments)
hoarded up by them, will get by it. To those by the proposed change of our
Money will be an increase of added to their Riches, paid out of the Pockets of
the rest of the Nation. For what these men received for Four Shillings, they
will pay again for Five. This weighty Money hoarded up, Mr. Lowndes, p. 105
computes at One Million and Six hundred thousand Pounds; so that by raising our
Money one fifth, there will Three hundred and twenty thousand Pounds be given
to those who have hoarded up our weighty Money; which hoarding up of Money is
thought by many to have no other merit in it than the prejudicing our Trade and
public Affairs, and increasing our necessities, by keeping so great a part of
our Money from coming abroad, at a time when there was so great need of it. If
the Sum of unclip'd Money in the Nation, be as some suppose, much greater; then
there will by this contrivance of the raising our Coin, be given to these rich
Hoarders, much above the aforesaid Sum of Three hundred and twenty thousand
Pounds of our present Money. No body else, but these Hoarders, can get a
Farthing by this proposed change of our Coin; unless men in debt have Plate by
them, which they will Coin to pay their Debts. Those too, I must confess, will
get one fifth by all the Plate of their own, which they shall Coin and pay
Debts with, valuing their Plate at Bullion: But if they shall consider the
fashion of their Plate, what that cost when they bought it, and the fashion
that new Plate will cost them, if they intend ever to have Plate again, they
will find this one fifth seeming present profit in Coining their Plate to pay
their Debts, amount to little or nothing at all. No body then but the Hoarders
will get by this Twenty per Cent. And I challenge any one to show how any body
else (but that little in the case of Plate Coined to pay Debts) shall get a
farthing by it. It seems to promise fairest to the Debtors; but to them too it
will amount to nothing. For he that takes up Money to pay his Debts, will
receive this new Money, and pay it again at the same rate he received it, just
as he does now our present Coin, without any profit at all. And though
Commodities (as is natural) shall be raised in proportion to the lessening of
the Money, no body will get by that, any more than they do now, when all things
are grown dearer. Only he that is bound up by contract to receive any Sum under
such a denomination of Pounds, Shillings and Pence, will find his loss sensibly
when he goes to buy Commodities, and make new Bargains. The Markets and the
Shops will soon convince him, that his Money, which is one fifth lighter, is
also one fifth worse; when he must pay twenty Per. Cent. more for all the
Commodities he buys with the Money of the new Foot, than if he bought it with
the present Coin.

This Mr. Lowndes himself will not deny, when he calls to mind what he himself,
speaking of the inconveniences we suffer by our clipped Money, says, P. 115.
Persons before they conclude in any bargains, are necessitated first to settle
the price or value of the very Money they are to receive for their Goods; And
if it be in clipped or bad Money, they set the price of their Goods accordingly:
Which I think has been one great cause of raising the price, not only of
Merchandises, but even of Edibles, and other necessaries for the Sustenance of
the common People, to their great Grievance. That every one who receives Money
after the raising our Money, on Contracts made before the change, must lose
twenty per Cent. in all he shall buy, is Demonstration, by Mr. Lowndes's own
Scheme. Mr. Lowndes proposes that there should be Shillings Coined upon the new
Foot lighter than our present Shillings, which should go for 12 pence apiece;
and that the unclip'd Shillings of the present Coin should go for fifteen pence
apiece, and the Crown for seventy five pence. A man who has a Debt of an
hundred Pounds owing him, upon Bond or Lease, receives it in these new
Shillings, instead of lawful Money of the present Standard: He goes to Market
with twenty Shillings in one Pocket of this new Money, which are valued at 240
pence; and in the other Pocket with four milled Crown pieces, (or 20 milled
Shillings of the present Coin) which are valued at three hundred pence, which
is one fifth more: it is Demonstration then that he loses one fifth, or 20 per
Cent. in all that he buys, by the receipt of this new Money, for the present
Coin, which was his due; unless those he deals with will take four for five
pence, or four shillings for five shillings. He buys, for example, a quart of
Oil for fifteen pence: If he pay for it with the old Money in one Pocket, one
Shilling will do it; if with the new Money in the other, he must add three
pence to it, or a quarter of another Shilling; And so of all the rest that he
pays for, with either the old Money which he should have received his Debts in,
or with the new, which he was forced to receive for it. Thus far it is
Demonstration, he loses Twenty per Cent. by receiving his Debt in a new Money
thus raised, when he uses it to buy any thing. But to make him amends, Mr.
Lowndes tells him, Silver is now dearer; and all things consequently will be
bought cheaper twenty per Cent. I am sure there is no Demonstration of that,
nor appearance of it yet; And if I may credit Housekeepers and substantial
Tradesmen, all sorts of Provisions and Commodities are lately risen
excessively; and notwithstanding the scarcity of Silver, begin to come up to
the true value of our clipped Money, every one selling their Commodities so as
to make themselves amends in the number of light pieces for what they want in
weight. A Creditor ought to think the new light Money equivalent to the present
heavier, because it will buy as much Commodities. But what if it should fail,
as it is ten to one but it will, what security has he for it? He is told so, and
he must be satisfied. The Salt, Wine, Oil, Silk, Naval Stores, and all Foreign
Commodities, will none of them be sold us by Foreigners for a less quantity of
Silver than before, because we have given the name of more Peace to it, is I
think Demonstration. All our Names (if they are any more to us) are to them but
bare sounds; And our Coin, as theirs to us, but mere Bullion, valued only by
its weight. And a Suede will no more sell you his Hemp and Pitch, or a Spaniard
his Oil, for less Silver; because you tell him Silver is scarcer now in
England, and therefore risen in value one fifth; than a Tradesman of London
will sell his Commodity cheaper to the Isle of Man, because they are grown
poorer, and Money is scarce there.

All Foreign Commodities must be shut out of the number of those that will
fall, to comply with our raising our Money. Corn also, it is evident, does not
rise or fall, by the differences of more or less plenty of Money, but by the
plenty and scarcity that God gives. For our Money, in appearance remaining the
same, the Price of Corn is double one year to what it was the precedent; and
therefore we must certainly make account, that since the Money is one fifth
lighter, it will buy one fifth less Corn Communibus annis. And this being the
great expense of the Poor, that takes up almost all their Earnings; if Corn be
Communibus annis sold for one fifth more Money in Tale than before the change
of our Money, they too must have one fifth more in Tale of the new Money for
their Wages, than they have now; and the Day-labourer must have, not only
twelve, but fifteen pence of the new Money a day, which is the present
Shilling, that he has now, or else he cannot live. So that all Foreign
Commodities, with Corn and Labor, keeping up their value to the quantity of
Silver, they sell for now; and not complying in the fall of their real price
with the nominal raising of our Money; there is not much left wherein Landlords
and Creditors are to expect the recompense of 20 per Cent. abatement of price
in Commodities to make up their loss in the lightness of our Money they are
paid their Rents and Debts in. 'Twould be easy to show the same thing
concerning our other native Commodities, and make it clear, that we have no
reason to expect they should abate of their present price, any more than Corn
and Labor. But this is enough, and any one, who has a mind to it, may trace
the rest at his leisure.

And thus I fear the hopes of cheaper Penny-worths, which might beguile some
Men into a belief, that Landlords and Creditors would receive no less by the
proposed new Money, is quite vanished. But if the promise of better
Penny-worths and a fall of all Commodities Twenty per Cent. should hold true,
this would not at all relieve Creditors and Landlords, and set them on equal
terms with their Neighbors: Because the cheap Penny-worths will not be for
them alone; but every body else, as well as they, will share in that advantage;
so that their Silver being diminished one fifth in their Rents and Debts, which
are paid them, they would still be Twenty per Cent. greater losers than their
unhoarding Neighbors, and Forty per Cent. greater losers than the Hoar^ers of
Money; Who will certainly get Twenty per Cent. in the Money, whatever happens
in the price of things; And Twenty per Cent. more in the cheapness of
Commodities, if that promised recompense be made good to Creditors and
Landlords. For the Hoarders of Money (if the price of things falls) will buy as
cheap as they. So that what ever is said of the cheapness of Commodities, it is
Demonstration,) whether that proves true or no) That Creditors, and Landlords,
and all those who are to receive Money upon Bargains made before the proposed
change of our Coin, will unavoidably lose Twenty per Cent.

One thing Mr. Lowndes says in this Paragraph very remarkable, which I think
decides the Question. His words p. 78. are these, That if the value of the
Silver in the Coins (by an extrinsick denomination) be raised above the value
or market price of the same Silver reduced to Bullion, the Subject would be
proportionably injured and defrauded, as they were formerly in the case of base
Moneys coined by public Authority. It remains therefore only to show, that
the Market-price of Standard Bullion is not one fifth above our Coin that is to
be raised, and then we have Mr. Lowndes of our side too against its raising. I
think it is abundantly proved already, that Standard Bullion neither is, nor
can be worth one fifth more than our Lawful weighty Money: And if it be not, by
Mr. Lowndes's confession, there is no need of raising our present legal milled
Money to that degree; and it is only our clipped Money that wants amendment: And
when that is recoin'd and reduced all to milled and lawful Money, that then too
will have no need of raising. This I shall now prove out of Mr. Lowndes's own
words here.

Mr. Lowndes in the forecited words compares the value of Silver in our Coin,
to the value of the same Silver reduced to Bullion; which he supposing to be as
four to five, makes that the measure of the raising our Money. If this be the
difference of Value between Silver in Bullion, and Silver in Coin; And it be
true, that four Ounces of Standard Bullion be worth five Ounces of the same
Silver Coined; Or, which is the same thing, that Bullion will sell by the Ounce
for Six Shillings and five Pence unclip'd Money; I will take the boldness to
advise His Majesty to buy, or to borrow any where so much Bullion, or rather
than be without it, melt down so much Plate, as is equal in weight to twelve
hundred pounds Sterling of our present milled Money. This let him sell for
milled Money; And according to our Authors Rule, it will yield fifteen hundred
pounds. Let that fifteen hundred pounds be reduced into Bullion, and sold
again, and it will produce eighteen hundred and Sixty Pounds: Which 1860 l. of
weighty Money being reduced to Bullion, will still produce one fifth more in
weight of Silver, being sold for weighty Money. And thus His Majesty may get at
least Three hundred and twenty thousand Pounds by selling of Bullion for
weighty Money, and melting that down into Bullion, as fast as he receives it;
till he has brought into his hands the Million and Six hundred thousand Pounds,
which Mr. Lowndes computes there is of weighty Money left in England.

I doubt not but every one who reads it, will think this a very ridiculous
Proposition. But he must think it ridiculous for no other reason, but because
he sees it is impossible, that Bullion should sell for one fifth above its
weight of the same Silver Coined; That is, than an Ounce of Standard Silver
should sell for six shillings five pence of our present weighty Money. For if
it will, it is no ridiculous thing that the King should melt down, and make that
profit of his Money.

If our Author's Rule, (p. 78, where he says, That the only just and reasonable
Foot upon which the Coins should be current, is the very price of the Silver
thereof, in case it be molten in the same place where Coins are made current)
be to be observed; Our Money is to be raised but an half penny in five
shillings; for that was the ordinary odds in the price between Bullion and
Coined Silver, before Clipping had deprived us, in Commerce, of all our milled
and weighty Money. And Silver in Standard Bullion would not be in value one jot
above the same Silver in Coin, if clipped Money were not current by Tale, and
Coined Silver (as Mr. Lowndes proposes, p. 73) as well as Bullion, had the
liberty of Exportation. For when we have no clipped Money, but all our current
Coin is weight, according to the Standard, all the odds of value that Silver in
Bullion has to Silver in Coin, is only owing to the Prohibition of its
Exportation in Money; And never rises, nor can rise, above what the Goldsmith
shall estimate the risque and trouble of melting it down; which is so little,
that the Importers of Silver could never raise it to above an half penny an
Ounce, but at such times as the East India Company, or some Foreign Sale,
calling for a great quantity of Silver at a time, made the Goldsmith scramble
for it; and so the Importers of Bullion raise its price upon them, according to
the present need of great quantities of Silver, which every Goldsmith (eager to
ingross to himself as much as he could) was content to pay high for, rather
than go without: His present gains from those whom he furnished, and whom
otherwise he could not furnish, making him amends.

The natural value then between Silver in Bullion, and in Coin, is (I say)
every where equal; bating the charge of Coinage, which gives the advantage to
the side of the Coin. The ordinary odds here in England, between Silver in
Bullion, and the same in our Coin, is by reason that the Stamp hinders its free
Exportation about an half penny in the Crown. The accidental difference, by
reason of sudden occasions, is sometimes (but rarely) two pence in five
shillings, or somewhat more in great urgencies. And since the ordinary rate of
things is to be taken as the measure of their price, and Mr. Lowndes tells us,
p. 78. That if the value of the Silver in the Coins should be raised above the
value, or Market Price, of the same Silver reduced to Bullion, the Subject
would be proportionably injured and defrauded; I leave him to make the
Inference, what will be the consequence in England, if our Coin be raised here
one fifth, or twenty per Cent.

Mr. Lowndes says farther, p. 80. That Silver has a price. I answer; Silver to
Silver can have no other price, but quantity for quantity. If there be any
other difference in value, it is or can be nothing but one of these two: First,
either the value of the labor employed about one parcel of Silver more than
another, makes a difference in their price; and thus fashioned Plate sells for
more than its weight of the same Silver; and in Countries where the Owners pay
for the Coinage, Silver in Coin is more worth than its weight in Bullion; but
here, where the Public pays the Coinage, they are of very near equal value,
when there is no need of Exportation: For then there is no more odds than the
trouble of carrying the Bullion to the Mint, and fetching again, is worth; Or
the charge of refining so much of it, as will bring it to Standard, if it be
worse than Standard.

Or Secondly, some Privilege belonging to one parcel of Silver which is denied
to another, viz. Here in England a liberty of Exportation allowed to Silver in
Bullion, denied to Silver Stamped. This, when there is need of Exportation of
Silver, gives some small advantage of value to uncoin'd Silver here, above
Coined; but that is ordinarily very inconsiderable; and can never reach to one
fifth, nor half one fifth, as has been already shown. And this I think will
answer all that is said about the price of Silver in that place.

It Is true what Mr. Lowndes says in the next words, p. 81. That five shillings
coined upon the Fo^t proposed, will actually contain more real and intrinsic
value of Silver by a great deal, than is in the current Money now commonly
applied to the payment of the said Rents, Revenues and Debts. But will he hence
conclude, because there is now lost in those Rents, Revenues and Debts, a great
deal more than twenty per Cent. under the present irregularity of our Coin, and
the Robbery in clipped Money, without any the least neglect or miscarriage in
the Owner that entitled him to that loss, that therefore it is just that the
loss of Twenty per Cent. be established on him by Law for the future, in the
reforming of our Coin?

Mr. Lowndes's second reason for lessening our Coin we have p. 82. in these
words, The value of the Silver in the Coin ought to be raised, to encourage the
bringing of Bullion to the Mint to be Coined. This raising of Money is, in
effect, as has been seen, nothing but giving a denomination of more pence to
the same quantity of Silver, viz. That the same quantity of Silver shall
hereafter be called seventy five pence, which is now called but sixty pence.
For that is all is done: As is manifest, when a Crown piece which now goes but
for sixty pence, shall be made to go for seventy five pence; for it is plain, it
contains nothing of Silver, or worth in it, more than it did before. Let us
suppose, that all our Silver Coin now in England were Six pences, Shillings,
Half-crowns and Crowns, all milled Money, full weight according to the present
Standard; And that it should be ordered, that for the future, the Crown piece
instead of going for sixty pence, should go for seventy five pence, and so
proportionably of all the other pieces; I ask then, how such a change of
denomination shall bring Bullion to the Mint to be Coined, and from whence? I
suppose this change of names, or ascribing to it more imaginary parts of any
denomination, has no Charms in it to bring Bullion to the Mint to be Coined:
For whether you call the piece Coined twelve pence, or fifteen pence, sixty or
seventy five, a Crown or a Scepter, it will buy no more Silk, Salt or Bread
than it would before. That therefore cannot tempt people to bring it to the
Mint. And if it will pay more Debt, that is perfect defrauding, and ought not
to be permitted. Next, I ask, from whence shall this raising fetch it? For
Bullion cannot be brought hither to stay here, whilst the Balance of our Trade
requires all the Bullion we bring in, to be Exported again, and more Silver out
of our former Stock with it, to answer our exigences beyond Seas. And whilst it
is so, the Goldsmiths and Returners of Money will give more for Bullion to
Export, than the Mint can give for it to Coin; and so none of that will come to
the Mint. But says our Author, p. 83. An Halfpenny an Ounce profit, which will
be in the proposed Coin, above the present price of Sterling Bullion, will be
an encouragement to those who have English Plate, to bring it in to be Coined.
I doubt whether there will be any such profit; for I imagine that Standard
Bullion cannot now be bought per Ounce for six shillings and five pence of our
clipped running Cash, which is the Measure whereby Mr. Lowndes determines of the
price of Sterling Silver. But taking this Halfpenny an Ounce profit for
granted, it will not bring to the Mint any Plate, whose Fashion is valued by
the Owner at an Halfpenny per Ounce; and how much then it is like to bring to
the Mint, is easy to guess.

The true and only good reason that brings Bullion to the Mint to be Coined, is
the same that brings it to England to stay there, viz. The gain we make by an
overballance of Trade. When our Merchants carry Commodities abroad, to a
greater value than those they bring home, the overplus comes to them in Foreign
Coin or Bullion, which will stay here, when we gain by the Balance of our
whole Trade. For then we can have no Debts beyond Sea to be paid with it: In
this thriving posture of our Trade, those to whose share this Bullion falls,
not having any use of it whilst it is in Bullion, choose to carry it to the
Mint to have it Coined there, whereby it is of more use to them for, all the
business of Silver in Trade, or purchasing Land; the Mint having ascertained
the weight and fineness of it: So that on any occasion, every one is ready to
take it at its known value, without any ^^^^ple; a convenience that is wanting
in Bullion. But when our Trade runs on the other side, and our exported
Commodities will not pay for those Foreign ones we consume, our Treasure must
go; and then it is in vain to bestow the labor of Coining on Bullion that must
be Exported again. To what purpose is it to make it pass through our Mint, when
it will away? The less pains and charge it costs us, the better.

His third reason P. 83 is, that this raising our Coin by making it more in
tale, will make it more commensurate to the general need thereof, and thereby
hinder the increase of hazardous Paper-credit, and the inconveniency of
Bartering.

Just as the Boy cut his Leather into five Quarters (as he called them) to
cover his Ball, when cut into four Quarters it fell short: But after all his
pains, as much of his Ball lay bare as before. If the quantity of Coined Silver
employed in England falls short, the arbitrary denomination of a greater number
of Pence given to it, or which is all one, to the several Coined pieces of it,
will make it commensurate to the size of our Trade, or the greatness of our
occasions. This is as certain, as that if the quantity of a Board which is to
stop a Leak of a Ship fifteen Inches square, be but twelve Inches square, it
will not be made to do it, by being measured by a Foot that is divided into
fifteen Inches instead of twelve, and so having a larger tale or number of
Inches in denomination given to it.

This indeed would be a convincing Reason, if sounds would give weight to
Silver, and the noise of a greater number of pence (less in quantity
proportionably as they are more in number) were a large supply of Money, which
our Author P. 84 says our occasions require, and which he by an increase of the
tale of pence hopes to provide. But that Mistake is very visible, and shall be
further shown in the business of Bartering.

The necessity of Trust and Bartering is one of the many inconveniences
springing from the want of Money. This inconvenience, the multiplying arbitrary
denominations, will no more supply, nor any ways make our scarcity of Coin
commensurate to the need there is of it, than if the Cloth which was provided
for clothing the Army, falling short, one should hope to make it commensurate
to that need there is of it, by measuring it by a Yard one fifth shorter than
the Standards or changing the Standard of the Yard, and so getting the full
denomination of Yards, necessary according to the present measure. For this is
all will be done by raising our Coin, as is proposed. All it amounts to, is no
more but this, viz. That each piece, and consequently our whole Stock of Money,
should be measured and denominated by a penny one fifth less than the Standard.

Where there is not Coined Silver in proportion to the value of the Commodities
that daily change Owners in Trade, there is a necessity of Trust, or Bartering;
i. e. changing Commodities for Commodities, without the intervention of Money.
For Example, let us suppose in Bermudos but an hunderd pounds in ready Money;
but that there is every day there a transferring of Commodities from one Owner
to anther, to the value of double as much. When the Money is all got into hands
that have already bought all that they have need of for that day, whoever has
need of any thing else that day, must either go on tick, or barter for it; i.
e. give the Commodities he can best spare, for the Commodities he wants, v. g.
Sugar for Bread, etc. Now it is evident here, that changing the Denomination of
the Coin they already have in Bermudos, or Coining it over again under new
Denominations, will not contribute in the least toward the removing this
necessity of Trust or Bartering. For the whole Silver they have in Coin, being
but four hundred Ounces; and the exchange of the value of Commodities made in a
distance of time, wherein this Money is paid, not above once, being to the
value of eight hundred Ounces of Silver; it is plain that one half of the
Commodities that shift hands, must of necessity be taken upon credit, or
exchanged by Barter; those who want them having not Money to pay for them. Nor
can any alteration of the Coin, of Denomination of these four hundred Ounces of
Silver help this: Because the value of the Silver, in respect of other
Commodities, will not thereby be at all increased; And the Commodities changed,
being (as in the case) double in value to the four hundred Ounces of Coined
Silver to be laid out in them; nothing can supply this want but a double
quantity, i. e. eight hundred Ounces of Coined Silver; how denominated it
matters not, so there be a fit proportion of small pieces to supply small
payments.

Suppose the Commodities passing every day in England, in Markets and Fairs,
between strangers, or such as trust not one another, were to the value of a
Million of Ounces of Silver; and there was but half a Million of Coined Silver
in the hands of those who wanted those Commodity; it is Demonstration they must
truck for them, or go without them. If then the Coined Silver of England, be
not sufficient to answer the value of Commodities moving in Trade amongst us,
Credit or Barter must do it. Where the Credit and Money fail, Barter alone must
do it: Which being introduced by the want of a greater plenty of Coined Silver,
nothing but a greater plenty of Coined Silver can remove it. The increase of
Denomination does, or can do nothing in the case: For it is Silver by its
quantity, and not Denomination, that is the price of things, and measure of
Commerce; and it is the weight of Silver in it, and not the name of the piece
that men estimate Commodities by, and exchange them for.

If this be not so, when the necessity of our affairs abroad, or ill husbandry
at home, has carried away half our Treasure, and a moiety of our Money is gone
out of England; it is but to issue a Proclamation, that a Penny shall go for
Twopence, Sixpence for a Shilling, half a Crown for a crown, etc. and
immediately without any more ado we are as rich as before. And when half the
remainder is gone, it is but doing the same thing again, and raising the
Denomination anew, and we are where we were, and so on: Where by supposing the
denomination raised 15/16, every man will be as rich with an Ounce of Silver in
his Purse as he was before when he had sixteen Ounces there; and in as great
plenty of Money, able to carry on his Trade, without bartering; his Silver, by
this short way of raising, being changed into the value of Gold: For when
Silver will buy sixteen times as much Wine, Oil, and Bread, etc: to day, as it
would yesterday (all other things remaining the same but the Denomination) it
has the real worth of Gold.

This I guess every body sees cannot be so. And yet this must be so, if it be
true, that raising the Denomination one fifth can supply the want, or one jot
raise the value of Silver in respect of other Commodities; i. e. make a less
quantity of it to day, but a greater quantity of Corn, Oil and Cloth, and all
other Commodities, than it would yesterday, and thereby remove the necessity of
bartering. For if raising the Denomination can thus raise the value of Coin in
exchange for other Commodities one fifth, by the same reason it can raise it
two fifths, and afterward three fifths, and again, if need be, four fifths,
and as much further as you please. So that by this admirable contrivance of
raising our Coin, we shall be as rich and as well able to support the charge of
the Government, and carry on our Trade without bartering or any other
inconvenience for want of Money, with sixty thousand Ounces of Coined Silver in
England, as if we had six or sixty Millions. If this be not so, I desire any
one to show me, why the same way of raising the denomination which can raise
the value of Money in respect of other Commodities, one fifth, cannot when you
please raise it another fifth, and so on? I beg to be told where it must stop,
and why at such a degree without being able to go farther.

It must be taken notice of, that the raising I speak of here, is the raising
of the value of our Coin in respect of other Commodities (as I call it all
along) in contradistinction to raising the Denomination. The confounding of
these in discourses concerning Money, is one great cause, I suspect, that this
matter is so little understood, and so often talked of with so little
Information of the hearers.

A Penny is a denomination no more belonging to eight than to eighty, or to one
single grain of Silver: And so it is not necessary that there should be sixty
such Pence, no more nor less, in an Ounce of Silver i. e. twelve in a piece
called a Shilling, and sixty in a piece called a Crown; such like divisions
being only extrinsical denominations, are every where perfectly arbitrary, For
here in England there might as well have been twelve Shillings in a Penny, as
twelve Pence in a Shilling, i. e. the denomination of the less piece might have
been a Shilling, and of the bigger a penny. Again, the Shilling might have been
Coined ten times as big as the Penny, and the Crown ten times as big as the
Shilling; whereby the Shilling would have had but ten Pence in it, and the
Crown an hundred. But this, however ordered, alters not one jot the value of
the Ounce of Silver in respect of other things, any more than it does its
weight. This raising being but giving of names at pleasure to aliquot parts of
any piece, viz. that now the sixtieth part of an Ounce of Silver shall be
called a Penny, and to morrow that the seventy fifth part of an Ounce of Silver
shall be called a Penny, may be done with what increase you please: And thus it
may be ordered by a Proclamation, that a Shilling shall go for twenty four
pence, an half-Crown for sixty instead of thirty pence, and so of the rest. But
that an half-Crown shall be worth, or contain, sixty such Pence as the Pence
were before this change of denomination was made, that no power on Earth can
do: Nor can any Power (but that which can make the plenty or scarcity of
Commodities) raise the value of our Money thus double in respect of other
Commodities, and make that the same piece, or quantity of Silver, under a
double denomination, shall purchase double the quantity of Pepper, Wine or
Lead, an instant after such Proclamation, to what it would do an instant
before. If this could be, we might, as every one sees, raise Silver to the
value of Gold, and make our Selves as Rich as we pleased. But it is but going to
Market with an Ounce of Silver of one hundred and twenty pence, to be convinced
that it will purchase no more than an Ounce of Silver of sixty pence. And the
ringing of the piece will as soon purchase more Commodities as its change of
denomination, and the multiplied name of pence, when it is called six score
instead of sixty.

It Is proposed, that the twelve pence should be raised to fifteen pence, and
the Crown to seventy five pence, and so proportionably of the rest: But yet
that the Pound Sterling should not be raised. If there be any advantage in
raising, why should not that be raised too? And as the Crown piece is raised
from sixty, to seventy five pence, why should not the Pound Sterling be raised
in the same proportion, from Two hundred and forty pence, to Three hundred
pence?

Farther, If this raising our Coin can so stretch our Money and enlarge our
pared remainder of it, as to make it more commensurate to the general need
thereof, for carrying on the common Traffic and Commerce of the Nation, and to
answer occasions requiring a larger Supply of Money, as Mr. Lowndes tells us in
his third Reason P. 83 Why are we so nigardly to our selves in this time of
occasion, as to stop at one fifth? Why do we not raise it one full Moiety, and
thereby double our Money? If Mr. Lowndes's Rule P. 78 That if the value of the
Silver in the Coin, should be raised above the Market price of the same Silver
reduced to Bullion; the Subject would be proportionably injured and defrauded,
must keep us from this advantages and the public care of Justice stop the
raising of the Money at one fifth, because if our Money be raised beyond the
Market-price of Bullion, it will be so much defrauding of the Subject: I then
say it must not be raised one fifth, nor half one fifth, that is, it must not
be raised fifteen pence in the Crown; no nor five pence. For I deny that the
Market-price of Standard Bullion ever was, or ever can be five Shillings seven
Pence of lawful weighty Money the Ounce: So that if our present milled Money be
raised one fifth, the Subjects will by Mr. Lowndes's Rule, be defrauded sixteen
per Cent. nay, above eighteen per Cent. For the Market-Price of Standard
Bullion being ordinarily under five Shillings four Pence the Ounce, when sold
for weighty Money (which is but one thirtieth) whatever our present milled
Money is raised above one thirtieth, it is by Mr. Lowndes's Rule so much
defrauding the Subject. For the Market-price of any thing, and so of Bullion,
is to be taken from its ordinary rate all the Year round; and not from the
extraordinary rise of two or three Market-days in a Year. And that the
Market-price of Standard Silver was not found, nor pretended to be above five
Shillings and four Pence the Ounce, before cliping had left none but light
running Cash to pay for Bullion, or any thing else, is evident from a Paper
then published, which I took the liberty to examine in my Consideration of the
consequences of raising the value of Money, etc. Printed 1692. The Author of
that Paper, it is manifest, was not ignorant of the price of Silver, nor had a
design to lessen its rate, set down the highest price it then bore.

If then, Mr. Lowndes's Rule of Justice, and care of the Subject, be to
regulate the rise of our milled Money, it must not be raised above one
thirtieth part. If the advantages he promises, of making our Money, by raising
it one fifth, more commensurate to the general need thereof, be to be laid hold
on, it is reasonable to further, and make it yet more commensurate to the
general need there is of it. Which ever of the two Mr. Lowndes will prefer,
either reason of State, or rule of Justice, one fifth must not be his measure
of raising our present milled Money. If the advantage of making our Money more
proportionate to our Trade, and other necessities, be to govern its proposed
raising, every one will cry out to Mr. Lowndes, If your way will do what you
say, the raising it one half will be much better than one fifth, and therefore
pray let an Half-crown be raised to a Crown, and a Sixpence to a Shilling. If
Equity, and the consideration of the Subjects Property ought to govern in the
case, you must not raise our milled Crown to above Five Shillings and Four
Pence.

If it here be said to me, that I do then allow that our Money may be raised
one thirtieth, i. e. that the Crown piece should be raised to Five Shillings
and two Pence, and so proportionably of the other species of our Coin; I
answer, he that infers so, makes his Inference a little too quick.

But let us for once allow the ordinary price of Standard Silver to be Five
Shillings Four Pence the Ounce, to be paid for in weighty Coin (for that must
always be remembered, when we talk of the rate of Bullion) and that the rate of
Bullion is the just measure of raising our Money. This I say is no reason for
the raising our milled Crown now to Five Shillings Four Pence, and recoining
all our clipped Money upon that Foot; unless we intend, as soon as that is done,
to new raise, and Coin it again. For whilst our Trade and Affairs abroad
require the exportation of Silver, and the exportation of our Coined Silver is
prohibited, and made penal by our Law, Standard Bullion will always be sold
here for a little more than its weight of Coined Silver. So that if we shall
endeavor to equal our weighty Coined Silver to Standard Bullion, by raising
it, whilst there is a necessity of the exportation of Silver, we shall do no
otherwise than a Child, who runs to overtake and get up to the top of his
shadow, which still advances at the same rate that he does. The privilege that
Bullion has, to be exported freely, will give it a little advance in price
above our Coin, let the Denomination of that be raised or fallen as you please,
whilst there is need of its Exportation, and the Exportation of our Coin is
prohibited by Law. But this advance will be but little, and will always keep
within the bounds which the risque and trouble of melting down our Coin shall
set to it in the estimate of the Exporter. He that will rather venture to throw
an Hundred Pound into his Melting-pot, when no body sees him, and reduce it to
Bullion, than give an Hundred and Five Pounds for the same weight of the like
Bullion, will never give Five Shillings and Five Pence of milled Money for an
Ounce of Standard Bullion; nor buy at that price, what he can have near Five
per Cent. cheaper, without any risque, if he will not accuse himself. And I
think it may be concluded, that very few, who have Furnaces, and other
conveniences ready for melting Silver, will give One per Cent. for Standard
Bullion, which is under Five Shillings and Three Pence per Ounce, who can only
for the trouble of melting it, reduce our Coin to as good Bullion.

The odds of the price in Bullion to Coin on this account (which is the only
one, where the Coin is kept to the Standard) can never be a reason for raising
our Coin to preserve it from melting down: Because this price above its weight
is given for Bullion, only to avoid melting down our Coin; and so this
difference of price between Standard Bullion and our Coin, can be no cause of
its melting down.

These three Reasons which I have examined, contain the great advantages, which
our Author supposes the proposed raising of our Coin will produce. And
therefore I have dwelt longer upon them. His remaining six Reasons being of
less moment, and offering most of them, but some circumstantial conveniences,
as to the computation of our Money, etc. I shall more briefly pass over. Only
before I proceed to them, I shall here set down the different value of our
Money, collected from our Authors History of the several changes of our Coin,
since Edward the First's Reign, quite down to this present time. A curious
History indeed, for which I think my self and the World indebted to Mr.
Lowndes's great Learning in this sort of knowledge, and his great exactness in
relating the particulars. I shall remark only the quantity of Silver was in a
Shilling in each of those Changes; that so the Reader may at first sight,
without farther trouble, compare the lessening, or increase of the quantity of
Silver upon every change. For in propriety of speech, the adding to the
quantity of Silver in our Coin, is the true raising of its value; and the
diminishing the quantity of Silver in it, is the sinking of its value; however
they come to be transposed and used in the quite contrary sense.

If my Calculations, from the Weight and Fineness I find set down in Mr.
Lowndes's Extract out of the Indentures of the Mint, have not misled me, the
quantity of Silver to a Grain, which was in a Shilling in every Change of our
Money, is set down in the following Table.

One Shilling contained of Fine Silver Grains. 28 Edw. 1 264 18 Edw. 3 236 27
Edw. 3 213 9 Hen. 5 176 1 Hen. 6 142 4 Hen. 6 176 49 Hen. 6 142 1 Hen. 8 118 34
Hen. 8 100 36 Hen. 8 60 37 Hen. 8 40 3 Edw. 6 40 5 Edw. 6 20 6 Edw. 6 88 2
Eliz. 89 43 Eliz. 86

And so it has remained from the 43 of Elizabeth to this day.

Mr. Lowndes's 69

Mr. Lowndes having given us the Fineness of the Standard Silver in every
Reign, and the number of pieces it was Coined into, closes this History with
words to this purpose, p. 56. By this deduction it does evidently appear, that
it has been a Policy constantly practiced in the Mints of England, to raise
the value of the Coin in its extrinsick Denomination from time to time, as any
exigence or occasion required, and more especially to encourage the bringing of
Bullion into the Realm to be Coined. This indeed, is roundly to conclude for
his Hypothesis. But I could wish, that from the Histories of those Times,
wherein the several changes were made, he had showed us the Exigences and
Occasions that produced the raising of the Coin, and what effects it had.

If I mistake not, Henry the 8 ths several raisings of our Coin, brought little
increase of Silver into England. As the several Species of our Coin lessened in
their respective quantities of Silver; so the Treasure of the Realm decreased
too: And he that found the Kingdom rich, did not, as I remember, by all his
raisings our Coin, leave it so.

Another thing, (that from this History) makes me suspect that the raising the
Denomination was never found effectively to draw Silver into England, is the
lowering the Denomination, or adding more Silver to the several Species of our
Coin, as in Hen. VI's time, the Shilling was increased from One Hundred Forty
Two Grains of Silver, to One Hundred Seventy Six. And in the 6 th of Edw. VI,
in whose time raising the Denomination seems to have been tried to the utmost,
when a Shilling was brought to Twenty Grains of Silver. And the great
alteration that was then quickly made on the other hand, from Twenty to Eighty
Grains at one leap, seems to show that this lessening the Silver in our Coin,
had proved highly prejudicial: For this is a greater change in sinking of the
Denomination in proportion, than ever was made at once in raising it; A
Shilling being made four Times weightier in Silver in the 6 th, than it was in
the 5 th year of Edw. VI. his Reign.

Kingdoms are seldom found weary of the Riches they have, or averse to the
increase of their Treasure. If therefore the raising the Denomination did in
reality bring Silver into the Realm, it cannot be thought that they would at
any time sink the Denomination, which by the Rule of contraries should be at
least suspected to drive, or keep it out.

Since therefore we are not from matter of Fact informed, what were the true
Motives that caused those several changes in the Coin; May we not with Reason
suspect, that they were owing to that Policy of the Mint, set down by our
Author, p. 83. in these words, that the proposed advance is agreeable to the
Policy that in past Ages has been practiced, not only in our Mint, but in the
Mints of all Politic Governments; namely, to raise the value of Silver in the
Coin to promote the work of the Mint? As I remember, suitable to this Policy of
the Mint, there was, some two years since, a complaint of a worthy Gentleman,
not ignorant of it, that the Mill in the Mint stood still; And therefore there
was a Proposal offered for bringing Grist to the Mill.

The business of Money, as in all Times, even in this our quick-sighted Age,
has been thought a Mystery: Those employed in the Mint must, by their places,
be supposed to penetrate deepest into it. It Is no impossible thing then to
imagine, that it was not hard, in the Ignorance of past Ages, when Money was
little, and Skill in the Turns of Trade less, for those versed in the Business
and Policy of the Mint, to persuade a Prince, especially if Money were scarce,
that the Fault was in the Standard of the Mint, and that the way to increase
the Plenty of Money, was to raise (a well sounding Word) the Value of the Coin.
This could not but be willingly enough hearkened to; when, besides the Hopes of
drawing an Increase of Silver into the Realm, it brought present Gain by the
Part which the King got of the Money, which was hereupon all coined anew, and
the Mint Officers lost nothing, since it promoted the Work of the Mint.

This Opinion Mr. Lowndes himself gives sufficient ground for in his Book,
particularly p. 29. where we read these Words, Although the former Debasements
of the Coins by public Authority, especially those in the Reign of King Henry
VIII. and King Edward VI. might be projected for the Profit of the Crown, and
the Projectors might measure that Profit by the excessive Quantities of Allay
that were mixed with the Silver and the Gold (and let me add, or by the
Quantity of Silver lessened in each Species, which is the same thing) And
though this was enterprized by a Prince, who could stretch his Prerogative very
far upon his People; and was done in Times when the Nation had very little
Commerce, Inland or Foreign, to be injured and prejudiced thereby; yet
Experience presently showed, that the Projectors were mistaken, and that it was
absolutely necessary to have the base Money reformed. This at least they were
not mistaken in, that they brought Work to the Mint, and a Part of the Money
coined to the Crown for Seigniorage; in both which there was Profit. Mr.
Lowndes tells us, p. 44. that Henry VIII. had to the Value of fifty Shillings
for every Pound Weight of Gold coined: I have met with it somewhere, that
formerly the King might take what he pleased for Coinage. I know not too but
the flattering Name of raising Money might prevail then as it does now; and
impose so far on them, as to make them think the raising, i. e. diminishing the
Silver in their Coin, would bring it into the Realm, or stay it here when they
found it going out. For if we may guess at the other, by Henry VIII's raising,
it was probably when, by reason of Expense in foreign Wars, or ill managed
Trade, they found Money begin to grow scarce.

The having the Species of our Coin one fifth bigger, or one fifth less than
they are at present, would be neither good nor harm to England, if they had
always been so. Our Standard has continued in weight and fineness just as it is
now, for very near this hundred Years last past: And those who think the
Denomination and Size of our Money have any Influence on the State of our
Wealth, have no reason to change the present Standard of our Coin; since under
that we have had a greater increase, and longer Continuance of Plenty of Money,
than perhaps any other Country can show; I see no reason to think, that a
little bigger or less Size of the pieces coined, is of any moment one was or
the other. The Species of Money in any Country, of whatsoever Sizes, fit for
coining, if their Proportions to one another be suited to Arithmetic and
Calculations, in whole Numbers, and the Ways of Account in that Country adapted
to small Payments, and carefully kept to their just Weight and Fineness, can
have no Harm in them. The Harm comes by the change, which unreasonably and
unjustly gives away and transfers Men's Properties, disorders Trade, puzzels
Accounts, and needs a new Arithmetic to cast up Reckonings, and keep Accounts
in; besides a thousand other Inconveniences; not to mention the Charge of
recoining the Money. For this may be depended on, that if our Money be raised,
as is proposed, it will enforce the recoining of all our Money, both old and
new (except the new Shillings) to avoid the terrible Difficulty and Confusion
there will be in keeping Accounts in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence (as they must
be) when the Species of our Money are so ordered, as not to answer those
Denominations in round Numbers.

This Consideration leads me to Mr. Lowndes fifth and sixth Reasons, p. 85.
wherein he recommends the raising our Money in the Proportion proposed, for its
Convenience, to our accounting by Pounds, Shillings, and Pence. And for
obviating Perplexity among the common People, he proposes the present weigthy
Crown to go at six Shillings three Pence; and the new Scepter or Unite to be
coined of the same Weight, to go at the same rate; and Half-crowns,
Half-scepters, or Half-unites, of the Weight of the present Half-erown, to go
for two Shillings seven Pence Halfpenny: By no Number of which Pieces can
there be made an even Pound Sterling, or any Number of even Shillings under a
Pound; but they always fall into Fractions of Pounds and Shillings, as may be
seen by this following Table.

l. s. d. 1 Crown or Scepter piece 6 3 2 Crown pieces 12 6 3 Crown pieces 18 9
4 Crown pieces 1 5 1 Half-crown piece 2 7 3 Half-crown pieces 8 10 5 Half-crown
pieces 15 1 7 Half-crowns. 1 1 4

The present Shilling, and new Testoon going for 15. Pence, no Number of them
make any Number of even Shillings, but five Shillings, ten Shillings, fifteen
Shillings, and twenty Shillings; but in all the rest, they always fall into
Fractions.

The like may be said of the present Six-pences, and future half Testoons going
for Seven Pence Halfpenny; the quarter Testoons, which are to go for three
pence three farthings; and the Gross and Groats, which are to go for five
pence; the half Gross or Groat, which is to go for two pence half penny; and
the Prime, which is to go for a penny farthing: Out of any Tale of each of
which Species there can no just Number of Shillings be made, as I think, but
five Shillings, ten Shillings, fifteen Shillings, and twenty Shillings; but
they always fall into Fractions. The new intended Shilling alone seems to be
suited to our accounting in Pounds, Shillings, and Pence. The great pieces, as
Scepters, and Half Scepters, which are made to serve for the Payment of greater
Sums, and are for Dispatch in Tale, will not in Tale fall into even Pounds. And
I fear it will puzzle a better Arithmetician, than most Country Men are, to
tell, without Pen and Ink, how many of the lesser pieces (except the Shillings)
however combined, will make just sixteen or seventeen Shillings. And I imagine
there is not one Country Man of three, but may have it for his Pains, if he can
tell an Hundred Pound made up of a promiscuous Mixture of the Species of this
new raised Money (excluding the Shillings) in a days time. And that which will
help to confound him, and every body else, will be the old Crowns, Half-crowns,
Shillings, and Sixpences current for new Numbers of Pence. So that I take it
for granted, that if our Coin be raised, as is proposed, not only all our
clipped, but all our weighty and milled Money must of necessity be recoined
too; if you would no have Trade disturbed, and People more diseased with new
Money, which they cannot tell, nor keep Accounts in, than with light and
clipped Money, which they are cheated with. And what a Charge the new coining
of all our Money will be to the Nation, I have computed in another place. Vid.
short Observations on a Paper entitled, For encouraging coining, etc. p. 8.
That I think is of some Consideration in our present Circumstances, though the
Confusion that this new raised Money, I fear, is like to introduce; and the
want of Money, and stop of Trade, when the clipped is called in, and the
weighty is to be recoin'd; be of much greater.

His fourth, Eighth, and Ninth Reasons, p. 84. and 86. are taken from the
saving our present milled Money from being cut and recoin'd. The End I confess
to be good: It Is very reasonable, that so much excellent Coin, as good as ever
was in the World, should not be destroyed. But there is, I think, a surer and
easier way to preserve it, than what Mr. Lowndes proposes. It Is past doubt, it
will be in no danger of recoining, if our Money be kept upon the present Foot:
But if it be raised, as Mr. Lowndes proposes, all the present milled Money will
be in danger, and the Difficulty of counting it upon the new proposed Foot will
enforce it to be recoin'd into new pieces of Crowns, Half-crowns, Shillings,
and Six-pences, that may pass for the same Number of Pence the present do, viz.
60.30.12. and 6. as I have above shown. He says in his fourth Reason, that if
pieces, having the same Bigness, should have different Values, it might be
difficult for the common People (especially those not skilled in Arithmetic)
to compute how many of one kind will be equal to he Sum of another. Such
Difficulties and Confusion, in counting Money, I agree with him, ought
carefully to be avoided. And therefore, since if pieces having the same Bigness
and Stamp, which the People are acquainted with, shall have new Values
different from those which People are accustomed to; and these new Values shall
in Numbers of Pence not answer our way of accounting by Pounds and Shillings;
it will be difficult for the common People (especially those not skilled in
Arithmetic) to compute how many of any one kind will make any Sum they are to
pay or receive; Especially when the Numbers of any one kind of pieces will be
brought into so few even Sums of Pounds and Shilings. And thus Mr. Lowdes's
Argument here turns upon himself, and is against raising our Coin, to the Value
proposed by him, from the Confusion it will produce.

His 8 th. Reason, p. 86. we have in these Words; It is difficult to conceive
how any Design of amending the clipped Money, can be compassed without raising
the Value of the Silver remaining in them, because of the great Deficiency of
the Silver clipped away (which upon recoining) must necessarily be defraid and
born one way or other.

It Is no Difficulty to conceive, that clipped Money, being not lawful Money,
should be prohibited to pass for more than its Weight. Next, it is no
Difficulty to conceive, that clipped Money, passing for no more than its
Weight, and so being in the state of Standard Bullion, which cannot be
exported, should be brought to the Mint, and there exchanged for weighty Money.
By this way, it is no Difficulty to conceive how the amending the clipped Money
may be compassed, because this way the Deficiency of the Silver clipped away,
will certainly be defraid and born one way or other.

And thus I have gone over all Mr. Lowndes's Reasons for raising our Coin:
wherein, though I seem to differ from him, yet I flatter my self, it is not
altogether so much as at first sight may appear; since by what I find in
another Part of his Book, I have reason to judge he is a great deal of my Mind.
For he has five very good Arguments for continuing the present Standard of
Fineness, each of which is as strong for continuing also the present Standard
of Weight; i. e. continuing a Penny of the same Weight of Standard Silver,
which at present it has. He that has a mind to be satisfied of this, may read
Mr. Lowndes's first five Reasons for continuing the present Standard of
Fineness, which he will find in his 29, 30, 31, 32 pages of his Report. And
when Mr. Lowndes himself has again considered what there is of Weight in them,
and how far it reaches, he will at least not think it strange if they appear to
me and others, good Arguments against putting less Silver into our Coin of the
same Denominations, let that Diminution be made what way it will.

What Mr. Lowndes says about Gold Coins, p. 88. etc. appears to me highly
rational, and I perfectly agree with him; excepting only that I do not think
Gold is in regard of Silver risen in England; which I think may be thus made
out. A Guinea weighing five Penny Weight and nine Grains, or one hundred and
twenty nine Grains; and a Pound Sterling weighing one thousand eight hundred
and sixty Grains; A Guinea at twenty Shillings is as one hundred and twenty
nine to one thousand eight hundred and sixty; that is, as one to fourteen and
an half.

A Guinea at two and twenty Shillings, is as one hundred and twenty nine, to
two thousand forty two, i. e. as one to sixteen.

A Guinea at thirty Shillings, is as one hundred twenty nine to two thousand
seven hundred eighty four, i. e. as one to twenty one and a half, near.

He therefore that receives twenty Shillings milled Money for a Guinea,
receives one thousand eight Hundred and sixty Grains Standard Silver, for one
hundred twenty nine Grains of Standard Gold, i. e. fourteen and an half for one.

He who receives two and twenty Shillings milled Money for a Guinea, has two
thousand forty two Grains Standard Silver, for one hundred twenty nine Grains
Standard Gold, i. e, sixteen for one.

He who receives thirty Shillings milled Money for a Guinea, has two thousand
seven hundred eighty four Grains Standard Silver, for one hundred twenty nine
Grains of Gold, i. e. twenty one and an half for one.

But the current Cash being (upon Trials made about Midsummer last) computed by
Mr. Lowndes P. 108. to want half its Standard weight, and not being mended
since, it is evident he who receives thirty Shillings of our present clipped
Money, for a Guinea, has but One thousand three hundred ninety two Grains of
Standard Silver, for One hundred twenty nine Grains of Gold, i. e. has but ten
and three quarters of Silver for one of Gold.

I have left out the utmost precisions of fractions in these computations, as
not necessary in the present Case, these whole Numbers showing well enough the
difference of the value of Guineas at those several Rates.

If it be true what I here assert, viz. That he who receives 30 Shillings in
our Current clipped Money for a Guinea, receives not eleven Grains of Silver for
one of Gold; whereas the value of Gold to Silver in all our Neighboring
Countries is about fifteen to one, which is about a third part more; It will
probably be demanded, how comes it to pass that Foreigners, or others, import
Gold; when they do not receive as much Silver for it here, as they may have in
all other Countries? The reason whereof is visibly this, that they exchange it
not here for Silver, but for our Commodities; And our Bargains for Commodities
as well as all other Contracts being made in Pounds Shillings and Pence, our
clipped Money retains amongst the People (who know not how to count but by
Current Money) a part of its legal value, whilst it passes for the satisfaction
of legal Contracts, as if it were Lawful Money. As long as the King receives it
for his Taxes, and the Landlord for his Rent, it is no wonder the Farmer and
Tenent should receive it for his Commodities. And this perhaps would do well
enough, if our Money and Trade were to Circulate only amongst our Selves, and
we had no Commerce with the rest of the World, and needed it not. But here lies
the loss, when Foreigners shall bring over Gold hither, and with that pay for
our Commodities at the rate of Thirty Shillings the Guinea, when the same
quantity of Gold that is in a Guinea is not beyond Sea worth more Silver than
is in twenty, or one and twenty and six Pence of our milled and lawful Money:
By which way of paying for our Commodities England loses near one third of the
value of all the Commodities it thus sells. And it is all one as if Foreigners
paid for them in Money Coined and clipped beyond Sea, wherein was one third less
Silver than there ought to be. And thus we lose near one third in all our
Exportation, whilst Foreign Gold Imported is received in Payment for Thirty
Shillings a Guinea. To make this appear, we need but trace this way of Commerce
a little, and there can be no doubt of the loss we suffer by it.

Let us suppose, for Example, a Bale of Holland Linen worth there, one hundred
and eighty Ounces of our Standard Silver; And a Bale of Serge here worth also
the same weight of One hundred eighty Ounces of the same Standard Silver: It Is
evident, these two Bales are exactly of the same value. Mr. Lowndes tells us P.
88 That at this time the Gold that is in a Guinea (if it were carried to Spain,
Italy, Barbary and some other places,) would not purchase so much Silver there,
as is equal to the Standard of twenty of our Shillings, i. e. would be in value
there to Silver scarce as one to fourteen and an half: And I think, I may say,
that Gold in Holland is, or lately was, as one to fifteen, or not much above.
Taking then Standard Gold in Holland to be in proportion to Standard Silver, as
one to about fifteen, or a little more; Twelve Ounces of our Standard Gold, or
as much Gold as is in Forty-four Guineas and a half, must be given for that
Bale of Holland-Linnen, if any one will pay for it there in Gold: But if he
buys that Bale of Serge here for One hundred and eighty Ounces of Silver, which
is Forty eight Pounds Sterling, if he pays for it in Gold at Thirty Shillings
the Guinea, two and Thirty Guineas will pay for it. So that in all the Goods
that we sell beyond Seas for Gold Imported, and Coined into Guineas, unless the
Owners raise them above what they would Sell them for in milled Money, we lose
twelve in Forty four and an half, which is very near one third.

This loss is wholly owing to the permitting clipped Money in Payment. And this
loss we must unavoidably suffer whilst clipped Money is Current amongst us. And
this robbing of England of near one third of the value of the Commodities we
Sell out, will continue whilst People had rather receive Guineas at Thirty
Shillings, than Silver Coin (no other being to be had) that is not worth half
what they take it for. And yet this clipped Money, as bad as it is, and however
unwilling People are to be charged with it, will always have Credit enough to
pass, whilst the Goldsmiths and Bankers receive it; and they will always
receive it, whilst they can pass it over again to the King with advantage, and
can have hopes to prevail, that at last when it can be born no longer, but must
be called in, no part of the loss of light Money, which shall be found in their
hands shall fall upon them, though they have for many Years dealt in it, and by
reason of its being clipped have had all the running Cash of the Kingdom in
their hands, and made profit of it. I say, clipped Money, however had it be,
will always pass whilst the King's Receivers, the Bankers of any kind, and at
last the Exchequer takes it. For who will not receive clipped Money, rather than
have none for his necessary occasions, whilst he sees the great Receipt of the
Exchequer admits it, and the Bank and Goldsmiths will take it of him, and give
him Credit for it, so that he needs keep no more of it by him than he pleases.
In this State, whilst the Exchequer receives clipped Money, I do not see how it
can be stopped from passing. A clipped Half-Crown that goes at the Exchequer,
will not be refused by any one who has hopes by his own or others hands to
convey it thither, and who, unless he take it, cannot Trade, or shall not be
paid. Whilst therefore the Exchequer is open to clipped Money, it will pass, and
whilst clipped Money passes, Clippers will certainly be at Work; and what a gap
this leaves to Foreigners, if they will make use of it to pour in clipped Money
upon us (as its Neighbors did into Portugal) as long as we have either Goods
or weighty Money left to be carried away at fifty per Cent. or greater profit,
its easy to see.

I will suppose the King receives clipped Money in the Exchequer, and at half or
three quarters loss Coins it into milled Money. For if he receives all, how
much soever clipped, I suppose the Clippers Sheers are not so squemish as not to
pare away above half. 'T will be a wonderful conscienciousness in them, no
where, that I know, to be paralleled, if they will content themselves with
less profit than they can make, and will leave seven Penny worth of Silver in
an Half-Crown, if six Penny worth and the Stamp be enough to make it pass for
Half a Crown. When his Majesty has Coined this into milled Money of Standard
weight, and paid it out again to the Bankers, Goldsmiths or others, what shall
then become of it? Either they will lay it up to get rid of their clipped Money,
for no Body will part with heavy Money, whilst he has any light; nor will any
heavy Money come abroad whilst there is light left; for whoever has clipped
Money by him, will sell good Bargains, or borrow at any Rate of those who are
willing to part with any weighty, to keep that by him, rather than the clipped
Money he has in his hands. So that as far as this reaches, no milled Money, how
much soever be Coined will appear abroad or if it does, will it long escape the
Coiners and Clippers hands, who will be at work presently upon it to furnish
the Exchequer with more clipped Money at fifty, sixty, seventy, or I know not
what advantage. Though this be enough to cut off the hopes of milled Money
appearing in payments whilst any clipped is current. Yet to this we may add,
that Gold Imported at an over value will sweep it away as fast as it is Coined
whilst clipped Money keeps up the rate of Guineas above their former value. This
will be the circulation of our Money, whilst clipped is permitted any way to be
Current. And if store enough of clipped Money from at home or abroad, can be but
provided (as it is more than probable it may now the Trade is so Universal, and
has been so long practiced with great advantege, and no great danger, as
appears by the few have suffered in regard of the great number it is evident are
engaged in the Trade, and the vent of it here in England is so known and sure)
I do not see how in a little while we shall have any Money or Goods at all left
in England, if Clipping be not immediately stopped. And how Clipping can be
stopped, but by an immediate positive total Prohibition, whereby all clipped
Money shall be forbid to pass in any Payment whatsoever, or to pass for more
than its weight, I would be glad to learn. Clipping is the great Leak, which
for some time past has contributed more to Sink us, than all the Force of our
Enemies could do. It Is like a Breach in the Sea-bank, which widens every moment
till it be stopped. And my timorous Temper must be pardoned if I am frighted
with the thoughts of clipped Money being Current one moment longer, at any other
value but of warrant'd Standard Bullion. And therefore there can be nothing
more true and reasonable, nor that deserves better to be considered, than what
Mr. Lowndes says in his Corollary P. 90.

Whoever desires to know the different ways of Coining Money by the Hammer and
by the Mill, may inform himself in the exact Account Mr. Lowndes has given of
both, under his second general Head: Where he may also see the probablest guess
that has been made of the quantity of our clipped Money, and the Silver
deficient in it; and an Account of what Silver Money was Coined in the Reigns
of Q. Elizabeth K. James 1st. and Charles 1st. more exact than is to be had any
where else. There is only one thing which I shall mention, since Mr. Lowndes
does it here again under this Head P. 100. and that is, melting down our Coin;
concerning which I shall venture humbly to propose these following Questions.

1. Whether Bullion be any thing but Silver, whose Workmanship has no value? 2.
Whether that Workmanship, which can be had for nothing, has, or can have any
value? 3. Whether, whilst the Money in our Mint is Coined for the Owners,
without any cost to them, our Coin can ever have any value above Standard
Bullion? 4. Whether, whilst our Coin is not of value above Standard Bullion,
Goldsmiths and others, who have need of Standard Silver, will not rather take
what is by the Free labor of the Mint ready essaid and adjusted to their use,
and melt that down, rather than be at the trouble of melting mixing and
essaying of Silver for the uses they have? 5. Whether the only cure for this
wanton, though criminal melting down our Coin, be not, that the Owners should
pay one Moiety of the Sixteen-pence Halfpenny, which is paid per Pound Troy
for Coinage of Silver, which the King now pays all? 6. Whether by this means
Standard Silver in Coin will not be more worth than Standard Silver in Bullion,
and so be preserved from this wanton melting down, as soon as an overballance
of our Trade shall bring as Silver to stay here? for till then it is in vain to
think of preserving our Coin from melting down, and therefore to no purpose
till then to change that Law. 7. Whether any Laws, or any Penalties can keep
our Coin from being carried out, when Debts contracted beyond Seas call for it?
8. Whether it be any odds to England, whether it be carried out, melted down
into Bullion, or in Specie? 9. Whether, whilst the Exigences of our occasions
and Trade call for it abroad, it will not always be melted down for the
convenience of Exportation, so long as the Law prohibits its Exportation in
Specie? 10. Whether Standard Silver in Coin and in Bullion, will not
immediately be of the same value as soon as the Prohibition of carrying out
Money in Specie is taken off? 11. Whether an Ounce of Silver the more would be
carried out in a Year, if that Prohibition were taken off? 12. Whether Silver in
our Coin will not always, during the Prohibition of its Exportation, be a
little less worth than Silver in Bullion, whilst the Consumption of Foreign
Commodities beyond what ours pay for, makes the Exportation of Silver
necessary? And so, during such a state, Raise your Money as much and as often
as you will, Silver in the Coin will never fetch as much as the Silver in
Bullion, as Mr. Lowndes expresses it, p. 110.
As to the Inconveniences and Damages we sustain by clipped Money passing by
Tale, as if it were Lawful, nothing can be more true, more judicious, nor more
weighty, than what Mr. Lowndes says under his third General Head; wherein I
perfectly agree with him, excepting only where he builds any thing upon the
proposed raising our Coin one fifth. And to what he says, p. 114, concerning
our being deprived of the use of our heavy Money, by men's hoarding it, in
prospect that the Silver contained in those weghty pieces will turn more to
their Profit, than lending it at Interest, Purchasing or Trading therewith. I
crave leave to add, That those Hoarders of Money, a great many of them drive no
less, but rather a greater Trade by hoarding the weighty Money, than if they
let it go abroad. For, by that means all the current Cash being light, clipped,
and hazardous Money, it is all tumbled into their Hands, which gives credit to
their Bills, and furnishes them to trade for as much as they please, whilst
every body else scarce Trades at all, (but just as necessity forces) and is
ready to stand still.

Where he says p. 114. It Is not likely the weighty Moneys will soon appear
abroad without raising their value and recoining the clipped Moneys: I should
agree with him, if it ran thus; Without recoining the clipped, and in the mean
time making it go for its weight. For that will, I humbly conceive, bring out
the heavy Money, without raising its value, as effectually and sooner; for it
will do it immediately: His will take up some time. And I fear, if clipped Money
be not stopped all at once, and presently from passing any way in Tale, the
Damage it will bring will be irreparable.

Mr. Lowndes 's Fourth General Head is, to propose the means that must be
observed, and the proper methods to be used in, and for the Re establishment of
the Silver Coins.

The first is, That the Work should be finished in as little time as may be;
not only to obviate a farther Damage by clipping in the interim, but also that
the needful advantages of the new Money may be the sooner obtained for the
service of the Nation.

These I agree with him, are very good and necessary Ends; but they are both to
be attained, I conceive, much sooner by making clipped Money go for its weight,
than by the Method Mr. Lowndes proposes. For this immediately puts an end to
Clipping, and obviates all further Damage thereby. Next, it immediately brings
out all the boarded weighty Money, and so that advantage will be sooner
obtained for the service of the Nation, than it can any other way besides. Next
it preserves the use of clipped Money for the Service of the Nation in the
interim, till it can be Re-coin'd all at the Tower.

His Second Proposition is, That the loss, or the greatest part of it, ought to
be born by the Public, and not by particulars, who being very numerous will be
prejudiced against a Reformation for the public benefit, if it be to be
effected at the cost of particular Men.

A Tax given to make good the defect of Silver in clipped Money, will be paid by
particulars, and so the loss will be born by particular men: And whether these
particulars be not more numerous, or at least a greater number of innocent men
of them more sensibly burdened that way, than if it takes its chance in the
hands of those men, who have profited by the having it in their hands, will be
worth considering. And I wish it were well weighed, which of the two ways the
greater number of men would be most dangerously prejudiced against this
Reformation. But as Mr. Lowndes orders the matter, every Body will I fear be
prejudiced against this Reformation, when (as he divides it p. 133, 134.) the
Owners will bear near one half of the loss in the price of his clipped Money,
and every Body else his part of the remainder in a Tax levied on them for it. I
wish a remedy could be found without any Bodies loss. Most of those ways I have
heard proposed to make Reparation to every particular man for the clipped Money
shall be found in his hands, do so delay the remedy, if not entail Clipping
upon us, that I fear such a care of particulars indangers the whole. And if
that suffer, it will go but ill with particulars. And therefore I think it will
be the Rational desire of all particulars, that the shortest and surest way,
not interfering with Law or Equity, should be taken to put an effectual end, to
an Evil, which every moment it continues works powerfully toward a general ruin.

His Fourth Proposition is, that no room must be left for Jealousy; I
acknowledge to be a good one, if there can be a way found to attain it.

I cannot but wonder to find these words P. 124 That no person whatsoever shall
hereafter be obliged to accept in legal Payments any Money whatsoever, that is
already clipped or may hereafter be clipped or diminished; and that no Person
shall tender or receive any such Money in Payment, under some small Penalty to
be made easily recoverable, etc.

As if any man now were obliged to receive clipped Money in legal Payment, and
there were not already a Law with severe Penalties against those who tendered
clipped Money in Payment?

It Is a doubt to me, whether the Warden, Master-worker, etc. of the Mint at the
Tower, could find Fit and Skilful Persons enough to set nine other Mints at
work in other parts of England in a quarter of a Year, as Mr. Lowndes proposes
P. 127. Besides, Mr. Lowndes tells us P. 96 that the Engines which put the
Letters upon the Edges of the larger Silver Pieces, and mark the Edges of the
rest with a Graining, are wrought secretly. And indeed this is so great a Guard
against Counterfeiting as well as Clipping our Money, that it deserves well to
be kept a Secret, as it has been hitherto. But how that can be, if Money be to
be Coined in nine other Mints, set up in several Parts, is hard to conceive.
And lastly, perhaps some may apprehend it may be of ill consequence to have so
many men instructed and employed in the Art of Coining, only for a short job,
and then turned loose again to shift for themselves by their own skill and
industry, as they can.

The Provision made in his fourth Rule, p. 136. to prevent the Gain of subtle
Dealers by culling out the heaviest of the clipped pieces, though it be the
Product of great Sagacity and Foresight, exactly calculated, and as well
contrived as in that case it can be; yet I fear is too subtle for the
Apprehension and Practice of Country Men, who, many of them, with their little
Quickness in such matters, have also but small Sums of Money by them, and so
neither having Arithmetic, nor Choice of clipped Money to adjust it to the
Weight there required, will be hardly made to understand it. But I think the
Clippers have, or will take care that there will not be any great need of it.

To conclude, I confess my self not to see the least Reason why our present
milled Money should be at all altered in Fineness, Weight, or Value. I look
upon it to be the best and safest from counterfeiting, adulterating, or any
ways being fraudently diminished, of any that ever was coined. It is adjusted
to our legal Payments, Reckonings, and Accounts, to which our Money must be
reduced: The raising its Denomination will neither add to its Worth, nor make
the Stock we have, more proportionate to our Occasions, nor bring one Grain of
Silver the more into England, or one Farthing Advantage to the public: It will
only serve to defraud the King, and a great Number of his Subjects, and perplex
all, and put the Kingdom to a needless Charge of recoining all, both milled as
well as clipped Money.

If I might take upon me to offer any thing new, I would humbly propose, that
since Market and retail Trade requires less Divisions than six pences, a
sufficient Quantity of Four penny, Four pence half penny, and Five penny Pieces
should be coined. These in change will answer all the Fractions between Six
pence and a Farthing, and thereby supply the Want of small Moneys, whereof I
believe no body ever saw enough common to answer the Necessity of small
Payments; whether, either because there was never a sufficient Quantity of such
pieces coined, or whether because of their Smallness they are apter to be lost
out of any Hands, or because they oftener falling into Childrens Hands, they
lose them, or lay them up; so it is, there is always a visible Want of them, to
supply which without the Inconveniences attending very small Coin, the
proposed pieces, I humbly conceive, will serve.

If it be thought fit for this end to have Four pence, Four pence half penny,
and Five penny pieces coined, it will, I suppose, be convenient that they
should be distinguished from six pences, and from one another, by a deep and
very large plain Difference in the Stamp on both sides, to prevent Mistakes,
and Loss of Time in telling of Money. The Four pence half penny, has already
the Harp for a known Distinction, which may be fit to be continued: The Five
pence may have the Feathers, and the Four pence this Mark IV. of four on the
Reverse, and on the other side they may each have the King's Head with a Crown
on it, to show on that side too, that the Piece so coined is one of those under
a Six pence; and with that they may each on that side also have some Marks of
Distinction one from another, as the Five penny piece this Mark of V. the Four
pence half penny a little Harp, and the Four pence nothing.

These, or any other better Distinctions, which his Majesty shall order, will
in Tale readily discover them, if by chance any of them fall into larger
Payments, for which they are not designed.

And thus I have, with as much Brevity and Clearness as I could, complied with
what Mr. Lowndes professes to be the end of printing his Report in these Words,
viz. That any Persons who have considered an Affair of this nature, may (if
they please) communicate their Thoughts for rendering the Design here aimed at,
more perfect, or more agreeable to the public Service. It must be confessed
that my Considerations have led me to Thoughts in some Parts of this Affair,
quite opposite to Mr. Lowndes's: But how far this has been from any Desire to
oppose him, or to have a Dispute with a Man, no otherwise known to me but by
his Civilities, and whom I have a very great esteem for, will appear by what I
printed about raising the Value of Money, above three Years since. All that I
have said here in answer to him, being nothing but the applying the Principles,
I then went on, particularly now to Mr. Lowndes's Arguments, as they came in my
way; that so thereby others might judge what will, or will not be the
Consequences of such a Change of our Coin, as he proposes, the only way, I
think, of rendering his Design more agreeable to the public Services

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 23. same qualities. p. 4. l. 23. or Sellers' p. 10. l. 15. already.
p. 27. l. 3. Wampompeak' p. 28. l. 10. the exact. p. 32. l. 4. for that
raising. l. 5. that lessening. p. 31. ult. Coin. p. 63. l. 4. at above. l. 23.
for all. p. 64. l. 23. will not. p. 57. l. 13. or at most a penny in. p. 58. l.
3. above a penny an. l. 25. about a penny in. p. 65. l. 6. larger. p. 74. l. 29.
to raise it higher to make. p. 77. l. 7. have it.


