THE FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS OF CAROLINA

THE Fundamental Constitutions OF CAROLINA.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD THE KING having out of His Royal Grace and Bounty, granted
unto us the Province of Carolina, with all the Royalties, Proprieties,
Jurisdictions, and Privileges of a County Palatine, as large and ample as the
County Palatine of Durham, with other great Privileges, for the better
settlement of the Government of the said Place, and establishing the Interest
of the Lords Proprietors with Equality, and without Confusion, and that the
Government of this Province may be made most agreeable to the Monarchy under
which we live, and of which this Province is a part; and that we may avoid
erecting a numerous Democracy, we the Lords and Proprietors of the Province
aforesaid, have agreed to this following Form of Government, to be perpetually
established amongst us, unto which we do oblige our selves, our Heirs and
Successors, in the most binding ways that can be devised.

. 1
THe eldest of the Lords Proprietors shall be Palatine, and upon the Decease of
the Palatine, the eldest of the seven surviving Proprietors shall always
succeed him.

. 2
There shall be seven other chief Offices erected, viz. the Admirals,
Chamberlains, Chancellors, Constables, Chief Justices, High Stewards,
Treasurers; which Places shall be enjoyed by none-but the Lords Proprietors, to
be assigned at first by Lot; and upon the vacancy of any one of the seven great
Offices by Death or otherwise, the eldest Proprietor shall have his choice of
the said Place.

. 3
The whole Province shall be divided into Counties; each County shall consist
of eight Signiories, eight Baronies, and four Precincts; each Precinct shall
consist of six Colonies.

. 4
Each Signiory, Barony, and Colony, shall consist of twelve thousand Acres, the
eight Signories being the Share of the eight Proprietors, and the eight
Baronies of the Nobility, both which Shares being each of them one fifth part
of the whole, are to be perpetually annexed, the one to the Proprietors, the
other to the hereditary Nobility, leaving the Colonies, being three Fifths,
amongst the People; that so in Setting out, and Planting the Lands, the
Balance of the Government may be preserved.

. 5
At any time before the Year One thousand seven hundred and one, any of the
Lords Proprietors shall have power to Relinquish, Alienate, and Dispose to any
other Person, his Propritetorship, and all the Signiories, Powers, and Interest
thereunto belonging, wholly and entirely together, and not otherwise. But after
the Year One thousand seven hundred, those who are then Lords Proprietors,
shall not have power to Alienate or Make over their Proprietorship, with the
Signiories and Privileges thereunto belonging, or any part thereof, to any
Person whatsoever, otherwise than as in. 18. but it shall all Descend unto
their Heirs Male; and for want of Heirs Male, it shall all Descend on that
Landgrave or Cassique of Carolina, who is Descended of the next Heirs Female of
the said Proprietor; and for want of such Heirs, it shall Descend on the next
Heir general; and for want of such Heirs, the remaining seven Proprietors shall
upon the Vacancy, choose a Landgrave to succeed the deceased Proprietor, who
being chosen by the majority of the seven surving Proprietors, he and his Heirs
successively shall be Proprietors, as fully to all intents and purposes as any
of the rest.

. 6
That the number of eight Proprietors may be constantly kept; if upon the
vacancy of any Propritorship, the seven surviving Proprietors shall not choose a
Landgrave to be a Proprietor, before the second biennial Parliament after the
Vacancy; then the next biennial Parliament but one after such Vacany, shall
have power to choose any Landgrave to be Proprietor.

. 7
Whosoever after the Year One thousand seven hundred, either by Inheritance or
Choice, shall succed any Proprietor in his Proprietorship, and Signiories
thereunto belonging, shall be obliged to take the Name and Arms of that
Proprietor whom he succeeds; which from thenceforth shall be the Name and Arms
of his Family and their Posterity.

. 8
Whatsoever Landgrave or Cassique shall any way come to be a Proprietor, shall
take the Signiories annexed to the said Proprietorship; but his former Dignity,
with the Baronies annexed, shall devolve into the Hands of the Lords
Proprietors.

. 9
There shall be just as many Landgraves as there are Counties, and twice as
many Cassiques, and no more. These shall be the hereditary Nobility of the
Province, and by right of their Dignity be Members of Parliament. Each
Landgrave shall have four Baronies, and each Cassique two Baronies,
hereditarily and unalterably annexed to, and settled upon the said Dignity.

. 10
The first Landgraves and Cassiques of the twelve first Countites to be
Planted, shall be nominated thus; that is to say, of the twelve Landgraves the
Lords Proprietors shall each of them separately for himself, nominate and choose
one; and the remaining four Landgraves of the first twelve, shall be nominated
and chosen by the Palatine's Court. In like manner of the twenty four first
Cassiques* each Proprietor for himself shall nominate and choose two, and the
remaining eight shall be nominated and chosen by the Palatine's Court; and when
the twelve first Counties shall be Planted, the Lords Proprietors shall again
in the same manner nominate and choose twelve more Landgraves, and twenty four
Cassiques for the twelve next Counties to be Planted; that is to say, two
Thirds of each number by the single nomination of each Proprietor for himself,
and the remaining one Third by the joint Election of the Palatine's Court, and
so proceed in the same manner till the whole Province of Carolina be Set out
and Planted, according to the Proportions in these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS.

. 11
Any Landgrave or Cassique at any time before the Year One thousand seven
hundred and one, shall have power to Alienate, Sell, or Make over to any other
Person, his Dignity, with the Baronies thereunto belonging, all entirely
together. But after the Year One thousand seven hundred, no Landgrave or
Cassique shall have power to Alienate, Sell, Make over, or Let the Hereditary
Baronies of his Dignity, or any part thereof, otherwise then as in. 18, but
they shall all entirely, with the Dignity thereunto belonging, Descend unto his
Heirs Males; and for want of Heirs Male, all entirely and undivided, to the
next Heir general; and for want of such Heirs, shall devolve into the Hands of
the Lords Proprietors.

. 12
That the due number of Landgraves and Cassiques may be always kept up, if upon
the Devolution of any Landgraveship or Cassiqueship, the Palatine's Court shall
not settle the devolved Dignity, with the Baronies thereunto annexed, before
the second biennial Parliament after such Devolution, the next biennial
Parliament but one after such Devolution shall have power to make any one
Landgrave or Cassique in the room of him, who dying without Heirs, his Dignity
and Baronies devolved.

. 13
No one Person shall have more than one Dignity, with the Signiories or
Baronies thereunto belonging. But whenever it shall happen, that any one who
is already Proprietor, Landgrave, or Cassique, shall have any of these
Dignities descend to him by Inheritance, it shall be at his Choice to keep
which of the Dignities, with the Lands annexed, he shall like best; but shall
leave the other, with the Lands annexed, to be enjoyed by him, who not being
his Heir Apparent, and certain Successor to his present Dignity, is next of
Blood.

. 14
Whosoever by Right of Inheritance shall come to be Landgrave or Cassique,
shall take the Name and Arms of his Predecessor in that Dignity, to be from
thenceforth the Name and Arms of his Family and their Posterity.

. 15
Since the Dignity of Proprietor, Landgrave, or Cassique, cannot be divided,
and the Signiories or Baronies thereunto annexed must for ever all entirely
descend with, and accompany that Dignity, whenever for want of Heirs Male it
shall descend on the Issue Female, the eldest Daughter and her Heirs shall be
preferred, and in the Inheritance of those Dignities, and in the Signiories or
Baronies annexed, there shall be no Cobeirs.

. 16
In every Signiory, Barony, and Manor, the respective Lord shall have power in
his own Name to hold Court Leet there, for Trying of all Causes both Civil and
Criminal; but where it shall concern any Person being no Inhabitant, Vassal, or
Leetman of the said Signiory, Barony, or Manor, he upon paying down of forty
Shilings to the Lords Proprietors use, shall have an Appeal from the Signiory
or Barony Court, to the County Court, and from the Manor Court to the Precinct
Court.

. 17
Every Manor shall consist of not less than three thousand Acres, and not
above twelve thousand Acres in one entire Piece and Colony; but any three
thousand Acres or more in one Piece, and the Possession of one Man, shall not
be a Manor, unless it be Constituted a Manor by the Grant of the Palatine's
Court.

. 18
The Lords of Signiories and Baronies shall have power only of granting
Estates not exceeding three Lives or thrity one Years, in two Thirds of the
said Signiories or Baronies, and the remaining Third shall be always Demesne.

. 19
Any Lord of a Manor may Alienate, Sell, or Dispose to any other Person and
his Heirs for ever, his Manor, all entirely together, with all the Privileges
and Leetmen thereunto belonging, so far forth as any other Colony Lands, but no
Grant of any part thereof, either in Fee, or for any longer Term than three
Lives, or one and twenty Years, shall be good against the next Heir.

. 20
No Manor, for want of Issue Male, shall be divided amongst Coheirs; but the
Manor, if there be but one, shall all entirely descend to the eldest Daughter
and her Heirs. If there be more Manors then one, the eldest Daughter first
shall have her choice, the second next, and so on, beginning again at the
eldest, till all the Manors be taken up; that so the Privileges which belong
to Manors being indivisible, the Lands of the Manors to which they are
annexed, may be kept entire, and the Manor not loose those Privileges, which
upon parcelling out to several Owners must necessarily cease.

. 21
Every Lord of a Manor, within his Manor, shall have all the Powers,
Jurisdictions, and Privileges, which a Landgrave or Cassique has in his
Baronies.

. 22
In every Signiory, Barony, and Manor, all the Leet-men shall be under the
Jurisdiction of the respective Lords of the said Signiory, Barony, or Manor,
without Appeal from him. Nor shall any Leet-man or Leet-woman have liberty to
go off from the Land of their particular Lord, and live any where else, without
License obtained from their said Lord, under Hand and Seal.

. 23
All the Children of Leet-men shall be Leet-men, and so to all Generations.

. 24
No Man shall be capable of having a Court Leet or Leet-Men, but a Proprietor,
Landgrave, Cassique, or Lord of a Manor.

. 25
Whoever shall voluntarily Enter himself a Leet-man in the Registry of the
County Court, shall be a Leet-man.

. 26
Whoever is Lord of Leet-men, shall upon the Marriage of a Leet-man or
Leet-woman of his, give them ten Acres of Land for their Lives, they paying to
him therefore not more than one eighth part of all the yearly Produce and
Growth of the said ten Acres.

. 27
No Landgrave or Cassique shall be Tried for any Criminal Cause, in any but the
Chief Iustice's Court, and that by a Jury of his Peers.

. 28
There shall be eight Supreme Courts. The first called The Palatine's Court,
consisting of the Palatine, and the other seven Proprietors. The other seven
Courts of the other seven great Officers, shall consist each of them of a
Proprietor, and six Counselors added to him. Under each of these later seven
Courts shall be a College of twelve Assistants. The twelve Assistants of the
several Colleges shall be chosen; two out of the Landgraves, Cassiques, or
eldest Sons of Proprietors, by the Palatine's Court; two out of the Landgraves,
by the Landgraves Chamber; two out of the Cassiques, by the Cassiques Chamber;
four more of the twelve shall be chosen by the Commons Chamber, out of such as
have been, or are Members of Parliament, Sheriffs, or Justices of the County
Court, or the younger Sons of Proprietors, or eldest Sons of Landgraves or
Cassiques; the two other shall be chosen by the Palatine's Court, out of the
same sort of Persons out of which the Commons Chamber is to choose.

. 29
Out of these Colleges shall be chosen at first by the Palatine's Court, six
Counselors, to be joined with each Proprietor in his Court; of which six one
shall be of those who were chosen into any of the Colleges by the Palatine's
Court, out of the Landgraves, Cassiques, or eldest Sons of Proprietors, one out
of those who were chosen by the Landgraves Chamber, and one out of those who
were chosen by the Cassiques Chamber, two out of those who were chosen by the
Commons Chamber, and one out of those who were chosen by the Palatine's Court,
out of the Proprietors younger Sons, or eldest Sons of Landgraves, Cassiques,
or Commons, Qualified as aforesaid.

. 30
When it shall happen that any Councellor dies, and thereby there is a Vacancy,
the Grand Council shall have power to remove any Councellor that is willing to
be removed out of any of the Proproprietors Courts to fill up the Vacancy,
provided they take a Man of the same Degree and Choice the other was of, whose
vacant Place is to be filled up. But if no Councellor consent to be removed, or
upon such Remove, the last remaining vacant Place in any of the Proprietors
Courts, shall be filled up by the choice of the Grand Council, who shall have
power to remove out of any of the Colleges, any Assistant, who is of the same
Degree and Choice that Councellor was of, into whose vacant Place he is to
succeed. The Grand Council also shall have power to remove any Assistant that
is willing, out of one College into another, provided he be of the same Degree
and Choice. But the last remaining vacant Place in any College, shall be
filled up by the same Choice, and out of the same Degree of Persons the
Assistant was of, who is dead or removed. No Place shall be vacant in any
Proprietors Court above six Months. No Place shall be vacant in any College
longer then the next Session of Parliament.

. 31
No Man, being a Member of the Grand Council, or of any of the seven Colleges,
shall be turned out but for Misdemeanor, of which the Grand Council shall be
Judge, and the Vacancy of the Person so put out shall be filled, not by the
Election of the Grand Council, but by those who first chose him, and out of the
same Degree he was of who is expelled. But it is not hereby to be understood,
that the Grand Council has any power to turn out any one of the Lords
Proprietors or their Deputies, the Lords Proprietors having in themselves an
inherent original Right.

. 32
All Elections in the Parliament, in the several Chambers of the Parliament,
and in the Grand Council, shall be Passed by Baloting.

. 33
The Palatine's Court shall consist of the Palatine, and seven Proprietors,
wherein nothing shall be acted without the Presence and Consent of the Palatine
or his Deputy, and three others of the Proprietors or their Deputies. This
Court shall have power to call Parliaments, to pardon all Offenses, to make
Elections of all Officers in the Proprietors dispose, and to nominate and
appoint Port-Towns: And also shall have power by their Order to the Treasurer
to dispose of all Public Treasure, excepting Money granted by the Parliament,
and by them directed to some particular public Use: And also shall have a
Negative upon all Acts, Orders, Votes, and Judgments, of the Grand Council and
the Parliament, except only as in. 6. and 12. And shall have all the Powers
granted to the Lords Proprietors by their Patent from OUR SOVEREIGN LORD THE
KING, except in such things as are limited by these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS.

. 34
The Palatine himself, when he in Person shall be either in the Army, or in any
of the Proprietors Courts, shall then have the Power of General, or of that
Proprietor in whose Court he is then present, and the Proprietor in whose Court
the Palatine then Presides, shall during his presence there be but as one of
the Council.

. 35
The Chancellor's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his six
Chancellors, who shall be called Vice-Chancellors, shall have the custory of
the Seal of the Palatinate, under which all Charters of Lands or otherwise,
Commissions and Grants of the Palatine's Court, shall pass. And it shall not be
lawful to put the Seal of the Palatinate to any Writing which is not Signed by
the Palatine or his Deputy, and three other Proprietors or their Deputies. To
this Court also belongs all State Matters, Disspatches, and Treaties with the
neigbor Indians. To this Court also belongs all Invasions of the Law, of
Liberty of Conscience, and all Disturbances of the Public Peace upon pretense
of Religion, as also the License of Printing. The twelve Assistants belonging
to this Court, shall be called Recorders.

. 36
Whatever passes under the Seal of the Palatinate, shall be Registered in that
Propristor's Court to which the Matter therein contained belongs.

. 37
The Chancellor or his Deputy shall be always Speaker in Parliament, and
President of the Grand Council, and in his and his Deputy's absence, one of his
Vice-Chancellors.

. 38
The Chief Iustice's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his six
Chancellors, who shall be called Justices of the Bench, shall Judge all Appeals
in Cases both Civil and Criminal, except all such Cases as shall be under the
Jurisdiction and Cognizance of any other of the Proprietors Courts, which shall
be Tried in those Courts respectively. The Government and regulation of the
Registries of Writings and Contracts, shall belong to the Jurisdiction of this
Court. The twelve Assistants of this Court shall be, called Masters.

. 39
The Constables Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his six
Counselors, who shall be called Marshals, shall order and determine of all
Military Affairs by Land, and all Landforces, Arms, Ammunition, Artillery,
Garrisons and Forts, etc. and whatever belongs unto War. His twelve Assistants
shall be called Lieutenane-Generals.

. 40
In time of actual War the Constable, whilst he is in the Army, shall be
General of the Army, and the six Counselors, or such of them as the Palatine's
Court shall for that time or Service appoint, shall be the immediate great
Officers under him, and the Lieutenant-Generals next to them.

. 41
The Admiral's Court, consisting of one of the Proprietors and his six
Counselors called Consuls, shall have the care and inspection over all Ports,
Moles, and Navigable Rivers, so far as the Tide flows, and also all the public
Shipping of Carolina, and Stores thereunto belonging, and all Maritime Affairs.
This Court also shall have the Power of the Court of Admiralty; and shall have
power to Constitute Judges in Port-Towns, to Try Cases belonging to
Law-Merchant, as shall be most convenient for Trade. The twelve Assistants
belonging to this Court shall be called Proconsuls.

. 42
In time of actual War, the Admiral whilst he is at Sea, shall Command in
Chief, and his six Counselors, or such of them as the Palatine's Court shall
for that time and Service appoint, shall be the immediate great Officers under
him, and the Proconsuals next to them.

. 43
The Treasurer's Court, consisting of a Proprietor and his six Counselors,
called Under-Treasurers, shall take care of all Matters that concern the
Public Revenus and Treasury. The twelve Assistants shall be called Auditors.

. 44
The High Steward's Court, consisting of a Proprietor and his six Counselors,
called Comptrollers, shall have the care of all Foreign and Domestic Trade,
Manufactures, public Buildings, Workhouses, Highways, Passages by Water above
the Flood of the Tide, Drains, Sewers and Banks against Inundations, Bridges,
Post, Carriers, Fairs, Markets, Corruption or Infection of the common Air or
Water, and all things in order to the public Commerce and Health; also Setting
out and Surveying of Lands; and also Setting out and appointing Places for
Towns to be built on in the Precincts, and the prescribing and determining the
Figure and bigness of the said Towns, according to such Models as the said
Court shall order, contrary or differing from which Models it shall not be
lawful for any one to Build in any Town. This Court shall have power also to
make any public Building, or any new Highway, or enlarge any old Highway, upon
any Man's Land whatsoever, as also to make Cuts, Channels, Banks, Locks, and
Bridges, for making Rivers Navigable, or for Draining Fens, or any other
public Use. The Damage the Owner of such Lands (on or through which any such
public thing shall be made) shall receive thereby, shall be valued, and
Satisfaction made by such ways as the Grand Council shall appoint. The twelve
Assistants belonging to this Court, shall be called Surveyors.

. 45
The Chamberlain's Court, consisting of a Proprietor and his six Counselors,
called Vice-Chamberlains, shall have the care of all Ceremonies, Precedence,
Heraldry, Reception of public Messengers, Pedegrees; the Registry of all
Births, Burials, and Marriages, Legitimation, and all Cases concerning
Matrimony, or arising from it; and shall also have power to regulate all
Fashions, Habits, Badges, Games, and Sports. To this Court also it shall
belong, to Convocate the Grand Council. The twelve Assistants belonging to this
Court, shall be called Provosts.

. 46
All Causes belonging to, or under the Jurisdiction of any of the Proprietors
Courts, shall in them respectively be Tried, and ultimately Determined, without
any farther Appeal.

. 47
The Proprietors Courts shall have a power to mitigate all Fines, and suspend
all Executions in Criminal Causes, either before or after Sentence in any of
the other inferior Courts respectively.

. 48
In all Debates, Hearings, or Trials, in any of the Proprietors Courts, the
twelve Assistants belonging to the said Courts respectively, shall have liberty
to be present, but shall not interpose, unless their Opinions be required, nor
have any Vote at all; but their Business shall be, by the direction of the
respective Coures, to prepare such Business as shall be committed to them; as
also to bear such Offices, and dispatch such Affairs, either where the Court is
kept, or elsewhere, as the Court shall think fit.

. 49
In all the Proprietors Courts, the Proprietor, and any three of his
Counselors shall make a Quorum; Provided always, that for the better dispatch
of Business, it shall be in the power of the Palatine's Court to direct what
sort of Causes shall be Heard and Determined by a Quorum of any three.

. 50
The Grand Council shall consist of the Palatine and seven Proprietors, and the
forty two Counselors of the several Proprietors Courts, who shall have power
to Determine any Controversies that may arise between any of the Proprietors
Courts, about their respective Jurisdictions, or between the Members of the
same Court, about their Manner and Methods of Proceeding: To make Peace and
War, Leagues, Treaties, etc. with any of the neighbor Indians: To Issue out
their general Orders to the Constable's and Admiral's Courts, for the Raising,
Disposing, or Disbanding the Forces by Land or by Sea.

. 51
The Grand Council shall prepare all Matters to be proposed in Parliament. Nor
shall any Matter whatsoever be proposed in Parliament, but what has first
passed the Grand Council; which after having been read three several Days in
the Parliament, shall by majority of Votes be Passed or rejected.

. 52
The Grand Council shall always be Judges of all Causes and Appeals that
concern the Palatine, or any of the Lords Proprietors, or any Councellor of any
Proprietors Court, in any Cause which otherwise should have been Tried in the
Court in which the said Councellor is Judge himself.

. 53
The Grand Council by their Warrants to the Treasurer's Court, shall dispose of
all the Money given by the Parliament, and by them directed to any particular
public Use.

. 54
The Quorum of the Grand Council shall be thirteen, whereof a Proprietor or his
Deputy shall be always one.

. 55
The Grand Council shall meet the first Tuesday in every Month, and as much
oftener as either they shall think fit, or they shall be Convocated by the
Chamberlain's Court.

. 56
The Palatine, or any of the Lords Proprietors, shall have power under Hand and
Seal, to be Registered in the Grand Council to make a Deputy, who shall have the
same power to all intents and purposes as he himself who deputes him, except in
confirming Acts of Parliament, as in. 76. and except also in nominating and
choosing Landgraves and Cassiques, as in. 10. All such Deputations shall cease
and determine at the end of four Years, and at any time shall be revocable at
the pleasure of the Deputator.

. 57
No Deputy of any Proprietor shall have any power whilst the Deputator is in
any part of Carolina, except the Proprietor whose Deputy he is, be a Minor.

. 58
During the Minority of any Proprietor, his Guardian shall have power to
Constitute and appoint his Deputy.

. 59
The eldest of the Lords Proprietors who shall be personally in Carolina, shall
of course be the Palatine's Deputy; and if no Proprietor be in Carolina, he
shall choose his Deputy out of the Heirs Apparent of any of the Proprietors, if
any such be there; and if there be no Heir Apparent of any of the Lords
Proprietors above one and twenty Years old in Carolinia, then he shall choose
for Deputy any one of the Landgraves of the Grand Council; and till he have by
Deputation under Hand and Seal chosen any one of the forementioned Heirs
Apparent or Landgraves to be his Deputy, the eldest Man of the Landgraves, and
for want of a Landgrave, the eldest Man of the Cassiques who shall be
personally in Carolina, shall of course be his Deputy.

. 60
Each Proprietor's Deputy shall be always one of his own six Counselors
respectively; and in case any of the Proprietors has not in his absence out of
Carolina a Deputy, Commissioned under his Hand and Seal, the eldest Nobleman of
his Court shall of courst be his Deputy.

. 61
In every County there shall be a Court, consisting of a Sheriff and four
Justices of the County, for every Precinct one. The Sheriff shall be an
Inhabitant of the County, and have at least five hundred Acres of Freehold
within the said County; and the Justices shall be Inhabitants, and have each of
them five hundred Acres apiece Freehold within the Precinct for which they
serve respectively. These five shall be chosen and Commissioned from time to
time by the Palatine's Court.

. 62
For any Personal Causes exceeding the value of two hundred Pounds Sterling, or
in Title of Land, or in any Criminal Cause, either Party upon paying twenty
Pounds Sterling to the Lords Proprietors use, shall have liberty of Appeal from
the County Court unto the respective Proprietor's Court.

. 63
In every Precinct there shall be a Court, consisting of a Steward and four
Justices of the Precinct, being Inhabitants, and having three hundred Acres of
Freehold within the said Precinct, who shall Judge all Criminal Causes, except
for Treason, Murder, and any other Offenses punishable with Death, and except
all Criminal Causes of the Nobility; and shall Judge also all Civil Causes
whatsoever; and in all personal Actions, not exceeding fifty Pounds Sterling,
without Appeal: But where the Cause shall exceed that value, or concern a Title
of Land, and in all Criminal Causes, there either Party, upon paying five
Pounds Sterling to the Lords Proprietors, use, shall have liberty of Appeal to
the County Court.

. 64
No Cause shall be twice Tried in any one Court, upon any reason or pretense
whatsoever.

. 65
For Treason, Murder, and all other Offenses punishable with Death, there
shall be a Commission, twice ayear at least, granted unto one, or more Members
of the Grand Council or Colleges, who shall come as itinerant Judges to the
several Counties, and with the Sheriff and four Justices shall hold Assizes to
Judge all such Causes: But upon paying of fifty Pounds Sterling to the Lords
Proprietors use, there shall be liberty of Appeal to the respective
Proprietor's Court.

. 66
The Grand Jury at the several Assizes, shall upon their Oaths, and under their
Hands and Seals, deliver in to the itinerant Judges, a Presentment of such
Grievances, Misdemeanors, Exigences. or Defects, which they think necessary for
the public good of the County; which Presentment shall by the itinerant
Judges, at the end of their Circuit, be delivered in to the Grand Council at
their next Sitting. And whatsoever therein concerns the Execution of Laws
already made, the several Proprietors Courts in the Matrers belonging to each
of them respectively shall take Cognizance of it, and give such order about it,
as shall be effectual for the due Execution of the Laws. But whatever concerns
the making of any new Law, shall be referred to the several respective Courts
to which that Matter belongs, and be by them prepared and brought to the Grand
Council.

. 67
For Terms, there shall be Quarterly such a certain number of Days, nor
exceeding one and twenty at any one time, as the several respective Courts
shall appoint. The time for the beginning of the Term in the Precinct Court,
shall be the first Monday in January, April, July, and October; in the County
Court, the first Monday in February, May, August, and November; and in the
Proprietors Courts, the first Monday in March, June, September, and December.

. 68
In the Precinct Court no Man shall be a Iury-man under fifty Acres of
Freehold. In the County Court, or at the Assizes, no Man shall be a Grand
Iury-man under three hundred Acres of Freehold; and no Man shall be a Petty
Iury-man under two hundred Acres of Freehold. In the Proprietors Courts no Man
shall be a Iury-man under five hundred Acres of Freehold.

. 69
Every Jury shall consist of twelve Men; and it shall not be necessary they
should all agree, but the Verdict shall be according to the Consent of the
Majority.

. 70
It shall be a base and vile thing to Plead for Money or Reward; nor shall any
one (except he be a near Kinsman, not farther off than Cosin-german to the
Party concerned) be permitted to Plead another Man's Cause, till before the
Judge in open Court he has taken an Oath, that he does not Plead for Money or
Reward, nor has nor will receive, nor directly nor indirectly Bargained with
the Party whose Cause he is going to Plead, for Money, or any other Reward for
Pleading his Cause.

. 71
There shall be a Parliament, consisting of the Proprietors or their Deputies,
the Landgraves and Cassiques, and one Freeholder out of every Precinct, to be
chosen by the Freeholders of the said Preciuct respectively. They shall Sit
altogether in one Room, and have every Member one Vote.

. 72
No Man shall be chosen a Member of Parliament, who has less than five hundred
Acres of Freehold within the Precinct for which he is chosen; nor shall any
have a Vote in choosing the said Member that has less than fifty Acres of
Freehold within the said Precinct.

. 73
A new Parliament shall be Assembled the first Monday of the Month of November
every second Year, and shall meet and Sit in the Town they last Sat in, without
any Summons, unless by the Palatine's Court they be Summoned to meet at any
other Place. And if there shall be any occasion of a Parliament in these
Intervals, it shall be in the power of the Palatine's Court to Assemble them in
forty Days notice, and at such Time and Place as the said Court shall think
fit; and the Palatine's Court shall have power to Dissolve the said Parliment
when they shall think fit.

. 74
At the opening of every Parliament, the first thing that shall be done, shall
be the reading of these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS, which the Palatine and
Proprietors, and the rest of the Members then present, shall Subscribe. Nor
shall any Person whatsover Sit or Vote in the Parliament, till he has that
Session Subscribed these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS, in a Book kept for that
purpose by the Clerk of the Parliament.

. 75
In order to the due Election of Members for the Biennial Parliament, it shall
be lawful for the Freeholders of the respective Precincts to meet the first
Tuesday in September every two Years, in the same Town or place that they last
met in to choose Parliament Men, and there choose those Members that are to Sit
the next November following, unless the Steward of the Precinct shall by
sufficient notice thirty Days before, appoint some other Place for their
Meeting, in order to the Election.

. 76
No Act or Order of Parliament shall be of any force, unless it be Ratified in
open Parliament during the same Session, by the Palatine or his Deputy, and
three more of the Lords Proprietors and their Deputies, and then not to
continue longer in force but until the next Biennial Parliament, unless in the
mean time it be Ratified under the Hands and Seals of the Palatine himself, and
three more of the Lords Proprietors themselves, and by their Order published at
the next Bieunial Parliament.

. 77
Any Properietor or his Deputy may Enter his Protestation against any Act of
the Parliament, before the Palatine or his Deputy's Consent be given as
aforesaid, if he shall conceive the said Act to be contrary to this
Establishment, or any of these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS of the Government. And
in such case after a full and free Debate, the several Estates shall retire
into four several Chambers, the Palatine and Proprietors into one, the
Landgraves into another, the Cassiques into another, and those chosen by the
Precincts into a fourth; and if the major part of any of the four Estates shall
Vote that the Law is not agreeable to this Establishment, and these FUNDAMENTAL
CONSTITUTIONS of the Government, then it shall pass no farther, but be as if it
had never been proposed.

. 78
The Quorum of the Parliament shall be one half of those who are Members, and
capable of Sitting in the House that present Session of Parliament. The Quorum
of each of the Chambers of Parliament, shall be one half of the Members of that
Chamber.

. 79
To avoid multiplicity of Laws, which by degrees always change the right
Foundations of the original Government, all Acts of Parliament whatsoever, in
whatsoever Form Passed or Enacted, shall at the end of a hundred Years after
their Enacting, respectively cease and determine of themselves, and without any
Repeal become null and void, as if no such Acts or Laws had ever been made.

. 80
Since multiplicity of Comments, as well as of Laws, have great inconveniences,
and serve only to obscure and perplex. All manner of Comments and Expositions
on any part of these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS, or any part of the Common or
Statute Law of Carolina, are absolutely Prohibited.

. 81
There shall be a Registry in every Precinct, wherein shall be Enrolled all
Deeds, Leases, Judgments, Mortgages, and other Conveyances, which may concern
any of the Land within the said Precinct; and all such Conveyances not so
Entered or Registered, shall not be of force against any Person nor Party to the
said Contract or Conveyance.

. 82
No Man shall be Register of any Precinct, who has not at least three hundred
Acres of Freehold within the said Precinct.

. 83
The Freeholders of every Precinct shall nominate three Men, out of which three
the Chief Iustice's Court shall choose and Commission one to be Register of the
said Precinct, whilst he shall well behave himself.

. 84
There shall be a Registry in every Signiory, Barony, and Colony, wherein shall
be Recorded all the Births, Marriages, and Deaths, that shall happen within the
respective Signiories, Baronies, and Colonies.

. 85
No Man shall be Register of a Colony that has not above fifty Acres of
Freehold within the said Colony.

. 86
The time of every ones Age that is born in Carolina, shall be reckoned from
the Day that his Birth is Entered in the Registry, and not before.

. 87
No Marriage shall be lawful, whatever, Contract and Ceremony they have used,
till both the Parties mutually own it before the Register of the Place where
they were Married, and he Register it, with the Names of the Father and Mother
of each Party.

. 88
No Man shall Administer to the Goods, or have right to them, or enter upon the
Estate of any Person deceased, till his Death be Registered in the respective
Registry.

. 89
He that does not Enter in the respective Registry, the Birth or Death of any
Person that is born or dies in his House or Ground, shall pay to the said
Register one Shilling per Week for each such Neglect, reckoning from the time
of each Birth or Death respectively, to the time of Registring it.

. 90
In like manner the Births, Marriages, and Deaths of the Lords Proprietors,
Landgraves, and Cassiques, shall be Registered in the Chamberlain's Court.

. 91
There shall be in every Colony one Constable, to be chosen annually by the
Freeholders of the Colony: His Estate shall be above a hundred Acres of
Freehold within the said Colony, and such subordinate Officers appointed for
his Assistance, as the County Court shall find requisite, and shall be
established by the said County Court. The Election of the subordinate annual
Officers shall be also in the Freeholdres of the Colony.

. 92
All Towns Incorporate shall be Governed by a Mayor, twelve Aldermen, and
twenty four of the Common Council. The said Common Council shall be chosen by
the present Householders of the said Town; the Aldermen shall be chosen out of
the Common Council, and the Mayor out of the Aldermen by the Palatine's Court.

. 93
It being of great consequence to the Plantation, that Port-Towns should be
built and preserved; Therefore whosoever shall lade or unlade any Commodity at
any other Place but a Port-Town, shall forfeit to the Lords Proprietors for
each Tun so laden or unladen, the Sum of ten Pounds Sterling, except only such
Goods as the Palatine's Court shall License to be laden or unladen elsewhere.

. 94
The first Port-Town upon every River, shall be in a Colony, and be a Port-Town
for ever.

. 95
No Man shall be permitted to be a Freeman of Carolina, or to have any Estate
or Habitation within it, that does not acknowledge a GOD, and that GOD is
publicly and solemnly to be Worshipped.

. 96
As the Country comes to be sufficiently Planted and Distributed into fit
Divisions, it shall belong to the Parliament to take care for the building of
Churches, and the public Maintenance of Divines, to be employed in the
Exercise of Religion, according to the Church of England, which being the only
true and Orthodox, and the National Religion of all the King's Dominions, is so
also of Carolina, and therefore it alone shall be allowed to receive public
Maintenance by Grant of Parliament.

. 97
But since the Natives of that Place, who will be concerned in our Plantation,
are utterly Strangers to Christianity, whose Idolatry, Ignorance, or Mistake,
gives us no right to expel, or use them ill; and those who remove from other
Parts to Plant there, will unavoidably be of different Opinions concerning
Matters of Religion, the liberty whereof they will expect to have allowed them,
and it will not be reasonable for us on this account to keep them out; that
Civil Peace may be maintained amidst the diversity of Opinions, and our
Agreement and Compact with all Men may be duly and faithfully observed, the
violation whereof upon what pretense soever, cannot be without great offense to
Almighty God, and great scandal to the true Religion which we profess; and also
that Jews, Heathens, and other Dissenters from the purity of Christian
Religion, may not be scared and kept at a distance from it, but by having an
opportunity of acquainting themselves with the truth and reasonableness of its
Doctrines, and the peaceableness and inoffensiveness of its Professors, may by
good usage and persuasion, and all those convincing Methods of gentleness and
meekness, suitable to the Rules and Design of the Gospel, be won over to
embrace, and unfeignedly receive the Truth; Therefore any seven, or more
Persons agreeing in any Religion, shall Constitute a Church or Prefession, to
which they shall give some Name, to distinguish it from others.

. 98
The Terms of Admittance and Communion with any Church or Profession, shall be
written in a Book, and therein be Subscribed by all the Members of the said
Church or Profession; which Book shall be kept by the public Register of the
Precinct where they reside.

. 99
The Time of every ones Subscription and Admittance, shall be Dated in the said
Book or religious Record.

. 100
In the Terms of Communion of every Church or Profession, these following shall
be three, without which no Agreement or Assembly of Men, upon pretense of
Religion, shall be accounted a Church or Profession, within these Rules:

I. That there is a GOD. II. That GOD is publicly to be Worshipped. III. That
it is lawful, and the Duty of every Man, being thereunto called by those that
Govern, to bear Witness to Truth; and that every Church or Profession shall in
their Terms of Communion set down the external Way whereby they witness a Truth
as in the presence of GOD, whether it be by laying Hands on, or kissing the
Bible, as in the Church of England, or by holding up the Hand, or any other
sensible way.
. 101
No Person above seventeen Years of Age, shall have any benefit or protection
of the Law, or be capable of any Place of Profit or Honor, who is not a Member
of some Church or Profession, having his Name Recorded in some one, and but one
religious Record at once.

. 102
No Person any other Church or Profession shall disturb or molest any religious
Assembly.

. 103
No Person whatsoever shall speak any thing in their religious Assembly,
irreverently or seditiously of the Government or Governors, or State-Matters.

. 104
Any Person Subscribing the Terms of Communion in the Record of the said Church
or Profession before the Precinct Register, and any five Members of the said
Church or Profession, shall be thereby made a Member of the said Church or
Profession.

. 105
Any Person striking out his own Name out of any religious Record, or his Name
being struck out by any Officer thereunto authorized by each Church or
Profession respectively, shall cease to be a Member of that Church or
Profession.

. 106
No Man shall use any reproachful, reviling, or abusive Language, against the
Religion of any Church or Profession, that being the certain way of disturbing
the Peace, and of hindering the Conversion of any to the Truth, by engaging them
in Quarrels and Animosities, to the hatred of the Professors and that
Profession, which otherwise they might be brought to assent to.

. 107
Since Charity obliges us to wish well to the Souls of all Men, and Religion
ought to alter nothing in any Man's Civil Estate or Right, it shall be lawful
for Slaves as well as others, to Enter themselves, and be of what Church or
Profession any of them shall think best, and thereof be as fully Members as any
Freeman. But yet no Slave shall hereby be exempted from that Civil Dominion his
Master has over him, but be in all other things in the same State and
Condition he was in before.

. 108
Assemblies, upon what pretense soever of Religion, not observing and
performing the abovesaid Rules, shall not be esteemed as Churches, but unlawful
Meetings, and be punished as other Riots.

. 109
No Person whatsoever shall disturb, molest, or persecute another for his
speculative Opinions in Religion, or his Way of Worship.

. 110
Every Freeman of Carolina shall have absolute Power and Authority over his
Negro Slaves, of what Opinion or Religion soever.

. 111
No Cause, whether Civil or Criminal, of any Freeman, shall be Tried in any
Court of Judicatnre, without a Jury of his Peers.

. 112
No Person whatsoever shall hold or claim any Land in Carolina by Purchase or
Gift, or otherwise, from the Natives or any other whatsoever, but merely from
and under the Lords Proprietors, upon pain of forfeiture of all his Estate,
moveable or immovable, and perpetual banishment.

. 113
Whosoever shall possess any Freehold in Carolina, upon what Title or Grant
soever, shall at the farthest from and after the Year One thousand six hundred
eighty nine, pay yearly unto the Lords Proprietors for each Acre of Land,
English Measure, as much fine Silver as is at this present in one English Penny,
or the value thereof to be as a Chief Rent and Acknowledgment to the Lords
Proprietors, their Heirs and Successors for ever. And it shall be lawful for
the Palatine's Court by their Officers at any time, to take a new Survey of any
Man's Land, not to out him of any part of his Possession, but that by such a
Survey the just number of Acres, he possesses may be known, and the Rent
thereupon due, may be paid by him.

. 114
All Wrecks, Mines, Mincrals, Quarries of Germms, and Precious Stones, with
Pearl-fishing, Whale-fishing, and one half of all Ambergreece, by whomsoever
found, shall wholly belong to the Lords Proprietors.

. 115
All Revenues and Profits belonging to the Lords Pooprietors, in common, shall
be divided into ten Parts, whereof the Palatine shall have three, and each
Proprietor one; but if the Palatine shall Govern by a Deputy, his Deputy shall
have one of those three Tenths, and the Palatine but other two Tenths.

. 116
All Inhabitants and Freemen of Carolina above seventeen Years of Age, and
under sixty, shall be bound to bear Arms, and Serve as Soldiers whenever the
Grand Council shall find it necessary.

. 117
A true Copy of these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS shall be kept in a great Book
by the Register of every Precinct, to be Subscribed before the said Register.
Nor shall any Person of what Condition or Degree soever above seventeen Years
old, have any Estate or Possession in Carolina, or protection or benefit of the
Law there, who has not before a Precinct Register Subscribed these FUNDAMENTAL
CONSTITUTIONS in this Form:

I A. B. do promise to bear Faith and true Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES the Second; and will be true and faithful to the Palatine and
Lords Proprietors of Carolina, and with my utmost power will defend them, and
maintain the Government according to this Establishment in these FUNDAMENTAL
CONSTITUTIONS.. 118
Whatsoever Alien shall in this Form, before any Precinct Registers Subscribe
these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS, shall be thereby Naturalized.

. 119
In the same manner shall every Person at his Admittance into any Office,
Subscribe these FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS.

. 120
These FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTIONS, in number a hundred and twenty, and every
part thereof, shall be and remain the sacred and unalterable Form and Rule of
Government of Carolina for ever. Witness our Hands and Seals, the first Day of
March, 1669.

Rules of Precedence.
1. THe Lords Proprietors, the eldest in Age first, and so in order. 2. The
eldest Sons of the Lords Proprietors, the eldest in Age first, and so in order.
3. The Landgraves of the Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand
Council first, and so in order. 4. The Cassiques of the Grand Council, he that
has been longest of the Grand Council first, and so in order. 5. The seven
Commoners of the Grand Council that have been longest of the Grand Council, he
that has been longest of the Grand Council first, and so in order. 6. The
youngest Sons of Proprietors, the eldest first, and so in order. 7. The
Landgraves, the eldest in Age first, and so in order. 8. The seven Commoners
who next to those before mentioned have been longest of the Grand Council, he
that has been longest of the Grand Council first, and so in order. 9. The
Cassiques, the eldest in Age first, and so in order. 10. The seven remaining
Commoners of the Grand Council, he that has been longest of the Grand Council
first, and so in order. 11. The Male Line of the Proprietors. The rest shall be
determined by the Chamberlain's Court.
FINIS.

