A CONFERENCE BETWEEN Two Protestants AND A PAPIST; Occasioned by the Late
Seasonable Discourse.

Anno Dom. 1673.

To the Reader.
AS Chance is sometimes more lucky than Design, an unexpected Re^contre has
discovered more to me of the Inside of Papists, than I could ever learn by
Enquiry. I carried a Friend o^ mine to a Coffee-house, with no farther
thoughts, than to divert my self for half an hour, and oblige him by ^n
entertainment of little expense. In a corner of ^he Room I observed a Papist,
one whom I had long known, alone and pensive, entertaining himself with his
thoughts and pipe, and little minding the rest of the Company, which was all
seated some distance from him. The convenience of the place invited us to sit
down by him, and there happened a discourse betwixt us, which I here
communicate to you, as near as I can in the (...) words in which it past, at
least I am confident not differing in substance: for as soon as we parted I
went immediately home, and writ it down, and as my memory was then fresh, and
my attention had been great, I believe I have omitted nothing which was
material. To avoid repetitions I will put an F. for my Friend, a P. for the
Papist, and for my self an N. After the usual passages of civility were ended,
I began the Discourse in this manner.

A Conference, etc.
N. I Am sorry to observe your pensiveness. Will you permit me to guess at the
cause, and tell you, I suspect the late Seasonable Discourse may have some
share in it?


P. I was indeed thinking of that Book.


N. Truly I cannot blame your trouble. That Gentleman has treated you something
severely; and if a Book which brings you so much shame, bring you some sorrow
too, you may be pardoned.


P. I must confess I was very sorry to see that Book, though for other reasons,
it may be, than those which you imagine. But why do you think it so shameful to
us?


N. Why, is it not a great shame to be such stiff Enemies ^s you are to so
glorious a Church as the Church of England; and such stiff ma^ntainers of so
stupid a Religion as yours is?


P. For my Religion, this is no place to give account of it. There are Books
enough which treat of that Subject. Only, since you are acquainted with me, I
appeal to your self, whether you do in earnest believe me so stupid as to be
given to Idolatry, or Supersti^ion, or the belief of Stories as impossible as
Amadis de Gaul or the Knight of the Sun, which that Gentleman charges on us.


N. I must declare I think better of you. But you cannot deny your e^^^^ty to
the Church of England.


P. I am ^a^ from being an Enemy to it.


F. By your favor, Sir, your principles are so fitted to the greatness of your
great Spiritual Monarch, that you cannot be friends to any Church but ^is, no
not ev^n of your own communion. For you hold that nothing, upon the matter, can
be done in matters o^ Religion, but what is done at Rome. A Convocation not
called by allowance from thence, is thought but a Conventicle. A Bishop cannot
be made, a Canonry, a Rectory granted, no Dispensation given, no Ecclesiastical
Authority exerc^z'd, but the Pope must be at one end. I say nothing of our
controversial Differences, because I perceive you are not willing to meddle
with them. But it is plain that while you hold thus, all but Italians, and those
of the Popes Territories too, must needs be back friends to the Churches of
their Native Countries. Nay, you are within a little of leaving no Churches to
which you might be kind. For what is a Church without Authority? And if all
Authority be in the Church of Rome, she is the only Church, and all the rest
but so many Parishes of her large Diocese, so much the worse to be governed, by
how much they are farther distant from the only true Bishop: for the rest will
have no more than the name.


P. How little do you understand how the world goes? It Is ^rue, there are of my
Religion who are possessed with this fancy, that unless the Bishop of Rome
intervene almost in every thing, nothing is well done. And this I believe
happens in a great measure, from a p^ece of Policy the greatest that ever has
been practiced in that Court. At least I have been informed so by one who
assured me he learned so much at Rome it self, and that from a Regular too. And
that is, the Exemptions which have been granted to most Regulars, and many
Chapters, which have been exempted to a great degree from the Jurisdiction of
their respective Bishops, and subjected immediately to the Pope. These
Communities thus exempted, are obliged for their own Interest, and to prese^ve
the ^dvantages which they enjoy by exemption, to magnify the Power which
exempted them. By which means, both they themselves are brought to depend on
the Pope alone, and Bishops too, who, all dependence on them being thus taken
away, are left weak and defenseless, and unable to maintain their due
Authority. I cannot tell whether the Jealousies of Princes, peradv^nture
suspicious of too much Authority in their Subjects, have no^ much contributed
to this effect. For I see that in some places they have made particular
agreements with the Pope, against the inclinations, and even Remonstrances of
their own people, according to which their Bishops are forced to regulate
themselves. However it be this Paramount, Omnipotent (if I may so call it)
Authority of the Bishop of Rome has been cried up so much, and so long, and by
so many, and those so much concerned (though thought disinteressed by the
vulgar) that it has now gained a great vogue, and passes among those who look
not into things, for unq^estionable. And yet the vogue is much less now than
heretofore, before our Countreyman Occam began to write in behalf of Lewis of
Bavaria. Notwithstanding still there are who think the cry greater than the
wool, and even complain and wish for remedy. That Author, and you after him
look upon this as part of my Religion, when alas! how many are there of my
Religion who look upon it as a grievance? They were of my Religion who made the
several S^atures of Provisors and Praemunire, which alone would serve for
answer to a good part of the Book in question. However they declare there very
plainly that the interposing of the Court of Rome, and this even in
presentiments to Benefices or at least cogn^^^nce of the Plea, translation of
Bishop^, etc. (which be matters Spiritual enough) are clearly against the King^
Crown and his Regality used and approved of the time of all his Progenitors --
That the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in
no Earthly Subjection, but immediately subject to God in all things, touching
the regality of the same, and to none other -- And God defend, say they, it
should be submitted to the Pope (as by the interposing aforesaid they declare
it would) and the Laws and Statutes of the Realm by him defeated and avoided at
his will -- Besides, that they will stand with the King, his Crown and Regality
in the cases aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him, his Crown
and Regality in all points to live and die. I know not, but methinks it is very
strange that People should be suspected of disaffection to their National
Church, and this out of too much affection to the Pope, who a low not the Pope
to meddle so much as with the most inconsiderable Benefice of the Nation. I
conceive it is the right of every N^tional Church to provide for the particular
concerns of that Nation, without any necessity of recourse to Foreigners. Sure
I am that we who live now, are as true Englishmen as our Ancestors, and love
Foreigners no more, nor think our selves tied to more subjection to them. If
the State would think fit to allow us Englishmen, such of who^e fidelity and
affection to their Country they were well assured, to whom we might have
recourse for our spirit^al concerns, we should quickly remove their jealousies
that we are over much affected to Strangers.


F. If you be so little affected to Strangers, why do you not enter into the
communion of the Church of England?


P. While our controversial differences remain undecided, if we come, we must
come with bad Consciences* and I suppose the Church of England would not admit
of Hypocrites. Neither indeed is it for her safety to receive those who do not
believe as she doe^.


F. If we must not expect you till the differences of Religion be determined, I
expect you not till Doomsday. People have writ and writ these hundred years,
and the more they write, the further we are from agreeing. The end of
Controversy and the end of the World I believe will happen both in one day.


P. With any other Church of the Reformation perhaps it might be as you say:
but I do not think the Controversies betwixt the Church of England and us so
irreconcilable as you imagine. And for this reason understanding Catholics
are more affected to her than any Church of the Reformation. She began the
Separation in an orderly way, and free from those tumultuous violences which
happened in other places. And as things carried by deliberation are always
better done, than when they are hurried on by heady ra^^ness, though we think
she has gone t^o far, yet I believe her moderation has preserved what may one
day help much to closing the breach betwixt us, when Gods providence shall
employ men about it who truly desire it.


F. Pray what do you mean by this?


P. I mean more than I shall perhaps upon the sudden remember. You must be
contented with what occurs. F^rst we o^^^^ve that she, and peradventure she
alone, has pr^serv'd the face of a continued mission, and uninterrupted
Ord^nation. Then i^ Doctrines her moderation is great* She professing, not
posi^ively to disbelieve, but only not to believe most, i^ not ^ll, points in
di^ference betwixt us; and in th^se of greatest concern has ex^r^st her self
very warily and so that her words may be brought to ^uit with our belief;
unl^^^ where to gratify, I suppose other dissenters, some harsh expr^ssion has
been inserted beyond the intention of the first compilers of her Doctrines. In
Discipline she ^reserves the Government by Bishops, agreeing in that point,
which is of great concern, so alone with the Church of Rome, that when the
Reformation met in the Synod of Dort, the English, I ^hi^k, were the only
Bishops there. But above all we pr^ze in her the aversion she has from
Fan^t^cism, and that wild error of the private Spirit with which it is
impossible to deal, since what they believe to day they may disbelieve
tomorrow. From this absurdity the Church of England desi^es to keep he^ self
free. She holds indeed that Scripture is the Rule of Controversy; but she
hol^s withal, Tha^ it is not o^ private interpretation. She is for Vin^^ntius
Lyrine^sis, Quod ab omnibus, quod semper quod ubique; and we are for the same.
Our Controver^ists ind^^d generally ^^y, That Tradition is the Rule, and when
this comes to be scanned I believe it will be found, the true difference is more
in words than meaning; at least it may soon and easi^y be seen which of the two
sp^ak more properly. However while we both agree in that me^hod of Vincentius,
which is an open visible way, and has nothing of the p^ivate ^ancy, miscalled
the Spirit, methinks 'twe^e no ^^ch impossible thing to take our Controversies
one by one and try them by that Test. We shall not insist upon what is not
Vincenti^^ p^o^^, and what is she professes to ^m^race as well as we.


N. I m^st conf^ss I did not reflect on ^o much bef^^e. But meth^nks so many
learned and good men ^aving spent their time in the study of these things, they
must needs have thought of all which can be thought on. And since we see no
effect of all their medi^ations, I cannot but think there must of necessity be
more in the case, some impossibility or other which has escaped your
observation. Otherwise why should the breach last so long, if it may so easily
be closed up?


P. I am not so vain to imagine I see all that can be seen. I tell you what
appears to me. It may be there may be something which appears not. But I wish
it were put to trial, and learned and unpassionate men employed to consider
what might be done. Men o^ animosity and stiffness, do more harm with their
bitterness, than the^ can do good with their learning. But if people would once
l^y aside their passions, and not look upon one another as enemies, they might
peradventure quickly cease to be so. You must needs perceive that the weak and
the fierce, are a great deal more numerous than the Judicious and the calm.
When any thing is said or written on either side, which by good handling might
be improved to some degree of reconcilement, generally there steps in some or
other of the former sort, (as the more ignorant and passionate a man is* the
more rash and busy he is too) and by his fiery zeal not only choaks the seed
of any good overture, but for the most part makes things worse than they were
before. It Is possible there may be some who do not desire Contentions should be
ended; whether it be from a perverseness of nature, or the consideration of
some particular Interest. But I see with grief that moderate counsels have been
discountenanced on both sides. Even this Author himself has a fling at Pacific
writ^rs.


F. And has he not reason, when those peaceful pretenses are but baits to catch
the unwary Proselyte, who when he is once hung, there is no getting loose
again, but concessions are retracted, the painted shows washed off; and he has
nothing left but a fruitless repentance.


P. As if we had any Prisons in which to keep men against their will, and every
man were no^ free to leave us when he pleases; as I suppose few would stay who
should find themselves so deluded. It Is likely you may know some; pray enquire
of them whether they have more obtruded on them after they came to us, than
they were made acquainted with before. Here is that Authors affirmation, and my
denial; believe neither of us, but satisfy your self, of those who can speak
of their own knowledge.


N. I am glad to perceive the breach is not altogether so wide as some imagine;
but yet there is one reason which makes me despair of any good. And that is
because you are, and must be always Enemies to the State. Believe me our Church
will no more harbor Traitors than Hippocrites.


P. Enemies to the state, and Traitors. God forbid.


N. Be not offended at the harshness of my Language, which I use not for
malice, but to speak properly, and call things by their own names. It Is not
that I charge you with actual Treason, but with Doctrines which will make you
traitors when ever they be put in practice. And in my opinion there is not much
difference betwixt an actual Traitor, and one who is ready to be so, as soon as
there is occasion.


P. Truly I think there is not.


F. If you think so, I do not see how you can be excused, That power which the
Pope claims to depose Kings, and d^^pose of Kingdoms is so destructive to the
safety of Princes, and q^iet of Kingdoms, that you must needs see you cannot be
good Subjects, while you believe it. Neither can you be Papists if you believe
it not. The Pope will no more endure you not to hold it, than States can be
safe where you do.


P. This is a Topic which never fails when any one has a mind to declaim
against Papists. It has been often objecte^ and as often answered. Since you
oblige me to speak of it, let me tell you, you are wonderfully out in your
apprehension of things. If the Pope should break with all, who believe no^ that
Power in him, he would quickly have but a thin Communion. I am yet to learn the
name and situation of that Coun^ry which belie^es it.


F. How of that Country? As if it were not believed in all Countries of your
Communion. And that we may not doubt of it, Bellarmine (against Barclay)
produces writers of all Countries who maintain it, I think he musters them up to
72* but sure they are not like the Disciples butonly in number.


P. Bellarmine had undertaken to maintain that position, and makes as good a
show as he can. From the beginning of the world, or rather from Gregory 7th.
who is his first man, he has found out the number you mention, and others cite
twice as many ag^^nst ^i^, some the very same alledg^d by him. How pertin^ntly
on either sid^ we cannot now examine. But I never th^^^ht of denying, those
Doctrines may be found in Books; I deny there is any Nation to be found which
believe them. Authors may ^^ite, and yet find few who give credit to what they
say. If we would know what people believe, we must consider what they do, not
what Scholars write. For let them write upon what motives they will, people
certainly act according as they are persuaded. Now to come to particulars,
there are few Nations, where the Neighborhood gave opportunity, but have at
some time or other been at open enmity with the Pope. The Spaniards, who are
thought the most devoted to him, have taken him Prisoner. The Duke of Atva
himself commanded an Army against him, and forced him to his terms of Peace.
The Venetians, not to mention other breaches, were so resolute in their contest
with Paul 5th, that it came to an Interdict: And they neither obeyed it, nor
would be brought by any solicitation of powerful Mediators to accept of
absolution. Other Princes of Italy have been at wars with him, and that lately
in the times of Urban the 8 h. and Innocent the 10th. Of the French we shall
speak by and by; but these have had as many and as great contrasts with him, as
any other. Which of all these Princes has been deserted by his Subjects, or
found them less ready to stand by them against the Pope, than against anoth^r
man? Had they indeed believed aright in the Pope, to dep^^e Princes, and
dispose of Kingdoms, they must needs taken his part; and left their own Princes
defenseless* But you see no such thing has happened, and may therefore
certainly conclude they believe no such power. The pretense of it may be
sometimes used to color an unjustifiable action, when people can get no
better; but I am confident there is no Prince or people in the world, who
truly believe it.


F. Truly, I know not what to say to you, what you allege is manifest, and
kno^n to the world; though I did not refl^ct on it before. But how comes it
that Doctrines so little believed are so openly maintained, and so maintained,
that they are altogether in vogue, and the contrary hardly find maintainers.


P. The contrary Doctrine never wants maintainers, when there is occasion;
neither are they the less numerous, or the less considerable, for making the
less noise: whereof the reason is the eagerness with which the Pope espouses an
opinion so favorable to him, which hinders us from being willing to do any
thing which we think he would take ill. And so we let people talk as they
please, till there be a necessity of declaring plainly what we think. And then
it plainly appears that the sense of the world is very different from the
thoughts of those writers how much soever they be cried up. Neither are the
maintainers even among writers so few, as you imagine. I am sure in our Nation
there have been more Catholic Writers against it than for it. Thirteen eminent
men subscribed a loyal profession to Queen Elizabeth, even alter the Bull of
Pius the 5th. came o^t: to whom* says Widdrington, thrice thirteen would
willingly have been added, had they not been prevented by the sudden
publication of that profession. And when Campian, Sherwin, and some others gave
evasions instead of answers to the Questions, about the Power of the Pope and
Queen, one John Bishop, a man devoted to the Sea of Rome, (says Mr. Cambden)
wrote against them, and foundly proved that that constitution of the Lateran
Council obtruded under that name, upon which the whole authority of absolving
Subjects from their Allegiance, and deposing Princes is founded, is no other,
than a Decree of Pope Innocent the 3d. and was never admitted in England. Yea
that the said Council was no Council at all, nor was any thing at all there
decreed by the Fathers.


F. But why do Princes permit the course of such Doctrines, which cannot but be
dangerous, if ever the people should come to be persuaded of them, as if they
go on uncheckt, it is like enough they one day will.


P. As if I would give account of the couns^ls of Princes, or should think it
fit, though I could* I suppose they find it for their interest; according to
which, wise Princes take t^eir measures, and having many intrigues with the
Pope, judge it advantageous to please him with words, which they see have
little credit with the wise. When there is any occasion of contest, they know
well enough that the wise will sway the rest. It may be they have at some time
or other, made use of that pretense themselves, or foresee some occasion
wherein they may. But neither is it true, that those D^ctrines go curran^ ev^ry
where. It Is treason in France, to Print, or disperse, or so m^^h ^s keep the
Books which have been condemned for main^^^ning (...). and his very Book of
Bellarmins, which you have (...) j^st now, is one. Besides all the^r
Univ^si^ies have solemnly and particularly condemned them, as pernicious, and
^ere ^ab^^ contrary to the word of God, etc. The Decrees bot^ of Parliament and
Universities have been so often published that you must needs have seen them.


F. I must confess I have.


P. Why then you see those Doctr^nes are not maintained every where, nor any
condition of Catholic Communion any where. The Pope communicates freely with
the French for all this, and so does the rest of the world. Which perhaps may
be one reason why they are the less forward to condemn them in other places.
For they see, ^hey can never pa^s for Catholic, so much as in the opinion of
the people, while so considerable a part of the Church so openly disavows them.
Wherefore, reserving to themselves the liberty to do as they see fit upon
occasion, they are willing to gratify the Pope in the mean time, and let
Scholars talk as they please,


F. But pray what do you think of those Doctrines your s^l^?


P. What should I think, but that they are false and naught?


F. And why do you not then disclaim them?


P. You see I do.


F. I mean publicly,


P. Because it is to no purpose, and I fear would look as odly as the request
of the Cutpurse, who went to the Constable and and would needs be set in the
P^l^ory by him; where when the flock^ng multitude ^o^d gazing and laughing at
the man's folly, his Companions pic^t all their pockets. Shall I deal plainly
with you! It Is you your s^^ves who are the cause that the^e Doctrines are not
renouncd', o^ which you pretend such fear.


F. We^ who are perpetually pressing you to renounce them, and there^o^e deal
the more unkindly with you, because, ^i^l you do it we cannot think you honest
men.


P. And when we have given you satisfaction, pray what more kindness would you,
or can you by Law show us? The Law makes no difference betwix^ a Papist who
renounces, and a Papist who holds those Doctrines; neither is there any Penalty
from which that renunciation would exempt him. On o^r side you know as well as
we, there are some who have more k^ndness for them then fitting. It cannot
otherwi^e be, but these men will look very untowardly on any who by such a
public renunciation shall condemn their persuasions, especially if he be
neither obliged, nor so much as invited to do it. Some of them have been
passionate and rash, and will be apt to revenge themselves, by clamors and
harsh censures, and peradventure cause intelligence to be given even at Rome,
where as they are very tender in this point, and very impatient of anything
which they conceive shocks their authority, you may be sure they will do all
that comes in their way to discountenance such a man, and work his discredit,
and it may be discomfort. On the other side, you take no care to give him any
manner of protection, or so much as countenance; but leave him to shift as well
as he can for himself, without any ease from the burden to which he is
otherwise subject. As your heats a^ present, and often, are very great against
us, none knows but he may at last be turned a begging, and be forced to seek
relief in foreign Countries, where Charity is like to be very cold to him,
against whom the Pope is incenst. What ever people think in their hearts,) they
will show but little countenance to him against whom the Pope declares himself.
Who would gratify you upon these terms, when a man is sure to live
uncomfortably with those of his own Communion, and receive no relief from you,
forwhose sake he runs into that inco^venience? A^ you carry matters, it is hard
to be imagined otherwise, but that whatever you say, you are in truth unwilling
those Doctrines should be renounced, perhaps least you lose something to say
against us. Do bu^ provide that he who satisfies you in this particular, and
r^nounce^ those Doctrines as fully as you can desire, be cherisht with some
moderation, and taken into the protection of the Laws, and then be angry freely
with those that refuse to do it. M^ke them Treason, if you will, h^re, as they
are in France, for any concern I have in them.


N. M^ thinks you do your self much wrong, to keep these things concealed If
every body knew as much as you have told us, perhaps the heats of which you
complain might cool, and people be less incenst against you.


P. I tell you no secrets. These things have been published over and over and
over again, but no not^ce is taken of them. This Author objects these Doctrines
as freely, as if nothing had ever been said to the^. And yet considering how
well he is acq^ainted with all sorts of books, sure he must needs know we areas
ready to renounce them, as he is^ forward to object them.


F. I must confess you speak like an honest man; but yet you answer for no more
then your self. You may be, and I believe are innocent; but you cannot deny
there are among you men of other principles. And ^t would not be safe, for the
sake of a few good, to cherish perhaps a great many bad


N. Nay Sir, I cannot agree with you there. If you think it not safe, to
protect the bad in respect of the good, I am sure it is not just to punish the
Good, for the faults of the Bad. We bl^me them for holding these Doctrines:
What can we have more more of them, than to renounce them? Those who do this
no^estly and fairly, without tricks or starting holes, what have we to say
against them? God forbid we should imitate the unreasonable severity of those
Nations, which when one man commits a fault, punish ^oth him, and all his
relations, though never so innocent. It Is no such hard mat^er to discern which
are fit for mercy, and which not; and I wish others may think so too, and hope
they will. But though I am in this particular, as I hope I always shall be, a
friend to Truth, I must needs declare to you I am no friend to Popery. When I
consider the many inconveniences which the Seasonable Discourse has well
observed, I believe we cannot be too follicitous to keep it out. Pray what
think you?


P. I think it is strange you should be so little acquainted with men, who live
amongst you, and with whom you converse every day. The understanding part of
those whom you call Papists, have peradventure as little inclination to Popery
as your selves, and would join heartily with you, if there were occasion, to
keep it out: especially if they were indulged such a proportion of mercy as
might make them live with comfort. For while men live uneasily, I cannot say
but they may have some inclinations to be at ease.


F. How! Papists keep out Popery! you may as soon persuade me, that Fire will
keep out Heat.


P. I know not what credit I have to persuade you, but I tell you nothing but
what I certainly know. Pray cast your eye a while on our Neighbors the
Hollanders, no Fools in matters of Government. They make a shift to allarm us
with fears of Popery, which being an odious thing, they think proper to cause
jealousy among us, and serve their ends; but their actions manifest that they
believe nothing less. They have a greater number of Papists than we have. They
are a considerable part of their Country, equal if not superior to any one
party. Whatever the Hollanders say to amuze us, they are so far from being
disquieted with fears of Popery themselves, that they take the very Priests
into the protection of the Magistrate, and give the rest a comfortable
indulgence: not out of carelessness, but because they are secure. For while the
Papists have no pinching dissatisfactions to make them wish to change, they see
well enough that they will not think of embroiling things, and upon uncertain
hopes of a condition which cannot be much happier than the present, hazard to
make themselves very unhappy by losing the present. So that till the Papists
can convert the whole Nation one by one, the States see their Religion will
never be in other terms than it is, and that is so unlikely, that she never has
the least suspicion of it. For this desire to make Proselytes, which is common
to all as well ^s Papists, gains and loses particulars, but advances little in
the general. Experience shows the progres of either side is inconsiderable, and
the benefit to the State very much. The Papists upon many occasions having been
found as faithful to the State, as any of their fellow Subjects. Even at this
time, while they have War with a powerful Enemy of that Religion, and who has
lodged a powerful Army in the bowels of their Country, they find the Papists
as fast to the interest of the State, as the best, and as earnest opposers of a
Foreign Power, though likely to introduce their Religion, if it should prevail.


F. I am apt to believe that ease might hinder you from desiring change; for
men therefore change because they are uneasy. But it is still incredible to me
that you should in earnest ever resist Popery. It Is a Forregn Enemy, not
Popery, which the Holland Papists oppose.


P. But that Foreign Enemy, if he were suffered to come in, wou^d bring Popery
along with him. But let us unde^stand one another. I conceive you mean by
Popery what the word sign^fi^s, a blind addiction to the Pope, and what this
Discourser meant, viz. something which is attended with those inconveniences he
mentions. And I can assure you those among us that understand things, and know
how to distinguish Religion from Abuse (I will not undertake for every
extravagant Zealot) would be as u^willing to admit them as your selves. Do you
think us so sensele^s as to be willing to forfeit our birth rights? to be
deprived of the b^nefit of our Native Laws? to submit to the Jurisdiction of
Foreign Courts, and at the summons of every crafty wrangler to run a thousand
miles a pettifogging? do you think those among us who are possessed of
Abby-lands, (whereof many are still in the hands of P^pists, and make if not
all, yet many times a great part of their Estate) would easily resign them, and
beggar themselves and Posterity? Do you think us unconcerned in the wealth of
the Nation, or forward with an Indian simplicity to barter gold for trifles?


F. But how could you help it?


P. Help what? we are troubled with no such grievances, nor ever mean to be.


F. God-a-mercie Reformation, which has removed those burdens.


P. The Statutes before mentioned eased as in part; and Hen. the 8. no great
friend to the ^eformation, did the rest, and more perhaps, than were it to do
again, your selves would do. But whatever was the cause, whether Reformation,
or any thing else, we are not subject unto those inconveniences now, and I
believe shall never subject our selves to them by our good wills.


F. Your Doctrines would subject you to them in spite of your teeth; while you
believe of the Pope as you do, there is no remedy but you must let him act as
he does. While you acknowledge him Head of the Uuniversal Church, you must grant
him power to make Laws for the Universal Church, and when he makes them, you
must obey them. Therefore he may cross and weaken the Laws of any particular
Nation, and remove proceedings to his own Court as he pleases. You must either
absolutely renounce him, or enslave your Country: for this unavoidably follows
from what you believe.


P. I thought I had believed my share of the Pope; but I am sure I believe no
such matter; and ^m sure my Catholic Ancestors believed as little as (...). No
remedy say you? Does the Statute of Praemunire before mentioned, si^^^fie
nothing? no^ the severe penalties elsewhere enacted against all of what
condition soever which shall draw any out any out of the Realm, in plea whereof
the cogniz^nce belongs to the Kings Court, or whereof judgments be given in
the Kings Court, or which do sue in any other Court to defeat or impeach the
judgment given in the Kings Court? Behold how much we think our selves obliged
to foreign jurisdiction, and how forward we are to enslave our Country. This
is no place to dispute the Popes Authority. Controversy does as ill in a Coffe
h^use as Policy. But it seems n^ hard matter to distinguish Primacy from
Omnipotency, and it is easy to see he may be Head, and yet cannot force Laws on
particular places without their consent. Hen. 8th was by Statute declared Head
of the Church of England. That Ti^le has been since ch^nged into Supreme
Governor, which in my opinion, amounts to the same. However, neither the one
nor the other enables our ^^^ngs to make Laws without the consent of their
Subjects If you look into Countries of the Popes Communion, I do not believe
that you will find any one, where they think themselves obliged by any Law made
at Rome, purely by virtue of that Authority. They allways examine it
themselves, and if they think it convenient, they receive it, and that
reception makes it binding; otherwise, no man regards it, or thinks himself
obliged by it, and perhaps would be punished if he should. The Discourser
mentions the Canon Law, which here we our selves do not wholly reject; and when
we do, must undo Doctors-Commons. Now I understand not that the Cannon Law is
obliging farther than it is received, or that any Country is obliged to receive
it, farther then as they find it for their convenience. Every Nation is at
liberty to do what appears best for themselves And therefore we see what is
binding in one place, signifies nothing in another. And since England is now
free from the Cannon Law, more than she finds for her benefit, assure your
selves Papists would be as unwilling to part with that freedom as Protestants.
We love not to thrust our necks into Yokes more than other people. I think
indeed, if any decrees for the advantage of our Country were sent from Rome, we
should not refuse a benefit, merely because it came from thence. But we do not
believe that what comes from thence, is obliging purely because it comes from
thence; but only, when after due examination, by due authority at home, it is
by that authority made obliging. And this holds, not only in decrees of Popes,
but of Councels too, though never so general. Nations admit them as they like
them, and so either receive all, or part, or none. Every body knows that no
inducements have yet been able to prevail with the French to receive such
Canons of the Council of Trent as concern manners. For which reason no man
there is obliged to these decrees or any such, but where they will oblige
themselves.


F. What you say is really considerable. But I fear it does not quite do the
Business. There is a great difference betwixt Laymen, and Clergimen. The Layety
may be well enough affected to the peace of their Country, to which they give
their Wifes and Children for Pledges; but the Clergy have no such hostages to
give, and besides are so tied by Education, and, if they aim at any preferment
that is considerable, by Oath to the Bishop of Rome that we cannever be secure
of them. Shall I deal freely with you, and tell you an unwelcome truth? It Is
for the Clergies sake, that we are the more jealous of you all. We could
believe the Laiety honest enough. But considering the influence the Clergy has
over them both by the respect which you bear them, and by the ty of Confession,
by which they are enabled to do even what they please, we can never be secure
of one, unless we were secure of both. Now for your Regular Clergy, your self
acknowledges the immediate dependence they have on the Pope by means of their
exemptions. But we know besides, that all particulars vow obedience to their
Superiors; which obedience passes for the greater virtue and more sublime
perfection by how much the more blind it is. These Superiors are subject to one
another, till all comes at last to the General, to whom the whole Order is
absolutely subject. This General both lives at Rome, and is many ways sure
enough to the Pope. So that if any one of the whole Order displease him, the
General presently takes his part, and enforces the obedience vowed to himself,
to whatever the Pope desires. And as we see in reason this must needs happen,
so we find by experience that it does; as in the case of Walsh, Withrington,
and others. Your secular Clergy, as you call them, indeed have not the same
dependence, and were they left to their native liberty might do well enough.
But the Pope has found out an expedient to bring them to his bow, and requires
such an Oath both from Bishops and other Dignitaries, that those who take it
must needs be more his Subjects than their own Princes. Wherefore pray consider
whether we can in any reason have a confidence in men who, though they be well
disposed themselves, are governed by such as we know are tied to the Popes
interest.


P. The more I should think it is for your interest to allow us such as are of
good Principles, and of whose fidelity and affection to the interest of their
Country you might be assured. You know as well as we that, we cannot be without
Priests, and that whatever hazard we undergo, whether of estate or life, we
must have some. So that unless you banish or hang us all up without more ado,
while there is a Papist in England, there will be a Priest. Now while you
hinder us from having men brought up in such principles as might be free from
jealousy, it is not possible for us to do otherwise than we do: for we are
forced to take such as we can get; and if they prove otherwise principl'd than
you would have them, the fault is none of ours. As for the objections, that vow
of obedience which Religious take, reaches no farther then to the better
performance of the duties of that kind of life which they have chosen, and is
so understood, and not otherwise, by those among them who are understanding.
And if you apprehend any danger in it it is very easy to make provision against
it. But for the Oath, which you mention, I must needs profess my ignorance* I
have never so^n ^ nor heard of it, and therefore know not what to say to it.
But I know in general that no Subject can take any Oath prejudicial to the
safety or service of his Native Prince, and if he do is obliged not to keep it.
Neither do I think an Oath can be imposed upon the Subjects of any Prince
without his consent, or at least against his con^^^^.


F. I easily believe you have not seen it, and that few of your Layty are
acquainted with such things. But, Sir, we are better verst in your matters than
you imagine. I think I have a copy of i^ rendered into English at this time
about me. Yes, here it is. Pray read it, and see if we have not reason to be
jealous. And if you doubt of the Translation, do you compare it with Original
Latin, as (...) is in the Pontificale Romanum (of Clement the 8) pro universo
orb Christiano, Printed at Antwerp 1617.


P. IN. Elect to the Church of N from this day forward will be faithful to B.
Peter the Apostle and the H. Romans Church, and our Lord N. Pope N. and his
Successors canonically entering. I will not concur by counsel, consent or deed
that they lose life or member or be unjustly taken, [mala captione] or violent
hands in any manner laid upon them, or any injury done them under whatsoever
pretext. I will not knowingly discover to any one to their prejudice any
counsel with which they shall entrust me, either by themselves, by their
Messengers or Letters. I will help them saving my Order, against all men, to
keep and defend the Romans Papacy and Regalities of S. Peter. I will treat with
honor, and in his necessities help a Legate of the Apostolic See both going and
coming. I will endeavor to preserve, defend, increase and promote the Rights,
Honors, Privileges, and Authority of the H. Romans Church, our Lord the Pope,
and his aforesaid Successors. I will not communicate in counsel, deed, or
treaty in which any thing sinister and prejudicial to their Person, Right,
Honor, State and Power shall be designed against our said Lord, by the Romans
Church. And if I shall know any such thing to be treated, or endeavored, I
will hinder it to my power, and, as soon as ever I can, will acquaint our said
(...) therewith, or some body else by whom it may come to his knowledge. I will
(...) self observe, and cause to be observed by others, the Rules of the H.
Fathers, the Decrees, Ordinances or Dispositions, Reservations, Provisions, and
Apostolical commands. I will to my power prosecute and impugn Heretics,
Schismatics, and Rebels to our said Lord and his said Successors. If I be
called to a Synod, I will come, unless I be hindered by a canonical impediment.
Every three years I will personally visit the shrines of the Apostles, and
render account to our Lord and his Successors aforesaid of my whole pastoral
Office, and of all things any way belonging to the state of my Church, the
discipline of the Clergy and People, and the health of Souls entrusted to my
charge, and on the other side will humbly receive and most diligently perform
the Apostolical commands. If I be detained by a lawful impediment, I will
fulfill all aforesaid by a special Messenger having a special Mandate to that
purpose, chosen from the bosom of my Chapter, or some other Ecclesiastical
Dignitary, or otherwise having some Ecclesiastical Personage; or in default of
such, by some Priest of my Diocese; and if there be none of my Clergy, by some
other Priest Secular or Regular, of approved virtue and Religion fully
instructed in all matters aforesaid. And of such impediment I will make lawful
proof to be sent by my said Messenger to the Cardinal presiding [proponert^m]
in the Congregation of the Sacred Council. I will not sell, nor give nor pawn,
nor mortgage anew, [infeudabo] nor alienate in any manner the Possessions
belonging to my Table even with the consent of the Chapter of my Church,
without consulting the Bishop of Rome. And if I do proceed to any alienation, I
consent ^o ipso to incur the penalties contained in a certain Constitution set
forth of this matter:

So help me God and these H. Ghospels of God.


F. Well, Sir, what say you to it?


P. I say I would not take it for the best Bishopric in Christendom. As far as
I can judge it is direct Prae^^nire, and perhaps worse. But pray, Sir, where did
you find it? Those Princes who are of the Popes communion are careful enough of
their Authority. It seems impossible they should be ignorant of it, and
incredible they should permit their Subjects to take it. I cannot believe it is
in use, wherever you found it.


F. I have never been present at the consecration of any of your Bishops, to
say of my own knowledge that it is taken: But I know it is prescribed in your
Pontifical to be taken; And I suppose your Bishops are consecrated according to
the prescriptions of your Pontifical.


P. Really, Sir, you tell me news, and such as I dare answer there is not on
one (at least Lay*) Catholic in ten thousand that ever heard of it. I will not
question the truth of what you ^ay, because I do not mistrust you; and besides
it is an easy matter when I can meet with a Pontifical to see what is there.
But I must still remain of my former opinion, that it is not generally in use,
though perhaps it may be in the Popes own territories. The Authority of the
Pontifical is no proof as to that point. For other countries have their
Pontificals and Liturgies of their own framing, and that may be in the Roman
Pontifical which perhaps is no where else. That it is of no ancient standing, is
clear by the Oath it self, which mentions the Congregation of the Sacred
Council, and every body knows that that Congregation was erected since the
Council of Trent; and every body knows too tha^ since that time Popes have not
had that credit in the world that they could impose Oaths upon the Subjects of
other Princes without the consent of those Princes. For England in particular,
besides the Statutes beforementioned, which in my opinion quash it
sufficiently, there is mention in Sir Ed Cook in his 3 book of Institutes tit.
Praemuni^e, of a renunciation used even from the times of Ed. 1. and Ed. 2 in
these words: I renounce all the words comprised in the Popes Bull to me made of
the Bishopric of A which ^e contrary or prejudicial to the King our Sovereign
Lord and to his crown, And of that I put my self humbly in his Grace, praying
to have restitution of the temporalities of my Church. This renunciation must
needs be a great deal more ancient than this Oath; and since our Catholic
Ancestors thought fit to renounce all words inserted in Bulls prejudicial,
though to a less degree, than this Oath. However it be it is a clear case that
being made by the Pope none can be more obliged to take it, than to receive his
other Decrees, which as we have discourst already, no Nation is obliged to do,
but by free consent, as far as they find them beneficial to themselves.
Wherefore as I said before, allow us Ecclesiastical Ministers, of whose
fidelity you may be assured, and we will be careful enough, you may be sure not
to run rashly and ca^slesly into Praemunires; or if we do, the Pope himself
cannot blame you if you severely execute those Laws which have been made even
by Catholics. But if you force us to take them upon such terms as we can get
them, we are blameless if things happen which we cannot avoid.


F. Why but you cannot avoid this. For let us allow you what liberty we will,
the Pope never make you Bishops on other terms; and you believe Bishops cannot
be made but by him, or authority derived from him.


P. I have already told you I do not believe Bishops are made any where upon
those terms, except perhaps in his own territories; but I am very certain, they
need not be any where; and am farther very certain that in England they should
not be, if you would allow us the liberty of acting in the concerns of Religion
openly, and without such fear of the Laws that many times we do we know not
what our selves. Believe me the Pope is too wise to give occasion to examine
whether Bishops may not be made without his intervening. For it is well known
that Bishops were made, and governed the Church a long time, and he never
meddled in the business. And at this day there are who will by no means use the
ordinary style, Dei and Aposholica sedis gratia, but leave Apostolica sedis
quite out. The Recourse, which is now had to him, I believe was occasioned by
the frequent abuses which happened in promotions, and which is thought so far
from necessary even now, that, if I mistake not, the Canons are still in force,
which order that unless he provide for a vacant Sea, within a time limited, and
that no long one, the three next Bishops shall make one without more ado.
However this collation of Bishoprics by the Pope, is plainly by Canon Law, and
subject to the contingencies and nature of other Canons.


^. To let pass at present, what you answer only, and me^ thinks
unsatisfactorily as before, of your remaining ^il^ of your former opinion, so
here again of your not believing that Bishops are made any where upon those
terms, except perhaps in the Popes own Territories: and not to press you
further home on this po^nt.

First, by telling you, not with any perhaps, or peradventure, but most
certainly, that all Bishops either named, created, confirmed, or consecrated by
virtue of the Popes Bulls, not only for his own temporal Territories, but for
any where else throughout the world, are made upon those terms; and that no
less certainly, that very Pontificale Romanam which prescribes the aforesaid
Oath to be taken by all Arch Bishops, and all Bishops, and all Abbots too, at
their consecration, nay and to be taken twice by every Arch Bishop, videlicet.
first, at his Consecration, and the second time at his receiving the Pallium)
is no less the Pontifical now in use throughout all Churches acknowledging the
Popes Supremacy, than the Roman Breviary, and the Roman Missal are are the only
Breviary and Missal now in public use in the same Churches as it is known they
are.

Secondly, by assuring you also, there are even at this present, within his
Majesty's Dominions, nay in one of them, i. e. Ireland, residing now publicly
enough, at home in their Diocesses, at least nine Ticular new Bishops, and
^ower also new ArchBishops, in all thirteen (besides two more alive still of
the old Nuncio Bishops) and every one of them created by the Pope, within these
four la^st years since 1669, consecrated according to the prescription of that
Roman Pontifical only, and swor^ the Popes devoted Bondslaves for ever, by that
very Oath; that Oath, which you please to call it, either of strictest (however
sacrilegious) fidelity to the Pope, or of most per^idious Treachery against the
King and Kingdom; for it is both; and you your self will easily believe they do
and will hold to it, being they are so far from thinking not only not to
renounce all (nay nor any of) the words comprised in the Popes respective
Bulls, to them made of their several Bishoprics, which be contrary or
prejudicial to the King our sovereign Lord and to his Crown, nor only not so
much as to renounce any part of those even most notoriously Traitorous promises
of the aforesaid Oath, not even so much as virtually, or indirectly, or even
implicitly to renounce any part of them by taking either the usual Oaths of
Supremacy or Allegiance, or even any other kind of Oath of fidelity to the
King, that on the contrary it is manifestly known they have all of them ever
since their Consecration, made it their work, not only to suppres^ utterly that
now so lamed Irish Remonstrance (or profession of fidelity to the King in all
temporal affairs according to the Laws of the Land) presented to, and accepted
by his Majesty in the year 1661, but also to prosecute with incredible malice
for so many years all those other Irish Ecclesiastics of their Church, who in
the said year or any time since had signed (as only for having signed) that
Formulory, until at last by such wicked ways they have forced most, of these
forlorn subjects ( forlorn I call them, because of one side persecuted by the
Pope, and of the other not protected by our Laws) to retract their
subscription, and consequently and even under their own hands to renounce
utterly their allegiance to the King; nay even also (and which must be
consequential to disclaim their acknowledgment of his being their King at all
in any matter or cause whatsoever, being he cannot be acknowledged King at all,
if he be not acknowledged King at least in all civil and temporal affairs
according to the Laws of the Land, or in indispensable Obedience and Faith be
not acknowledged to be due to him in such matters, from all his Subjects.

Thirdly, by desiring you to consider, that of all the Roman Catholics, by all
right and Laws, subject to the King, the great and considerable body indeed, is
only the Irish Nation, instructed now and wholly (as to point of Conscience)
governed by those very Bishops and Archbishops, how apt, as those instructors,
so the instructed Irish generally taken, are in the present conjuncture for any
kind of bad impressions, from abroad, and consequen^ly for another, fatal
revolution at home and what other probable design, then that of preparing them
for a new rebellion in due time or fit opportunity at home, could ther^ be in
those eager persecutions continued so inexorably, scandalously, and incessantly
these eleven years past, both by the Court of Rome abroad, and by all its
Emissaries at home, although more violently and confidently these four last
years by the foresaid new Bishops and Archbishops, and all their underlings
and other adherents against so innocent a profession of Allegiance or promise
of Obedience in temporal things on^y to the King? Nay what other probable
design could there be (but that) of creating in, and commanding home too, and
crouding in that Kingdom so many titular Bishops and Archbishops (besides
Vicars Apostolic with Episcopal jurisdiction in so many other of the vacant
Sees, and besides too so many Nunciotist Provincials of Regular Orders, and
Abbots also) and that immediately upon the Duke of Ormonds removal from that
Government in the year 1669? Bishops and Archbishops without Benefice, without
Revenue, without Patrimony, or other means to maintain them, but what they get
neither by preaching nor praying, but by poling and pilling and fleecing and
flaying the poor both Priests and people under their pretended jurisdiction;
though withal, I must confess, devou^ing even already in hopes, those indeed
considerable Temporalties which the Protestant Bishops enjoy at present
according to Law; Pluncket of Ardmagh 5000 l. a year old Revenue, lawfully as
yet possessed by Margetson of the same See; Talbot of Dublin thetwo or 3000 l.
of that See also, which Boil or Michael Dubliniensis has now in legal
possession: and so for the rest all over Ireland respectively. Which Revenues,
as they were one of the chief causes of the last Rebellion; think you they may
not in all likelihood be of another yet in our days? Being those Papal Bishops
hold these Royal Prelates to be mere usurpers even of those very temporal
revenues, and know themselves are entitled by the Popes Bulls not only to the
spiritual Jurisciction but unto all kind of temporals belonging to their
respective Sees, and were both created and commanded home to Ireland (as
others, their Predecessors had been in so great number immediately before the
last Rebellion in 1641) of purpose to try their fortune, or what they might do
for playing the old game over again.

And in the fourth place, by entreating you moreover to reflect on all the
Particulars of the foresaid Oath, in which particulars those Papal Bishops bind
themselves with so much solemnity and Sacriledg to be Traitors, certainly at
least to a Protestant King, and Kingdom; unless peradventure you think that
neither that neither the Popes Canon Law, nor Council of Trent, nor Bulla
Coenae, nor Court of Rome it self. nor these Bishops themselves, hold
Protestants to be either Heretics or Schismatics: or that you see not how
these Bishops bind themselves even to persecute to their power all Heretics
and Schismatics whatsoever. And how, if they will not be and continue Traitors
to the King, they must be at Rome esteemed even perjured Villains, and Rebels
too against the Pope, whom they do (as they are indeed by the tenor of the said
Oath obliged to) maintain to be doubtless the only Supreme Lord of Ireland (yea
England, etc) both in temporals and Spirituals. Now what confidence th^nk you
can be, by a Protest n King or people reposed in such men (even what ever they
may chance say, or swear hereafter) who of their own free accord, nay desire,
ambition, and migh^y solicitation, that I may say no more, put an absolute
necessity on themselves even at their holy Consecration, either to be Traitors
perpetually to the King, or continually perjured to the Pope? Though otherwise,
I must confess, they are by the eternal Law of God and man, and reason also,
bound to be so perjured.

I say, that to let pass at present all these considerations, and many more
too, which no less materially than occasionally might be returned to your
answer, videlicet, either that of your remaining still of your former opinion,
or that which in effect is the same) of you not believing that Bishops are made
any where upon those terms except perhaps in the Popes own Territories: nor to
press you at all with those insoluble arguments, being you not only seem to be
an absolute stranger to all affairs in the Kingdom of Ireland, wherein I cannot
be so, as having a good part of my estate lying there upon the account of an
old Adventurer by the Act of Decimo septimo Caroli primi but you also, and
indeed no less plainly then honestly condemn that wicked, Traitorous nay cruel
too and barbarous Oath, (albeit indeed the chief support, nay together with the
Profession of Faith, and other Oath also ther^ in contained, ordered by Pius
the 4th. to be ma^e and sworn both by all whatsoever Bishops, and by all
Dignitaries too, yea all Canons, Parsons, Curats, all beneficed Clerkwh^tsoever
that have the care of Souls, yea also by all Superiors of Monasteries,
Convents, Houses, Places of Regular Orders, (understand Orders not mendicant)
even those also of Millitary Orders) the only support of the otherwise
tottering Papacy: I say therefore that not to give you any more trouble at
present, with those or any other such, however material replies, nor expecting
any r^joynder from you to them, what I am to tell you now, is first, my own
Ingenuous acknowledgment; that if but even all the rest you say be true, your
Religion as it is, does not make you all stupid. And that for ought I perceive
there be honest and sensible men among you. The next is, that notwithstanding
all your seeming candor, I cannot thoroughly believe you, while you hold the
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. For, if indeed you hold this tenent,
who can be persuaded, there is any trust so much as to your solemn promises,
much less private Protestations.


P. Shall I give you a short answer? Being you acquit me at present of all the
rest. Whoever holds so, hang him up in Gods name; for no honest man will think
him worthy to live. Many of you deal with us both at home and abroad; I hope
you find us deal as fairly as other men. Not but that you may have met with
Knaves: for there are Knaves and honest men of all professions. But he that
cheats one of another Religion, would not spare one of his own I warrant him.
As for the truth of wha^ I say-, 't^s easy to try. Cherish with some
comfortable moderation, and take into the protection of the Law, such as shall
secure you in the man^er you shall think fit, that they truly are so persuaded
as I have informed you, (for I have already to^d you, that every body will be
shy to offend the Pop^ and not be secure so much as of protection) But show
indulgence to those who shall renounce the power which you except against, to
depose Kings and dispose of Kingdoms, and if the Statutes of Praemunire and the
rest, be not enough, find out what more punishment you please, for those who
shall receive and obey decrees sent from Rome, without allowance of the State:
And for those who refuse to give you such security, treat them w^^^ (...)
severity you please.


N. What think you Friend? to my apprehension this seems but fair. For methinks
it is a preposterous cross piece of Wisdom, to be perpetual, y disquieting our
selves with fears. of Papists and not admit them to secure us against those
fears. As if we were afraid not to be afraid of them: or as if it were for our
t^ est to keep up our jealousies, and not suffer them by any means to be taken
away.


F. I am of the mind; but yet while people remember Queen Marys days, the
Powder Treason, the Massacres in France and Ireland, and Inquisition every
where; things as manifest as horrid, I doubt they will always be afraid; though
I see withal it is something hard to make those who live now bear the blame
both of past generations, and other Nations.


P. You would think it yet harder, if you knew how truly we abhor such things,
and how little share Religion had in them. It was the influence, which the
severe humor had of King Philip had upon the Counsels of England, which
brought that blemish upon Queen Marys days. He was one who thought violent
remedies the best, insom^^h that he spared not the Ashes of a man in whose arms
his own Father had yielded up his breath. By his inflexible fi^ure upon such
courses He lost the Low Countries, and is become an example to the world, how
little severity is proper in matters of Religion. For had the cruelty of those
days been effectualy to the ends, for which it was used, you had not been now
to upbraid us with it.

Religion was not the cause of the Massacres you mention; but Fear of a
powerful faction in France; and Hate of a foreign and commanding nation in
Ireland. In both cases it happened indeed by chance, that there was difference
of R^l^gion, but had they been all of the same Religion, the barbarous violence
would not have been less cruel. Massacres have been in other p^aces, even in
England, and where Hate, or Revenge, or any other violent passion hurries men
to them, they spare their own Religion no more than another* Cruelty shows so
ugly, that it is no wonder if those, who are guilty of it, desire to hide it
under some handsomer vizard: and Religion being the most specious of all other,
if every body take it up that can, and desire to pass rather for Zealous than
Barbarous: And ^so poor Religion must be abused to disguise the Fear of France,
and Hate of Ireland, and Rebellion of England, (^or here it was pretended too, as
twill be in all places) and all this while is a mere pretense, and least of all
aimed at by those who cry loudest out upon it. By the way, if I may speak of
Ireland in particular, without the imputation of approving what past there, for
in truth I abhor those passages too much to go about so much as to excuse them,
I could wish that the Author who mentions the Lord Orrery would h^ve taken some
notice too of what is answered by P. W Your Author mentions two hundred
thousand throats cut: P. W. affi^ms that my Lord himself bates half the number,
and yet confidently avows, and that to the Duke of Ormond who should know, that
even that number is exorbitantly vast. And I am sure I have heard from those
who are well acquainted with particulars ^ and ^^fficient haters of those
cruelties, that they defied all the world to make good the murder of half one
hundred thousand, or so much as twenty thousand, or even one thousand slain
otherwise than in the Wars; and where things are so bad of themselves methinks
there is no need to make them worse than they are.

The Powder Traitors were Papists, it is true; and it is true likewise that that
there are and allways will be wicked men of all Religions. Had Papists been
their Judges they would have escaped no better than they did. I think there is
no more to be said of them, but this, in which I am sure all honest men agree,
that the Justice of that Law which past upon them, had more of mercy than they
deserved.

For the In quisition take my word Papists like it no more then you. But you
are much out when you think it is every where. The Pope with all his credit
cannot settle it any where but in Italy and Spain, and that with cautions enough
too, except just in his own Territories, where he may order things as he
pleases. Those Princes who receiveit, conceave it is for their Interest, and
it is by their authority introduced among their Subjects, whereof I believe
there are many ill satisfied with it. For us who are Englishmen, I dare answer
there is not one who would not oppose it with all his power.


F. There is but one thing more which I shall propose to you, and that I decare
is more for the satisfaction of my curiosity, then that I believe any great
matter in it. But yet why do you not take the Discoursers counsel in one thing,
and clear your selves from the imputation of Sacred blood charged home upon you
by the answerer of Philanax Anglicus.


P. It is an imputation so wild and manifestly groundless, that I do not think
any understanding m^n, though never so great an Enemy to Papists, gives any
credit to it. Does not all the world which side the Papists took? Inquiry has
been made for the guilt of that sacred blood, and all England knows they were
not Papists who were found guilty. If they had, I wonder who would protect
Popish Traitors. If the Rebellion, as that Author would pe^swade us, was raised
and fomented by the Arts of the Court of Rome, it is as plain case that the
Court of Rome had very little influence upon the Papists here^, who acted quite
contrary to their designs. It is undeniable that to design the Kings ruin, and
at the same time to fight to preserve him from ruin, are inconsistent and
impossible thin^s. To go about seriously to answer such extravagant fancies, is
to give them a credit which they otherwise have not, nor can have with any man
of judgment.


F. For all that he tells very shrewd stories, and such as he undertakes to
make good.


P. If he can make good his understanding, I think he is no friend to his
Country to let Traitors lie concealed in it, whom he can discover. Wherefore in
behalf of Justice, and Reverence to that sacred Person a Loyalty to his sacred
Success^r, I summon him to make good what he says he can, and require at his
hands that he spare none, whoever they be, but expose them all to deserved
punishment. And I am confident I shall be disavow'd by none of my Religion, if
in this particular I disclaim all benefit of the of the Act of Oblivion for any
of us. For his stories by your favor they are far from shrewd, He talks of a
Priest and confessor who flourisht his sword at the Kings death. This story if
I we^l remember, I have seen in one of Mr. Prinn's Books, and he ^athers it
upon a dead man, who is sure enough will not rise again to disprove him. But as
luck is, he says '^was the Queens Confessor And it is sufficiently known that
the Queens Confessor does not use to leave the person of the Queen, and it is
more than sufficiently known that the Queen at that time was not in England.
And were it to purpose, I believe there are yet living those, who can testify
on their knowledge where the Queens Confessor then was. So that 'twas something
shrewdly done of the Answerer, to leave out that particular, who this Confessor
was, by which the forgery of the story may be detected, and involve the matter
in a general charge, which none knows how to answer; otherwise he has said
nothing but what every body could see throu^h that read it in Mr. Prinn. Ag^^n
he tells of 30. Jesuits betwixt Roan and Diepe, who discovered strange designs
to one whom they took to be of their party. And if he or any man ever saw 30
Jesuits upon a R^ad together, or if he did can fancy them to simple, as to
discover their designs to men they know not, I am content he believes ev'en
what he pleases. Then he talk of the F^yar ^s that Dunkirk, whom he makes to vy
with the Jesuits, for the glory of that inhuman action; and this before an
understa^ding Gentl^man. But certain 'twas no great sign of understanding; to
broach such a story, when all the world knows there neither are, nor ever were
any F^ya^s at Dunki^k, English I mean, for str^nge^s, I suppose he will not
make so concerned in the affai^s of our Country. He talks too of our
transformations unto Indepe^dents to make England depend on the Pope, and fifth
Monarchyst's to ruin the English Monarchy, and Agitator, and I know not what,
I suppose to show he can quibble; otherwise every body le^s if we could so
easily, and undiscoverably disguise our selves, we were mad if we took not all
the shape of Protestants, and so avoided the danger of the Law without more
ado. For who should find us out if we could make all the wo^ld believe we were
Protestants? Alas ^ you know, and we know too we^l, that a Papist cannot long
conceal his Religion. If these be your shrewd stories, your hate to us will let
any thing p^ss; I have not seen any thing that pretends to serious, less
significant, and a body would have thought a Churchman should better know what
belong to defaming our Neigebour, tha^ to expose the credit of a great many
innocent men to scandal upon such no-grounds as he mentions.


F Nay Sir, I declared before, it was only out of curiosity I spoke of this
matter, For I ever thought it very od, you should be looked upon as friends to
the King during all the times of confusion, and for that reason be out of
favor with all the several changes of Government, and of a sudden be charged
with Annuity to the King when he came in. But I thank you for the information
you have given us, and avow fr^ely to you, I shall carry away apprehensions of
you very different from what I brought in. For indeed I thought the blind
implicit obedience had involved you all into stupid and unsufferable errors,
and rendered you unfit, not only for protection, but even harbor amongst honest
men: But I perceive it is with you, as with the rest of the world, where there
are good and bad of all sorts, And though I have no kindness for your Religion
yet I will confess I begin to wish as well as you, that the book which has
occasioned all our discourse had not been written; for methinks it is hard to
charge the follies of some, without distinction upon a^^.


P. I cannot tell what the design of the Author was. It Is in the number of
unknowable secrets, and we ought still to judge favorably of things we know
not. But his Book seems apt to stir animosities, which if he judge seasonable,
I should think not so charitable. Neither can I understand why the moderate
share we had in the late Indulgence, should occasion so much Zeal against us,
and none against others who were more largly indulged, and are otherwise much
and many ways more considerable: Especially, when I consider the Topies he
uses, your Religion, says he, is an excellent Religion, and ours full of
stupidity: Be it so; may we not therefore be Permitted to say our prayers in
private? Which is all the Indulgence allowed us. Sure it is no part of the
goodness of your Church to hinder others from being as good as they can; and
the worse our Religion is, the more need we have of praying to make us better.
Again let the Pope claim what power he pleases, and that power be as
inconvenient as that Gentleman pleases; private prayer will not therefore be
inconvenient, or you receive any harm from what passes in private. Against
seditious Doctrines, such as those are declared by Catholics to be, I hope the
Laws takes Order, and they are excepthd by the very declaration. It Is the name
of Abbey Lands and Vbby-Lubbers* and the rest of the inconveniences he mentions;
private prayer certainly will never pray them in, and were there any danger of
them, we should help you to our powers to keep them out. His Topic of Auricular
confession, in my opinion might have been spared in respect to the Church of
England, which is far from disaproving such Confession. And however every body
must needs see that there are Nations, who use it, as careful of the honors,
of their Families every jot as the English, and something more jealous. An
abuse may sometimes happen, from which there is nothing so sacred that can
always be free but good things are not to be taken away because it is possible
they may be abused. At worst I do not see that you are concerned. If we have a
mind to prostitute our Wives and Daughters, how are youth^ less safe, or which
way endangered if we be all Wh^res and Cuckolds.


We fell a laughing at that expression, and that laughter broke of our
discourse, and soon after our company. I parted as soon as I had paid our
Coffee, and I wish you may think your few pence as well bestow d on the
Relation as I did mine to hear it.

FINIS.

