A SERMON Preached before Her Majesty, On May 29, being the ANNIVERSARY Of the
Restoration of the King and Royal Family.

By the Bishop of S. ASAPH, Lord Almoner to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

By her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones in Lincoln's Inn new Square next Clare-Market.
1692.

A SERMON Preached before Her Majesty, At White Hall, May 29. 1692.
Psalm 118. 23, 24. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

THE day for which David intended this Psalm, was probably the day of that
great Revolution upon the Death of Saul, by which he was exalted to the Throne
of his Kingdom.

It was not long before this, that David had said, I shall perish one day by
the hand of Saul. He confessed afterward, that it was in his have that he said
this; Psalm. 31. 22. not considering (as he ought) the promise of God, that he
should live to be King of Israel.

But now, after Saul himself was cut off by that terrible Judgment of God;
which David lamented, as you see, 2 Samuel 1. 17. Yet being thus secured from
that which he feared, and seeing his way open to that which God had promised;
now he corrects that hasty word of his. He says here, verse. 17. I shall not
dye, but trve, and declare the works of the Lord.

What works? That he shows in the following words, (there are other words
between; but I pass by them, for I am not now Expounding a Psalm.) Verses 22.
23. The stone which the Builders refused is become the head stone of the
Corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.

It is plain how these words were true of David himself, Who, tho he was Readiness
Son in Law; and made so on the account of his Merit, which was so conspicious
every way, that the Honor of so high a Relation was the least part of his
Character: Yet they that were in power about Saul, finding that Saul had a
jealousy of him, inflamed it to that degree, that David was thrown out, not
only of his Place, but of the Kingdom. And so he continued in Exile till Readiness
Death. But then, by a strange turn of affairs, and of the People's hearts;
First, the House of Juda, and afterward all the Tribes of Israel, anointed him
King. And so God turned the Kingdom to David the Son of Jesse. 1 Chronicles 10. last
verse. This I take to be the lite^al sense of the words, Verses 22. and 23.
beforementioned.

But as Da^id was a most Illustrious Type of the Messiah who w^^ the Son of
David according to the Flesh, and who is called by the name of David in some of
the Prophecies: So the Actions and Events of David's life, were many of them
Types of the like Actions and Events, that should be done by, and should happen
to, the Messiah.

That particularly, which you have heard, of David's being rejected by Readiness
Courtiers and Counselors; was a Type of Christ's being rejected by the Priests
and Elders of the Jews. And that which you heard of that strange Revolution, by
which David was advanced to the Kingdom; was a Type of the Resurrection of our
Savior, by which he was Exalted to be Lord and Christ. In both these respects,
(as you have heard) the stone which the Builders refused, was made the
headstone of the Corner: both these were alike the Lords doing, and were
mavelous in men's Eyes.

But especially the last, that of Christ's Exaltation to his Kingdom; to which
these words are applied, both by our Savior himself, and more then once by his
Holy Apostles; this was the very sense, that the Holy Ghost intended, in
inspiring David with this Psalm, and the Church has used it accordingly. This
is one of the Psalms the Church has appointed to be used on Easter Day.

When we Celebrate the memory of Christ's Resurrection, then, if ever, we have
reason to say, this is the Day that the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be
glad in it.

But as this intent of the Holy Ghost did not make it unlawful for David to
make use of these words in a literal sense, (as no doubt he did, for his part
intend it) in the composing of this Psalm: So, without comparing with the
Resurrection of Christ, (with which no earthly thing ought to be named,) when
we are in David's Case as to our Temporal condition, I know no reason to doubt
but we may lawfully take up his words. And that is enough to justify my Choice
of this Text.

For the matters contained in it, here are two things in which we have David
for an Example before us.

First, When it pleases God to give us such a Deliverance, as appears to be
the work of God by the marks of his hand upon it, we ought to give him the
glory of it, by acknowledging it to be his doing.

Secondly, When God does such a work for his People, they ought to show their
sense of it, by rejoicing in the Lord, and by keeping a Day for that purpose;
of which we may say in David's words, this is the Day which the Lord has made.
I shall add, that whenever the benefit is such as is not confined to the
present age; even Posterity, as they come to have a share of the benefit, so
they are to continue the memory of it, by keeping Yearly Days of Thanksgiving
to God.

We are now above thirty Years after the date of that mercy which we Yearly
commemorate on this Day; and yet now, enjoying the full benefit of it, we truly
may, and therefore ought to say it; this is the day which the Lord has made.

The first of these will be more then I can well bring within the compass of my
time; that where God has done a signal work, we are to acknowledge it is his
doing. This is nothing else, but what all mankind will agree to. All will agree
that this is Just and Right. It is but giving God the glory that is due to his
name. The Question will be, how we shall distinguish such works as are to be
ascribed to God only.

I am not now to prove that there is a God, or that he Created the World, or
that he governs all things in it; as well things that are wrought by humane
means, or otherwise by second Causes, as those which God works immediately by
himself. These things I ought to take for granted by all that hear me.

What is it then that comes properly into our Question? Only this, how any work
may be appropriated to God, so that this or that, above other, may be said to
be of Gods doing Not to reckon all that can be said of this kind, I shall show
it particularly in these three respects.

First, When it is so surprising a work, that we can assign no other Cause,
from which it does, or can, proceed, but God only.

Secondly, When, beside the unaccountableness of the Cause, we see the effect
is such as we may reasonably believe that God is concerned for.

Thirdly, When we see there was a great and near danger of losing that which
God was concerned for, if this had not happened for its preservation. I think
these three that I have named are sure tokens by which we may Judge, without
danger of mistake, that any thing that happens in this manner is of God's doing.

1. First, When we see a thing done, that is great and extraordinary in it
self, or is like to be so in its consequence, it sets us presently on thinking
whence this should proceed. For we know that nothing happens by chance: every
thing has a Cause, wheher we know it or not. But if we are so at a loss for it,
that either we see no Cause at all, or none that can reach the effect: What
then? We Judge the Cause to be something that is to us invisible.

The Heathens, as they held every thing which they could not see to be a God,
so when they saw any thing done which they knew not how any creature should do,
they ascribed it to God. Thus the Magicians of Egypt, when they saw Moses turn
dust into lice, a thing which they could not do with all their Enchantments;
They confessed that this was the finger of God. When the Syrians saw their
mighty armies overcome by a handful of Israelites; they knew it was not done by
humane strength; what then? It must be a Divine power that assisted them. When
the Jews that were returned from the Babylonian Captivity, had built up the
Wall about Jerusalem in fifty two days, which was a very unaccountable thing;
even their Enemies the Moabites and others that saw it, confessed that this was
the work of God. Thus they Judged, not from any peculiar notions of their own
Nation or Religion; but it was the reasoning of humane nature, upon that
Hypothesis, that there is a God that governs the World.

And therefore much more, we that have Revelation for this; We that have the
holy Scriptures, which teach us, that from him and by him are all things; when
we see such things done, as could be from no other, it confirms us that such
things must be from God. It is that Allwise and Allmighty Being, that shows
himself now by his ordinary Providence, in such works as are above our reason
and strength, no less then he did by works of Miracle, to them that lived in
Scripture times.

Secondly, Especially we see this in such works as appear to be done for such
purposes as we have all reason to believe God would be most especially
concerned for in this World. This is the second thing that I proposed, among
the ways we have to Judge that any great work is of God's doing.

The Old Romans, in judging of Criminal matters, when they would kn^w the
author of any thing that was done, one of their first Questions was that of
Cassius, Cui bono? Who has been, or who was like to be, the better for this? If
the ben^fit of it redounded to any person, whether to himself, or to his
Children, or his family; that gave a shrewd suspicion that he was the Author of
it.

The same way one may guess at the author of any Action, whatsoever the nature
of it may be. And by this measure God is pleased to give us leave to Judge of
him and of his doings.

This he tells us in the first place, that he made all things for his Glory. It
is that which we are therefore to consider in the first place, as being the
chief end of all his doings. Whatsoever is contrary to that, (and so is all sin
whatsoever,) we are sure he is not the Author of it: And though he suffers such
things, as far as he sees fit, yet he does not even that, but so as it may turn
to his G^ory.

But of all things that he has made, he loves those things best that are
fittest to set forth his Glory. Those are here upon earth, the Rational beings,
whom he Create^ in his own Image, howsoever by Sin they are fallen from it.

Again, among these, his chief care is for them whom he has re^^emed to
himself. Especially he takes care for the B^dy o^ his redeemed ones, that is,
for his Church. And therefore for those societies of men that are his Church in
the several Kingdoms or Nations.

As this is his chief care for Persons, so for Things, he is chiefly concerned
for those things by which man shows forth his Image: all those Godlike
Qualities, of Truth, and Righteousness, and Peace, and Charity, and Mercy, and
the like. And above all, for true Religion, and the true Worship of God. These
things are directly for his glory; therefore these things are his great
concernment in the World.

That Gods greatest care of all is for his Church; this is so clear, that they
that held a multiplicity of Gods, the Heathens, thought it most reasonable to
believe, that every God should be most concerned for his own people. They
believed the God of Israel would do things for his own people, that he would
not do for any other. And therefore when they saw great things done for Israel,
they did not doubt that those things were done by Israel's God.

In like manner, whatsoever may be done by any other supernatural power; as it
cannot be denied that Devils may do great things, that may resemble the
wonderful works of God; yet they are to be distinguished by this, that whereas
God's works are for the good of his Church, and for the promoting of Religion
and Goodness, which are his great concernment in the World; Whatsoever tends to
the destruction of these, we may be sure it is not the work of God; It is the
Enemy that has done this. And yet, when the Enemy has done his worst, (which
may go very far toward the Destruction of the Church, so far as to bring it
into great sufferings, by the permission of God, for the Chastisement of his
People; which having obtained its effect, they will have cause to thank God for
their sufferings: Yet I say, when the Devil has done his worst before it comes
to utter destruction, God will find a way to deliver his people; and that is
truly the work of God.

3. And the nearer they were to destruction, the more visible is his work in
their deliverance; that is the third thing I have to show. The greater danger
there was, of our losing that for which God is concerned; so much the more of
his Hand appears in our deliverance from it

The greatest dangers are those, which, as to men, appear to be insuperable.
Therefore the more any danger appears to be such, the more it appears to be
worthy of God, that he should deliver us from it. For though as to him, all
things are easy alike: no one work is harder then another; to make the World
out of nothing, no more then making Lice out of Dust: Yet as to us, there is a
great difference; for we are most affected with such works as seem to us to be
of the greatest difficulty.

When all Humane help fails, then it is worthy of God to show himself to be the
deliverer of his people. And therefore God has chosen such times, when his
people have been at or near the very brink of destruction, then to give them
deliverance from it. We may see this in many Instances in Scripture. The most
tamed Instance is, that of God's bringing his people out of Egypt, and through
the Red Sea: We read the like, of Hezekiah's deliverance from Senacheribs's
army: The Book of Judges is full of such great works of God for the deliverance
of his people. Such things as God did then by Miracle he does now in the course
of his Ordinary Providence; things which no man can do, nor can think how they
were done. And when he thus delivers his people from such dangers as seemed to
be inevitable: and especially when at such a pinch of time, when nothing but
destruction is looked for that then deliverance comes in the stead: such a
work has so many marks of Gods hand upon it, that whosoever sees and considers
it, cannot but say, this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.

Now for the Application of this, I am to show all those marks of Gods hand,
that they are in the work of this day: I speak plainly, in the Restoration of
the Royal Family; and therewith of our Church and Religion, our Government and
Laws, the most valuable things in this Nation.

But though that which led in all the rest, and that which gives the title to
the day; the Restoration of the King that then was, and of all the Royal
Family; tho that I say is, and ought to be, the chief subject, as well of our
Sermons, as of our Prayers and praises on this day: Yet I shall at this time
crave leave to insist chiefly, upon the restoring of our Church, and Religion,
as being the great concernment of God in this Nation: In order to which, Kings
and Queens are chiefly a blessing to a Nation.

As to Civil government, this is the only promise that God has made to us in
Gospel Times; that Kings and Queens shall be nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers to his Church: which he has now Graciously accomplished to us.

And therefore to return to the work of this day; I am to prove that this was
the Lords doing, by showing these three marks of his hand upon it. First, that
the restoring of the Royal Family was for the benefit of the Church of God, and
of the true Christian Religion. Secondly, that it was in a most needful time,
when Gods true Church and true Religion were in the utmost danger of being
extinguished in this Nation. Thirdly, that then God was graciously pleased to
preserve and restore it, by such means as were to men unaccountable. These
three things being proved, it will certainly appear that the work of this day
was the Lords doing.

The same may be said of all our other deliverances since. I cannot, when I
speak of such things, I cannot without ingratitude to God, but mention that
mercy of the late Revolution; and those of our deliverances since; especially
that of this present time: All these being so visibly the effects of Gods
continued care of us; being all for the same Church and Nation, all in times of
great and near danger, and all with the like Evidence of Gods hand in them; so
that whosoever considers them severally, cannot but see reason enough to
acknowledge, that each of these was the Lords doing, as well as the great work
of the Kings restoration.

1. But first, I am to show that This was the work of God. It was certainly so,
If ours be a true Church of God. If it be, did I say? I said it not as
doubting, but taking it for granted, as we have Just reason to do. We have
reason to insist upon that which has been sufficiently proved in so many
excellent Books as have been written in the Just vindication of our Church. I
need not say more particularly what has been done of this kind, especially in
the last reign, when the Press was most open and free to all sorts of our
Adversaries. That more then Liberty, that Power they had then, gave the world
occasion to see how little they had to say against us. And therefore after such
a trial as this, we ought to take it for granted, that ours is a true Church of
God, as it stands established at this day.

To this we may add the Testimonies of all the Reformed Churches abroad, who
not only agree with us in Doctrine, but allow of our Orders, and Worship, and
Sacraments; and are so far from denying us to be a Reformed Church, that they
own us to be the Bulwark of the Reformation.

They that will not allow of this proof, and of these Testimonies that I have
mentioned; as they cannot expect to be heard in this place, so if they have any
thing to object against them, they will not want an answer, elsewhere.

Only in this place I cannot but mind them, If they are Papists, how they have
used to reckon wordly prosperity among their notes of a true Church; and if
they are other Dissenters, how they used when time was to value themselves by
it, that God owned them by Acts of his Providence. I hope neither of them will
take it amiss, if we tell them again, that God has not left us altogether
without witness of that kind. What greater Testimonies could he give to any
Church, then he has done to ours, in those wonderful deliverances he has given
us?

Not to go to Old things, such as that of Eighty Eight, and at the time of the
Gunpowder Treason: (tho these were as great as ever were given to any Nation;
yet we need not go so far back;) we have enough to name of later memory, many
and great deliverances, and those fresh in memory, even in the memory of you
all that hear me this day.

1. But first upon this day, I must insist on that Deliverance that we had at
the Kings Restoration. How great a Deliverance that was, they that were not
then born, can scarce conceive: but I shall tell you what they that lived then
saw and know.

We were then, as to our Civil Government, after many horrible things which I
do not love to repeat, after many vain. Attempts to set up a Commonwealth,
which stood like a Castle of Cards, (pray pardon the Comparison) we were at
last come to be under no Government at all: unless I may call that a Government
which an Army sets up and pulls down as often as they please. It was such a
State of a Nation, than which worse cannot well be spoke or conceived. Not to
give you a Detail of the many Mischiefs that are contained in it, I will only
give you two Examples of the wretchedness of this Estate: (I could name you
many more, but these two are the best known,) that of the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes of Israel, and that of the Roman Empire after Commodus's time.

First, of the Kingdom of Israel, after the murder of Zechariah, the last King
of Jehu's Family. After his Death, there was no King for some years together.
Then the Army set up a King. They killed him, and set up another. There were
five such Kings one after another: every one coming in by the killing of his
Predecessor. How the Nation flourisht the mean while, you may guess: or you may
read in the Book of Hosea: he Prophesied at that time; and he tells us, how
this People having cast off God, he cast off them to utter destruction, and
this way he brought it upon them.

In the Roman Empire, after Commodus's Death, who was the last of the Aelian
Family; after him the Army set up whom they pleased, for above a hundred years
together. In this time they had about twenty Emperors, I mean successively, for
of Competitors they had near thirty at one time, but I do not reckon these. Of
those successive Emperors, there were but two or three that succeeded their own
Fathers: all the rest came in by Violence, and went out by violent Deaths.

For the People the mean while, what Case they were in you may imagine. At
almost every Change, there was Rapine, and Oppression, and Blood, till
Diocletian's time. He indeed put a stop to these Evils, but there was no end of
them till Constantine the Great set up a kind of Hereditary Empire.

From these two Examples we may guess what we were to have expected, if the
Power had continued in the Army. We had some trial of it, in the last Year of
their Reign: when, (not to say what they had done before) they changed the
Government for us five or six times in the compass of that One year.

For Religion the mean while, whosoever considers what it was that prevailed in
the Army may easily judge to what a miserable pass we were brought. There were
of all Religions among them, but ours: and they granted a Liberty to all, but
ours. Yes, they joined Popery with it in their Declarations: Prelacy and Popery
were always Excepted together.

But as for Popery, as it was never more freely Professed, so I will be bold to
say, it never had a greater Harvest then at that time. But with Prelacy they
were in earnest. We found it so, in being deprived of all those Rights the Law
had given us. Our Liturgy, our Sacraments, our Offices of Worship, though they
were Established then as much by Law as they are now; yet Men were punished,
without, and against Law, for using them. But that which was worst, our Body of
a Church was dissolved, our Discipline was trod under foot, our Eyes could not
see our Teachers; and as for our Bishops, the Order was near being extinct; it
subsisted but in five or six old Men, that probably might have died all within
one or two years.

Let others think as light of this as they please; they that have a true sense
of Religion will grant that these were Wounds in the Vitals of the Church; of
which our Church had certainly died at that time, if he that raises Men from
the Dead, had not given our Church a new Life at the Kings Restoration.

But how was that brought about? I am coming to show, that it was a most
visible Work of God: so visible, that I know not whether any thing could be
more; perhaps we may except one thing that has lately happened; but certainly
there was no greater in all the Examples of ancient Times.

The great Instance of old in the Christian Church, was that which I mentioned
of Constantine the Great. It was indeed the Hand of God that brought him into
the Government. But I do not know whether his coming in was more wonderful then
that of the Kings Restoration.

Here was certainly a greater Force to oppose then any that stood in
Constantine's way to keep him out of the Government. There were, both in
England, and all over the three Kingdoms, great numbers, that would have done
all they could to have hindered the Kings Restoration: being engaged so to do,
not only by their Affections, but even by their Judgment and Conscience: (and
few of these, but were engaged by their Interest too.) All these, having Swords
in their Hands, or being backed by an Army that had, such a numerous Army, of
Disciplined experienced Men, as well paid as ever was Army in the world, as
absolute in their Power, and as unwilling to part with it: How was it possible,
that all those Armed Men, should either lay down their Arms, or wear them to
bring in his Majesty? that those others likewise should give up their
Interests, and smother their Prejudices and Disaffections? that all the Kings
Enemies should be so charmed, that at his coming in, not a Dog should stir his
Tongue against him?

A Thing that was certainly done, do I ask how it was possible? The matter is
plain; that which is impossible with Men, is possible with God. It was God that
did that which none other but God could do. It was God that partly turned their
Hearts, and partly insatuated their Counsels. Their dividing (as they did)
among themselves, was an absolute Insatuation: And when they were thus divided,
God turned the Hearts of part of them to bring in his Majesty. But especially
it was God that so united the Hearts of the People, not only in this, but in
all the three Kingdoms, as they never were before, nor since, but upon one
Occasion. If ever there was an Agreement of the People, (we know when there was
a thing falsely so called, but if ever there was truly such,) it was at the
Kings Restoration.

Other things I might instance, wherein God showed himself wonderfully at that
time. But if there were no more then these three that I have mentioned, I think
these are enough to show it was the Lords doing. He did great and unaccountable
things, he did them for the preservation of his Church, he did them at that
time when she was at the very brink of destruction.

Our Church was certainly then at the brink of destruction. But was it never so
since? If we forget, we are extremely unthankful to God. It is too true, we are
an unthankful People, but yet none of us can easily forget so great a Dinger as
we were in, so lately as within these four years: I know no Man of the Church
of England, (except a few rotten Members, that showed what they were then and
since, none besides,) but what did acknowledge we were in extreme danger at
that time.

It was a Melancholy thing to have our King, whom our Religion binds us to obey
for Conscience sake, come to be of that Religion that obliges him to destroy us
for Conscience sake.

All our hope was, that our practicing the Duty of our Religion would make him
be dispensed with for the Obligation of His. For we know they have them that
can dispense with their Consciences in the Roman Church. And at first we were
made to believe it should be as we hoped.

But Alas! we soon found those Dispensers with Conscience were too hard for us.
Instead of suffering him to let us enjoy our Religion and Laws, they made use
of their Power quite the contrary way. It is (as I said) a Melancholy thing to
speak of, or even to think of it. But it was too plain. They had brought things
to that pass, that our Laws signified nothing but what they pleased: Our
Religion was held at the Courtesy of them that were the bloody Enemies of it:
Our Obedience was made use of as a perfect Snare to us: We must not Resist,
that our Religion would not allow; We could not Petition neither, but at our
peril. What should we do then, but let things go on in their Course? They had
us bound Hand and Foot: They might do what they pleased with us: They had us at
their Mercy, such as it is; And considering the Mercy of Jesuits, which in
France and in England is much the same, I think we have good grounds to judge,
that if they had held their Power six Months longer, France is no worse Kingdom
for a Protestant to live in, then England would have been at this time.

But what hindered? Nothing but the Prince of Orange's coming over: nothing
else could have hindered in all humane appearance. He was the only Prince in
the World, that could and durst Interpose between us and the last Stroke of our
Enemies. It was so hazardous an Attempt, that I am amazed when I think of it;
how so wise a Prince could Embark himself in that Expedition; much more, how he
could persuade the wary Dutch to venture with him, in so many great Dangers and
Difficulties, as if he had miscarried, would have certainly sunk their whole
Nation.

I can give no other Reason for this, but that it was (...), an irresistible
Impulse of God. It was that Divine Power, that has so often preserved this
Church and Nation, that now took this way to prevent that Ruin that was coming
upon us. It was God that Infatuated our Oppressors, to join the Injuries of a
People that could not lawfully Resist, with those of a Prince that could not
lawfully pass them by without Resistance: A Prince whose Fates are so knit to
those of the Public, of his Country, of this Nation, and of the Protestant
Religion; that as it is visible they cannot stand without him, so he showed by
this Proof that he had no mind to live after them.

Can any one think, that thinks at all, how these Just and great Interests
could have been preserved? how any one of these could have stood, any
otherwise, then by his venturing himself as he did? or when he had gone so far,
how he could Retreat afterward, without taking the Government upon him? when
it was (as it were) thrown into his Hands; when he must either take that or
lose all, for there never was any Offer of any other Condition.

But for the Justifying of what he did, enough has been said and written. I am
now to show only this, that it was the great Work of God. And of this, the
Marks are so clear, that it cannot be denied, even by them that would dispute
the Justice of it.

For what can they say to so many things that God only can do, and that all
concurred together in this matter? Was it by chance, that things were so
prepared Abroad, that the French King, though he had notice of this Expedition,
yet should be so blinded or benumbed, as to do nothing to hinder it? Was it by
chance, that Winds and Seas, which at that time of the year are most
intractable, were yet so wholly engaged on his Side, that they both shut in the
English Fleet that would have endangered him, and brought him safe to the best
Haven in England for his purpose? Was it by chance that a whole Nation's
Hearts, divided before in Religions and Interest, should be now so united as
they were, to wish, and pray, and long for his coming? These are all
extraordinary things. Yet if only one of these had happened, That indeed might
have been said to be by chance: but no one or two would have done his business:
If all three had not concurred as they did, the want of any one would have
spoiled his Expedition: and such a Concurrence, of such three things together,
any one of which was above the power of Man, this I take to have been an
extraordinary Providence of God.

Whosoever denies this, I cannot but wonder at him. But he that only doubts,
may soon find wherewith to be confirmed. Let him consult his own memory of
things; and let him see how every Year since this Revolution has brought forth
a fresh Testimony of the care of God's Providence.

If Ireland had been quite lost the first Year, it had involved his Majesty in
the greatest D^fficulties and Perplexities. But do you remember how, and by
whom it was preserved? even by the incredible Courage and Bravery of a few Men
driven to Derry and Iniskellin, much unprovided, half Armed, and wholly
unskilled in Warlike Matters. See the next Year: if then our Fleet had been
lost, none can doubt but that would have made a short end of the business. But
how was it preserved, at that time, when the Enemies Fleet were coming with
full purpose to have burnt it in the Haven of Portsmouth? What preserved us
from this great Danger? nothing but a sudden stop of the Wind, that would not
let them put this well laid Design in Execution. After that, when they had got
an Advantage in Fight, which quite divided and disordered our Fleet; what
hindered them so many Tides while they might have destroyed it? nothing could
have hindered them but the unaccountable Will of God.

It was about the same time, that his Majesty was in that Danger, which I even
tremble to think of; and yet there is some comfort in the thought of it at this
time. He is sure the only King, if not the only Man in the World, that had his
Skin brusht off with a Cannon Bullet, without any other ill Consequence; as if
it had not come to do any hurt, but rather an Honor to his Majesty.

Go on, and remember this last Year, when it was of so great moment to his
Majesty's Affairs, that he should finish the Reducing of Ireland that Year;
what a strange appearance there was of a Divine Conduct over his Majesty's
Forces, at Athlone, and Agbrim, and especially at Limeric, which could not have
been Reduced otherwise. They are such Marks of Gods Hand in his Majesty's
Affairs, that whosoever is not affected with a sense of it, I should think,
that either he has not heard the truth of these things, or he has an ill Memory
that does not retain what he has heard, or some worse Defect there is that I
would not name. Sure I am, that upon some of those that were present at the
things that I have mentioned, though otherwise they were far enough from being
overreligious, yet that which they saw could not but make a deep Impression.

And if that be your Case, that only present things will affect you; then I
must crave leave to put you in mind of the things which are hardly yet past.
There lies now a great Army upon the French Coast, and they say
Transport-Ships, that for six Weeks together wanted only a Guard of Ships of
War to set them over into this Kingdom. And we are told there has been a
sufficient number of Ships of War these six Weeks ready to set Sail, only they
wanted Wind to bring them, first together, and then into our Seas.

But the Dutch Fleet, and Ours, have wanted no Wind, to bring them out, nor to
bring them together. And the French have wanted it no longer, then till our
Fleet was in readiness, and till all the Advantages of Number and Strength were
on our side. Then it pleased God to bring them forth, with positive Orders to
Fight us, of which we can give no other account but that it was an Insatuation
from God. Whatsoever the Instruments were, it was surely an Insatuation from
God: who was pleased with their own Kings Consent, nay by his Order, to deliver
so many of their best Ships into our hands. It was a wonderful thing, that God
should give us such a Deliverance, much more that he should give us such a
Victory, and all this by Means to which we could contribute nothing.

The Deliverance was from such a Danger, as we may reasonably hope we shall
never be in again, after such a Victory. A Victory, that not only puts an end
to the present Descent, but that, if we know how to use it, secures us against
any the like for the future. A Victory, of which it seems to be as true as it
was of the Spanish Invasion: there ended their Power at Sea; there ended their
Terror to our Island; there ended their hopes of an Universal Monarchy.

I might say a great deal more, but this is, I confess, a fresh Subject, which
is reserved for some other Hand. I shall therefore leave it to him to whom it
belongs. Only one thing I ought to observe, as to the timing of this Victory.
Considering how little the present French King was a Friend to our Royal Family
before the Restoration: and considering how much he has been an Enemy to our
Church, both before and since: I suppose he had very little Joy of that which
happened on our Nine and twentieth of May. I do not believe that he did ever
heartily thank God for it. Well! for all that, we thank God for that which
happened on His Nine and twentieth of May. It was on his May 29. that God was
pleased to send us this Victory.

We have cause indeed to thank God, not only for this, but for so many other
great Deliverances that he has given us. So many, and so great* he has heapt
upon us in our Age, nay in a small part of our Age, within these very few
Years; that I do not believe he has sh^wn the like care of his Pro^i^^nce over
any other Christian Nation: Nay he scarc^ showed the like in any one Age, over
them in the J^wish Church.

What should be the Meaning of our most gracious God in all this? Is it his
meaning to set us up like a Light on a Hill, that we should be a Pattern to all
other Nations? Is it his meaning that we should be hi^ Instruments to help
others, with the like Affection and Care as he has sh^wn in helping us? Is it
his meaning that we should show our concernedness for those things which he has
sh^wn himself so much concerned for? Is it his meaning that w^ should love the
Church of England, to which h^ has shown so much love in so many Deliverances?
Is it his meaning to knit our Hearts to their Majesty's, whom he has so
wonderfully blessed and preserved, and whom he has made the blessed Instruments
of so much good to us?

The good God dispose us, and enable us, to perform his good meaning in every
one of these Particulars.

The Lord make us as much concerned for their Majesty's Preservation and
Service, as they have shown themselves concerned for the Deliverance, and for
the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation: especially to His Majesty, in those
great Dangers to which he is daily exposing himself, it is all the Return we
can make, in Praying for him, while he is Fighting for us. The Lord make us
alike affected to his Church, and alike concerned for it, as he has shown
himself in all his Deliverances and Mercies. The Lord make us as ready to help
our Brethren, specially those that suffer for righteousness sake, as he has
shown himself ready to preserve us, and to help us, out of all our Dangers and
Sufferings. But one thing more; The Lord dispose us in all things, to live
worthy of his Goodness and Mercy, as a People that he has so often and so
wonderfully delivered; and that we may show it by living blameless and
harmless, as the Sons of God without rebuke in this corrupt Age, that we may
shine as lights in the world.

The Lord grant it for his Mercies sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Catalogue of Books lately Printed for Thomas Jones in Lincoln's Inn new
Square next Newmarket.
A Discourse of God's ways of Disposing of Kingdoms.

Part I. The Second Edition. Price 1 s.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall Ian. 30. being the Day of the
Martyrdom of King Charles the First. Published by Her Majesty's Command. Price
6 d.

A Letter to Dr. Sherlock, in Vindication of that part of Josephus's History
which gives an Account of Jaddus the High Priest's submitting to Alexander the
Great while Darius was living, against the Answer to the Piece Entitled,
Obedience and Submission to the present Government. The Second Edition. Price 6
d.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall May 29. being the Day of the
Restoration of the Royal Family. Price 6 d. These Four by the Right Reverend
Father in God William Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, and Lord Almoner to their
Majesty's.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at Whitehall Aug. 23. by Jonathan Blagrave,
Sub-Almoner and Chaplain in in Ordinary to their Majesty's. Published by Her
Majesty's Command. Price 6 d.

Mr. Finger's choice Collection of Airs for two and three Treble Flutes,
curiously Engraven on Copper Plates. Price 2 s. 6 d.

An Account of the late Action of the New-Englanders under the Command of Sir
William Phipps, against the French at Canada, together with the Articles of War
composed and agreed upon for that purpose. Price 4 d.

A Dialogue between two Oxon Scholars. Price 3 d.

A Dialogue between the Confederate Princes, concerning the Affairs of Europe.
Price 2 d.

Dr. Sherlock of Death, in Welsh. Price 2 s.

A Fatal Mistake, or the Plot spoiled, a Tragedy, as it was lately Acted.
Written by Joseph Haynes.

A Moral Essay of the Soul of Man, in Three Parts.

A Weeks Exercise, preparatory toward the worthy Reception of the Lord's
Supper, in Meditations, Prayers and Ejaculations before, at, and after the Holy
Communion; Also Rules and Exercises how to live well after it. The Second
Edition.

A Pious Office for Sick and Weak Persons, wherein many Directions and useful
Instructions are given them, with Supplications, Prayers and Meditations proper
for their Condition. In Three Parts.

The Effigies of King William and Queen Mary, with Seven new Bishops, viz. The
Most Reverend Fathers in God the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Right
Reverend Fathers in God Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum, Edward Lord Bishop of
Worcester, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely, Robert Lord Bishop of Chichester, and
Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, curiously Engraven on a large Copper
Plate by Mr. William Elder and Arthur Soley. Price 1 s.

Dr. Kenn's Practical Catechism, in Welsh.

The Lively Oracles, by the Author of The Whole Duty of Man. Octavo.

An Account of the French King's Cruelty over the Protestants in France, acted
by Monsieur St. Ruth, at the Instigation of the Priests and Jesuits. Price 4 d.

FINIS.

