A further DEFENSE OF THE REPORT. Vindicating it from Mr. Alsops Cavils, AND
Showing the Difference between Mr. W's and my self to be Real, and the Charge
in my Appeal to be True.

1 Cor. 4.13. Being defamed we entreat.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-Hall-Street,
over against St, Mary Axe, School.

TO THE READER.
MY sincere Aim being still to clear the Truth, in order unto Peace, I have not
only waved the Examination of History, given by Mr. W. and Mr. A. which sundry
Instances, is so very distant from Truth, ^^t 'twill be difficult for them to
bear a Dete^^^^^on; But being assured by my Presbyterian, as ^^^^ll as other
Brethren, that Mr. Alsop's Vin^^^ation of his Rebuke, is extravagantly
pro^^king, I would not put my self to the pain of ^ading it. However, some
worthy Persons, ^^ving examined that Rhapsodie, did send me ^^at they
apprehended needful for me to Answer; ^^ich I have considered, and in the
ensuing ^^pers have given a Reply unto. And that ^^at I thought necessary to
urge, might be so de^^ered, as rather to induce unto, than drive ^im the
things, which make for Peace, I have ^^deavoured to observe that Rule, the
Larned ^^d Pious Dr. Manton, now in Glory, has on ^^e Ninth Verse of Jude,
given about Answer^^g a Railing, Scoffing Adversary. Do not says the Dr.)
imitate him in his Foolish Passion, -- But yet Answer him to the purpose, with
solid Arguments: -- Beat down his Presumption and Ignorance with a mee^ Reply,
such as may check his Pride, but no^ imitate his Folly.

There is one Calumny I must remove, but to do i^ with that softness, which is
most consonant to my Inclination, Principles and Temper; the Nature of the
Thing will not easily allow: For which Reason I was once resolved to say
nothing of it. But being assured, that the Lie, my Adversaries have
industriously attempted to spread throughout the Land, is made their Principal
Refuge: For the sake of Gods Glory, my continued Usefulness in the Ministry,
and that I may clear my self from so vile a Reproach, most unjustly cast upon
me by Mr. Williams's and Mr. Alsop's Innuendo's, Insinuations and Suggestions;
and the Lies they have sent down into the Country as a Key to unlock their
Meaning, That my entering on this Controversy is to Disserve the Protestant,
and Promote the Popish Cause; And to compass such base and unworthy ends, I am
(they say) engaged in the most villainous Attempts, I must, and do solemnly
declare; and if ever I am necessitated to give a History of my Concernment in
this Affair, I doubt not but that I shall be able convincingly to demonstrate,
That there is nothing more abhorred by me, than such Methods and Designs, as
are charged upon me; That my sincere endeavor has been, and still is, That
God may glorified, in a lasting Establishment of (...) Protestant Faith; And
its well known to ^^se, who are most inwardly acquainted with me, (...) to the
Consciences of these Accusers, That it (...) my hearty Labor to serve, not
only the Pro^^stants in general; but my Dissenting Brethren particular, that
occasioned their Enemies, as (...) as mine to do their most to fasten these
very ^^lumnies upon me; And I have a Letter of (...) Alsop's in my Custody to
Testify how Indu^ously and Faithfully, I did, to his knowledge, ^^ve the
Protestant Dissenters. And ever since ^^ve been discharged from that Expensive
Ser^^^^, I have confined my self to my Ministerial ^^^k, extending my
Correspondencies no fur^^^ than to matters relating to my Improvement in
^^erature, the Service of Christ's Churches, and my ^^^ily Concern; conversing
with very few be^^^ my own Brethren; And in my Deportment ^ords them and all
others, I have obliged my (...) to those Rules of Civility, which become a
^^^leman, a Christian, and a Minister of Christ's ^^spel.

And I must add, That had I not been most ^^ote from the Guilt they now would
cover me (...), Mr. Williams was so very well known to me, (...) Spirit, his
Principles, and somewhat else, ^^ch I forbear to mention, that I would as soon
(...) put my hand into the Fire, as engage in (...) Contrast, and adventure on
his Displea^^. But my Innocence, which has often passed ^^^^ugh the Ordeal,
feared none of these ^^ngs.

Besides, Had I been the Man, they represent me to be, I would never have
undertaken the Defense of those Points, which are most opposite to what, they
say, I would promote. But I would have fallen in with Mr. Williams, whose
Notions have so near an Alliance with, and so natural a^ Tendency unto the
Introduction of Popery; It being manifest, that Popish Designs can never be
better carried on, than by bringing into Reputation, some main Branches of the
Popish Religion; which is done effectually by Mr. Williams and some of his
Followers, by their insisting on a Justification by Works, and their
Arminianizing. But how my Zeal against those Doctrines, some of which are
Popish, and others prepare for Popery, should be a Reason for their charging me
with favoring that way, is beyond the Comprehension of Persons, whose
Understandings are much larger than mine.

In a word, my Part in this Controversy, is to Tare up that Sovereign Drug,
which the Jesuits planted in this Kingdom, to Purge Protestants (as they
expressed it in their Letter to the Father Rector at Bruxills) from their
Heresy. And they were Men of deep Judgment, sound in the Faith; and as great
Enemies to Popery, as ever breathed in English Air; who in the Reign of King
Charles I. discovered their Fears, concerning a Change in Religion, upon the
daily growth and spreading of Arminianism, which in their esteem, was a cunning
way to bring in Popery, whilst they Judged the Professors of these Opinions to
be the Common Disturbers (...) the Protestant Churches; and Incendiaries, ^n
those Estates, in which they had gotten any Head, being Protestants in show;
but Jesuits (...) Opinion, and Practice. And it was no ^^all part of the Glory
of King James I. and of ^he House of Nassau, that they labored to crush ^he
Errors, I Oppugn, as having a tendency (...) introduce Popery; and Supported
those Divines who Defended the very Cause, for which Plead. And it is well
known, that of all Armi^ians, they who Socinianize in the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, as Mr. W's does, are the ^^st Dangerous.

It is not then a Design to promote the Popish ^nterest, directly or
indirectly, but a Detecting ^he Craft and Errors of this Man, whose Prin^iples
tend to the bringing in of Popery, that is my ^rime; from which neither their
severest Me^aces, nor the worst they can do unto me (I trust (...) the mercy of
the Lord) shall be able to divert (...). For as in former, so in this
Persecution from them, the Lord has been and still is my ^trength, who in his
own time, will not only indicate all opposed Truth, but clear my Inno^ency.
Whether it be either pious or wise, for the ^^t. Hellens Brethren to leave such
Charges upon an innocent Brother, to pass without Rebuke, I sub^it to their
Consciences, knowing how hateful Delators, when amongst Persons of an inferior
Rank, have been unto them, in whom could be foun^ the least degree of Morality.

But however their Carriage may be toward m^ in this respect, I am not, I
bless God, in the lea^ gone off from my peaceable Principles or Tempe^ being
most desirous the Brethren, who are unfeigne^ Embracers of the Protestant
Faith, would ente^ on such Methods as are most likely to Restore Pea^ upon the
Foundation of Necessary Truth.

There is nothing more needful, that I can at pr^sent think of, to be spoken
unto, unless what relat^^ to Amyrald, which will require more room tha^ is here
left me.

S. L.

Books sold by Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arm^ in Leaden-Hall-Street.
THE Divine Institution of Congregations Churches, Ministry and Ordinances, [as
ha^ been Professed by those of that Perswasion] Asse^^ted and Proved from the
Word of God. By Isaa^ Chauncy. M. A.

A Discussion of the Lawfulness of a Pastors Acting as an Officer in other
Churches, besides tha^ which he is especially called to take the Oversigh^ of.
By the late Reverend Mr. Nath. Mather.

A further DEFENSE OF THE REPORT.
Was once, as I suggested in the Preface to my Appeal, Resolved against
Answering some Objections, not only, as I then said, because it was so
difficult for their Authors either to (...) Contradiction; or forbear Personal
Reflecti^^; but, because what was objected, appeared to ^^to be very Weak,
Impertinent and Frivolous: But, ^^^g assured by some Learned and Judicious
Di^^^s, who have Read Mr. Alsop's late Rhapsodie, (...), passing by his Rude
and Uncomely Invectives, False and Injurious Accusations; the whole of strength
lies in Noise and Clamor, which he ^^es upon the account of my saying nothing
to ^e of his Trifling Objections; and, as he pretends ^^use of my Quarrelling
with my Brethren about ^^^ers of no moment, etc. I will, without giving my
(...) the trouble of Reading that Book which has ^^^d the Hearts of his most
Godly, Learned and ^^icious Friends with unconceivable Grief, Exa^^e those
Objections, which, when I wrote my ^ince, I did not answer, and give some
Reasons, (...) I think the Differences amongst us are more than Verbal, and
that they are about some of t^^ most substantial Articles of our Holy Religion.

Section 1.
I will begin with what he objects against the ^^^porter, and my self.

His first Objection.
That the Reporter has left out of his substance the Gospel, Regeneration,
Conversion, Repentan^^ Holiness, Sanctification, a New Heart, and New O^dience,
Good Works, etc. A blessed Report for t^^ Country. You are eased at least of
one Moity (...) your Work.

Reply.
In my Return, I will give you the Passage (...) which he refers as it is in
the Report, and then con^^der what Reason Mr. A. had for this Objection.

In the Report it is thus; That all, Who belief might escape the Wrath to come,
and have Everlasti^^ Life, the Lord Jesus Undertakes for us, by maki^^
satisfaction to Punitive and Remunerative Justic^^ and, that he might do so, he
did put himself in our Place, State and Condition; so that whereas v^^^ were
Sin, and under a Curse, by this Blessed Chan^^ Christ is made Sin, and a Curse,
and we deliver^^ from Sin, and the Curse, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.

This is the substance of the Gospel of Christ this the Ground, and Foundation
of our Faith.

Out of this Passage it is, that Mr. Alsop fetche^ the Reason, why he charge
the Reporter for l^^ving out his Substance of the Gospel, Regeneration
Repentance, etc. To which I answer.

1. That 'twill be very hard for them, who kno^^ the Person, that is thought to
be the Reporter, (...) think it possible for Mr. A. to believe one word of h^^
own Charge against him, it being in his own Conscience so contrary to Truth,
and can therefore (...) no less than a Calumny, as Calumnia est cum quis (...)
^^^ta Scientia, and dolo injuste agit, and excipit. But it ^^st be further
observed;

2. That this Passage of the Reporter was only ^^out Christ's Satisfaction, as
it is an Article of ^^^ple Belief, and of distinct Consideration, either ^^^m
Matters of Practice; or, such Works, as are ^ought in us by the Holy Spirit.

3. That Matters of Simple Belief have been ever, (...) the Churches of God,
placed in a Formula, by ^^^mselves. And, if there be any strength, in the
^^jection, it must lie in this, That whenever a ^^^mula is given of the
Credenda, there must be ^^ed with it an Exact Catalogue of the Agenda; (...)
that whoever Composes a Summary of Matters Simple Belief, without inserting in
it the Agenda, Matters of Practice, does thereby Reject out of Substance of the
Gospel Repentance, Good Works, etc. ^^e, I say, lies the strength of his
Objection, ^^ch if of any force at all against the Reporter, must ^^^^g all the
Churches of Christ from the Begin^^ under the same Condemnation, because they
had (...) Credenda in a Formula by themselves.

The Reporter had in his Summary a word more ^^is in many of the Ancient
Creeds. For, he says, ^^^at all, who Believe might escape the Wrath to ^^me,
and have Everlasting Life, etc. thereby ^^ing Faith, which supposes
Regeneration, and in^^es within it the Entire Nature of Evangelical ^^tance,
and is Prolifick of Good Works, neces^^^ to Salvation; and therefore so long as
this ^^ge, viz. [That all who Believe might escape Wrath to come, etc.]
continues in his Summa^^ there will not be the least pretense for the Hor^^^
Noise he has made about it. But.

Mr. A. as one, whose Conscience had, whilst (...) as making this Objection,
checked him for it, (...) add, [ But suppose this were intended only as the
Substance of the Gospel so far as we ar^^^ to Believe what Christ has done and
suffered fo^^ Sinners without them, etc.] Well then, let us su^pose it, and see
what will follow. Really, as for m^^^ part, I can observe in it nothing less
than a Fu^^^ Answer to his own Objection. For, if the Report (...) intended no
more than the Substance of what w^^^ are to Believe concerning what Christ has
done a^^ suffered for Sinners without them and with God ((...) really he did
not) he was under no Obligation (...) mention Regeneration, Conversion,
Repentanc^ Good Works, etc. which are wrought in, and upon Sinners, and the not
mentioning 'em cannot be (...) Reason a Rejecting'em.

The Reporter was writing of the Substance (...) the Gospel so: far as it
concerned the Article (...) Christ's Satisfaction: 'Twas no part of his
Provin^^ to entreat of Regeneration, Conversion, Rep^^tance, etc. And Mr. A.
might have blamed h^^^ for not opening the Nature of Faith, Regenerati^^ or
Repentance, as well as for not mentioning eith^^ them, or the Order in which
they are wrought. A^ would it not be very wisely urged, The Reporter (...)
dertook to discourse of the Substance of one th^^ and therefore not speaking a
word of another, t^^^ of a distinct Nature, he must be interpreted to ^^ject
that other, as if he who writes of Botannicks, m^^^ be looked on as a denyer of
the Existence of ^^nerals, because he confines his Discourse to (...) matter in
hand.

6. This Objection must be either the most T^^ fling one that ever was started;
or be most Fer^^^^ of Blasphemous Absurdities. For, if when we (...) course of
what Christ has done, and suffered for ^^ners, without them, the not
mentioning Regen^^tion, Conversion, Repentance, etc. be a Rejec^ them, it must
be because these things are Essen^^^ P^rts of Christ's Obedience and
Sufferings; what ^^ore evident than that if Regeneration, Repen^^^ce, Good
Works, etc. be not Essential Parts of ^^at Christ has done and suffered for
Sinners, the ^^orter, when he gave the Substance of what we (...) to believe of
Christ's Obedience, and Sufferings, (...) he did not mention Regeneration etc.
cannot (...) justly esteemed a Rejecter of them; whence (...) good Man's
pretenses for his Charge against the ^^^orter (though on it, as is said by many,
the Sub^^^ce of his late Rhapsodie depends) dwindles into ^^hing, and the
Objection appears to be a most ^^^fling one. But,

1. If Regeneration, Conversion, Repentance, (...) Obedience, etc. be essential
Parts of what ^^rist has done and suffered for Sinners without (...), then
'twill follow, 1. That a Man may be ^^nerated, converted and sanctified; as
well as ^^ified and adopted by a mere external or relative ^^ange: And
Regeneration, Sanctification, etc. ^^port no more an internal Physical Change
on the ^^art and Life than Justification does. For if they (...) the Essentials
of what only is done without us, Christ's Obedience and Sufferings are
acknowledg^^ to be in this Place, by Mr. A -- himself, they (...) be as perfect
in their own Nature, without (...) as Christ's Satisfaction is, which is a
Notion, if ^^ad been true, that would have been very useful (...) the
Libertines, Ranters and Debauchees of the Age; (...), though they make no
Conscience of what they (...) write or do; do nevertheless, please themselves
^^th the conceit of their being in a blessed State, as generated, converted and
sanctified; which, ac^^ding to the natural and easy Consequence, that ^^es
from what strength Mr. A's. Objection has in (...) may be without a work
wrought in them. And ^^t be thus, then Christ in doing and suffering for
Sinners, regenerated, converted, sanctified them, etc. an^ all this without
them; they still remaining in themselves as Vile and as Vicious as ever. Again,
'twill follo^^

2. That if the Substance of what Christ has do^^ and suffered for Sinners,
without them, cannot (...) given in a Formula, unless there be the mention made
of Regeneration, Conversion, Repentan^^ new Obedience, good Works, etc. then
our Fait^ Repentance, new Obedience, etc. are included (...) what Christ has
already done and suffered for Si^^ners, without them, as if Christ had believed
and ^^pented for us, yea, as if he had done whatever w^^ necessary for us to
have done, in order to our actu^^^ Justification, Pardon, and entrance into the
etern^^ Glory.

This is the way of my Adversary, who fears no^^ to run upon the most dangerous
Precipices, nor (...) give Advantage to the most malignant Heretic (...) how
ridiculously soever, when he fancies 'tw^^^ make against his Opposers. But,

7. That I may follow this witty Gentlema^^ somewhat further, I will go on to
consider wh^^ Use he makes of this Supposition, which carries (...) it the
genuine Sense of the Reporter, which he giv^ in these words. Here Is something
says he in th^^ Draught that gives cause of Suspicion, to tho^^ who are of no
jealous Inclinations: For; where^^ he informs us that Christ suffered and
satisfied, th^^ all who believe might e^cape Wrath to come, and ha^^
everlasting Life: Here Is no necessity of Faith in ^^der to Justification; no
believing necessary to Pard^^ of Sin, or Peace with God; no Faith needf^^ to
Union with Christ, that we may have an I^terest in his Righteousness, but only
to escape Wrat^ to come and the having everlasting Life. To this (...) answer.
1. What is here urged, being upon Supposition, that the Reporter intended only
a summar^^ (...) what Christ has done and suffered for Sinners with (...), and
with God, and not of the Order between ^^th, and Justification, or Pardon;
there is no ^^re room for suspicion in this Draught than there (...) the
ancient Symboles, in which not a word of ^^^h's precedence to Justification or
Pardon. And ^^^ld an Antinomian imitate this learned Man, in ^^way of arguing,
would he not be as able to vin^^^e his most licentious Principles from the
Apo^^ Creed, as Mr. A. is to fasten his Charge on the ^^ter, and after his
manner, professing an extra^^ary Zeal for that Creed? press it, that there is
^ecessity of Faith in order to Justification; because (...) word of it in that
Symbol, though it contains (...) the sum and substance of the Gospel. For, if
(...) is not mentioned in the Formula, composed by Reporter must be looked on
as rejected, because mentioned in it, then what is not in the Formula ^he
Apostles, must be also looked upon as reject^^ them, as if they had held, that
Faith does ^antecede Justification, and is not necessary to ^^^on or Peace with
God. But 2. Why does he Here Is no believing necessary to Peace with God? (...)
he think that a Man may escape the Wrath to ^^e and have everlasting Life, though
his Peace with (...) be not made? When it is said in Scripture, that (...) who
believe escape the Wrath to come and have ever^ng Life? I thought nothing less
could be meant, that they had on their believing, Peace with God; is, (as Beza,
Piscator, Tolet, Estius, Pareus, in Poole) (...) Reconciliation; or (as
Vatablus (ubi supra) are re^^ed into Favor with God. 3. The Godly learned
their general Discourses about these Points, have (...) thought it sufficient
to secure themselves from (...) slanderous Accusations, as Mr. A -- would
fasten the Reporter; if they did but mention believing, as ^^ssary to our
Deliverance from eternal Wrath, or to our having everlasting Life. I might give
a large catalogue of learned men on this occasion, but will only instance in
the learned Grotius, who, in the Summary he gave of the Catholic Faith in this
very Point has it thus, at nos intercedente vera Fide, a Poena Mort^ aeternae
liberaremur. This great Man, writing to Christ's Satisfaction, says, that
Christ did it, that o^ the Intervention of true Faith, we might be delivere^
from the Punishment of eternal Death. But 4. The Reporter has one Passage more
than Grotius, (wh^ was never thought to reject the necessity of Faith in order
to Justification) namely, and have everlasting Life. Thus much the Reporter
took care to inser^ into the substance of the Gospel in this Article, having a
regard to that Place in John 3.36. He that be lieveth on the Son has
everlasting Life. That is, hat^ a Right to everlasting Life. Habet, i. e. certo
habituru^ est, as Lucas Brugensis, in Poole, who refers us unto John 1.12.
where it is thus, Jus ad haereditatem quod and Haereditatis nomine interdum
venit, sicut qu^ credit (nempe sicut oportet credere; viva side,) di^citur
habere vitam aeternam. C. 3.36. Sic Juris con^sulti, is qui actionem habet ad
rem ipsam, rem habere videtur. Well then, the import of what the Reporter has
here said, is, That Christ suffered, that they who believe may have a Right to
eberlasting Life, and seeing Justification carries in it a Right to Life
eternal; it is as if it had been said, That they who believe may be justified.
(5.) That this is the manifest intendment of the Reporter, may be seen by
comparing the present Paragraph with the fore going, which is,

We are all by Nature under the Curse of the Law, and destitute of a
Righteousness entitling to eternal Life. -- That Vindictive Justice, which is
essential unto God, makes it necessary, that the wrath be inflicted, and that
there be no Right to eternal Life without a perfect meritorious Righteousness.
This is our State and Condition: This is the Place, in which we are, in which
if we dye, we are eternally undone.

The Reporter having shown into what a deploable Condition we are brought by
Sin, and urging the necessity of an Interest, in a perfect meritorious
Righteousness; he proceeds to show, how we may obtain such a Righteousness, as
is meritorious of eternal life, to the end we may obtain a right thereunto,
^ying, 'That all who believe might escape the Wrath to come, and have
everlasting Life; the Lord Jesus undertakes for us; thereby clearing it, that
they who believe having an Interest in Christ's Righteousness, may have a Right
to everlasting Life, that is, may be justified, so that here is an asserting of
faith as necessary to Justification, Pardon and Peace with God. (6.) The
Reporter in giving this brief account of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction,
has followed the blessed Jesus, and the ^oly Apostles as his Guides; for our
Lord when ^e sent out his Disciples to preach the Gospel, bids them declare,
That whoever believe and are baptized shall be saved, and they who believe not
shall be damned. In this Summary, though not one word expressly of Regeneration,
Conversion, Repentance, etc. nor a word of the Precedence of Faith to
Justification or Pardon of Sin; yet are all these included in it. The ^reaching
of the Apostles was frequently the same, Believe and thou shall be saved. But,
(7.) If there had been any Strength in this Objection, Mr. A. does make, not
only the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, and the rankest
Socinians, but the very Mehometanes would be very much beholding to him for it.
For, if the not mentioning every Article of the Christian Faith particularly in
the Letter, where our Lord gives a Summary of the Gospel, must import a
Rejection, or at least an Indifference about the Points not mentioned; then to
believe that Jesus is the Messiah, is sufficient, and we may burn our Systems,
Catechisms and larger Confessions of Faith.

But (8.) If he says, it is mentioned by our Lord Jesus and his Apostles
elsewhere, I grant it, and from thence I infer, that as our Lord's not
mentioning these things, in a summary, is not a Rejecting them; so the
Reporter, though he spoke not a word of them in his summary, cannot without the
greatest Injustice, and wrong done him, be charged, as a Rejecter of them. And
(9.) It Is not unworthy our observation, that the Lord Jesus did in Mark 16.15,
16. give a summary of the whole Gospel without the mention of the particulars
specified by my Adversary; but the Reporter only of the substance of the Gospel
so far as we are to believe what Christ has done, and suffered for Sinners
without them, and with God, in which he has insisted on the necessity of
Faith, in order to our escaping the Wrath to come, and our having Everlasting
Life, which passage importing the necessity of Faith to our actual Right unto
Glory, is as much as if it had been said, that it is necessary to our
Justification and Pardon.

But Mr. A. it is likely, not thinking himself under those Bonds which oblige to
a strict adherence unto Truth, in what he either says, or writes, I have
Reason to believe, that he has charged the Reporter for Rejecting what he
himself believes in his Conscience he holds, and that he has done thus much,
upon a Reason, which he is persuaded has nothing of strength in it; so
dangerous a thing it is for a Man, who in his own Opinion, is a Great Wit, to
enter on a Controversy, with a design to load his Opposers with False and
Reproachful Charges, though it be to the cost and expense of his own Reputation,
and in an Instance wherein he cannot expose the Reporter, but by casting dirt
on the Cathick Church, and on his own Understanding too, giving ^ountenance to
nothing so much as unto the vain ^retences of such Debauched Heretics as the
Licentious Antinomian, and Libertines of the Age are.

Thus, we see, whither somewhat has hurried his Man, and how he has brought
himself into such Circumstances, as may move a Christian Temper ^o Pity and
Compassion, for which reason I Will say ^o more to this Objection, but go on to a
second.

The second Objection.
Be pleased to observe. He instructs you, That we are all by Nature under the
Curse of the Law, and destitute of a Righteousness, that may entitle us to
Eternal Life, and that this was our Place, State and Condition.

Reply.
And was not this our Place, State, and Condition? Will Mr. A. deny it? No, he
dares not; for, says ^e, This we all own, and lament as too true. Where ^hen
is his Objection? It is in the following words.

But then he instructs you also, That Christ put himself into our Place, State,
and Condition: Will you not, must you not conclude from hence, That Christ also
was destitute of a Righteousness to entitle him, and if himself, us too, to
Eternal Life.

Reply.
1. That I may show how Mr. A. trifles in raising his Objection, I will propose
the Sentiments of the Reporter about a Commutation of Persons between Christ,
and us; which was the Occasion of what was said about our being destitute of a
Righteousness. And it must be observed, that the Reporter had his Eye on the
Manuscript, in which its Author, speaking of a proper Commutation, says, That
it is the same with a proper Surrogation, where the Surety [or Surrogate] puts
on the Person, and stands in the Quality, State, and Condition of the Debtor,
and lies under the same Obligation he did to answer for him. Not that he
apprehended the Agreement there is between Christ's Suretiship, and that
amongst Men to be adaequate, and full; nor did he allude unto a Creditor and
Debtor to insinuate, that whatever may be truly affirmed of them, in Humane
Courts, might be safely applied unto God, and Sinners, as to Christ acting the
part of a Surety: But, to explain how Christ came under the same Obligations,
we stood; and by his Satisfaction, and Merit Redeems us from that miserable
state and condition our sin had cast us into, and procures for us a Right to
Eternal Life; And therefore in Obedience to the Holy Scriptures, he considered
Jesus Christ as a Surety that came into the State, Quality, or Condition of
Sinners, so far, and no further, than to come under the same Obligations, and
Bonds with us, to answer for us, and do, on our behalf, what was impossible to
be done by our selves. And that he might make this the more clear, he
represented unto us that State, in which we all are by Nature, affirming, That
we are all under the Curse, destitute of a Righteousness, that may entitle us
to Eternal Life. And, that, except Satisfaction be made both to Punitive, and
Remunerative Justice, it is impossible for us to be saved. For, seeing the Law,
under which we were Created is of Everlasting Obligation, we stand bound
thereby both to Obedience, and the Punishment, and until this Debt be paid, we
cannot be Relieved.

This is our State, this is our Condition, and that they who believe may be
brought out of this Place, State, and Condition, and have Everlasting Life,
Christ came into this Place, into this State, and Condition, that is, he came
under those Bonds, and Ob^igations that lay on us, that, by answering them, we
^ight be the Redeemed, and Saved.

But, says Mr. A. if it be thus, Christ must be de^itute of a Righteousness;
to which I reply, By no ^eans; and if we consider how it is between a Surety
and a Debtor, in our Courts, we may soon see ^he contrary. For, when one
becomes Surety for another, he comes into the Place, State and Condition ^f
that other, that is, under the same Bonds and Obligations to pay for him, what
he could not do for himself. But, would any Man of Sense say, that the Surety
coming into the same State and Condition of the Debtor, to pay his Debts for
him, must be thereupon destitute of what is necessary in order thereunto? He
comes into the Place of one who is Insolvent, but must he therefore be himself
Insolvent, and yet pay what neither the Debtor nor himself can pay? Thus you
see what Mr. A's. Objection is at last come to. But,

2. The Righteousness of which our Discourse is, answers that Law, which said,
Do this and live; In the day thou sinnest thou shall die; and it is to make
Satisfaction both to Punitive and Remunerative Justice. For whatever some may
impertinently object, it may be very safely said, that Justice distributes
Rewards and Punishments, and therefore is rightly denominated Remunerative and
Punitive. For though it is said, That Punishment is merited by, or is rather the
Demerit of sin; and that the Sinner, when he bears the Punishment due unto him
for his Iniquity, partakes of the Reward of Unrighteousness; yet none can with
the least pretense to Reason, say, That Punitive and Remunerative are Terms in
all respects Coincident. For, it is most notorious, that when Believers are, for
the sake of Christ's Righteousness rewarded with Eternal Life, they are not
then punished; though Remunerative Justice is then glorified, yet Punitive
Justice is not so

But, being assured, that Mr. Alsop says, these Terms of Remunerative and
Punitive Justice are Coincident; I will give the Sense of some learned
Protestants about it. Gilbertus Voet, a Man of good Learning and a right
Calvinist, discoursing of the Justice of God, says, that Justitia Dei est vel
in Dictis, vel in Factis. Posterior duplex scilicet Regiminis, and Judicii.
Justitia Judicii est, quae secundum Opera Mercedem retribuit. Estque haec
duplex, vel, Remunerativa seu Praemians secundum Promissionem erga been
agentes; vel Correctiva erga male agentes. Quae etiam distinguitur in
Castigantem erga Filios, and Vindicantem, seu Punitivam proprie, and stricte
sic dictam erga Reprobos. Voet. Select. Disput. Pas. 1. Disp. de Jure and
Justitia page 357, 358. And the learned Doctor Owen, in his Diatribe de
Justitia Divina, says the same, affirming it to be the general Sense of Modern
Divines, not one of them who writ on the Divine Attributes, being of a
different Opinion: And in the Margin, he makes particular mention of Zanchy,
Voet, Maresius and others; directing us also unto Doctor Ames his Cases of
Conscience; who in the second Chapter of his fifth Book, resolves this Question
viz. Whether Remuneration or Punition belongs, to Communicative or to
Distributive Justice? Whether Mr. A. understood these things or not, is not in
my Opinion very material, it being sufficient to my purpose, that in the
Judgment of wiser Men than himself these Terms are not so Coincident, as it is
said he does insinuate.

But to return, The Lord Jesus undertaking to make Satisfaction both to
Punitive and Remunerative Justice, that is to say, the obliging himself to
suffer the Punishment due to us; for the Satisfaction of Punitive Justice, and
render Obedience to the same Law, to merit the Reward we had ^ost; the
Righteousness the Reporter spoke of, lies (...) bearing the threatened Curse,
and in obeying the Pre^^pts of that Law we violated. And I demand of ^^r.
Alsop, Whether the Lord Jesus was always ^ossess'd of this Righteousness? Had
he it the ^^rst Instant of his undertaking? or when he first ^ame into our
Place, State and Condition?

That there was no Guile in the Mouth, nor De^^it in the Heart of the blessed
Jesus; That he ^as ever, even whilst he was in a State of Exa^nition without
Spot, Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, ^^parate from Sinners, and at the greatest
distance ^^om the least Pollution or Impurity, we do firmly ^elieve: And though
he had not actually a satisfying-^eritorious Righteousness before, he did by
his Pae^^l Sufferings, and his perfect Obedience to the vio^^ted Law satisfy
and merit; yet was he at no in^^ant of time destitute, of what in that instant
it ^ecame him to have. But its like, nothing will ^^tisfie Mr. A. but the
granting, That either be^^re, or at his undertaking; or at least the first
^^^ment of his entering on the work of our Redemp^on, he was actually possessed
of a satisfactory ^eritorious Righteousness, as if he believed, that Christ
before he obeyed and suffered, did perfect^^ obey and fully satisfy. How else
can he make ^^hideous a Noise, about the Reporters holding, at Christ was
destitute of a Righteousness, enti^^ng himself and us too, to eternal Life?
Once more. 3. Mr. A -- blames the Reporter for suggesting if Christ had not a
Righteousness, entitling himself (...) eternal Life. To which I answer,

1. That the Reporter, spoke not about Christ's ha^^ng, or not having a
Righteousness entitling himself (...) eternal Life. But, 2. Seeing Mr. A. does
insi^^nate, That Jesus Christ has wrought for himself Righteousness, that he
might by it be entitled to Eternal Life, I will consider the Import and
Tendency of such an Assertion.

1. As for its Import, it cannot be any thing less than that the Lord Jesus
Christ was once in a state of Trial, and made under the same Law for himself,
that we were for our selves, and that Obedience was required of him, to the end
that he merit Eternal Life for himself: Whence it follows, That when the
Promise of Eternal Life was proposed, for the Encouragement of his Obedience,
he had no Right nor Title to Eternal Life; no, not for himself: But that to get
a Title thereunto, he was under the Obligation of the same Law, that we were;
and to speak most modestly of Mr. A's. Notion, The Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man,
was antecedently to his rendering Obedience to the Law, which said, Do this and
live. He was as destitute of a Right to Eternal Life, as Adam was on his first
Creation. Thus, whilst he would fasten on the Reporter the groundless Charge of
making Christ destitute of (...) Righteousness; he makes our Blessed Lord
destitute of Eternal Life, ay, of a Right thereunto: But le^ us consider,

2. The Tendency of this Notion; and that I may do it with the greater
clearness, I will deliver what I design to offer on this occasion; as pressed
by the Learned, Judicious and Holy Doctor Owen* who in his Day excelled most
Men in these Studies And whoever will consult his Discourse of Justification
from page 366 to page 378. will see, That this great Man in confuting the
Socinians, and their next of Kin in the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction and
our Justification, does with much concern, declare and strongly prove, That
Christ came not under the Law for himself, but for us.

To set this Important Point in the clearer Light it must be observed, That the
Controversy is not, whether the Humane Nature of Christ, as it is a Ra^ional
Creature, be subject unto the Law of Crea^ion, and eternally obliged from the
Nature of God, ^^d its Relation thereunto, to Love him, Obey him, ^epend upon
him, and to make him its End, Blessed-^^ss, and Reward. For as the Dr.
admirably well ^^presseth it; 'The Law of Creation, thus considered, does not
respect the World, and this Life only; but the Future State of Heaven, and
Eternity. But the Point here controverted is, Whe^^er Christ be under the Law,
as it is imposed on ^reatures by especial Dispensation, for some time, ^^d for
some certain End, with some Considerations, ^^les, and Orders, that belong not
essentially to the ^^w, as before described, as it is presented unto us, ^^^t
absolutely and eternally, but whilst we are in this World, and that with this
special End, that by Obe^^^nce thereunto, we may obtain the Reward of ^ternal
Life?

To this the Dr. answers; That the Lord Jesus Christ was not made under the
Law, under this ^^nsideration, for himself, to the end he might get a ^ale unto
Eternal Life. For, (says the Doctor) upon the first Instant of the Union of
his Natures, being holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, he
might, notwithstanding that Law, he was made subject unto, have been stated in
Glory. For, he that was the Object of all Divine Worship, ceded not any New
Obedience to procure for him state of Blessedness. And a little before. Setting
side (says the Doctor) the consideration of the Grace, and Love of Christ, and
the Compact be^ween the Father and the Son, as to the Undertaking ^or us, which
undeniably proves all that he did in pursuit of them to be done for us, and not
for himself. I say, setting aside the consideration of these things, and the
Humane Nature of Christ, b^ virtue of its Union with the Person of the Son
(...) God, had a Right unto, and might have immed^ately been admitted into the
Highest Glo^^ whereof it was capable, without any Anteceder Obedience unto the
Law. And this is appare^^ from hence, in that from the First Instant of the
Union, the whole Person of Christ, with our Natu^^ Existing therein, was the
Object of all Divi^^ Worship from Angels and Men, wherein consis^ the Highest
Exaltation of that Nature. So f^^ Dr. Owen.

Here then you see a difference between this Lea^ned Dr. and Mr. A. Mr. A.
suggests as if Christ were under the Law, which says, Do this and liv^ for
Himself, as well as for us, that he might be e^^ titled to Eternal Life; but
the Dr. denies it upon the weightiest consideration. Besides, the Doct^^ is the
more positive in his Opinion, as it does mo^^ effectually subvert the Notion of
Socinus, which (...) That our Lord Jesus Christ was for himself, or on (...)
own account, obliged unto all that Obedience, which (...) performed, and
therefore could no more obey, a^^ satisfy for others, than any other person.
But the Doctor proves, That Christ's Obedience unto t^^ Law was for Us, and not
for Himself; and ther^ by does most effectually enervate the strength (...)
Socinus his Argument, which upon Mr. A's. Notio^ receives new Life, and Vigor.

Whoever desires a suller understanding of the Controversy, will do well to
consult the Doct^^ himself; who, in the pages referred unto, has (...) fully,
and clearly stated this Doctrine, as to obvia^^ Objections, made against it by
the Remonstrant Socinians, and others; but what I have here said (...)
sufficient to show Mr. A's. Mistake, and what countenance it gives the
Socinians, and how much reason (...) has to be more in his Study consulting,
not ^ay-Books for the sake of foolish Jests, but the ^oly Scriptures, and the
Learned Writings of D. O. ^^d other Orthodox Divines, that for the future,
^rough inadvertency, or otherwise, he give not those ^dvantages to the common
Enemies of our Holy ^eligion, he has too often done. But I pass on to third
Objection.

The Third Objection.
We are sin, (says the Reporter) and under a Curse: Can you, with all your
Penetration, Divine the ^eason, why it is said, we are sin? -- but how ^^e we
sin? -- why must it be phrased thus, we are (...)? It was Poetically and
Satyrically said, That ^lexander the sixth, was non tam vitiosus, ^^am vitium,
non tam scelestus quam scelus: but ^^e need to be taught how Man was sin? sin
it ^^lf?

Reply.
1. That Mr. Alsop is so very much at a loss to ^^d out the genuine meaning of
the word Sin, ^en it is said we are Sin, as if it had been never ^used in
Scripture, does not a little surprise; it ^^ng so common for the Holy Ghost to
express the ^^erlative Degree by the Abstract, not only in ^^er Instances, but
even in this, that does so puz^^ and confound him. For, as the Devils, whose
^^s are exceeding great, are called, (...) or spiritual wickedness, so wicked
Men are cal^^ Wickedness, particularly, in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. ^ere is an
enumeration of sundry sorts of Sinners, (...) render it, [ And such were some
of you] (...), ^^t is, as may be seen in Poole; talia scelera eratis, ^^th
Wickednesses were some of you; and as Ca^arius, ut cum Sceleratum dicimus
Scelus. The like also in Ephesians 5.8. ye were Darkness, that is, as Zanchy,
ut Scelus pro scelestissimo; and Bishop Reynolds observes, on Psalm 110. The
Lord, to signify that his People were most Rebellious, says, that they were
Rebellion it self, Ezekiel. 2.8. and many other instances of this kind might be
given, which may move some of no jealous Inclinations, to suspect, that the
Objector has been more conversant with the Poets, than with the Prophets and
Apostles.

2. Well then, by comparing Scripture with Scripture, the signification of the
word [Sin] is very obvious, denoting the greatness of Wickedness we are Sin; we
are Sin in the Abstract, we are Sinners in the highest degree. But,

3. Does not this Interpretation give advantage to the Objector, who says, you
shall see the mystery of his Phraseology; it was to mislead you, into that
Abomination, that Christ was sinful, that h^ was a Sinner; for, if Christ was
Sin in the same Acceptance, that we are, then he was sinful, h^ was a Sinner,
and the greatest Sinner, that eve^ was in the World. To this I answer, That
whatever is here suggested, my Interpretation of the word [Sin,] gives not the
least advantage to the Objector. For,

1. If the word [Sin] has a Sense in the Superla^tive Degree, in which it is
true, not only of us, bu^ of Christ, without making Christ inherently sinful or
personally guilty; all this noise is to no purpose.

2. That Christ was Sin in an Acceptance, tha^ we are Sin without being
Inherently Sinsul, i^ evident; as the word [ Sin imports Guilt, I mea^ Legal
Guilt, and a proper Punishment consequen thereupon. Sin in Scripture often
imports the sam^ with Legal Guilt, in the Sense described by the ^arned Bishop
of Worcester, and it also oft-times ^^gnifies Punishment. My Sin, and sometimes
my ^uilt, at other times my Punishment; and when ^uilt and Punishment are
expressed by the word Sin, ^e are not only directed to our Sins as the
merito^us Cause, but to the dreadful and dismal Effects. We are Sin, we are
upon the account of our Trans^ressions exceeding Guilty, and the Punishment
they ^serve is exceeding great. But,

3. If Christ be not Sin in some of the same Ac^ptations, in which we are Sin,
then the Guilt of ^^r Sins was never transferred upon Christ, nor the
^unishment thereof inflicted on him; which is a ^ry liberal giving up the
Controversy to the Soci^ans, who deny Christ to be made Sin in any one ^ense,
in which we are Sin, and so will not own ^at our Guilt was laid upon him, or a
proper Pun^ent inflicted on him.

4. If Christ be in no Sense Sin, in which we ^e Sin, then our Sins were never
imputed unto christ, nor did he, in a proper sense, bear our Guilt, (...)
Punishment, nor was he, nor could he be a Proper ^^crifice for sin. To say,
that Christ was a Sacrifice (...) sin, in a proper sense, and yet not sin in
any one ^se, in which we are sin, is to say he had not the ^uilt, nor the
Punishment of sin upon him, and that ^e was not a proper Sacrifice for sin; for
it is essen^al to a proper Sacrifice for sin, to have the Guilt, ^^d Punishment
of sin laid upon it. Upon this ac^unt it is that amongst the Hebrews the word
(...) is used for sin, the Guilt, the Punishment, and ^^crifice. And amongst
the Greeks, and Latins the ^ne word signifies a wicked man, and an Expiatory
^^crifice. Thus (...) is. as Dr. Owen against Biddle, cap. 22. observes, Homo
pia cularis pro Lustratione, and Expiatione Patriae devotus; whence the word is
often used, as scelus in Latin for a wicked man, a man fit to be destroyed and
taken away Agreeably hereunto, Budaeus renders that place o^ the Apostle, 1
Cor. 4.13. (...) -- nos tanquam piacula -- we as as the accursed thing of the
World, and Sacrifices for the People; it being, a may be seen in Poole in loc.
the Custom of some Countries, in the day of their Calamity, to take the vilest
amongst the People, and Sacrifice them, wh^ by the Athenians were called (...);
so common has it been for the Sinner, and the Sacrifice to bea^ the same Name
even amongst the Heathen; but i^ the Holy Scriptures nothing more evident,
because the Sin, for which the Sacrifice was to be offered was laid upon it in
the Old Testament, whereby the Laying of our sins on the Lord Jesus, which wa^
a necessary antecedent to his Death, as he was a Sacrifice, was prefigured. But,

5. Mr. A. writes, as if he had either never known or had quite forgot what is
so very obvious to mos^ Divines; and therefore what he says on this occasion
is to be the less regarded, and to be considered as what can serve no other
sort of People, tha^ the Socinians, and their Allies, though I still charitably
hope, that he abhors their Tenants, even when hi^ Writings do, in too many
instances, favor their Cause.

The Fourth Objection.
That it is a mistake to conclude from Christ^ being called Surety, that
therefore he came under the Sanction of the Law of Works. And the rather
because being styled the Surety of a better Testament can respect only the
Covenant of Grace.

Reply.
1. I do not say that this is an Objection of Mr. Alsop's framing, nor will I
answer it as such. The Episcopianism, and Socinianism, that is in it, is so
clear ^n evidence of its being formed by a Well-wisher ^o the Errors of our
Adversaries, that I Will not ^asten it on one in whose Writings I have not met
^ith it. But that it is of the same nature with that Mr. W. has advanced, is to
me most certain.

2. Whatever this Objector has, with a boldness ^ommon amongst our
Adversaries, asserted, I must ^ave leave to suggest, that by this way of
arguing, ^^d by these Assertions, he has left out Orthodox Writers, and is
gone over to the Tents of Limborch, ^^rcellaeus, Schlictingtons, and Crellius.

3. That herein the Objector has forsaken the Or^odox, I will evince by setting
down the Senti^ents of some of the most Eminent amongst them. and that I may be
the more convincing in what I (...), I must observe, that the hinge of this
Contro^ersie turns on a sound determination of this Que^^on, viz. Whether
Christ's Suretiship belongs to his Priestly ^ffice, or not? For, if it belongs
unto the Priestly Of^^e, 'twill unavoidably follow, that as our Surety, ^e Lord
Jesus offered up himself a Sacrifice to God (...) the Expiation of the Guilt of
our sins, that to ^is end he took on him our Guilt, and bore the ^unishment due
to us, which he could not do but by ^^ming under the Sanction of the violated
Law. The ^^nnection there is between Christ's Priesthood, ^^d his offering up a
proper Sacrifice, between his ^eing a proper Sacrifice, and his bearing the
Guilt, ^^d Punishment of our sins; and between his bear^^g the Guilt, and
Punishment of our sin, and his ^eing under the Sanction of the violated Law, is
so ^ose, so firmly fixed, and inviolable, that, on the ^^anting, that Christ's
Suretiship belongs to him, as ^^iest, the whole here mentioned necessarily
follows. The Links are too strong to be broken. If then our Divines hold, that
the Suretiship mentioned in Heb. 7.22. belongs to Christ's Priestly Office, if
they produce this Text to prove, that Christ as our Surety took on him the
Guilt and Punishment of our sins, to satisfy God's Justice for them, then they
do run counter herein, unto the Episcopians and Socinians, in holding that
Christ came under the Sanction of the Law.

4. That, in what I have delivered, I have given the sense of the Orthodox is
manifest. The Learned Bishop Reynolds on Psalm. 110.4. p. 417. says, That
Christ, being a Priest, must of necessity be a Mediator, and Surety between
Parties, that he might have one, unto whom, and others, for whom, and in whose
behalf to offer a Sacrifice. Every Priest must be a Mediator to stand between
God and the People, and to intercept, and bear the Iniquity o^ their Holy
things -- But every Mediator is not presently a Priest, for there is a Mediator
only by way of Entreaty and Prayer, etc. And there are Mediators by way of
Satisfaction, as Sureties are between the Creditor and the Debtor; and such a
Mediator was Christ; not only a Mediator, but also a Surety of a better
Covenant, Heb. 8.6. Heb. 7.22. He was not to procure Remission of our sins by
way of Favor and Request, but he was set forth to declare the Righteousness of
God, Romans 3.25. and such a Mediator between God and Us must needs be a Priest
too. For the Debt, which we Owed unto God was Blood. Without shedding of Blood
there is no Remission, Heb. 9.22. Essenius, who is applauded for his Defense of
Grotius, de Satisfactione, by Lutherans, as well as Calvenists, says the same;
Quantum ad Locum, Heb. 7.22. rations a Crellio, allatas cur Christus Sponsor
Novi Foederis vocetur minime sufficere oftendimus, Sect. 1. hujus Libri. Imo in
an^ecedentibus, and consequentibus agitur de Sacerdotio Christi quo ipse non
fungitur nomine Dei apud bomines; sed nontine Hominum, apud Deum, cui se
victimam obtulit. Atque Ita Sponsorem egit pro hominibus apud Deum. Essen^
Triump. Crucis, (...). 2. sect. 3. cap. 1. p. 500. Judicious Mr. Strong, his
Discourse of the two Covenants, lib. 2. cap. 2. ^^ct. 1. 2. p. 128. has it
thus; 'The Lord Christ, by becoming a Surety, did give his hand; that is, be
did enter into Covenant with the Lord, and so his Name is put into our Bond,
Gal. 4.4, 5. He is said to be made under the Law, and that as a Covenant; and
when the Apostle says, He is the Surety of a better Covenant, whereas the main
of Christ's Suretiship refers unto the first Covenant, the Covenant of Works
broken, and therefore, in respect of our Debt, he is the Surety of the first
Covenant; yet the Apostle does not so express it, but of the better Covenant,
because the Commutation of the Person, the bringing in of a Surety, does
properly belong unto the Covenant of Grace, and it is a part of the Covenant of
Grace, that there should be (...), or a Propitiation, one to stand in our
stead, or to make Satisfaction to the Justice of God for the Breach of the
Covenant of Works; and therefore the whole Suretiship of Christ does refer unto
the Covenant of Grace, of which his standing in our stead, and paying our Debt,
is a principal part. To this of Mr. Strong I will add what Mr. Alsop with about
the Covenant of Grace, in his Anti-Sozzo, 717, etc. The Covenant of Grace may
be considered, either in its Constitution, or Execution: -- In the Execution of
the fixed Constitution -- the Redeeming Mediator Undertakes with God as a
Righteous Judge -- and therefore becomes a Priest, a Sacrifice, a Price, a
Ransom, a Curse, to satisf^^^ the Judge and his Law -- Christ himself is
promised in the Covenant as the Great Comprehensive Blessing of the Covenant,
Isa. 49.8, 9. So that Christ being given in the Covenant of Grace, to Redeen us
by his Death, and Sufferings, by his satisfying the Judge, and his Law, from
that Misery, our sins ha^ brought upon us, he might very well be styled by the
Apostle, Heb. 7.22. a Surety of a better Covenant, o^ Testament, which shows
the vanity of that part o^ the Objection, which says, Christ cannot be said to
come under the Sanction of the Law of Works, because being styled the Surety of
a better Testament, cat^ respect only the Covenant of Grace. Once more.

The Learned Dr. Owen, in opposition to the Interpretation given of Heb. 7.22.
by Schlictingius Curcellaeus, and Hammond, (and I may justly add to that given
by Mr. W.) declares. That the generality of Expositors, Ancient, and Modern, of
the Roman, and Protestant Churches, on the place, affirm, that the Lord Christ,
as the Surety of the Covenant, was properly a Surety, or Undertaker unto God
for us; and not a Surety, or Undertaker unto us for God. And because this is a
matter of great importance, wherein the Faith and Consolation of the Church is
highly concerned, I shall (says he) a little insist upon it -- It is the
Priesthood of Christ that the Apostle treats of in this place, [ viz. Heb.
7.22.] and that alone. Wherefore he is a Surety as he is a Priest, and in the
discharge of that Office, and therefore is so with God on our behalf -- He
undertook, as the Surety of the Covenant, to answer for all the sins of those,
who are to be, and are made Partakers of the Benefits of it; that is, to
undergo the Punishment due unto their sins; to make Atonement for them by
offering himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Expiation of their sins,
Redeeming them by the ^^ice of his Blood from their state of Misery, and
Bondage under the Law, and the Curse of it. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 10. Matthew. 20.28.
1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Cor. 6.20. Romans 3.25, 26. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 8.2, 3. 2 Cor.
5.19, 20, 21. Gal. 3.13. And his was Absolutely Necessary, that the Grace and
Glory prepared in the Covenant, might be communicated to us. This, and much
more to the me purpose has the Learned Dr. in his Disc. of ^^stif. p. 256,
etc. To whom I will only add what ^e Learned Author of the Interest of Reason
in Re^ion offers on this Point. 'Whereas Christ is styled says he) the Surety
of a better Covenant, it i^ because the Enacting of the Covenant of Grace
respects his Undertaking to he made sin, and to undergo the Curse as the Moral
Cause and Condition; without which there had been no Overtures of Mercy made to
the Sons of Men, p. 537, 538.

5. What these Great Men have here delivered, ^oth not only testify to the
Truth of what I have ^ffirmed about the Opposition the Or. hodex have ^ade
against the Interpretation given of Heb. 7.22. ^^y Mr. W. Curcellaeus, and the
Socinian; but it also does. ^ost convincingly prove, that Christ's Suretiship
belongs to his Priesthood, that in his Acting the part of Surety, or in the
Execution of his Priestly Office, ^e Offered up himself a Sacrifice, took on
him our ^uilt and Punishment, and, to this end, came under ^he Sanction of the
violated Law. For,

6. The connection the Apostle affirms to be be^ween Christ's Suretiship and
his Priestly Office is ^uch, that a denying Christ to be a Surety, under^aking
to bear the Guilt and Punishment of our sins, ^or that he came under the
Sanction of the Law, to satisfy God's Justice for us, has a direct tendency
to subvert the true Notion of the Priestly Office. Of this Schlictingius was so
sensible, that he could think on no way (as Dr. O. observes) to solve the
Apostles mention of Christ's being a Surety in the Description of his Priestly
Office, but by overthrowing the Nature of that Office also. Of Justif. p. 261,
262, 263. Have we not then reason enough to be concerned to see any, amongst
our selves, turning aside from the Common Faith delivered to us from the Lord
Jesus, and his Apostles, and falling in with the Inveterate Enemies of our
Savior's Satisfaction? One thing more I must note,

7. That the Notion, Paraphrase, and Exposition, given by Socinians, and a few
other Authors, of Christ's being made, and called our Surety, because of his
Undertaking to be Pledge, and Guarranty for God to Sinners, that upon their
Repentance and Faith he will both pardon, and bestow upon them Eternal Life, is
no ways either consistent with, or to be reconciled unto what the same Apostle
had declared, chap. 6. p. 16, 17. where, though he had been discoursing of
Christ's Priestly Office, he does nevertheless expressly, and positively affirm,
that God's Word of Promise, accompanied, and ratified by his Oath, is the
whole, and that praeclusive of all other means of Security, and Assurance,
which we either need; or, that God has in this matter been pleased to afford
us, in order to the stedfastness of our Faith, the Fullness of our Consolation;
God being willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the
Immutability of his Counsel confirmed it by an Oath, that by two Immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set before us.
So that the Reason of his being styled the Surety of the better Testament is,
because of his ^^ffering and performing those great Things for us ^owards God,
without which the Testamental Inhe^^tance bequeathed in that better Testament,
would ^ot have been upon any Terms acruable unto, and claimable by us.

The Fifth Objection.
That by saying Christ sustained the Person of Sinners, Mr. L. must be thought
to acknowledge, That he dyed for the Reprobate, as well as for the Elect, and
that it favors the Nestorians, who maintain, That Christ was constituted of
two Persons.

Reply.
1. What is objected against me in these words, (...) as much against the
generation of the Orthodox, ^ho use the same Phrases which I do. Not that
^^intend only the Lutherans in this Instance, who are ^^iesly concerned in the
first part of the Objection, or I use it in no other sense than the Reformed
^^nerally do.

2. The Conffusion which the Author of this Objection is fallen into, in his
opposing the Phrase (...) Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, has ^oved
some to fear, that all things are not Right ^ith him. For one while this Phrase
can signify nothing less than that Christ puts on the Disguise of ^inners
(Horresco referens) and Acts the part of a ^age-Player; at another time, it
must import Ne^ianism, as if Christ had taken on him the Natu^^^ Person of
Sinners; And again, the Enquiry is, ^hether the Persons of Sinners are not
United, and to be considered as One Person, and whether christ did not die and
satisfy for that One Person, that is for all equally, which he does not
believe to ^e our sense, as he declares. But,

3. The sense, in which we use this Phrase, is known to Divines of the least
accquaintance with these Studies, so that unless there had been a fault
somewhere, the Objector could not have been thus puzzled, for it has been
cleared in my Defense, that when its said Christ sustained the Person of
Sinners, it is not meant that the Person he took on him, was either a Feigned or
a Natural Person, that it was only a Legal Person; so that, did he understand
what is most plain and easy, he could not but see that he had not the least
Pretense for his Blasphemous Representation of our blessed Savior's Acting the
part of a Stage Player; nor for his charging us with Nestorianism.

4. As for his Endeavor to infer from this Phrase of [Christs sustaining the
Person of Sinners] the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, is so destitute of the
least color of Reason, that as he believes we do not hold it, so it has no
Foundation for its support: For the Phrase of [Christ sustaining the Person of
Sinners] and that other o^ [Christs dying for Sinners] is of one and the same
Extent, and the Interpretation given by the Orthodox of the one, is sufficient
to vindicate the other from his trifling Cavils. But,

5. When we say, That Christ sustained the Person of Sinners, we mean it of
those Sinners, who are given by the Father to the Son, whom the Father will
draw unto him, who come to the Father by the Son, do believe are Converted,
Regenerated and Saved. In a word, we mean it of Elect Sinners.

The Sixth Objection.
That it is both Scandalous and Blasphemous to say* That Pestilent Doctrines
have been oftentimes Communicated in the Language of Scripture.

1. When I wrote my Defense of the Report, ob^erving how zealous Mr. W's and
his Substitute, ^ere for strict Adherences unto Scripture words, and how much
against the use of some Terms and ^hrases (chosen by the Orthodox, to explain
the Truth) because not in the Letter of Scripture, I ^^ought it necessary to
suggest in my Defense, as did, p. 59. That it has been the way of the
Here^^cks to Quarrel with such Terms and Phrases as ^he Church had chosen,
because not found in the ^etter of Scripture; adding, That amongst many others,
it is well observed by the Learned Mr. Norton ^f New England, That the most
Pestilent Doctrines ^^ve been Communicated in the Language of Scripture; ^^on
which (as I am told) Mr. Alsop briskly deli^ers his charitable Censure, vix.
That to say so is ^oth Seandalous and Blasphemous. But,

2. What Mr. Norton said is Matter of Fact, in Point whereof the Truth is too
Notorious to be ^^nyed. And may we not transmit to Posterity the ^retched and
villanaous Practices of Vile Heretics, without falling under the censure of
being both ^andalous and Blasphemous?

3. If it be Blasphemous to relate a Matter of this nature, some of the most
Judicious and Learned ^istoriographers and Fathers of the Church, such
Eusebius, Theodoret, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Jerome, (...) Austine, and many
others, who have faithfully ^elated, with much clearness detected the Frauds
^^d confuted the detestible Errors of Heretics ^e Guilty. And whoever will
escape this Man's ^enaces and Threatings, whilst they behold the ^afty Methods
of the Enemies to our Holy Religion, though subversive of the Truth, and ruinous
(...) the Souls of Men, must tamely look on, and not speak one word of them,
because they deliver their Pernicious Doctrines in Scripture Language. Bu^

4. As in all ages of the Church, Heretics have had their Advocates to plead
their Cause, or at lea^^ to extenuate and speak favorably of their Errors in
like manner, there have not been wanting some who though to the hazard of their
Liberty, their Reputation and Lives, because of malicious Intreagues an^
Invidious Designs of Erroneous Delators, have discovered the Cheat, oppugned
the Error, and defended the Truth.

5 That it has been the way of Heretics t^ act deceitfully, and communicate
their Pestilen^ Notions in Scripture Language; I will, for the sak^ of the
Objector, and such as want either Ability o^ Opportunity to consult Church
History, or the Fathers, show out of Kracanthorp, who, in his Treatise of the
fifth General Council, held at Constantinopl^ under the Emperor Justinian,
making a very stric^ search into these matters, comes at last to this
Conclusion, viz. That the Nestorians spoke like Catholics, but thought
otherwise: Their Words were holy, and Orthodoxal, but their Sense and Meaning
was Blasphemous, and Heretical. Neither wa^ this any New Policy of the
Nestorians; the Ar^ans, the Pelagians, almost all Heretics have practiced the
like. Out of them all (says he) I will here allege but one Example. Vitalis,
a Presbyter of Antioch was accused unto Damasus to maintain in some part the
Heresy of Apollinaris, as denying Christ to have a Soul or Mind; at the motion
of Damasus he delivered in Writing a Confession of his Faith -- In this
Confession Vitalis had placed the very words of the Scripture, not depraved not
any way changed, neither the Order, nor the Writing of them being corrupted.
But, when Vitalis came among his own Fellows, to them he ^pened his secret
meaning and his Fraud. Whence ^^akanthorp observes, That an Heretical
Profession ^^y be made in the very words of holy Scripture; which is, as if it
had been said, Pestilent Doctrines ^^y be communicated in Scripture Language.
And must add,

6. That as it has been a common practice of ^^reticks, to keep most rigidly
to the Letter of Scrip^^re; and from time to time, provoke their Ortho^^x
Opposers thereunto; so, the Church, to the end ^e might the more effectually
discover the Heresy, and ^^retick, explain and defend the Truth, did always
use apt Words, Terms, and Phrases, from which the ^^amour of Heretics could
never prevail with her (...) turn.

Doctor Owen, in the Preface to his Answer unto ^^ddle, speaks very fully unto
this Point, declaring, ^^t it has been his observation, That such Words (...)
Expressions, as are not (...) found in Scripture, ^^e Questioned and Rejected
by none but such as ^y their Rejection intend and aim at the Removal ^f the
Truth it self, which by them is expressed and plentifully revealed in the Word.
Hence when Valens the Arian Emperor, sent Modestus the Praetorian Prefect, to
persuade Basil to be an Arian, the Man entreats him not to be so rigid as ^o
displease the Emperor, and trouble the Church, for (...) Over-strict Observance
of Opinions; it being but ^^e Word, indeed one Syllable, that made the
Difference. And he thought it not Prudence to stand so much upon so small a
Business. The Holy Man ^eply'd, However Children might be so dealt withal,
those who are bred up in the Scriptures, or nourished with the Word, will not
suffer one Syllable of Divine Truth to be betrayed. The like attempt of this of
Valens and Modestus upon Basil, was made by the Arian Bishops at the Council of
Arminum, who pleaded earnestly for the Rejection of one, or two Words, not
found in Scripture, laying on the Plea much weight, when it was the Eversion of
the Deity of Christ, which they intended and attempted Thus Doctor O. ubisupra.
p. 21.

7. After the same manner, in the present Controversy, my Adversaries make an
amazing Noise crying out that the Quarrel is only about some Words, Terms,
Phrases and Expressions, such as Chang^ of Persons, Christ's sustaining the
Person of Sinners, etc. which are neither in Scripture, nor in any Public
Confessions, and thus make a horrid strife about Words, when there is an
agreement in things; calling upon us, to show the Scripture, that has the
controverted Words and Phrases literally in them, which you see from what I
have urged out of Dr. Owen is an old Practice of Heretics: I will further show
out of the Learned Dalley, who in his Demonstration of Faith from Scripture,
gives a particular account of the Reasonings of the Ancient Heretics, and of
what Answers the Fathers returned unto them.

This great Man Notes it as the Practice of Arians and other Heretics, to
provoke to the Express Letter of Scripture, for the use of those Terms and
Phrases that were then controverted. For instance* Where is it (say they) in
the Letter, that the Son is Consubstantial with the Father, where in so many
Words and Syllables? Away with your Syllogisms, and show where nakedly and
literally it^ said, that the Son is the True God. So Pascentius Comes an Arian,
in St. Austin, In what Text is the word Omoousios, or Consubstantial? And in
Victor Vitensis, its said, that Hunnericus, an Arian King of the Vandals, in an
Edict, by which he commanded the Catholic Bishops of the Affrican Churches to
meet with Men of his own Opinion about Matters of Faith, would have them show
the Faith of the Omoousians to be in so many Letters and Syllables of
Scripture. But,

8. This way of Arguing was exploded by the ^athers, as Absurd and Foolish, who
constantly ^sserted, That although what they belived was not to (...) found in so
many express Words and Syllables, (...) was it very clearly and manifestly
deduced from ^ain Scriptures. And as Athanasius expressed it, ^o matter whether
what, we believe be in so many words the Scriptures, so long as the Truths
themselves are ^erein Contained. That is said to be Written, although (...), in
the very Letter, if the Sense of it there. So Chrysostom. To which add, that of
^regory Nazianzen, there are some things in Scripture intended, which are not
Literally expressed; ^ere are other things Literally mentioned but are not
really intended, etc. Thus though it is not in ^e Letter said, That God is
Impassible, without ^^inning, etc. Yet these things are by other words ^^ended:
Again, although it be in the Letter, that ^od sleeps, awakes, moves, yet are they
not really ^eant. Dal. Vbi. sup. Cap. 7. and 8.

9. This Learned Person induces sundry other authorities, and at last refers
to his Appendix, in which is a Treatise of Theodoret (which has been ^^serted
in the Works of Athanasius) against 'em, ^^o are for a rigid, and stiff
Adherence unto the ^^ry words of Scripture, without any regard to their
Contsonancy, or Dissonancy unto Reason, or ^^e Analogy of Faith; or Mysteries
of the Gospel, which the Father does thus expostulate with 'em. What shall I
believe with my Heart unto Righteousness? What shall I confess with my Mouth
unto Salvation? when it is maliciously objected, That the Father who has sent
me is greater than I? shall I hastily assent unto it as thus simply Delivered,
and boldly deny the Son to be equal with the Father? Must I not at all weigh
the matter, nor consider that this is to be understood in regard to the
Economy and Dispensation? May I not observe what is said elsewhere of the
Father and the Son's being one, and that we must honor the Son as we honor
the Father?

10. To gather up what has been briefly suggested, it is manifest that Heretics
have communicated Pestilent Doctrines in Scripture Language; that they have
been for a rigid Adhesion unto the very words, syllables and letter of
Scripture; That they would Reject those Terms and Phrases, used by the Orthodox
to explain the Truth, and distinguish it from Error; because not in the Letter
of Scripture; That the Church would not part with a word, a syllable, nor with
a Letter, that was necessary to express the Truth. The Council of Nice would
not gratify the Arians nor Nestorians in a Letter, says Dr. Manton on Jude p.
163. That the Opposers of Orthodox Terms and Phrases, always did it with a
design to subvert the Truth. But, if it be Blasphemous to detect the fraudulent
Practice of Heretics, what Fence can we have against a Vitalis, a Biddle, a
Socinian or Arian? I might enlarge and expose, but I will forbear, and Apply my
self to the Consideration of the next.

The Seventh Objection.
Mr. Lobb leaves out a considerable word in his translating a part of the
Scotch Confession p. 81. -- There Is word [QUASI] which he did not think for his
purpose to English. He ought to have said, And to appear [as it were] in our
Person, that is, that Christ appeared not properly in our Person.

Reply.
1. When I did, in answer to the Request of several learned and judicious
Brethren, undertake to ^^amine the Writings of Mr. W. I found his Attempts to
be so like, what had been used by Men ^^ound in the Faith, who have made it
their Business, for a while to conceal their own Notions, and ^^em to quarrel
rather with the Terms and Phrases ^osen by the Orthodox to Explain the Truth;
than ^ith the Truth it self; that I could do no less than ^^ke notice of it to
my Brethren, who having not ^^en so forward, as I think they should, to give
^^eck to his Career, have (though not designedly) ^^couraged him and his
Partisans, to make further ^^cursions on the controverted Terms and Phrases.
^^d insinuate, that the whole contest is but about ^ords.

2. This being the way and method of my Oppo^^^s, I did in my Defense,
carefully endeavor to ^^ulcate it, that we contend for the controverted
^^rases, only, as they are expressive of what is es^^^tial to a real, proper
and plenary Satisfaction to Gods ^^tice for our Sins, so that in good earnest,
the ^ontention is about the great and necessary Doctrine (...) Christ's
Satisfaction, and for the Terms and Phrases (...) otherwise than as they are
expressive of this ^octrine.

3. That I might bring our true and genuine ^^nse into so clear a Light, as not
to leave the least ^adow of Reason for one doubting thought, ^out what it was I
expressly declared, That if I did but direct to the Confession, where either a
^roper Satisfaction is asserted, or, where it is said, that Christ, as our
Surety suffered for us; or that Christ suffered in our Place and Stead, or
stood in our Person when he died; it might I hoped, satisfy any unprejudiced
Person; that the Phrases contended for, are in our Confessions, that is, The
thing they signify, and for which we plead, is there; thereby showing, that it
is the Doctrine, which these Terms and Phrases do most aptly, and with the
greatest Clearness and Distinction, convey unto our Understandings, that we are
for.

5. That these Terms and Phrases are not of our Invention, but have been (as I
have in my Defense unanswerably proved) used by the Orthodox in their
Opposition unto the Arminians and Socinians, in a Sense known both to our
Divines and their Adversaries. And that it has been the trick of Heretics and
their Favorers, to raise Doubts and Scruples about their meaning and
usefulness; As, on the other hand, it has been the constant Practice of the
Church (as I have already suggested) to defend them, -- as they are most apt to
explain the Truth, and distinguish it from Error.

For which Reason, as soon as I have cleared my Translation of the Scotch
Confession, and detected the Impertinence and Folly of some other Cavils, I
will go on to the second Point I have proposed to discourse of, and show, that
the Controversy I have with Mr. W. is about the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction; that the Difference is Real, in an Article that affects the
Vitals of Religion. But,

6. The Phrase of [Christs sustaining our Person] has been generally received
by the Orthodox, as expressive of what is Essential, unto a real and Proper
Satisfaction, even of what Christ did, to the end, he might appear before Gods
Tribunal, under the Guilt of our Sins, and bear a proper Punishment for them.
To suppose the Lord Christ to be guilty in (...) his own Person, is as if it
had been said, He had been in himself a Sinner, unclean, unholy: But to
consider him as our Surety, sustaining the Person of Sinners, and so to charge
on him the Guilt of ^^r Sins, cannot in the least defile or pollute his ^oly
and righteous Soul. It has been therefore ^^firmed by the Orthodox, that the
Lord Jesus ^^stained his own and our Person. As considered in his own Person,
he is most remote from the Guilt ^^d Filth of Sin. As standing in our Person,
so he was covered with the Guilt of our Iniquities, though ^ot touched with the
least Moral Filth.

7. The Phrase of Christ's sustaining our Person, ^ust be taken in Sensu forensi
in Law-Sense, importing, that as a Surety does in foro soli, represent the
^^ebtor, so the Lord Jesus Christ, when at the ^ribunal of the Father,
represented those Sinners, those Redemption and Salvation he had undertaken,
^^d whether it be said, that Christ does put on, or ^lain, or bear our Person;
the meaning is the same, and they who speak, as if these three words of [
putting on, bearing and sustaining] the Person of Sinners, had as many different
meanings; do talk as (...) they understood not the genuine Import of the
^hrase. The same is true of the Latin Phrase, Christus sustinuit Personam
nostram; Christus sustinuit quodammodo, seu, quasi Personam nostram] or the
English, [Christ did sustain our Person, Christ sustain^^ as it were our
Person] the signification is the same, ^or whether quodammodo or quasi be added
or not, the meaning is, That Christ did in Sensu forensi bear ^ur Person. Take
the word [Person] in Law-Sense and there is no need of the word quodammodo or
quasi; but if the word Person, Import a natural ^r proper Person, then to
ascertain the meaning to be Forensic, it is requisite to add, either quasi or
quodammodo: For, Persona moralis est quasi Persona propria. And accordingly our
Divines, do indifferently use the Phrase, with or without quasi or quodammodo;
for whether they use either of these words or not, the Sense is known to be the
same, and the meaning of them who have it, and who have it not is, That Christ
took on him our Person in Sensu forensi, in Law Sense, as I have cleared it in
my Defense p. 24, 25, etc. so that I have not the least reason to scruple the
adding that considerable word [quasi,] and for the sake of a weak Brother am
content to do it, at any time when desired. For,

8. If the words [Christ sustained our Person] signify somewhat really
different from [ Christ's sustaining as it were our Person] then it must be
owned, that many Orthodox Divines, who have been thought to be of a mind, do
really differ in this Point from each other. And many learned Persons, who
express themselves with the greatest accuracy and caution, affirming sometimes,
that Christ sustained our Person, and at other times as it were our Person, do
really differ from themselves, particularly Calvin, who on 2 Cor. 5.21. says,
[That Christ did susciper^ quodammodo personam nostram] and on Gal. 3.13*
[personam nostram susceperat,] quarreled with himself or at least either the
Reverend Mr. Poole, or Marlorat did misrepresent Calvin on 2 Cor. 5.21. For as
Marlorat gives the Sense of Calvin thus, personam nostram quodammodo suscepit
Christus, ut Reus nostr^ nomine fieret, and tanquam Peccator judicaretur, no^
propriis sed alienis Peccatis; so Mr. Poole thus, Christus autem Personam
nostram suscepit, ut Reus nostr^ nomine fieret, and tanquam Peccator
judicaretur. So that the learned Mr. Poole is fallen into the very Error, Mr.
W. and his Defendor charge on me; for as I am accused for leaving out that
considerable word [quasi.] Mr. Poole has left out as considerable a quodammodo.
But whether Mr. P. or these Gentlemen be the most skilled in the Latin Tongue
and the Civil Law, is not over difficult to determine. Once more,

9. My Learned Adversary, Mr. W. adds, that I ought to have said. [And to
appear [as it were] in our Person, that is, Christ appeared not properly in our
Person.] To which I answer,

1. What he means by this Passage [Christ appeared not properly in our Person,]
is not easy to understand. If he means, that Christ did not take upon him, nor
appear in our natural or proper Person, I have over and over said it, it being
most manifest, that he appeared only in our Legal Person, which is what Mr. W.
does expressly oppose. The thing he is against is, Christ's taking on him our
Person, in Sensu forensi, in Law Sense.

2. This word therefore [properly] if he will in Opposition unto me, abide by
his Notion, that Christ did not take on him our Person in Law Sense, must be
tacked to [Christs appearing,] as if he had said, Christ did not properly
appear before the Judgment Seat of God to answer for our Sins, but only
improperly, or Metaphorically. But,

10. Had it been said, That Christ did as it were, take on him our Legal
Person, 'twould have been to his purpose, and have signified no more than that
Christ did not really and truly take on him our Legal Person. But not a word of
this in the Scotch Confession. There it is clear, that the Lord Jesus did
appear before the Judgment Seat of the Father in our Legal Person, which was
the point for which I produced it. And although the [quasi] is in the Latin, and
[as it were] in the English, yet the Doctrine therein contained, is most
opposite to what is advanced by Mr. W. and his more learned and upright
Coryphaeus, as I hope, to the Conviction of an unbyassed Reader to evince. For
the differences amongst us are real, in matters of the biggest Importance, and
nearest Concernment to our Immortal Souls.

Sect. II. The present Differences more than Verbal, being about an Article,
that affects the Vitals of our Holy Religion.
In my Appeal to the learned Bishop of Worcester, and the Principal of Jesus
College, Oxon, I charged Mr. Baxter, whose Notions Mr. W. labors to
propagate, for denying Christ's sufferings to be properly Paenal. And I have
received a Line from a learned Friend, intimating, that Mr. Alsop has these
words in his late Rhapsodie. The Charge against Mr. Baxter is notoriously
false, all the Authors Tricks to force him to deny the Sufferings of Christ to
be proper Punishments.

In this Charge the Heart of the Controversy betwixt us does lie, and if I
make it good against Mr. Baxter, I doubt not but that my Orthodox Breteren
amongst the Presbyterians, will acquit me from those Censures they now load me
with

The thing that lies on me to prove, is, That Mr. Baxter denies our Sins to
be the meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings; or, that his Sufferings are a
proper Punishment.

That this Charge sounds harsh in the Ears of the Orthodox, who do not only
think highly of him, for the Services he did in confuting the real Antinomians,
but also for his exemplar Piety, and in some Instan^es uncommon self denial.
For, though they have ^een of Opinion, that in opposing one extreme, he ^eemed
to verge too much toward the other, and perhaps to fall in with Amyrald, yet
they ^ever thought that in the Doctrine of our Sa^iours Satisfaction, he left
Grotius and fell in with Episcopius his Disciples. It lies on me therefore to
^roduce very clear and substantial Proof to support my Charge. And that Mr.
Alsop and his Associates ^ay be the more fully convinced, that I am far from
Tricks to force Mr. Baxter, to deny the Suffer^ngs of Christ to be proper
Punishments; I will make (...) my endeavor to show, that in the controverted
^oint about Christ's Satisfaction, he forsook Grotius and the generality of the
Reformed, asserting as his ^ated Judgment, 'That our Sins, were not the
meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings; That no Sufferings are properly
Paenal, but what are infliced on the Delinquent himself, that when Parents or
Princes sin^ and their Children or Subjects suffer, their Sufferings are but
Improperly or Analogically Poenal; and that therefore Christ not being the
actual Transgressor, could not be in a proper Sense punished for our Sins; That
properly speaking he did not satisfy the violated Law; And agreeably adds,
that the Sufferings were exacted by God, not as he was a Rector, as such, but
as a Rector supra Leges, and as an offended Lord, and Benefactor. And, that I
may be the more clear in this attempt, I will show; how exact the Agreement
between Mr. B. Crellius, Episcopius, Curcellius and Limborch is, and how full a
Confutation the Answers of Grotius to Socinus, of the Bishop of Worcester unto
Crellius, and of the Principal of Jesus Oxon unto the Disciples of Episcopius,
are, of the Principles which Mr. Baxter has advanced.

Subsect. I. Of the Meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings.
1. That Mr. Baxter denies our sins to be the near impulsive, and proper
meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings.
1. It Is well known to the Learned, That if Christ's suffering be not ex
obligatione Legis, and by virtue of the Sanction of the Law, sin cannot be the
near impulsive, or proper meritorious Cause of them: For, as an universal and
perfect Obedience to the Praeceptive part of the Law, as it respects the
Promissary Part, would, according to the Rules of distributive Justice, have
been the meritorious Cause of the Promised reward, in like manner Sin, the
transgression of the Precept, as it respects the Paenal Sanction, is the
meritorious Cause of the threatened Sufferings. If then I clear it, that Mr. B.
is of Opinion, That Christ's sufferings are not Ex obligatione Legis, it must be
acknowledged, that he denies our sins to be their meritorious Cause, which I
hope to prove, even to Mr. Alsop's Conviction, and moreover, to evince it that
he does expressly declare, that our sins were not the meritorious Cause of
Christ's sufferings. For,

2. Mr. B. in his sixth Determination, which is in the first Chapter of the
third Part of his Methodus, after he had set down his Distinctions between the
Law of innocent Nature, and the Law, peculiar to the Mediator; And considering
the Law in the first Sense, which he says obliged Christ himself, as Man, and
all others, even sinners, he adds another Distinction between the Obligation of
this Law, as a Remote, and as a near Cause, and declares his Judgment thus.

1. 'The Law of Nature, although it did oblige both Christ, and us unto
Obedience, yet, it did only oblige us, not Christ, unto Punishment. The Law
obliges not an innocent Person to Punishment, it condemns not the Just.

2. 'That the Law of Grace obliged Christ neither to Obedience, nor to
Punishment.

3. 'By the Law, peculiar to the Mediator, called the Covenant, between the
Father and the Son, Christ was obliged to suffer Punishment for Sinners,
namely, by his Consent and proper Sponsion, and the Fathers Will and
Commandment. From this Law the near obliging Cause of Christ's suffering
Punishment had its Rise.

4. 'By the Law of Nature, obliging us sinners unto Punishment, Christ was not
directly obliged to Punishment; However, it was the occasion of his Punishment,
and the Obligation we lay under was ^he Remote Cause of Christ's Obligation,
for, if the Law had not condemned us, Christ had never undertaken, or suffered
a vicarious Punishment. So (...) Mr. B.

3. From what Mr. B. has so freely declared, it is ^ident he is of Opinion, That
the Obligation Christ (...) under to suffer, arises not from that Law we
violated; but from the mediatorial Convenant, and ^at the Obligation to
Punishment, which is by ^^rtue of the Sanction of the Law we violated, under
which we all are by Nature) is but an ^ccasion or Remote Cause, and therefore
our sins ^e not the near impulsive, and proper meritorious ^^use of Christ's
sufferings, which is conform to that he has in his other Writings, not only in
his Posthumous Discourse of Universal Redemption, but in the Preface to his
Confession of Faith, page 4. where he says, That as Christ could not take upon
himself the same Numerical Guilt, which lay on us, so neither could he take
upon himself Guilt of the same sort, as having not the same sort of Foundation,
or Efficient; Ours arising from the Merit of our sins, and the Commination of
the Law, and his being rather occasioned, than meritted by our sin, and
occasioned by the Laws threatening of us, both which are as we may call them,
but ^rocauses, as to him, etc. And in his Catho. Theol. Part II. Page 78.
Christ suffered not by that Obligation which bound us to suffer.

4. These Passages I have mentioned do sufficiently clear it, That Mr. B. owns
not, that our sins were the near impulsive, or meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings, the most he will yield being this, viz. That our sins were the
Occasion, or Remote Impulsive Cause, or the Pro-cause, somewhat in the place of
a meritorious Cause, which is no more than Socinus, Crellius and their
Followers do grant, as I will immediately show.

II. The Socinians do grant, That our sins are a Remote Impulsive Cause, or
mere Occasion of Christ's sufferings.
1. That the Socinians make so large a Concession as this unto us, is evident
from most of their Writings. Crellius against Grotius confesses it, Fatemur,
Peccata nostra, posito Dei de salute nobis danda -- decreto, eatenus etiam
fuisse Impulsivam mortis Christi Causam, etc. Ad partic. 2. Cap. 1. But,

2. There is so much to this Purpose in the Answer the Learned Bishop of
Worcester gives, to what Crellius has on this Point, that I will say no more of
(...) in this place, but proceed to the Proposal of that the Bishop offers
unto your Consideration.

III. What Mr. Baxter and the Socinians hold about our sins being only a Remote
Impulsive Cause, or Occasion of Christ's sufferings, opposed by the Orthodox,
particularly by the Bishop of Worcester.
1. The Learned Bishop gives the Sense of the Socinians about the Impulsive
Cause of Christ's sufferings, assuring us, 'That though Crellius Attributes ^he
sufferings of Christ merely to Acts of Dominion, without any respect to sin,
yet elsewhere he will allow a Respect, that was had to sin, antecedently to the
Sufferings of Christ, and that the Sins of Men were the Impusive cause of them.
And although Socinus in one place utterly denies any Lawful Antecedent Cause of
the Death of Christ besides the Will ^f God and Christ; yet Crellius in his
Vindication, ^ith, by Lawful cause he meant Meritorious; or ^^ch, upon
supposition of which he ought to Die: for elsewhere, he makes Christ to die for
the Cause or by the occasion of our Sins, which is the same, that Crellius
means by an Impulsive or Procatartick Cause. Of Christ's Suffer. Cap. 2. Sect. 2.

2. To this Notion of Socinus and Crellius the Bishop, who thoroughly searched
into this Controversy, Answers, 'That we understand not an impulsive Cause in
so remote a Sense, as though our Sins were (...) mere Occasion of Christ's
Dying, because the Death of Christ was one Argument; among many others ^o
believe his Doctrine, the Belief of which would make Men leave their Sins. But
we contend for a nearer and more proper Sense.

But, when we come to consider that other point, whether Christ's Sufferings
were a proper Punishment: We shall hear further what his Lordship says to this
particular. For he rightly informs us, That if the Sufferings of Christ be to
be taken under the Notion of Punishment, then our Adversaries grant, That our
Sins must be an impulsive Cause of them, in another Sense than they understand
it. What that other Sense is, will be shown under the next Head, about
Punishment, where you will meet with enough to satisfy you, That the impulsive
Cause, which they will grant on a Supposition, that Christ's Sufferings are
properly Paenal, is a near impulsive and proper meritorious Cause.

3. Dr. Edwards does also, in his Preservative against Socinianism, Part 2. p.
94. speak very distinctly to this thing. For, says he, That Christ dyed for
us, are the plain words of Scripture, He gave himself for us, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians.
5.25. 1 These. 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And this, not only in general for our
good, but he was delivered up for our Offenses, Romans 4.25. He dyed for our
Sins, 1 Cor. 15.3. So to the same purpose, and for the same Reason, he is said
to dye for the Ungodly, Romans 5.6. And it is mentioned, as the great Instance of
Gods Love to us; that whilst we were yet Sinners Christ dyed for us, ver. 10.
of the same Chap. All which Phrases of dying for Sins and Sinners, plainly
denote to us, that Sin in those places, is not to be considered as the Final,
but as the impulsive and meritorious Cause of Christ's Death.

Thus you see the Agreement between Mr. Baxter, Socinus and Crellius about our
Sins, being the remote impulsive Cause, or mere occasion of Christ's Sufferings,
to be real; and that he has herein left the Orthodox, such as Grotius, the
Bishop, and Dr. Edwards is clearly proved. I will therefore consider, what is
said of Christ's Sufferings being Paenal.

Subject II. Of the Paenalness of Christ's Sufferings.
1. Mr. Baxter denies Christ's Sufferings to be a proper Punishment.
1. Mr. Baxter, in his Methodus, proposes this Question.: Whether the Passion
or Sufferings of Christ, were properly and formally a Punishment? and his
Determination is such as clears it, that he holds Christ's Sufferings, to be
only Improperly, Analogically and Materially, not properly and formally a
Punishment.

2. To evince thus much, I will distinctly con^^der what he has premised, and
show how he determines it.

1. In his Premises, he tells us, 'That a proper Punishment is a natural Evil,
inflicted for a moral Evil. The Matter is Affliction, or a natural Evil
inflicted. The Form is the Relation of this Matter to its meritorious Cause.
The Fault (or moral Evil) is either really such, or by a wrong Judgment: and so
Punishment is distinguished into that which is due, (...) Justitia; or that
which is undue, ex Injustitia: The first is a Punishment in a proper Sense; the
^ther is a Punishment, Analogice, and only in ^he sense of a Judge, and others
unjustly judging. ^he word [Punishment] therefore is ambiguous. Punishment in
the first, and most famous Sense is a natural Evil on the Delinquent himself.
Punishment, (...) a secondary and Analogical Sense, is a natural Evil; which
does not directly, but mediately only, and by accident flow from a moral Evil.
This Punishment 'is twofold.

The one which naturally follows the Sin of another; that is, from that natural
proximity there i^ between the Sufferer and the Sinner. The other, which does
not naturally but by a voluntary Sponsion, so that, by Virtue of the Sponsion,
vicarious Punishments are endured.

2. The Determination is, 1. That Christ wa^ not re vera the Sinner, and
therefore his Suffering were not Penal, in the Primary and most Famou^ Sense.

2. Christ was not in the account of the Father a Sinner. For, God does not
judge falsely, and therefore, he did not suffer an Analogical Punishment, ex
falsa Reputatione Dei.

3. Christ, being miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, could not suffer
Anolagical Punishments for his Parents Sins.

4. Christ, being voluntarius Poenarum Sponsor did, as our Sponsor, suffer
Analogical vicarious Punishments. His Sufferings therefore, as to the Reason of
the thing, were a natural Evil, endured (...) occasion, and causalitate remota
Peccatorum human generis and proxime, from the Obligation of his prope^
Sponsion and Consent.

3. In these Premises, and this Determination, Mr* Baxter freely declares, That
our Sins were but the occasion or remote, not the near impulsive Cause o^
Christ's Sufferings, that his Sufferings were no^ properly and formally, but
only Improperly and Analogically Penal. Yea,

4. There is more in it, he is express, That a proper Punishment cannot be
inflicted on any, but the Delinquent himself. For, says he, Poena in sens^
primo and famosissimo est ipsius Delinquentis malum n^ral^rale. The formal
Nature of Punishment lying in (...) Relation unto Sin as its meritorious Cause,
the Punishment formally considered, cannot he thinks, ^e on any but them, by
whom the Sin is committed; and therefore agreeably enough, in pursuit of his
Principle, He denies the Sufferings of Children and ^ubjects for their Parents
and Princes Sins, to be ^roperly and formally Penal. His distinction is be^ween
Punishment taken properly, in Sensu primo and ^^mosissimo; and in an improper,
secondary, and an Analogical Sense. His Determination, that Punishment (...)
the first sense, is only on him that actually commit^ed the Sin. That there can
be no Punishment ^ut what is deserved; and that no Man can deserve that another
should be punished. That when Pa^ents and Princes sin, and their Children and
Subjects ^uffer, their Sufferings cannot be properly and for^ally Penal;
because they did not commit the Sin, and so could not deserve it: Their
Sufferings therefor can be but improperly and analogically Penal; as ^r. B.
freely owns, when he says, That Poena in ^^nsu secundo and analogico est
duplex. Altera quae pec^atum alterius naturaliter sequitur, id est, ex
proximi^^te naturali patientis ad peccantem, and ita ob peccata ^ominorum
Poenas consequenter patiuntur vernae -- (...) in sensu adhuc pleniore, filius
pro Parentum peccatis (...) Paenas; which he thinks may be called Punish^ent
aptly enough, because they have a relation unto ^^^n, as to an Occasion or
remote meritorious Cause.

2. Mr. Baxter's Agreement with Crellius, about the meritorious Cause of
Christ's Sufferings, and his Sufferings being a proper Punishment.
The Sense of Crellius, being with the greatest ^earness delivered by the
Bishop of W. which (says his Lordship,) will be best done, by laying down his
principles as to the Ju^tice of Punishments, in a more distinct Method than
himself has done: I will show the Agreement there is between Mr. B. and
Crellius, by proposing Crellius his Principles, in the very words of the
learned Bishop; which in his Disc. of Christ's Sufferings, Cap. 3.. 3. you will
find to be thus

1. That no Person can be justly punished, either for his own or another
Fault, but he that has deserved to be punished by some Sin of his own: For, he
still asserts, That the Justice of Punishment arises from his own Fault,
though the actual Punishment may be from another: But he that is punished
without respect to his own Guilt, is punished undeservedly, ^^d he that is
punished undeservedly, is punished unjustly.

2 That Personal Guilt being supposed, one Man's Sin may be the impulsive Cause
of another Punishment, but they cannot be the meritorious. The difference
between them he thus explains, the Cause is that which makes a thing to be; The
impulsive (...) that which moves one to do a thing without any Consideration of
Right that one has to do it; Merit, is that which makes a Man worthy of a
thing either good or bad, and so gives a right to it: if it be good to himself,
if had to him at whose hands he has deserved it. Now he tells us, that it is
impossible* That one Man's Sins should make any other deserve Punment, but the
Person who committed them; but they may impel one to punish another, and that
justly, if the Person has otherwise deserved to be punished, unjustly, if he
has not. The Reason he gives of it is, That the vi^osity of the Act, which is
the proper Cause of Punishment, cannot go beyond the Person of the Offender;
and therefore can oblige none to Punishment, but him that has committed the
Fault. And therefore he asserts, That no Man can be punished beyond the desert
of his own Sins, but there may be sometimes a double impulsive Cause of that
Punishment, viz. his own and other Men's, whereof one made, that they should be
justly punished, the other that they should be actually. But the latter, he
says, always supposes the former, as the Foundation of just Punishment, so
that no part of Punishment, could be executed upon him, wherein his own Sins
were not supposed, as the meritorious Cause of it. Here then you may see, with
what clearness the ^ishop has stated the Principles of Crellius, and if ^ou'll
compare them with what I have taken out of Mr. Baxter's Methodus, you will find
the Agreement to be in the following Instances.

1. That a proper Punishment cannot be inflicted, ^n any but him that committed
the Sin. There ^^n be here no difference between them, unless in ^^is, that
Crellius grants more, and, if I mistake not ^omes nearer to the Orthodox than
either Mr. B. (...) Mr. W. do, when he owns,

1. 'That a remote Conjunction, may be sufficient for a Translation of Penalty,
viz. from one Generation to another.

2. 'That Sins may be truly said, to be punished in others, when the Offenders
themselves may escape Punishment. Thus the Sins of Parents in their Children,
and Princes in their Subjects.

3. 'That an Act of Dominion in some, may be designed as a proper Punishment to
others.

4. 'That the Nature of Punishment is not to be measured by the Sense of it.

When I observe, with what indignation Mr. B. ^xpresseth himself against our
Suffering, or being ^unished in Christ; I cannot but conclude, that herein
Crellius yields more to the Orthodox than Mr. B. does, who, I believe, being
aware that such learned Men as the Bishop of W. would make too great an
Improvement of such Concessions, he would not give the Advantage. For indeed,
the Bishop has well improved what Crellius grants; as is plain from what he
says, in Cap. 3.. 2. Now upon these Concessions, though our Adversaries will
not grant, That Christ was properly punished for our Sins; yet they cannot
deny, but that we may very properly be said, to be punished for our Sins in
Christ; and if they will yield us this, the other may be a Strife about words.
For, surely there may be easily imagined, as great a Conjunction between Christ
and us, as between the several Generations of the Jews* and that last which was
punished in the Destruction of Jerusalem: And though we escape that Punishment
which Christ did undergo, yet w^ might have our Sins punished in him, as well
as Princes theirs, in their Subjects, when they escap^ themselves, etc.

What I have suggested on this Occasion, clear^ it, that Mr. B differs at least
as much if not more from the Orthodox, than Crellius and his Admirers do.

2. They also agree, in holding; That the Sufferings of Children or Subjects,
when their Parents o^ Princes Sin, are not proper Punishments, either o^ the
Children or Subjects, and that Christ's Sufferings because he was not the
Sinner, were not properly Penal.

The Opposition made by the Bishop of Worcester* and the Principal of Jesus,
Oxon, against the Principles, embraced by Mr. Baxter an^ Crellius.
1. The Bishop having given a clear state of the ^rinciples of Crellius in this
matter, as I have alrea^y shown, adds, 'These are his [viz. Crellius] two main
Principles, which we must now thoroughly examine, the main force of his Book
lying in them. But if we can prove, that it has been generally received by the
Consent of Mankind, that a Person may be punished beyond the desert of his own
Actions; if God has justly punished some for the Sins of others, and there be
no Injustice in one Man's Suffering by his own Consent for another, then these
Principles of Crellius, will be found not so firm as he imagins them.

1. That it has been generally received, by the Consent of Mankind, That a
Person may be justly punished beyond the Desert of his own Actions. For which
Pupose, Grotius objected against Socinus (who appealed to the Consent of
Nations, about one being punished for another Fault) that the Heathens did
agree, That Children might be punished for their Parents Faults, and People for
their Princes; and that corporal Punishment might be born, by one for another;
did appear by the Persians punishing the whole Family for the Fault of one. --
In which Cases, (says the Bishop) The Punishment did extend beyond the Desert
of the Person, who suffered it; for no other Reason is assigned of these
Sufferings, besides the Conjunction of the Person or his Consent; but no
antecedent Guilt is supposed as necessary to make the Punishment Just. -- If it
be said that the unjustice lies in this; that such a one suffers undeservedly,
and therefore unjustly; I answer, If it be meant by undeservedly, without
sufficient Cause or Reason of Punishment, then we deny, that such a one does
suffer undeservedly. Immerito in the Greek Glosses is rendered by (...) and
merito by -- (...), and in Cicero, Jure, and merito are most commonly joined
together. So that where there is a Right to punish, and sufficient reason for
it. such a one does not suffer Immerito (i. e.) undeservedly. If it be said,
That such a one is not dignus poena. that implies no more than the other; for
Dignus, or as the Ancients writ it Dicnus, comes from the Greek(...), Jus, as
Vossius tells us, ut dignus sit cui tribui aliquid aequum est: So that where
there is an equity in the thing, there is a Dignity in the Person, or he may be
said to be worthy to undergo it. So far the Bishop, who has cleared it beyond
contradiction, that one may endure a proper Punishment for the sins of another,
and that thus it is in the case of Childrens and Peoples sufferings for their
Parents and Princes fins*

2. The confining a proper and just Punishment to the Person that commits the
sin, denying the sufferings of one for the sin of another to be properl^ penal,
does at once subvert both the Doctrines o^ our Savior's Satisfaction and
Original Sin. For, i^ a Man may not be justly punished beyond the Desert^ of
his own Acts, the Lord Jesus, who never committed sin, could not bear a proper
Punishment, not could any of Adam's Posterity be justly punished for his sin.
In answer hereunto I will give you the sense of the Learned Dr. Edwards, who
expresses himself in these words; Now I say, there has not been (for ought I
know) any Nation, or Kingdom in the World, that has not in some cases and for
some weighty Reasons, thought, and adjudged it lawful to punish one man for the
sins of another. So that over-hastily, and peremptorily; (as the Socinians, and
Remonstrants do) to pronounce the Imputation of Adam's sin, and the punishing
of his Posterity for it Unlawfully, barely for this Reason, that no man can be
justly punished, who was not a Party, and actually engaged in the practice of
the sin, is to contradict the Reason, and condemn the Usage of all Mankind: and
not only so, but as this Position is roundly, and without exception laid down
by them, it tends plainly to overthrow the whole Design of the Gospel, by
denying the sufferings of Christ to have the true Notion of a Punishment,
whereby he satisfied the Justice of God for the sins of Mankind.

In short; The present matter in debate between us, and our Adversaries, turns
upon this point, whether in any case, a person may lawfully, and justly be
punished for a Crime, which he did not personally commit? They deny it, and
condemn the practice as absolutely unlawful: We, on the other hand say, This
may be justly done, and for a proof of the Legality of it, we can produce the
consent of all the most Civilized States and Governments that have been in the
World, who have accounted it in some cases Lawful, and those especially two. 1.
Where there has been the voluntary Offer, and Consent of the Party, as in the
case of Sureties, Hostages, etc. Or, 2. Without that Consent, where there is
either a Natural, or Civil, and Political Union between the Persons offending,
and the Persons punished; such as is that between a King and his Subjects,
Parents and Children. And here we have, which is a consideration of much
greater weight, the particular Direction, and Example of God himself, to
justify and warrant this practice. Saul slew the Gibeonites, and the Sons and
Grandchildren are executed for it, 2 Samuel 21. David sins in numbering the
People, and God sent a Pestilence among his Subjects -- 2 Samuel 24. This and
much more is in Dr. Edwards, his Preservat. part. 2. p. 50, 51, etc. making it
very clear, That one may be properly punished for another sin. And that thus
it is in the case of Christ's suffering for us, and of Childrens and Subjects
suffering for the sins of their Parents, and their Kings.

3. What I have cited out of the writings of these great Men, makes it very
clear, That Mr. Baxter's denying our Sin to be the proper meritorious Cause of
Christ's Sufferings, and his Sufferings to be a proper Punishment; is a manifest
contradicting the Body of Protestant Writers on these Points, as an opposition
to the allowed Custom of Mankind, and the plainest Texts of Scripture. And his
affirming that a proper Punishment, cannot be justly inflicted on any but him
who committed the Sin; and that when they, who by their own Actions have not
deserved a Punishment do suffer, their Sufferings are no otherwise Penal than
materially, improperly and analogically, he agrees with Socinus, Crellius,
Episcopius and his Disciples is most evident; and what the learned Bishop and
Principal have insisted on, in their answer unto our Socinian and Episcopian
Adversaries, is a most direct and exact Confutation of Mr. Baxter.

4. These things are so plain, that I doubt not of the concurrence of an
impartial learned Reader. However for the sake of Mr. Alsop, and others less
studied or prejudiced Divines, I will offer sundry other Considerations for the
fuller Proof, that Mr. Baxter differs from his Orthodox Brethren, and falls in
with Episcopius and his Disciples in the Doctrine of our Saviors Satisfaction.

Subsect. 4.
Further Proof that Mr. B. has left the common Doctrine of Protestants in the
Article of Christ's Satisfaction.

Consideration I.
1. It must be acknowledged, That if Christ's Suf^erings were properly Penal,
they would so far have ^nswered the Obligations of the violated Law, that (...)
might be said, properly speaking, Christ satisfied the ^aw it self. On the
other hand, in case it shall ap^ear, that Mr. B. denies Christ's satisfying the
Law ^^self in a proper Sense, it must be yielded, that he ^enyeth Christ's
Sufferings to be a proper Punishment. The Connection that there is between the
one and ^he other, makes good what I herein affirm, and whoever will search
closely into this Controversy, will find, That the true Reason, why Christ's
satisfying the Law in a proper Sense is denied, is because (...) Satisfaction
cannot in this Sense, be made to the Law any otherwise than by Christ's enduring
a proper Punishment. To satisfy the Law it self, is to answer the Obligation
of the Law, and suffer by Virtue of its Sanction, and nothing more evident,
than that Sufferings by Virtue of its Sanction, are a proper Punishment. But,

2. Mr. B. is as express in denying Christ's satisfyng the Law, as he is in
denying his Sufferings to be a proper Punishment. This Charge has so much
Reason for its support, that whoever will consult his Methodus, p. 3. cap. 1.
Determ. 2. will see enough to convince him, there he will meet with this
Question, Whether it may be properly said, that Christ satisfied the Law it
self, as it obliged Sinners to Punishment, to which he adds in a Parenthesis
(etiam si eam non patiendo implevit?) or rather ought we not to say, That
Christ satisfied not the Law, but the Law giver, as above his Laws?

3. That we may with the more distinction, take in his genuine Sense, it must
be noted. 1. That Mr. B. is of opinion, there was a dispensing with the Law,
not only as to the Person suffering, but as to the Penalty suffered; that the
Sufferings of our Savior were not by Virtue of the Penal Sanction of the Law,
and therefore could be in no sense a fulfilling that part of the Law.

2. That he considers not God in exacting Satisfaction, as a Rector qua
talis, whose part it is to see, that the Law be satisfied, but as a Rector qua
supra Leges, and God considered as such may be satisfied, although no proper
Punishment be endured.

3. Thus much premised, we shall find, that he uses the word [Satisfaction] in
a very large and comprehensive sense, for whatever answers some remote ends of
the Law. The Sanction of the Law is essential to it, and cannot be satisfied
but by sufferings that are properly a Punishment. But such ends of the Law as
are not essential thereunto, and only remote, may be obtained without bearing
the Punishment, or indeed without enduring any Sufferings at all.

4. That Mr. B. aims at no more by his Notion of Christ's Satisfaction, than an
obtaining some remote ends of the Law; is manifest from the very passage my
Friend tells me, Mr. Al^op refers unto, to prove my Charge to be notoriously
false; and a careful observing its genuine Import, which will be very plain if
we consu't that enti^e Paragraph, may convince an impartial Mind; That Mr. B.
has different Apprehensions in th^se Points, from his Orthodox Brethren: For,
s^^^h he, ^ocutione remota, and lata Christ us dici pos^^^ Legis fines remotas,
ipst non essentiales, obtinend^^ ei satisfecisse: In a remote, large Sense,
Christ may be said to satisfy the Law. But how? not by obtaining any End
essential to the Law, but the remote Ends of the Law; for its immediately
added, 'That Gods hatred of Sin and his Justices are no less demonstrated by
Christ's Satisfaction, at least in a matter no less congruous for obtaining all
the ends of Government, than if the Sinners themselves had been damned. If we
compare this clause of the Paragraph with the foregoing part; we shall find,
that what he says, of [all the Ends of Government] must ^e understood, as he
expresses it of [ all the remote ^nds of the Law,] which are not essential to
the Law, and may in Mr. Baxters opinion, be obtained without Christ's bearing a
proper Punishment, the true evincement of Gods hatred to Sin.

5. That I take Mr. B. right will further appear, ^y considering the Paragraph
next after this, where ^e distinguishes between the Near and the Remote Ends
of the Law, affirming, 'That the Finis proximus, which does enjoin Obedience,
and threatens a punishment for Disobedience, is a part of the Law, and it must
not be said that Christ did properly satisfy this End. But there is the Remote
End of the Law, namely, the prevention of sin, the exercise, and preservation
of Humane Righteousness, and demonstration of Divine Justice, which is not the
Law it self, although it is so termed by the Jurists, because these Ends may be
obtained by other Means than by Punishing. So that it is manifest, he holds,
that these Ends might be obtained by the Lord Jesus, though he never bore the
punishment of our sins. The Satisfaction then that Mr. B. is for, is of another
nature, than what is embraced by the Reformed; It is what is done without
Christ's suffering a proper Punishment, and without a proper satisfying of the
Law; For, says he, properly speaking, Christ did not Satisfy the Law it self,
nor did he properly satisfy the Near End of the Law, viz. the ^oenal part.
Met. p. 3. c. 1. p. 47.

A Second Consideration.
2. The very Notion Mr. B. has of Christ's Satisfaction is, not only different
from what is embraced by the Orthodox, but such as is so far from comprizing
within its compass Christ's suffering a proper Punishment, as to exclude it: It
is what can be made without the Lord Christ's taking on him the Guilt of our
sins; and what is inconsistent with Christ's making a proper Satisfaction to
the Law.

1. Thus much he endeavors to prove from the definition he gives of
Satisfaction, which is thus, Satisfactio stricte sumpta, est Redditio
Aequivalentis indebiti pro ipso debito; vel tantundem pro eodem, and by
Indebitum, he means somewhat of a distinct nature from what the Law exacts;
somewhat that is not properly Poenal, and consonantly by the Equivalens, or
Tantundem, he intends what is very different from what is Received and Believed
by the Reformed. For, whereas the Equivalent, in their Judgment, respects the
Punishment we deserved, and in those instances in which it is not the same, it
does in its Valuation bear a just proportion thereunto; His Equivalent does not
respect the Sufferings we deserved, but the Remote Ends of the Law, and as it is
adjusted to those Ends, though there be nothing of the Nature of Punishment in
it, yet is it an Equivalent.

2. That this is his sense of an Equivalent, is manifest from his asserting,
that Qui fines Legis Remotos alio Modo quam Puniendo obtinet, Tantundem
praestare putatur, acsi Peccatorem Punivisset; ubi sup. p. 47. This account Mr.
B. gives of Satisfaction, is in the first Argument, he urges to prove, that
properly speaking, Christ did not satisfy the Law it self. What is, (says he)
impossible, Christ did not do; but to satisfy the Law, strictly speaking, is
impossible. The Minor he thus proves; Satisfactio stricte sumpta est Redditio
Aequivalentis indebiti, pro ipso debito; At impossible est ipsam eandem Legem
(de qua loquimur) commutare idem pro aequivalente. This is his Argument, in
which lies the main stress of his Cause, which methinks may be soon enervated,
if we consider, as indeed we must, that the Poenal Sanction of the Law is not
Abrogated; that it is only Relaxed; that the Relaxation is not of the Formal
Nature of the Poenalty suffered, but does respect the Person suffering; and
that though the Relaxing be an act of Dominion, yet God exacts and receives
satisfaction, is a Rector qua talis, and not as a Rector supra Leges.

3. The Learned Bishop of Worcester against Crellius, cap. 4. 5. has with
great clearness shown, in what respects the Sufferings of Christ were the same
with what we deserved, and in what Instances not. That they were so far the
same as to be a proper Punishment: and in those circumstances, wherein there
was a difference, there was an Aequivalent. No more is necessary (says his
Lordship) to the delivery of another Person, than the satisfying the Ends of
the Law, and Government. And, if that may be done by an Aequivalent Suffering,
though not the same in all respects, then it may be a proper Surrogation. If
David had obtained his wish, that he had Died for his Son Absalom, it had not
been necessary in order to his Sons escape, that he had hanged by the hair of
the head, as his Son did. And therefore, when the Lawyers say, Subrogatum sapit
Naturam ejus in cujus locum subrogatur: Covarruvias tells us, it is to be
understood secundum Primordialem Naturam, non secundum Accidentalem; from
whence it appears that all Circumstances are not necessary to be the same in
Surrogation, but that the Nature of the Punishment remain the same. But,

4. Mr. B. has not in his Aequivalent, so much as the Formal Nature of
Punishment, nor are his Aequivalent Sufferings of Christ satisfactory, as they
respect the Proxime End of the Law, to wit, the Commination, or Sanction; but
as they are adjusted to obtain such other Ends of the Law as are not Essential
to the Law: and herein also lies the Principal Reason of Christ's
Satisfaction, according to the Notion he has framed of it. Thus in one place (
viz. p. 53.) he says; And because the reason of Satisfaction, lies in its
being the Payment of an Aequivalent, instead of the Debt it self; and the
Aequivalent consists in its Aptitude to obtain the same Ends of Government, and
because One End of Government is the demonstration of God's Punishing Justice,
and another End the demonstration of God's Sanctity and Love, and the
vindication of the Honor of his Law; and because God does no less effectually
show his Punishing Justice in the Punishment of Christ, than if he had
destroyed the World, and also has no less evidently shown his Sanctity, his
Love of Goodness, and the Equity and Perfection of his Law by the Perfect
Holiness and Obedience of Christ, than if we our selves had perfectly obeyed
it, it follows, that the punishment of Christ is satisfaction, and the
Meritorious Goodness of Christ is satisfaction, but not in the same sense with
the former. Thus he, who indeed speaks of Punishing Justice, which cannot be
meant in any other sense than that, in which he takes Punishment it self, in
this Controversy. I doubt not but that he was of Opinion. that by Extrinsecal
Denomination, God's Justice may by us, through our weakness, be distinguished
according to its respect to diversity of Objects, by inadaequate conceptions;
and that the Punishing Justice, he speakss of, in this place, connoting only an
improper Punishment, is from that connotation, by him denominated Punishing
Justice in as improper a sense, as he takes the Punishment it self to be.

5. That I have not misrepresented Mr. B. in the account I have given of his
Notion about Punishing Justice, is evident to me from the following
considerations.

1. Punitive Justice, as it imports a Perfection, Natural in God, discovers it
self by inflicting proper Punishments on Offenders. The Sufferings that are but
materially, improperly, and analogically poenal, called by Mr. Baxter as well
as by Limborch, Vicarious Punishments, that is, Sufferings, which, though they
are not themselves Punishments, are nevertheless in their ^lace and stead, flow
not from Punitive Justice, taken ^roperly, and are not Effects, or discoveries
of it, but ^t most they are and can be Acts only of Dominion. And that we might
not mistake Mr. Baxter, when he mentions the Demonstration of God's Punisheng
Ju^tice, as if he had taken it in the same sense the Or^hodox use the words, he
closes the Paragraph, in which they lie thus; Sed breviter, and Simpliciter
^icendum est, Deum peccata, and poenas nobis remittere, ^^ia Christus hoc
Meruit, and perfectione habituali, and (...) actuali, and Paenas vicarias
subeundo. Thus you ^e, he reduces all he had said before to the Merit ^f
Christ's Habitual and Actual Perfections, and to ^is Suffering Vicarious
Punishments, that is, mate^^al, improper and analogical Punishments, instead of
^^ch as are properly poenal; and therefore by Punitive ^^stice, he cannot mean
what the Orthodox do. ^ut,

2. The reducing all to Merit does further con^^m my sense of Mr. B. who in
'this very page assu^eth us, That the Mediator could not procure our
Justification, and Salvation any otherwise than by way of Merit, and because
nothing can more effectually Merit from the most Holy God, than that which does
mostly Please Him, and nothing more Pleasing to him than Goodness, Holiness,
Love, and Justice, it follows that Christ could not more effectually Merit our
Justification and Salvation, than by Goodness, Holiness, Love, Justice and
Obedience; and, by this method turning a proper Punishment into mere
Sufferings, (which, as divested of their Poenal Nature, can no otherwise fall
under the consideration of a Law, but as enjoined by a Precept, which, he
says, belongs to the Mediatorial Law,) these Sufferings also are made to be
but Acts of Obedience, and, in conjunction with other Mediatorial Acts of the
same nature, are affirmed to be Meritorious; and this Merit resolved, in its
Last Result, into Divine Pleasure; I say, in the Last Result, because, he does
not only assign unto the Divine Pleasure, the admission of another on our
behalf; but will have it, that the Merit it self is of that kind, which is no
further Meritorious than as it does, and only as it does satisfy the Divine
Pleasure, for as it is Pleasing, so it merits, and proportionably as it is most
Pleasing, so it is most meritorious; whereby Distributive Justice altogether, as
well as Punitive, (which is but one Branch of it) is excluded from having any
Glory upon the account of what Christ did and suffered, the whole of the Merit
being from Divine Grace, and Acceptance: So far is Mr. B. from owning, that
Punitive Justice, taken properly is satisfied by the sufferings of Christ.
Besides,

3. Mr. Baxter insisting so very much on Satisfaction, as its Principal Reason
lies in its aptitude to obtain the Remote Ends of the Law, leaves no room for
doubt concerning his sense in this matter. For seeing the Formal Reason of
Satisfaction, lies in the Aptitude of what Christ did or suffered, to obtain
some Remote Ends, which, of what nature soever, so long as they are Remote from
the Sanction, they cannot be satisfactory in the sense embraced by the
Reformed, and the sufferings themselves can be no otherwise a satisfaction,
than any other eximious work may be: and any other excellent work done by him,
may be as truly satisfactory, as his sufferings; a Notion which he freely
acknowledges, p 55. where he says, Rector, qua supra Leges, satisfactionem
recipere potest, etiam per opus aliquod Praestantissimum.

A third Consideration.
3. That Mr. B. denies Christ's Sufferings to be properly Penal, is further
evident from his holding, that Christ's Satisfaction is not made to God as a
Rector qua talis, but to him as he is a pars offensa; an injured Lord and
Benefactor.

1. The learned Grotius, in the account he gives of the (...), the Principal
and Foundation Error, that runs through the Socinian Scheme, says, That it
lies in their considering God in this great Transaction, as a pars offensa, a
Creditor, a Lord, or Sovereign; and in Opposition unto them, he proves, That to
punish is not an Act competent to an offended Party, as such; that naturally
the Pars offensa, as such, has no right in Punishment. That to inflict
Punishment belongs primo and per se to a Rector, as such; and that this right
in the Rector, is not a right of absolute Dominion or of Credit; That God in
exacting Satisfaction, is to be considered only as a Rector, whence it is, that
the Sufferings Christ endured when he made Satisfaction, must be owned to be an
Act of Justice, and properly Penal.

2. Mr. Baxter on the other hand, is as express, That God is not to be
considered only as a Rector qua talis but as a Rector supra Leges, as a Pars
offensa, and as an injured Lord and Benefactor; that properly speaking, we must
not say; That Christ satisfied the Legistator, qua talis tantum, but the
Rector, qua supra Leges. That although God considered only as a Rector exacts
Punishments formally, as such, yet God requires them qua Satisfactory, not only
as a Rector, but as a Lord and Benefactor, vindicating his own Glory, see Meth.
Part 3. p. 47, 51, 55.

3. The learned Mr. B. being so full in the declaration of his Mind in this
Point, and over and over averring, that Deum Satisfactionem recepisse, non
tantum qua Judicem, sed etiam, qua Dominum and Benefactorem offensum; we have
the greatest reason to conclude, that the Satisfaction he is for, cannot (as
Grotius well observes) be at all unto God as a Rector qua talis. Non potest
enim idem duobus diversis tribui qua talibus; nor can it include any thing
within its compass, that is, properly Penal, so long as the Act of punishing
does not belong only to a Rector as such.

4. That I take Mr. B. right, appears to me very manifest, from what he has in
the first Part of his Methodus cap. 15. where he says, That after Grotius his
Book de Satisfactione had been published, 'twas made a Question, Whether God
punishes Sinners either as an absolute Lord and Sovereign, or as pars offensa;
or only as a Rector secundum Leges? To which he distinctly answers in these
words, passing by the Opinions of others. The Truth is, 1. No Sins do really
hurt God. However, 2. They are injurious to God. 3. There is a threefold Right
of God, quantum in se, struck at. 1. A Right of Dominion by alienating and
denying his own quod usum. 2. A Right of Empire by Rebellion, and a denial of
that Obedience which is due unto him. 3. The Right of Friendship by with
holding their Love, and by an ungrateful abuse of his Benefits. 4. These
violated Rights, God may vindicate in each of these Relations. 5. God therefore
is an Actor, not only as he is a Rector, but as he is a pars offensa, although
not realiter Lasa. 6. Thus much appears with the greatest clearness, because.
although the public Good is the end of humane Regiment, yet the Glory of God
himself, his Complacency or Pleasure, is the end of Divine Government and of
every thing besides. But, 7. To judge formally, belongs to a Rector as such,
and not to a Lord or Benefactor as such. 8. However, when God judges he does
not divest himself of the Relations of a Lord and Benefactor; but these
Relations are to be considered, as connoted and inseparable in a Judge. 9. When
God is called pars offensa, we do not mean pars aequalis, or one offended
against that Justice, which is merely commutative: But we intend no more than
the supreme Lord of all, The Rector and Benefactor is offended by them who are
his own, his Subjects, but disobedient and ungrateful, Isa. 1.2, 3, 4. Ezekiel.
18.4. God therefore does exact Punishment not only for conserving the order and
good of the World; but also finally for his own Glory, to demonstrate his
Holiness and Justice. Because his Glory is the end of his Government, God
therefore does exact Punishments, not only as a Rector but as an injured Lord
and Benefactor. And although he judges formally, as a Rector secundum Leges,
prius a se datas, yet as connoting his other Relations, that is, as a Rector
who is an offended Lord and Father. So far Mr. Baxter, who scruples not to
declare, that God in requiring Satisfaction, is not to be considered only as a
Rector secundum Leges, as such, but as an injured Sovereign and Benefactor, and
as a Rector supra Leges, whence it must be acknowledged, that Christ's
Sufferings could not be properly Paenal. That they are no other than what are
exacted by an injured Lord and Benefactor, or as a Rector supra Leges, who, as
such, exacts not Punishment, formally as such; and that therefore the
punishment can be but improper and analogical, as he explains it, p. 341. where
he freely declares, That although Punishment, strictly taken, is only the Effect
of a Rector, yet a Friend, or Benefactor, wearied with Ingratitude, may Execute
Analogical Punishments. Thus, for a Friend, not to love, A Benefactor, ceasing
to bestow his Favors; a Father, withholding the Effects and Tokens of his
Paternal Affections; are their ways of Punishment. And because God's Kingdom is
Paternal, where all that the Subjects enjoy belong to the Ruler, and where Love
bears Dominion in the Government, the withholding Divine Benefits, is not in a
forced, or improper, but in a most eminent sense called Divine Punishing.

5. This passage of Mr. Baxter does fully clear it, that in his Opinion
Christ's Sufferings are not proper Punishments. And tho, in condescension to
the weak, he yielded so far as to accommodate his way of writing to them, who
differed from him, using sundry Terms and Phrases, which the Orthodox have
chosen and established as explicating the Truth most distinctly, and with the
greatest plainness, yet did he openly oppose the use of other Terms and
Phrases, such as Christ's Sufferings, and Dying in the Person of Sinners, etc.
and took particular care to discover his true meaning; that we might not think
he did take even those he used, in the same sense, in which they are used by
the Orthodox. For, it appears very convincingly to me, it is his stated
Judgment, that God exacts formal and proper Punishment only as a Rector qua
talis; and as an Injured Lord and Benefactor, he ^^^cates Analogical
Tunishment; and that when God, as a Benefactor, withholds his Benefits, he may
be said to punish, and so far, and in what sense he may be said to punish, he
may be said to glo^ifie his Punishing Justice; but not as an Injured Lord and
Benefactor. And he not exacting Pu^^ashments taken properly and formally, the
punishing Justice Mr. Baxter speaks of is not taken in a proper sense; for
Punishing Justice thus taken, belongs only to a Rector, qua talis.

These Considerations may suffice to vindicate my Charge, [That Mr. Baxter
denies Christ's Sufferings to be a proper Punishment] from the Ignorant and
Rude Assaults of my Adversary; who, if he had kept more closely to his Studies,
and minded Things more than Indecent Words, could never have been imposed upon,
as in this Point he has been. And certain I am, that if the Learned and
plain-hearted Mr. Baxter had been alive, he would thank neither Mr. Williams,
nor Mr. Alsop for their Attempts to conceal his true sense of these Points from
the World.

Before I close this Discourse, I will set down a summary of Mr. Baxter's
Belief in these matters, particularly, That Christ's sufferings were not ex
Obligatione Legts; That our sins were not the near impulsive, or proper
meritorious cause of his sufferings; That his sufferings were not properly and
formally, poenal; That no sufferings are properly punishments, but what are
inflicted on the Delinquent himself; That when Parents sin, and their Children
suffer, their sufferings are not properly and formally, but materially,
improperly and analogically poenal; That Christ, (properly speaking) did not
satisfy the Law, nor God, as a Rector, qua talis only, but as a Rector supra
Leges, as a pars offensa, as an Injured Lord and Benefactor; That a proper
strict Satisfaction is the solution, or payment of an Aequivalent, which was
not due for what was due; That the Aequivalence lies in an aptitude to answer
the Remote Ends of the Law, That an answering the Remote Ends of the Law, is of
a distinct nature from answering its Obligations or Poenal Sanction; That the
Obligation Christ lay under to suffer, arose only from the Mediatorial
Praecept, and Christ's voluntary Sponsion; That what answers only the Preacept
of a Law, and is only an Act of Obedience, cannot, considered as such, be a
punishment; That the true Reason, why Christ's sufferings are said to be
poenal, is because of their matter, which is painful and dolorous; That the
Justice of God, which Christ satisfied, though called punitive, yet must not be
understood in a strict sense, for that punishing Justice, from whence a proper
punishment does flow, That Christ's entire Righteousness was his performance of
the Condition of his Covenant with the Father; and his performance of that
Condition was his meritorious Title to God's promised Effects; That though the
matter of the Covevenant of Works was taken into the Mediatorial Law, yet
Christ was never under the Formal Obligation of the Law of Works, nor did he
strictly merit according to its Rule.

This is an impartial Account of Mr. Baxter's Sentiments touching the Nature of
Christ's Satisfacti^n and Merit; and, as this Notion is distinct from what is
embraced by the Reformed, so, whilst he uses the same Terms the Orthodox do,
yet it is in a different sense. For by the works [ Punishment, Punishing
Justice, Christ's Righteousness and Merit, yea and proper Satisfaction] he does
(as I have already suggested) intend quite another thing than the Protestants
do: And, because these Terms and Phrases are not in Scripture, he is not for an
insisting on their use against the Socinians. De Nomine [vid. Satisfactionis]
non nultum Litigandum est: and siqui Sociniani, aut alii Satisfactionis nomen,
quia in Sacris Literis non re^eritur, repudiant necessitatem Nominis, non
asserere lebemus: Meth. Theol. part. 3. cap. 1. Diterm. 12. ^. 49.

But, in opposition hereunto, the Learned Dr. Edwards expresses himself thus:
The words vid. Satisfaction and Merit] are now adopted by the Church, inserted
into her Homilies and Liturgies, they are part of the Catholic Faith, and
become the Common Language of all Christians. So that we cannot lay them aside,
without giving infinite offense, and scandal to all our Friends of the
Reformation, and at the same time of affording matter of Boasting and Triumph
to our Adversaries of the Church of Rome; who have long since told the World,
that we are grown weary of our Old Religion, and are all ready to turn
Socinians. Besides all this, it will justify in great measure the Calumnies of
our Modern Unitarians who will exceedingly triumph to find their suspicion made
good, viz. that we secretly favor their Impious Opinions: and that if it were
not for the Biass, that is given to our minds ly the Awe of our Superiors, and
the Love of our Preferments, we would soon take off the Mask, ard discover our
True Sentiments in their favor. Preservat. against Socin. Part. 3. p. 110.

What this Learned Person offers against the very Notion of Mr. Baxter, as well
as of Curcellaeus and Limborch, I do humbly recommed to the consideration not
only of Mr. Alsop, but of all the Brethren at Little St. Hellens, and do wish
with all my heart, that Mr. Alsop may be enabled to weigh with deliberation and
soberness, whether there be the least Reason for his declaring so positively,
That neither Mr. Williams, nor Mr. Baxter deny Christ's Sufferings to be proper
punishments? Or what pleasure it can afford him, on a Dying Bed to consider
what countenance he has given to the very Notions he now would be thought to
abhor^ How he has discouraged, yea reviled them, who appear in the Defense of
those Truths, which so nearly affect our Salvation? And how much he has
strengthened the hands of them, who hold such Opinions as open a Door for the
letting in the very Abominations we are at this time in most danger of: For,
the very Engine chosen by the Socinian Combinators in the year 1546. as most
likely to introduce their Impious Heresies, was their corrupting the Doctrine
of our Blessed Savior's Satisfaction. As Wissowatius, in his Compendious
Narration, in the mention he makes of the Italian Combinators, tells us, it was
to bring the Received Opinion of the Trinity into doubt; so Sandius in his
Anti-Trinitarian Bibiiothee. p. 18. speaking of their Colleges and
Conferences, adds, in quibus potissimum Dogmata vulgaria de Trinitate, ac
Christ. Satisfactione, hisque similia in Dubium revocabant; And what is
remarkable, Lubieniecius, in his History of the Polonian Reformation, lib. 2.
c. 1. Ingenuously confesses, that 'twas also their care to insinuare, that in
the Article of Justification, an applying the Merit of Christ unto us by Faith
alone, was one of those Opinions, introduced by the Greek Philosophers.

Of these things I take the more notice, because at this time, as Mr. Williams
does, not omy corrupt the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, but that other of
Justification; in like manner, He does as these Socinians did, subscribe with a
distinction, securing his own sense, and carries it so subdolously, as to
influence some worthy Divines, who are sound in the Faith, to give too much
Reputation unto him, and consequently to his Erroneous Opinions. I can hardly
forbear the mention of an Aged Divine, who has been Mr. Williams his Tool to
the hindering a Reunion; but at this time I will spare him. And only add, that
Mr. Williams acts so like unto these Combinators, that unless some more than
ordinary care be taken to give check unto him, his success may bear some
proportion to what Laelius Socinus, Blandrata and some others of that way, had
in Poland. What Reputation Blandrata had amongst the Orthodox, notwithstanding
the Indefatigable Pains of so great a Man, as Calvin, to discover his
Hypocrisy, I have shown in my Growth of Error, and in this place will observe
what I have met with concerning Franciscus Lismaninus, who carried it so
craftily, as to obtain a great Interest in the Esteem of the Reformed in
general, and of Calvin and Zanchy, in particular. Lubieniecius, in his Polonian
History, lib. 2. c. 2. says, that Calvin, in a Letter to the King of Poland,
highly applauded Lismaninus, though the Publisher of his Epistles did unfairly
omit the mention of his Name; and sure I am, that, he joined with other
Polonian Divines in a Letter to Zanchy, in which, he, with them, expresses
himself so Orthodoxly, that Zanchy in answer unto them could not but rejoice
exceedingly, to understand that so much Holiness and Truth was amongst them,
which was about the year of our Lord 1562, 63. and yet long before this time
Wissowatius dates Lasmaninus his being influenced by Laelius Socinus to embrace
his Opinions even about the year 1552, 53. And it is very probable, the
Concealment of his Heresy from the Notice of the Orthodox, was continued unto
the Day of his Fatal Catastrophe; [which, as Sandius, Bibl. Anti-Trin. p. 35.
observes out of Budzinius his History, was by his falling into a Well. (where
he was Drowned,) when in a Frenzy, occasioned by his Wifes being suspected
guilty of Adultery.] For it is conjectured, that his Death was not long after he
joined, in the above mentioned Letter, with Gregorius Pauli, Stanislaus
Lathomiski, Paulus Gilovius and Martinus Crovitius, at that time Socinians, who
by sheltring themselves amongst the Orthodox, had gained such Advantages for
the Propagating their Impious Opinions, as to put an effectual stop to the
spreading of the Truth in that Kingdom, which, for the most part, has been
ever since Popish and Socinian.

What I have said, will, I hope, clear it to them, who sincerely desire the
Knowledge of what it is that does really lie at the bottom of the present
Heats, That our Differences are in Points of the greatest weight, and that the
Contention on our part is, that the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction may be
secured from the Insults of Mr. Ws. and his followers. For, in a word, the true
State of the Case is thus. Mr. Williams in his Writings, falling in with the
Learned Mr. Baxter, has corrupted the Doctrine of our Savior's Satisfaction;
The first Book, in which he laid the Foundation of the whole, he has since
advanced, came forth under the countenance of the St. Hellens Ministers, for
above forty of their Hands are unto a Testmonial prefixed unto it. In which, it
is declared, that the Truths, and Errors therein mentioned as such, are fully
and rightly stated in all that is material. Several Exceptions have been made
against this Book, fervent desires that our Brethren, whose Hands are to it,
would recall them. This never yet done, but when some of the most Eminent of
our Brethren sent a Paper securing the Doctrines of Christ's Satisfaction, and
our Justification, in opposition to Mr. Williams his Errors, which greatly
rejoiced the hearts of the Grieved Brethren; a Check was put thereunto by them,
who meet at Little St. Hellens, and another Paper composed, which broke down
those Barriers which were inserted in the First Paper, on purpose to secure the
Truth against the Socinianizing-Arminians. This last Paper increasing the
Offense given by Mr. Williams; the offended Brethren earnestly desired that
they would join with the most Eminent of their own Number in the first Paper.
To this never any Answer returned, but various Misrepresentations given of
Matters of Fact, which occasioned the Publishing a Sheet of Paper, entituld,
The Report, etc. This is followed with a Scandalous Rebuke, written by Mr.
Alsop, in which, without the least provocation he Rails against all the
Congregational Churches, Ministers and People, calling 'em Petty Foggers,
Intreaguers, Whaffing Whelps, Mastiff Dogs, Rosacrusions, and the like. Some
time after this, out comes a Book called, An Answer to the Report, said by Mr.
Williams, to be composed by a Committee of the Saint Hellens Brethren; to this
are annexed two Letters, the one from the R. Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Worcester, the other from the Reverend Dr. Edwards, Principal of Jesus College
Oxon, in which the Truths we own are explained and asserted.

Thus, instead of examining Mr. Williams his Book, and Recalling their Hands,
or witnessing against the Errors in it, the Ministers at Little St. Hellens,
who formerly took special care to keep themselves (as considered collectively)
at a distance from the Contest, have now made themselves Parties, not only by
their Answer to the Report, which contains in it a Plea for Mr. Williams his
Notions, but also by their approval of Mr. Alsop's scurrulous and false Charge
against the Congregational Brethren, which is not only evident from their not
testifying against the Barbarity of the Abuse, but from their caressing him for
it.

And whereas they say, the Difference is only about words, or modes of
expression, you have it here fully proved that it is in such Points, as affect
the very Vitals of our Holy Religion. For, Justification, by that Righteousness
of Christ which answers the Law of Works is rejected, for a Righteousness of
Christ which lies entirely and solely in the performance of the Conditions of
the Mediatorial Covenant under which we never were. Besides, that Satisfaction,
which lies in answering the Obligations of the Violated Law by Christ's
suffering a proper Punishment is rejected, for a Satisfaction, which only
answers some Remote Ends of the Law, which was done without Christ's bearing a
proper Punishment. And that these things are of importance, I doubt not but my
Lord Bishop of Worcester, and the Principal of Jesus, to whom I have Appealed,
will with Conviction demonstrate.

But, whereas Mr. Williams, to drown the Charge against himself, makes a Noise
of Antinomianism as embraced by the Congregational, it must be noted, that
there was never any Charge brought in against them by Mr. Williams, or any
other to the Ministers at Little St. Hellens, whilst they were amongst them,
nor any where else that I know, nor did the Congregational set their Names to
any Book chargeable with Antinomianism, unless three, or four of them, with as
many more of their Presbyterian Brethren to a Testimonial before Dr. Crisps
Book; which was before the Union commenced.

This being a short, but Impartial State of the Controversy, I do with the
utmost Fervor beseech the Brethren who meet at St. Hellens, more particularly
the Reverend Mr. Hammond to clear themselves from having any hand in approving
of Mr. Williams and Mr. Alsop's unbrotherly False and Railing Accusations,
whereby they will remove that Block, which they have thrown in the way, to
hinder Conciliatory Endeavors, and greatly exhilerate the Spirits of their
Injured and Grieved Brethren, who I doubt not, will concur with them in
witnessing against the Errors on the other Extreme, if they at St. Hellens
will but join heartily with them in Asserting those great Articles of Christ's
Satisfaction and Merit, which have been very distinctly taught by the Church
from the beginning, as Vossius and Grotius declare in the Preface to that
Excellent Discourse of the Latter De Satisfactione, where it is said, Cum vero
duo nobis peperisse Christum dixerimus, Impunitatem, and Praemium, illud
satisfactioni, hoc merito Christi distinct Tribuit vetus Ecclesia, both which
are effectually secured in the First Paper.

A Learned Brother, whose Conciliating Attempts are very pleasing to me, having
sent me his thoughts on this Controversy: I thank him heartily for it, craving
his Opinion of my Appeal, and of this Discourse, that I may dispose of his
Letter to the Churches greater Service.

FINIS.

