A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, March 6. 1673/4;.

BY William Lloyd, D. D. Dean of Bangor, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary.

Published by His Majesty's Command.



LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West End of
St. Paul's, MDCLXXIV.

A Lent-Sermon.
ROMANS VIII. Ver. 13. If you walk after the flesh, ye shall die; but if you
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live.


IT was the Apostles design in most part of this Epistle, both for his Converts
at Rome, to whom it was immediately written, and for all other Christians that
should come to read it in after times, to draw them off from a carnal and
sensual course of life, to that which is most agreeable to our Christian
profession.

In order to this, he lays the foundation of his Discourse in a discovery of a
twofold principle in man, that strongly enclines him the one way or the other:
he shows the certain tendency of both these ways; the one exposing us to the
just wrath and indignation of God, which must end first or last in our ruin
and destruction; the other pleasing to God, and beneficial to our selves, full
of inward peace and comfort in this life, sure of endless joy and happiness in
the future.

These two opposite principles in my Text, so much spoken of in the beginning
of this Chapter, are the same which our Savior formerly mentioned in that
discourse, St. John ^. 6. where he shows what they are, and whence they proceed.

There is a principle of Flesh (as he calls it) in every man that is born into
this world; it descends to us from the parents of our flesh, in that taint of
our nature which we call Original Sin; and this addicts us to all Carnal and
Sensual things, but more strongly to those which are evil and forbidden. There
is also another principle in every Christian, the Grace which we receive at our
New Birth in Holy Baptism: This our Savior calls Spirit, for it is infused into
us by the operation of the Spirit of God. This inclines (and inables those that
will be led by it) to those things which are spiritual and eternal. The
opposition between these two principles in us, and the consequence of each to
them that are led by it, is thus described by the Apostle in my Text, If ye,
etc.

That is, in other words, If you lead your life according to the Carnal
Principle, and be not changed and renewed by the Spirit, i. e. until you repent
and be converted, you are spiritually dead in this life, and are to look for
nothing but eternal death in the future. But if the Spiritual Principle have
power in you, so as to subdue the irregular inclinations of the flesh, you
shall live, i. e. being quickened and renewed by the Spirit, you shall have
that spiritual life here which shall be consummated hereafter in life
everlasting.

In the last words which are my subject at this time, I shall consider these
four particulars.

1. What are here called the deeds of the flesh. 2. How these are to be
mortified. 3. How we are to do it by the Spirit. 4. How thus doing we shall
live.
All these parts I shall consider with a twofold respect.

To them that have spiritual life, and to them that are destitute of it; for
those of both sorts have an interest in my Text, and a capacity to receive
benefit by it.

You that have Spiritual Life in you, if you mortify the deeds of the flesh,
you shall continue the life of Grace here, and shall attain to the life of
Glory hereafter.

And even you that are spiritually dead, you are not so dead but that you also
may live; if you by the spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh; you shall
thereby come to the life of Grace here, and so you also shall attain the life
of Glory hereafter.

To proceed in the method which I have propounded, I am first to consider what
are the Deeds of the flesh. And if the flesh be, as is said, our original
Concupiscence, then the deeds or actings of it must be actual sins. So that
look how many sorts of such sins are in the world, so many sorts we may reckon
of the Deeds of the flesh: Our Apostle gives us a black Catalogue of them, Gal.
5. 19. where he says, The works of the flesh are manifest, and they are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wraths, Strifes, Seditions, Heresies, Envying,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings and such like; which whosoever does, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And lest our Apostle's calling them Works in that
Text, and Deeds in this, should make any one think, he means only outward
actions, and no other; I must desire you to remember, that God sees not as man
sees, nor judges as man judges. Man can see no more but the outward action, God
looks chiefly, if not only at the heart; man can judge of no sin till he sees
it acted, with God it is acted as soon as it is conceived. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death, James 1. 15. It Is conceived as soon as ever it is thought of with
consent; as we proceed to delight in the speculation, it ripens; when we
resolve to commit it, then it is finished; for then the heart has done as much
as it can do. Though we never proceed to action, it is perfect sin. I cannot say
it is more sin if we do bring it to action. Only then it is the more dangerous,
and approaches more to habit; for the purpose continues all the while we commit
it, and is confirmed by the pleasure we have in committing it. Therefore it is
the great mercy of God when he restrains us, when he hinders us, when he takes
away the power and opportunity from us, that we cannot put an ill purpose in
execution: though we are nevertheless guilty of the sin, having gone as far as
we can go in it, when it is fully resolved and purposed in the heart. Mat, 15.
19. says our Savior, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witness, Blasphemy. They could not
proceed out of the heart, but that first they were in the heart. And many sins
may be in the heart, that are never brought forth into action. All the sins
that I have mentioned may lie within in the heart, and only those come abroad
that see their occasion; but whether outward or inward, they are the works of
the flesh, they are the same sins whether purposed and committed, or whether
never committed, but only purposed and determined in the heart.

These we are to mortify, says my Text: To mortify, that is, to kill them, to
put them to death; or, which is equivalent, yea much better, to keep them from
ever coming to life.

This mortifying of sin, is the proper work and business of Repentance: now
Repentance (ye know) runs throughout the whole course of ones life: every day
of our life has need of repentance, for no day is free from the pollution of
sin. But through Gods mercy in Christ, sin shall not be imputed to them in whom
it is mortified or subdued and kept under, in whom the power of it is conquered
and killed, or in whom it is kept from coming to life.

I endeavor to use so many several terms, as may reach the several states of
men, which I have to consider.

The first state is of them that are not yet grown up to years of discretion,
that cannot yet fully distinguish between good and evil; they are to mortify
sin, (I cannot properly call it repentance) that have not yet soiled the white
robe of Innocence which they put on through Gods Grace in the Sacrament of
Baptism.

The second state is of them who having broke their Baptismal profession, and
having fallen into sin, through ignorance and frailty, have not yet proceeded
so far as to have defiled themselves by any wilful or deliberate sin.

The third state is of them who have thus transgressed, and yet not gone to
that height of enormity, as to commit any sin against the light of nature, such
as God has particularly threatened with excision; and have not yet contracted
any habitual custom of those sins into which they have fallen.

The fourth state is of them who having done thus are therefore said to be
spiritually dead The Question is, what men in each of these states have to do
in the work of Repentance? how in each of these states they are to mortify the
deeds of the flesh?

First of them that are not yet grown up to years of discretion, children that
can scarce distinguish between good and evil; the question is, what they have
to do in this work? sure there is much to be done by their Parents and
Governors. It Is their duty to forwarn them of sin; to make them know their
danger of it, and by it; to teach them, as they are able to learn, what solemn
Vows and Professions were made for them in Baptism. The first promise then made
for them was, that they should forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps
and vanities of this world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Children
should be taught what these things are; how hard it is to forsake them, through
the naughtiness of our natural disposition; and yet how necessary it is to
forsake them, and how possible through the Grace and Goodness of God. Children
should be taught in their daily prayers, to acknowledge what they find of their
ignorance and frailty, to ask pardon for what has been amiss in their little
time past, and to beg the assistance of Gods Grace for the future.

Whenever they do fall into actual sin, as soon as ever it comes to the
knowledge of their friends, it is their duty to admonish them, and to make them
sensible of it; to make them ashamed of it, and sorry for it; To bring them, if
it be possible, to hate and detest it; To see that they Confess it to God, and
ask his pardon for that sin and all other; that they resolve by promise to
forsake it, and beseech God for his Grace to enable them to fulfill that good
resolution.

In the whole course of our life after Infancy, being obnoxious to many and
manifold sins; some of Ignorance, some of Weakness, and some of Wilfulness and
Presumption; and none of these being to be forgiven without Repentance; we
ought, as far as we know and are able, to suit our Repentance to our Sins.

For sins of Ignorance, and of daily Incursion, I conceive a general Repentance
may suffice: for sins of Wilfulness and Presumption, there ought to be a
particular Repentance.

First, for sins of Weakness and daily Incursion, I say, it is necessary there
should be a general Repentance. Every one that has the use of knowledge and
reason, should make such a daily Confession in his Prayers, as David did in
that Psalm 19, 12. Cleanse me Lord from my secret sins. This our Church has
taught us to do in our public Prayers; and we should do it as often as we repeat
that Confession, Almighty and most merciful Father, we have offended against
thy holy Laws, doing those things which we ought not to have done, and not
doing those things which we ought to have done. In this and such like offices,
we sum up together our sins of Ignorance and daily Incursion; we cast our
selves, with them, before the Tribunal of God; imploring that Mercy, which
according to the terms of the Gospel, we are sure he will grant to them that
confess in the general those sins which they know not in particular. In this
sense I conceive those words may be understood, 1 John 1. 9. We, says the
Apostle of himself, and such as he was, cannot say that we have no sin: We have
sins of Ignorance, and of daily incursion; but blessed be God, if we confess
our sins, he is faithful and will forgive us, according to the terms of the
Gospel.

As for those sins which need a particular Repentance, of them, says the same
Apostle, he that abides in God, sins not, 1 John 3. 6. and ver. 9. He does
not commit sin, he does not fall into wilful and deliberate sin. If he does,
there is a breach, and he must speedily make it up by particular repentance for
that particular sin. Good God! how many such sins do many of us commit, and
pass them by without particular notice, and therefore without particular
Repentance? they do not remember themselves, and are as quiet as if God had
forgotten them.

Because this happens too often, and cannot be helped when it is past; I must mind
them that are sensible of it, how much they are obliged to special and solemn
acts of Repentance. This God will surely expect, and less will not be accepted
at their hands; that they should set apart some special times for their
spiritual account, and especially when they would prepare to receive the Lords
Supper. All Christians are obliged to receive at Easter, according to the
ancient Laws yet in force. When those Laws were first made in the Primitive
Church, care was taken there should be a time of preparation: and (I suppose
for this purpose) it was wisely ordained, that there should be not only a whole
Lent of Abstinence, but a Week of Fasting; the Passion Week, in which men, as
it were, with one common consent, not to interrupt and hinder one another,
might set themselves to examine the state of their Conscience, to mortify their
Lusts, and correct their evil Habits, to purge out the old Leaven before they
come to the Feast of that Sacrament. What care the Church has taken for this,
we ought our selves to take for all our other preparations; to set
apartSufficient time for the cleansing of the Conscience. To say how much is
Sufficient, I shall not undertake, for the measures are various according to
men's several circumstances: Of them that have much time, much will be required;
and less will be sufficient for them that have less: But I beseech you let the
thing be effectually done. Call your self into your Chamber or Closet, and
there, as the Psalmist says, Commune with your own heart and be still. Examine
your self wherein you have transgressed, and wherein you have been most apt to
transgress, especially in those things which are your foulest transgressions.
Search as far as you are able into the very particulars of them: where you have
forgot the particulars, yet at least, to remember the kinds of them. The kinds
of every ones sins are known to himself: The kinds wherein men may sin are
infinite, and yet these may be reduced under certain Heads; and are so in some
Books to which you may have recourse, in this duty of Self-examination. If you
have not such a Catalogue of Heads (which were well worth the having and
considering at such a time) you may do well to think deliberately with your
selves what you know that God has commanded in Scripture, and what you know
that God has forbidden in Scripture; and examine your self how you have done
those things which God has commanded, and avoided what God has forbidden.
Especially

If you know any Catalogue in Scripture, either of Commands and Duties, or of
Prohibitions and Sins; you may do well to examine your self by that Catalogue,
and to consider what the state of your soul is as to every Particular. For
example, you know the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law; you may take a
particular account of your obedience to those Commands. You know the three
Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity; examine the state of your soul
as to these three Graces and Virtues. You may possibly have observed sundry
Catalogues of sins; I quoted you one in Gal. 5. 19. you find there how God
threatens all them that are guilty of such sins, you may do well to ask your
selves with the Apostles, Is it I? and see what answer you can make upon each
of those Particulars.

To do just as I advise in this matter, I know is not so absolutely necessary;
for the same thing may be effected sundry ways: but this way is the best that I
am able to advise, and I am sure the thing might be profitably done: I question
how faithful they are to themselves that leave it undone.

The use of this advice is, as far as it is possible, to find out the
particulars; at least to find out the kinds of your sins. That having found you
may mortify them; bring them forth one by one in Confession, and recount them
to God in the bitterness of your soul; and take up strong resolutions against
them, beseeching God by his Grace, to enable you to fulfill those resolutions.

Yet when all this is done, I cannot say you have mortified your sin, till you
have truly forsaken it, and at least broke the Habit of it. This is true
Mortification, when the sin is cast off and forsaken; when the lust, the parent
of it is so conquered and subdued, that though still it dwell in us (we cannot
help that) yet it has no more dominion over us.

But what shall we say when the sin is not forsaken, when lust is in full
dominion, when Religion and the fear of God is so abandoned and lost, that one
does not stick at those Sins which the Gentiles, that have only the Light of
Nature, would have detested and abhorred? Or when one allows himself in the
Habitual Practice of that which he knows to be Sin, or might know, if he would
but consider it? In this Case, the Person being spiritually dead, (which is the
fourth and last State) I am to show how such an one may yet mortify the Deeds
of the Flesh, (that is) may recover from this Death, and so escape Eternal
Death; which is the next thing that falls under consideration.

And surely this Estate being extraordinary bad, is not to be remedied without
extraordinary Care. Lust, where it has got an Head, where it has the Dominion,
is like that Unclean Spirit, Mat. xvii. 21. that was not to be cast out without
Prayer and Fasting. Without Prayer there is nothing to be done in any spiritual
Business; especially in this, there is need of most intent and most vehement
Prayer. And there is need of Fasting too, that is, of much Severity to be
exercised upon our selves: and that not only in Abstinence from Meats, which
of it self, St. Paul says, profits little, 1 Timothy iv. 8. but we are chiefly to
abstain from the satisfying of our Lusts in those things which are more to us
than Meat and Drink. This being as much the hardest, as most needful Severity;
our Savior calls it, The plucking out of the Right Eye, the cutting off a
Limb, Mat. v. 30. St. Paul calls it, The Circumcision of the Heart, Romans ii.
19. and Gal. v. 24. The crueifying of the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts.

I know it is in vain to proceed upon this Subject, to show how a Man
spiritually dead, should mortify fin; how one dead in any kind, should do any
act of life in that kind; much more, to excite you with great Cost and Pains to
endeavor it; unless first I show that you are capable to do it: for no Man
that thinks what he does, will set about, much less be at great cost to do,
that which he thinks impossible to be done.

Therefore, ere I go any farther, I shall endeavor to show, how he that is
spiritually dead may mortify Sin, and what is to be done on his part toward
the mortifying of it.

I trust you understand what is most certainly true; that as there is no Man
wholly free from Lust, so there is no Man entirely under the Dominion of it.
That Devil is not so great in any Man living, that he can quite put out the
Eyes, or stop the Mouth of his Conscience: Nay, he cannot hinder it from
observing, and speaking out, and interrupting him between whiles. No Habit is
so deeply radicated in us, so entirely possessed of us, but that it may be broken
off, it may be altered by degrees, and turned quite into the contrary, as we
may order the matter.

That ill Habits may be altered we know, and by what Causes; as by Diet and
Physic; by Education and Converse; by diligent Exercise, whether for ones
Moral Improvement, or whether out of any other Design.

We know Men may be extremely changed, for we see by experience they are so. It
were no hard thing to show by Examples, some that have been in their time
Lavish, Riotous, Spendthrifts, and come after to be Greedy, Sordid, Penurious
Wretches. Some that were Dissolute and Loose, without appearance of any Sense
of Religion, have in time come to be Superstitious, Schismatical, and Factious.
Such as have been factious in their Sect of Religion, having afterward found
that to be a Cheat, and judging all Religion to be so, have turned Ranters, and
run out into all manner of Licentiousness. Some that have much valued
Themselves by their Clothes, and taken a Pride to out - do others that way,
becoming Quakers have put off that Pride, and put on Spiritual Pride in the
stead. It Is Lust governs them still, though it has shifted it self; it has
altered its Habit, it has quitted its Place, and put on other Circumstances;
it is no other than Satan that has cast out Satan. However this sufficiently
shows how possible it is for a Habit to be broken and left off, and turned into
the contrary. Being sure then it is possible, we are to see how this may be
done to good purpose in the way of Mortification.

It may be done Morally, as I intimated before: So Heathens have done it, and
so the Spiritually Dead may do it, Morally, by attending to the Dictates of
Natural Reason.

Common Reason will tell you what a weakness it is to give the Reins to your
Lust, to let your Beast carry you whither he pleases; to run out of your
Estate, your Credit, your Health, in pursuit of an unsatisfying momentany
Pleasure: and will therefore tell you how unwise they are that give themselves
to Drunkenness, to Riot, and Uncleanness. Common Reason will tell you what a
vain thing it is to Pride your selves in that which is not yours, or in that
which soon may be another, (for all things here are subject to Time and
Chance.) Common Reason will tell you what a madness it is to run into a
Needless Quarrel, and then, as the fashion is, to stake all you have upon the
issue of it; to put it in the power of every worthless man to make you go to
Cross and Pile with him for your Life. Common Reason will tell you what a
vexatious, endless thing it is to set your heart upon uncertain Riches; to live
Poor, that you may die Rich; to wrong others, and be never the better for it
your self, but much the worse, when all accounts are cast up.

These and many things more, common Reason will tell you, if you attentively
heed it. You may learn much from Reason, and it is well if you do that; But let
me tell you, Reason will not do this business in my Text. It will not convince
you of all Sins, it cannot cope with all Lusts, it corrects but few Habits, and
not any sufficiently: for it does not purify the Fountain, it cleanses not the
Heart; it does not place it upon God, the right Object; it does not season it
with Grace, the right Principle; without which all that you do otherwise is
light and defective, 'twill not hold weight in the Scales of the Sanctuary of
God. This it is which the Apostle supposes in this Work, saying, If you through
the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Flesh: You must do it, but not you; you of
your selves, so you cannot; but you through the Spirit, so you may, and so you
ought to do it.

The Spirit in this Text is taken by Interpreters for either the Spirit of God,
or the Spirit of Man; both these, in their several ways and degrees, have to do
in the Work of Mortification.

First Actively, only the Spirit of God: and that either outwardly, by means;
or inwardly, working on our Spirit.

Outwardly God has given us means of Mortification, both to them in whom it
succeeds, and to them in whom it succeeds not: Those Means are both his Word
and his Works.

First, Gods Word is generally propounded in Scripture, where whosoever reads and
lists to observe cannot but see how God forbids and dissuades from all manner
of Sin, how he invites and exhorts us to Repentance and Newness of Life. He
cannot but see how God seconds his Commands with exceeding rich and precious
Promises: He cannot but see how his Prohibitions are pressed with Threatenings of
Judgments both in this Life and the future.

Of his Works: We have an account of His Wonders of old, in all the Historical
Part of Scripture; of the Mercies which he showed to them that did Repent, and
of the Judgments which he executed upon hardened and impenitent Sinners. We
cannot but see in our own daily Experience the Works of Gods ordinary
Providence, both his Judgments and his Mercies in this Life. We see daily
enough to convince us, if we please to observe, that as the Psalmist says,
Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, verily there is a God that judges
even here in the Earth.

Nay, if we collect from Experience, we need go no farther than our selves. We
are forgetful and ungrateful, if we observe not in our selves that God has been
merciful to us, that he has not taken us at advantage; that he has spared us
when he might have punished us, and punished us Gently when he might have
consumed us: We cannot but see how he has forborne us, and warned us; how he has
sometime come near and threatened us, and as it were walked off to see what we
would do: We cannot but see what he has done to others before our Eyes, how he
has made quick work with them, and cut them off in his wrath; whilst we have
been the Objects of his Patience and Long-suffering, treated with all the
Means, and invited with great Opportunities, (for what end?) to bring us to
Repentance. If that be his end, as we are certain it is, where is the fault all
this while, that You have not yet mortified the Deeds of the Flesh, O ye that
are dead in Trespasses and Sins?

What is it because you are dead? So some may conceive; we being dead there is
nothing for us to do; yes, there is much for you to do, much that you may do;
so much, that as you cannot but confess it is your fault that you are
spiritually dead, so it is ten thousand times more your fault if you continue
so.

For though you are so far dead that you cannot be rightly active, you are to
be more than merely passive in the Work of Mortification. I mean, you are not
Stocks and Stones, you are not tied to a necessity of lying still. Though you
are so dead, that you cannot help your selves; you can do that which being
done, God will assuredly help you. God will help you if you earnestly apply
your selves unto him; if you use those Means which he has prescribed; if you
bewail that which has so deaded and disabled you; if you earnestly sue to him
for his Grace to enable you, and for his Mercy to spare you, so long time that
this Work may yet be brought to Perfection.

Prayer to God should have the first place, if it has any in this matter; and
that it has, St. Peter teaches in his Advice to Simon Magus, Acts viii. 22, 23.
Thou art (says he) in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity; yet
pray unto God, if perhaps thy Wickedness may be forgiven thee. Doubtless a
wicked man's Prayer is abomination to the Lord, while he resolves to continue
such; but we are as sure he can never be otherwise without daily and earnest
Prayer unto God.

But then Praying is not all, ye must also do what ye can. Ye can choose
whether you will go to the House of Prayer at Prayer-time; or whether you will
sit at home, or visit, or walk the Fields: at home you can choose whether you
will pray, or read a Book that may profit you; or whether you will do that
which may hurt, or which cannot profit you. You can choose whether you will
give your mind to what you read or hear; or whether you will divide it between
Sleep and Talk, and other matters. You can, if you please, lay up what you
learn; you can think of it again in due time, and so apply it, that it may make
some impression: I do not say you can have Faith when you please; but St. Paul
says, Faith comes by hearing the Word of God; and you may hear it when you
please; and Gods Blessing is ready to go along with his Word, it is your own
fault if you do not partake of that Blessing.

If you are sick, and a Physician comes to you, and offers you that which he
says, and you believe, will certainly cure you; if you take his Physic, and
observe his Rules, and so doing recover your Health; it is he that has cured
you, you have not cured your self. And yet thus much you have done toward it,
you have done all as he directed you, you have been willingly passive, which
was more than he could compel you to be. Now this is all that God requires in
the Work of our Conversion; He could compel us, but he will not; for he expects
we should be willingly passive: he would have us take his Physic, and observe
his Rules. God expects we should apply our Hearts to Spiritual Knowledge, with
a full resolution to live accordingly. God expects we should abstain from ill
Diet, that is, from the satisfying of our Lusts, which (I have shown you) upon
a Moral Account we are able to abstain from, if we please. God expects we
should be conversant in his Word, and that we should observe him in his Works.

For his Word, he expects you should read or hear it often, and diligently;
that what you read or hear, you should lay to heart, so as to make some
impression; that you should heed it with the same concernment, and with at
least as much effect, as you would do if your Lawyer should tell you of
something which endangered your whole Estate; or if your Physician should warn
you of some Disease, that, if not prevented, would shorten your Life.

Of his Works, chiefly of his Judgments, God expects you should be a diligent
Observer.

First, when you see others suffer for their sins, which perhaps are also
yours; You cannot but know that God has made them Examples to you: and
therefore (whatsoever his end may be toward them) you have much cause to fear,
that unless you repent, God will also make you (perhaps you next) an Example to
others?

When any Judgment of God is fallen upon your self, God expects you should
consider whence it comes, and wherefore it is; to take away your sin: that you
should mind this especially in Sickness, which is the greatest Temporal Mercy,
in order to a Spiritual good, the greatest God can show to any hardened and yet
not incorrigible Sinner.

If ye neglect all these Methods and Means of Conversion, what remains but a
sad and fearful Account? An Account that comes Slow, but will be most Sure;
First for your Sin, and then for your Impenitence, and then for your neglect of
the means of Repentance. This last will make you quite inexcusable. When you
are in Hell, whither you are going, and must come, without Repentance, it will
be another Hell to you to consider; how possible it was for you, by repenting
in this Life, to have prevented that misery which now you are for ever to
endure; and to have obtained that Bliss from which you are now separated for
ever.

Whereas contrary wise, if you lay hold on this Opportunity, if you make use of
these Means, that use for which they were intended of God; you will soon find a
sensible Benefit, in certain Effects which* deserve more time then I have now
to consider them.

First, You will find the Means of Grace more effectual by degrees: You will
find a Lesson from hence make more impression upon your thoughts: You will find
both a softning and a strengthening of your Heart.

I dare promise you from God an increase of the Means of Grace; and perhaps a
longer Life to profit by them; Why not? For God wills not the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that he should be converted, and live. If longer Life
therefore be needful to complete your Conversion, God will give it: if not, he
will the sooner perfect your Conversion; for he has declared in favor of such
as you are, that He will not quench the smoking Flax, nor break the bruised
Reed, until he has brought forth Judgment to Victory, till he has given you a
full Conquest of your Sins.

But how? Through his Spirit: That is, the inward Work of it; which comes next
to be considered. God works outwardly, as you have heard, by giving us the
Means of our Conversion. God works inwardly by his Grace, which gives efficacy
to the Means; or more properly, he gives it to Us; to a Sinner so humbled, and
so contrite, as ye have heard, for his own Promise, for his own Mercy's sake,
God gives that Grace which is the Life and Soul of Conversion.

And this being infused into our Spirits by the Spirit of God, may cause that
Doubt among Interpreters, as ye have heard, (though it comes all to one)
whether our mortifying of Sin be by the Spirit of God, or by our Spirit
enlightened and enabled by his Spirit.

Sure enough the Agent or Efficient in our Conversion is the Spirit of God; Our
Spirit, which is willingly Passive before and in our Conversion, after this
becomes Active, it cooperates with the Spirit of God.

First in our Conversion it is the work of Gods Spirit to mortify our Lusts, to
break the power of them in our Hearts, to set our captive and enthralled
Affections at liberty.

It Is the Work of God to change our Spirit or Rational Soul; having thus broken
the Bonds of Death wherein it was held, to quicken it, to give it Spiritual
Life: so to create in us, as it were, a New Heart, and a New Spirit; whence the
Soul that repents is said to be a New Creature, made as Adam was at first,
after the Image of God. Both these Works of Gods Spirit St. Paul requires of
us, though our part in them be only such as you have heard, Ephesians. iv. 22,
etc. That we put off, concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is
corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of our
Minds; and that we put on the New Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and Holiness.

Our Spirit being thus quickened and renewed, becomes Active, and has its work
upon all the inferior Faculties, it bestirs it self to fill the room of those
Lusts which God has chased out of our Hearts; it changes the Work of every Part
to an unspeakable Advantage; it never rests till it has the whole Body to offer
up as a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. But its chief Work is on
the Affections; which, while they were Servants to the Flesh, commanded under
it, and were the Instruments of its Tyranny over the whole Man; when God has
set them at liberty, they are as able to fight on his side, and to make them as
willing, that is the work of the Spirit.

Between God and the World St. John shows you the opposition, 1 John ii. 15,
etc. All that is in the World, says the Apostle, is the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life: As it is the business of our Lusts to
engage our Affections to the World; so those Lusts being mortified as you have
heard, it is the work of a renewed Spirit to convert all those Affections to God.

What is the Pride of Life, but an Affection to worldly Honor and Greatness?
The Affection being mortified to that, the New Creature exalts to true Honor
and Greatness: No such Honor, no such Greatness as this, to be the Child of
God, and to bear the Image of God. To which Image Sin is so contrary, that it
is only Reproachful, only worthy of our Scorn and our Disdain. The Child of God
aims at no other Glory, but that of God, which we advance; and that from God,
which we are sure to receive, by Well-doing.

The Lust of the Flesh is the Affection irregularly set on worldly and carnal
Mirth and Pleasure. The Affection being mortified to that, is for Mirth and
Pleasure still; but only such as is worthy of a good Man, and of a true Child
of God. If this Affection ever hated Melancholy before, it is more freed from it
than ever, when converted to God: It Is entertained with the continual Feast of
a good Conscience, a Feast that consists not of Meat and Drink, but of
Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: It has the Love of God,
which is infinitely above the Love of Women: It has within it self the matter
of eternal Thanksgivings, and some Tastings of those Joys of the Blessed, whose
work it is to Praise God for Evermore.

The Lust of the Eyes is an Affection set either on Revenge, or on Covetousness.

It Is the business of Revenge to see ones Will upon his Enemies: The Affection
being mortified to that, has its exercise still, though it has no Enemies: For,
as Tertullian says, A Christian is no Man's Enemy: But he hates and declares
against the Enemies of God; that is, not against Persons, but Sins; against
Atheism and Profaness, and whatsoever it be that dishonours God, that affronts
his Name, that disgraces his Worship, that defaces his Image, Truth and
Holiness, the best Image of God amongst Men.

And what is Covetousness but an Affection irregularly set upon worldly Goods,
still craving and saving for an uncertain Future? The Affection being mortified
to that, the renewed Spirit sets before it a certain Future, a lasting Future,
that is and will be the same to Eternity: the Affection cannot be too intent
upon that, no Provision can be excessive for that, no Care can be too great to
preserve it, nor Watchfulness against him that would rob us of it. There is but
one that can rob us of it, that is, Sin; the Affection cannot be too watchful
against Sin. There is but one Provision will do us good, that is, Good Works;
the Affection cannot be too intent upon Good Works. O wise and happy
Covetousness of that true Riches which will neither be lost nor left behind,
but will follow us, and be with us for ever!

This then is True Mortification of the Deeds of the Flesh: When a Sinner being
Convinced of the Evil of his Way, reflecting on his Guilt, and apprehending
his Danger, seeing the Jaws of Destruction open before him; applies himself
humbly to the Methods of God; abstains from his Sin, takes all that God
prescribes, waits on God for the Effect, in Supplication and Prayer. God is
pleased to give him the Conquest of his Lusts, sets him free from the Bonds of
Death, creates in him a New Heart and a New Spirit; which being purged from its
Filth, finds a New Current for its Affections, sets them wholly on things
Spiritual and Eternal.

The Whole Man being thus transformed to the Image of God, in Goodness and
Holiness and Truth; He whose Eternal Delight is in these Lineaments of Himself,
delights and dwells in that Man whom he has thus consecrated to Himself by his
Spirit.

What remains? but that it should be our Care for the future not to Grieve that
Good Spirit of God; but to Rejoice him with Good Works, that we also may
Rejoice with him and in him; Enjoying that Blessed Estate of Spiritual Life
here, Preparing and Waiting for the full Possession of Eternal Life hereafter.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Henry Brom, since the Dreadful Fire in London.
DR. William Lloyd' s Sermon before the King against the Papists. His Sermon at
the Funeral of John Lord Bishop of Chester.

A Seasonable Discourse against Popery.

A Reasonable Defense of the Seasonable Discourse.

The Difference between the Church and Court of Rome considered.

The Papists ^^^t: Or, Their Way to gain Proselytes. Answered by Chapter Gataker.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed. Folio.

A Sermon at the Assizes at Reading: By Joi. Sayer, M. A.

Mr. Stanhopp' s Four Sermons on several Occasions.

Mr. Hampton' s Assize-Sermon.

Mr. Tho. Tanner' s Sermon to the divided and scattered Members of the Church.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury: By Dr. Du Moulin.

Education and Governing of Children of all Conditions; By Dr. Du Moulin.

The Controversial Letters, or Grand Controversy, concerning the pretended
Authority of Papists over the Whole Earth.

Popery Manifested: Or the Papist Incognito made Known.

Toleration discussed: The Second Edition Enlarged: By R. L'Estrange Esquire.

The Vindication of the Clergy.

Manudictio ad Coelum, or a Guide to Eternity: Extracted out of the Writings of
the Holy Fathers and Ancient Philosophers. Written originally in Latin, by John
Bona.


