A SECOND VINDICATION OF THE Reasonableness OF Christianity, etc.

By the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.

LONDON, Printed for A. and I. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, and Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate, by White Hall,
1697.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT has pleased Mr. Edwards, in Answer to the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. and its Vindication, to turn one of the most weighty and important Points
that can come into Question (Even no less than the very Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion) into a mere Quarrel against the Author; as every one, with
Mr. Bold, may observe. In my Reply to him, I have endeavored, as much as his
Objections would allow me, to bring him to the Subject matter of my Book, and
the merits of the Cause; Though his peculiar way of writing Controversy has
made it necessary for me in following him step by step, to wipe off the Dirt he
has thrown on me, and clear my self from those Falsehoods he has filled his Book
with. This I could not but do, in dealing with such an Antagonist; that by the
Untruths I have proved upon him, the Reader may judge of those other
Allegations of his, whereof the Proof lying on his side, the bare Denial is
enough on mine, and indeed, are wholly nothing to the Truth or Falsehood of what
is contained in my Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. To which I shall desire
the Reader to add this further Consideration from his way of Writing, not
against my Book, but against me for writing it, That if he had had a Real
concern for Truth and Religion in this Dispute, he would have treated it after
another manner; And we should have had from him more Argument, Reasoning and
Clearness, and less Boasting, Declamation and Railing. It has been unavoidable
for me to take notice of a great deal of this sort of Stuff, in answering a
Writer who has very little else to say in the Controversy, and places his
strength in things besides, the Question: But yet I have been so careful to
take all Occasions to e^^lain the Doctrine of my Book, that I hope the Reader
will not think his Pains wholly lost labor in perusing this Reply, wherein he
will find some further, and I hope satisfying, Account concerning the Writings
of the New Testament, and the Christian Religion contained in it.

Mr. Edward's ill Language, which I thought personally to me (though I knew not
how I had Provoked a Man whom I had never had to do with) I am now satisfied by
his Rude and Scurrilous treating of Mr. Bold, is his Way and Strength in
Management of Controversy; And therefore requires a little more Consideration
in this Disputant than otherwise it would deserve. Mr. Bold, with the Calmness
of a Christian, the Gravity of a Divine, the Clearness of a Man of Parts, and
the Civility of a well bred Man, made some Animadversions on his Socinianism
Unmasked; Which with a Sermon Preached on the same Subject with my
Reasonableness of Christianity, he Published: And how he has been used by Mr.
Edwards, let the World judge.

I was extremely surprised with Mr. Bold's Book, at a time when there was so
great an Outcry against mine on all hands. But it seems he is a Man that does
not take up things upon Hearsay; nor is afraid to own Truth, whatever Clamor or
Calumny it may lie under. Mr. Edwards confidently tells the World, that Mr.
Bold has been drawn in to espouse this Cause, upon base and mean
Considerations. Whose Picture of the two, such a Description is most likely to
give us, I shall leave to the Reader to judge, from what he will find in their
Writings on this Subject. For as to the Persons themselves, I am equally a
Stranger to them both: I know not the Face of either of them: And having
hitherto never had any Communication with Mr. Bold, I shall begin with him, as
I did with Mr. Edwards in Print; and here publicly return him this following
Acknowledgment for what he has Printed in this Controversy.

To Mr. Bold.
SIR,
THough I do not think I ought to return Thanks to any one for being of my
Opinion, any more than to fall out with him for differing from me; Yet I cannot
but own to all the World the Esteem that I think is due to you, for that Proof
you have given of a Mind and Temper becoming a true Minister of the Gospel, in
appearing as you have done, in the Defense of a point, a great point of
Christianity, which it is evident you could have no other temptation to
dedeclare for, but the love of Truth. It has fared with you herein no better
than with me. For Mr. Edwards, not being able to Answer your Arguments, has
found out already that you are a Mercenary, defending a Cause against your
Persuasion for hire; and that you are sailing to Racovia by a side Wind: Such
Inconsistencies can one (whose Business it is to Rail for a Cause he cannot
defend) put together to make a noise with: And he tells you plainly what you
must expect, if you write any more on this Argument, viz. to be pronounced a
downright Apostate and Renegado.

As soon as I saw your Sermon and Animadversions, I wondered what Scarecrow
Mr. Edwards would set up, wherewith he might hope to deterr Men of more Caution
than Sense from reading of them: Since Socinianism, from which you were known
to be as remote as he, I concluded would not do. The unknown Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, he might make a Socinian, Mohammedan, Atheist,
or what sort of Raw-head and Bloody-bones he pleased. But I imagined he had had
more sense than to venture any such Aspersions on a Man whom, though I have not
yet the Happiness personally to know; yet I know has justly a great and
settled Reputation amongst worthy Men: And I thought that that Coat which you
had worn with so much Reputation, might have preserved you from the
bespatterings of Mr. Edward's Dunghill. But what is to be expected from a
Warrier that has no other Ammunition, and yet ascribes to himself Victory from
hence, and with this Artillery imagines he carries all before him? And so
Skimmington Rides in Triumph, driving all before him by the Ordures that he
bestows on those that come in his way. And were not Christianity concerned in
the case, a Man could scarce excuse to himself the Ridiculousness of entering
into the List with such a Combatant. I do not therefore wonder that this mighty
Boaster, having no other way to Answer the Books of his Opponents, but by
popular Calumnies, is fain to have recourse to his only Refuge, and lay out his
natural Talent in Vilifying and Slandering the Authors. But I see, by what you
have already writ, how much you are above that; and as you take not up your
Opinions from Fashion or Interest, so you quit them not to avoid the malicious
Reports of those that do: Out of which number, they can hardly be left, who
(unprovoked) mix with the management of their Cause, Injuries and ill Language
to those they differ from. This, at least I am sure, Zeal or Love for Truth,
can never permit Falsehood to be used in the Defense of it.

Your Mind I see prepared for Truth, by resignation of it self not to the
Traditions of Men, but the Doctrine of the Gospel, has made you more readily
entertain, and more easily enter into the meaning of my Book, than most I have
heard speak of it. And since you seem to me to comprehend, what I have laid
together, with the same Disposition of Mind, and in the same Sense that I
received it, from the Holy Scriptures, I shall as a mark of my respect to you,
give you a particular Account of the Occasion of it.

The Beginning of the Year in which it was Published, the Controversy that
made so much noise and heat amongst some of the Dissenters, coming one Day
accidentally into my Mind, drew me by degrees into a stricter and more through
Enquiry into the Question about Justification. The Scripture was direct and
plain, that 'twas Faith that justified, The next Question then, was what Faith
that was that justified; What it was which, if a Man believed, it should be
imputed to him for Righteousness. To find out this, I thought the right way was
to Search the Scriptures; and thereupon betook my self seriously to the Reading
of the New Testament, only to that Purpose. What that produced, you and the
World have seen.

The first View I had of it seemed mightily to satisfy my mind, in the
Reasonableness and Plainness of this Doctrine; But yet the general Silence I
had in my little Reading met with, concerning any such thing, awed me with the
Apprehension of Singularity; Till going on in the Gospel History, the whole
tenor of it made it so clear and visible, that I more wondered that every body
did not see and embrace it; than that I should assent to what was so plainly
laid down, and so frequently inculcated in Holy Writ, though Systems of
Divinity said nothing of it. That which added to my Satisfaction, was, that it
led me into a Discovery of the mavelous and divine Wisdom of our Savior's
Conduct, in all the Circumstances of his promulgating this Doctrine; as well as
of the necessity that such a Lawgiver should be sent from God for the
reforming the Morality of the World; Two Points that I must confess, I had not
found so fully and advantageously explained in the Books of Divinity I had met
with, as the History of the Gospel seemed to me, upon an attentive Perusal, to
give Occasion and Matter for. But the Necessity and Wisdom of our Savior's
opening the Doctrine (which he came to publish) as he did in Parables and
figurative ways of speaking, carries such a Thread of Evidence through the
whole History of the Evangelists, as I think is impossible to be resisted; and
makes it a Demonstration, that the Sacred Historians did not write by concert
as Advocates, for a bad Cause, or to give Color and Credit to an Imposture
they would Usher into the World; Since they, every one of them, in some place
or other, omit some Passages of our Savior's Life, or Circumstances of his
Actions; which show the Wisdom and Wariness of his Conduct; and which even
those of the Evangelists, who have recorded, do barely and transiently mention,
without laying any Stress on them, or making the least remark of what
Consequence they are to give us our Savior's true Character, and to prove the
Truth of their History. These are Evidences of Truth and Sincerity, which
result alone from the Nature of things, and cannot be produced by any Art or
Contrivance.

How much I was pleased with the growing Discovery, every Day, whilst I was
employed in this search, I need not say. The wonderful Harmony, that the
farther I went, disclosed it self, tending to the same Points, in all the parts
of the sacred History of the Gospel, was of no small Weight with me and another
Person, who every Day, from the beginning to the end of my search, saw the
Progress of it, and knew at my first setting out, that I was ignorant whither
it would lead me; and therefore, every Day, asked me what more the Scripture
had taught me. So far was I from the thoughts of Socinianism, or an Intention
to write for that or any other Party, or to publish any thing at all. But when
I had gone through the whole, and saw what a plain, simple, reasonable thing
Christianity was, suited to all Conditions and Capacities; and in the Morality
of it now, with divine Authority, established into a legible Law, so far
surpassing all that Philosophy and humane Reason had attained to, or could
possibly make effectual to all degrees of Mankind; I was flattered to think it
might be of some use in the World; especially to those who thought either that
there was no need of Revelation at all, or that the Revelation of our Savior
required the Belief of such Articles for Salvation, which the settled Notions
and their way of reasoning in some, and want of Understanding in others, made
impossible to them. Upon these two Topics the Objections seemed to turn, which
were with most Assurance, made by Deists against Christianity; But against
Christianity misunderstood. It seemed to me, that there needed no more to show
them the Weakness of their Exceptions, but to lay plainly before them the
Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, as delivered in the Scriptures, and
not as taught by the several Sects of Christians. This tempted me to publish
it, not thinking it deserved an Opposition from any Minister of the Gospel; and
least of all, from any one in the Communion of the Church of England. But so it
is, that Mr. Edwards's Zeal for he knows not what (for he does not yet know his
own Creed, nor what is required to make him a Christian) could not brook so
plain, simple, and intelligible a Religion: But yet not knowing what to say
against it, and the Evidence it has from the Word of God, he thought fit to let
the Book alone, and fall upon the Author. What great Matter he has done in it I
need not tell you, who have seen and showed the Weakness of his Wranglings. You
have here, Sir, the true History of the Birth of my Reasonableness of
Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures, and my Design in publishing it,
etc. What it contains, and how much it tends to Peace and Union amongst
Christians, if they would receive Christianity as it is, you have discovered. I
am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant A. B.


My Readers will pardon me that in my Preface to them I make this particular
Address to Mr. Bold. He has thought it worth his while to defend my Book. How
well he has done it, I am too much a Party to say: I think it so sufficient to
Mr. Edwards, that I needed not have troubled my self any further about him on
the account of any Argument that remains in his Book to be Answered. But a
great part of the World judging of Contests about Truth, as they do of popular
Elections, that the Side carries it where the greatest Noise is; 'twas
necessary they should be undeceived, and be let see, that sometimes such
Writers may be let alone, not because they cannot, but because they deserve not
to be answered.

This farther I ought to Acknowledge to Mr. Bold, and own to the World, that he
has entered into the true sense of my Treatise, and his Notions do so
perfectly agree with mine, that I shall not be afraid by Thoughts and
Expressions very like his in this my Second Vindication, to give Mr. Edwards
(who is exceedingly quick-sighted and positive in such Matters) a handle, to
tell the World, that either I borrowed this my Vindication from Mr. Bold, or
writ his Animadversions for him. The former of these I shall count no
discredit, if Mr. Edwards think fit to charge me with it: And the latter Mr.
Bold's Character, is Answer enough to. Though the Impartial Reader, I doubt
not, will find that the same Uniform Truth considered by us, suggested the same
Thoughts to us both, without any other Communication.

There is another Author, who in a Civiller Style has made it necessary for me
to Vindicate my Book from a Reflection or two of his, wherein he seems to come
short of that Candor he Professes. All that I shall say on this Occasion here
is, that it is a wonder to me, that having published what I thought the
Scripture told me was the Faith that made a Christian, and desired that if I
was mistaken, any one that thought so, would have the goodness to inform me
better; so many with their Tongues, and some in Print, should intemperately
find fault with a poor Man out of his Way, who desires to be set right; and no
one who blames his Faith, as coming short, will tell him what that Faith is
which is required to make him a Christian. But, I hope, that amongst so many
Censurers, I shall at last find one, who knowing himself to be a Christian upon
other Grounds than I am, will have so much Christian Charity as to shem me what
more is absolutely necessary to be believed by me, and every Man, to make him a
Christian.

ERRATA.
PAge ^6. line 22. read, Are in the Apostles Creed set down as m^^e. ^. 2^* r.
and therefore may. p. 46. l. 8. dele And in the next place where it i^ that I
say, VIII. That there must be nothing in Christianity that is not* plain and
exactly level to all men's Mother Wit? p. 57. l. 20. r. Mistake, p. 76. l. 25.
r* Enquiry, p. 10^. l. 21. r. needs, l. 22. r. needs, p. 113. l. 1. r.
Premiss^s, p. 146. l. 3. r. Sc^rr^ity. p. 167. l. 21. r. p^rp^s^, which I, p.
17^. l. 9. r. distinction, p. 179. l. 3. r. baptizes him, p. 181. l. 2. r. in
the Vnmas* p. 186. l. 5. r. Creed do not, p. 228. l. 3. r. Gentleman, p. 258.
l. ^. r. Article, p. 260. l. 26. r, Of the Doctrines, p. 269. l. 21. r. St.
Peter Preached, l. 24. r. as well as he, p. ^71. l. 19. r. inserted, p. 316. l.
16. r. them* but has* p. 337. l. 13. r but what we understand, p. 356. l. 1^.
r. in them granted all I would have: And shall not meddle with his sp^^king
closely and strictly; but, l. 23. r, bespattered, p. 379. l. 11. r. sense and
love, p. 399. l. 2. r. Apostles, p. 413. l. 2^. r. Sacrament, p. 417. l. 18. r.
mangle^, p. 420. l. 10. r. a dangerous, p. 432. l. 10. r. to which, p. 433. l.
14. r. ^nanswerable, l. 22. r. above four Pages, p. 438. l. 3. believes all p.
451. l. 9. r. and to proceed, l. 11. go for Payment, should be in Roman
Characte^^, p. 47^. l. 16. r, have: l. 17. ^. these Questions.

A Second Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
A Cause that stands in need of Falsehoods to support it, and an Adversary that
will make use of them deserve nothing but Contempt; which I doubt not but every
considerate Reader thought Answer enough to Mr. Edwards's Socinianism Unmasked.
But since in his late Socinian Creed, he says, I would have answered him if I
could, That the Interest of Christianity may not suffer by my silence, nor the
contemptibleness of his Treatise afford him matter of Triumph amongst those who
lay any weight on such boasting, it is fit it should be shown what an Arguer he
is, and how well he deserves for his Performance to be dubbed by himself
Irrefragable.

Those, who like Mr. Edwards, dare to publish Inventions of their own for
Matters of Fact, deserve a name so abhorred, that it finds not room in civil
Conversation. This secures him from the proper Answer due to his Imputations to
me in Print of Matters of Fact utterly false, which without any Reply of mine,
fix upon him that Name (which without a profligate Mind, a Man cannot expose
himself to) till he has proved them. Till then he must wear what he has put
upon himself. This being a Rule which common Justice has prescribed to the
private Judgments of Mankind, as well as to the public Judicatures of Courts,
That all Allegations of Fact brought by contending Parties should be presumed
to be false till they are proved.

There are two ways of making a Book unanswerable. The one is by the clearness,
strength and fairness of the argumentation. Men who know how to write thus, are
above bragging what they have done, or boasting to the World that their
Adversaries are ba^^led. Another way to make a Book unanswerable, is to lay
stress on Matters of Fact foreign to the Question, as well as to Truth; and to
stuff it with Scurrility and Fiction. This has been always so evident to
common sense, that no Man who had any regard to Truth or Ingenuity, ever
thought Matters of Fact besides the Argument, and Stories made at pleasure, the
way of managing Controversies. Which showing only the want of Sense and
Argument, could, if used on both sides, and in nothing but downright railing:
And he must always have the better of the Cause, who has Lying and Impudence on
his side.

The Unmasker in the Entrance of his Book, s^ts a great distance between his
and my way of Writing. I am not sorry that mine differs so much as it does from
his. If it were like his, I should think, like his, it wanted the Author's
Commendations. For, in his first Paragraph, which is all laid out in his own
Testimony of his own Book, he so earnestly bes^eaks an opinion of Mastery in
Politeness, Order, Coherence, Pertinence, Strength, Seriousness, Temper, and
all the good Qualities requisite in Controversy, that I think, since he
pleases himself so much with his own good opinion, one in pity ought not to go
about to rob him of so considerable an Admirer. I shall not therefore contest
any of those Excellencies he ascribes to himself, or Faults he blames in me in
the management of the Dispute between us, any further than as particular
Passages of his Book, as I come to examine them, shall suggest unavoidable
Remarks to me. I think the World does not so much concern it self about him or
me, that it need be told, in that Inventory he has given of his own good Parts
in his first Paragraph, which of us two has the better hand at Flourishes,
Jesting, and Common-Places; If I am, as he says, page 2. troubled with angry
Fits and passionate Ferments, which though I strive to palliate, are easily
discernable, etc. and he be more laudably Ingenuous in the openness of that
Temper, which he shows in every Leaf, I shall leave to him the entire glory of
boasting of it. Whatever we brag of our Performances, they will be just as they
are, however he may think to add to his by his own Encomiums of them. The
difference in Style, Order, Coherence, good Breeding (for all those amongst
others the Unmasker mentions) the Reader will observe, whatever I say of them:
and at best they are nothing to the question in hand. For, though I am a Tool,
Pert, Childish, Starched, Impertinent, Incoherent, Trifling, Weak, Passionate,
etc. Commendations I meet with before I get to the 4th. Page, besides what
follows as Upstart Racovian, p. 24. Flourishing Scribler, p. 41. Dissembler,
106. Pedantick, 107. I say, although I am all this, and what else he liberally
bestows on me in the rest of his Book, I may have truth on my side, and that in
the present case serves my turn.

Having thus placed the Laurels upon his own Head, and sung Applause to his own
Performance, he, page 4. enters, as he thinks, upon his Business, which ought
to be, as he confesses, page 3. to make good his former charges. The first
whereof he sets down in these words. That I unwarrantably crowded all the
necessary Articles of Faith into one, with a design of favoring Socinianism.

If it may be permitted to the subdued to be so bold with one, who is already
Conqueror, I desire to know, where that Proposition is laid down in these terms
as laid to my Charge. Whether it be true, or false, shall, if he pleases, be
hereafter examined: But it is not at present the Matter in question. There are
certain Propositions, which he having affirmed and I denied, are under debate
between us: And that the Dispute may not run into an endless ramble by
multiplying of new before the Points in contest are decided, those ought first
to be brought to an issue.

To go on therefore in the order of his Socinianism Unmasked (for p. 3. he has
out of the Mishna taught me good Breeding, to answer the First first, and so in
order) the next thing he has against me, is p. 5. which, that the Reader may
understand the force of, I must inform him, that in the 105. p. of his Thoughts
concerning the Causes of Atheism, he said, that I give this plausible conceit,
as he calls it, over and over again in these formal words, viz. That nothing is
required to be believed by any Christian man but this, that Jesus is the
Messiah. This I denied. To make it good, Socinianism Unmasked, p. 5. he thus
argues, First, It is observable, that this guilty Man would be shifting off the
Indictment, by excepting against the formality of Words, as if such were not to
be found in his Book: But when does he do this? in the close of it, when his
Matter was exhausted, and he had nothing else to say, Vind. p. 38. then he
bethinks himself of this salvn, etc. Answ. As if a Falsehood were ever the less
a Falsehood, because it was not opposed; or would grow into a Truth if it were
not taken notice of, before the 38th. Page of the Answer. I desire him to show
me these formal words over and over again in my Reasonableness of Christianity:
Nor let him hope to evade by saying, I would be shifting by excepting against
the formality of the words.

To say that I have over and over again those formal words in my Book, is an
Assertion of a Matter of Fact, let him produce the words, and justify his
Allegation; or confess, that this is an Untruth published to the World: And
since he makes so bold with Truth in a Matter visible to every Body, let the
World be Judge, what Credit is to be given to his Allegations of Matters of
Fact, in things foreign to what I have Printed; and that are not capable of a
Negative Proof. A sample whereof the Reader has at the entrance in his
Introducti^^, Page A 4, and the three or four following Pages. Where he affirms
to the World not only what I know to be false; but what every one must see, he
could not know to be true. For he pretends to know and deliver my Thoughts. And
what the Character is of one that confidently affirms what he does not know, no
body need be told.

But he adds, I had before Pleaded to the Indictment, and thereby owned it to
be true. This is to make good his Promise, p. 3. to keep at a distance from my
feeble strugglings. Here this strong Arguer must prove, that what is not
answered or denied in the very beginning of a Reply, or before the 38th. Page,
is owned to be true. In the mean time till he does that, I shall desire such of
my Readers as think the Unmasker's Veracity worth the examining to see in my
Vindication, from p. 26. to 31. wherein is contained, what I have said about
one Article, whether I have owned, what he charged me with, on that Subject.

This Proposition then remains upon him still to be proved, viz.

I.
That I have over and over again these formal words in my Reasonableness of
Christianity, viz. That nothing is required to be believed by any Christian
Man, but this, That Jesus is the Messiah.

He goes on page 5. And indeed he could do no other, for it was the main Work
he set himself about to find but one Article of Faith in all the Chapters of
the four Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles. This is to make good his
Promise, page 3. To clear his Book from those sorry Objections and Cavils I had
raised against it. Several of my sorry Objections and Cavils were to represent
to the Reader, that a great part of what he said was nothing but Suspicions and
Conjectures, and such he could not but then own them to be. But now he has rid
himself of all his Conjectures, and has raised them up into direct positive
Affirmations, which being said with Confidence without Proof, who can deny, but
he has cleared, thoroughly cleared that part from my sorry Objections and
Cavils? He says it was the main Work I set my self about to find but one
Article of Faith. This I must take the liberty to deny: And I desire him to
prove it. A Man may set himself to find two, or as many as there be, and yet
find but one: Or a Man may set himself to find but one, and yet find two or
more. It is no Argument from what a Man has found, to prove what was his main
Work to find, unless where his aim was only to find what there was, whether
more or less. For a Writer may find the Reputation of a poor contemptible
Railer; Nay, of a downright impudent Liar, and yet no body will think it was
his main work to find that. Therefore Sir, if you will not find what it is like
you did not seek, you must prove those many confident Assertions, you have
published, which I shall give you in tale whereof this is the second, viz.

II.
That the main Business I set my self about, was to find but one Article of
Faith.

In the following part of this Sentence, he quotes my own words, with the Pages
where they are to be found; The first time, that, in either of his two Books
against me, he has vouchsafed to do so, concerning one Article, wherewith he
has made so much noise. My words in page 192. of my Reasonableness of
Christianity, stand thus; For that this is the sole Doctrine pressed and
required to be believed in the whole tenor of our Savior's and his Apostles
preaching, we have showed through the whole History of the Evanlists and Acts,
and I challenge them to show that there was any other Doctrine upon their
assent to which, or disbelief of it, Men were pronounced Believers or
Unbelievers, and accordingly received into the Church of Christ, as Members of
his Body, as far as mere Believing could make them so; or else kept out. This
was the only Gospel Article of Faith which was preached to them. Out of this
Passage, the Unmasker sets down these words, This is the SOLE Doctrine pressed
and required to be believed in the whole tenor of our Savior's and his
Apostles preaching, p. 129. this was the ONLY Gospel Article of Faith which was
preached to them.

I shall pass by all other Observations, that this way of citing these words
would suggest, and only remark, that if he brought these words to prove the
immediately preceding Assertion of his, viz. That to find but one Article of
Faith was the main Work I set my self about. This Argument reduced into form
will stand thus.

He who says, that this is the sole Doctrine pressed and required to be
believed, in the whole tenor of our Savior's and his Apostles Preaching, upon
their assent to which, or disbelief of it, Men were pronounced Believers or
Unbelievers, and accordingly received into the Church of Christ, as Members of
his Body, as far as mere believing could make them so, or else kept out, sets
himself to find out but One Article of Faith, as his main Work. But the
Vindicator did so: Ergo:

If this were the use he would make of those words of mine cited, I must desire
him to prove the major. But he talks so freely, and without book, every where,
that I suppose he thought himself, by the Privilege of a Declaimer, exempt from
being called strictly to an Account for what he so loosely says, and from
proving what he should be called to Account for. Rail lustily, is a good Rule,
something of it will stick, true or false, proved or not proved.

If he alleges these words of mine, to answer my Demand, Vind. p. 27. where he
found that I contended for one single Article of Faith, with the exclusion and
defiance of all the rest which he had charged me with. I say, it proves this as
little as the former. For to say, That I had showed through the whole History
of the Evangelists, and the Acts, that this is the sole Doctrine, or only
Gospel-Article pressed and required to be believed in the whole Tenor of our
Savior and his Apostles Preaching; upon their assent to which, or disbelieving
of it, Men were pronounced Believers or Unbelievers, and accordingly received
into the Church of Christ, or kept out; is the simple Assertion of a positive
Matter of Fact, and so carries in it no defiance, no, nor exclusion of any
other Doctrinal or Historical Truth contained in the Scripture: And therefore
it remains still on the Unmasker to show where it is I express any de^iance of
any other Truth contained in the Word of God; or where I exclude any one
Doctrine of the Scriptures. So that if it be true, that I contend for one
Article, my Contention may be without any defiance, or so much as exclusion of
any of the rest, notwithstanding any thing contained in these words. Nay, if it
should happen that I am in a mistake, and that this was not the sole Doctrine
which our Savior and his Apostles preached, and upon their assent to which,
Men were admitted into the Church; yet the Unmasker's Accusation would be never
the truer for that, unless it be necessary, that he that mistakes in one Matter
of Fact, should be at defiance with all other Truths; or, that he who
erroneously says, that our Savior and his Apostles admitted Men into the
Church upon the believing him to be the Messiah, does thereby exclude all other
Truths published to the Jews before, or to Christian Believers afterward.

If these words be brought to prove, that I contended for one Article, barely
one Article, without any defiance or exclusion annexed to that Contention; I
say, neither do they prove that, as is manifest from the words themselves, as
well as from what I said elsewhere concerning the Article of One God. For here,
I say, this is the only Gospel-Article, etc. upon which Men were pronounced
Believers; which plainly intimates some other Article known and believed in the
World before, and without the Preaching of the Gospel.

To this the Unmasker thinks he has provided a Salvo in these words,
Socinianism Unmasked, page 6. And when I told him of this one Article, he knew
well enough that I did not exclude the Article of the Deity, for that is a
Principle of Natural Religion. If it be fit for an Unmasker to perceive what is
in debate, he would know, that the Question is not, what he excluded or
excluded not, but what Articles he charged me to have excluded.

Taking it therefore to be his meaning (which it must be, if he meant any thing
to the purpose,) viz. That when he charged me so often and positively for
contesting for one Article, viz. that Jesus was the Messiah, he did not intend
to accuse me for excluding the Article of the Deity. To prove that he did not
so intend it, he tells me, that I knew that he did not.

Answ. How should I know it? he never told me so either in his Book, or
otherwise. This I know, that he said, page 115. That I contended for one
Article, with the exclusion of all the rest. If then the belief of the Deity,
be an Article of Faith, and be not the Article of Jesus being the Messiah, it
is one of the rest; and if all the rest were excluded, certainly that being one
of All the rest, must be excluded. How then he could say, I knew that he
excluded it not, i. e. meant not that I excluded it, when he positively says I
did exclude it, I cannot tell, unless he thought that I knew him so well, that
when he said one thing, I knew that he meant another, and that the quite
contrary.

He now it seems acknowledges that I affirmed, that the Belief of the Deity, as
well as of Jesus being the Messiah, was required to make a Man a Believer. The
Believing in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, is one
Article; and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, is another Article. These
therefore being two Articles, and both asserted by me to be required to make a
Man a Christian, let us see with what truth or ingenuity the Unmasker could
apply, besides that abovementioned, these following Expressions to me, as he
does without any exception. Why then must there be one Article, and no more?
page 115. Going to make a Religion for his Mermidons, he contracts all into one
Article, and will trouble them with no more, page 117. Away with Systems, away
with Creeds, let us have but one Article, though it be with the defiance of all
the rest, page 118. Thus we see why he reduces all Belief to that one Article
before rehearsed, page 120. And all this without any the least Exception of the
Article of a Deity, as he now pretends. Nor could he indeed, as is evident from
his own words, page 121, 122. To conclude, This Gentleman and his Fellows are
resolved to be Unitarians, they are for one Article of Faith, as well as one
Person in the Godhead: -- But if these learned Men were not prejudiced -- they
would perceive, that when the Catholic Faith is thus brought down to one
single Article, it will soon be reduced to none, the Unite will dwindle into a
Cipher. By which the Reader may see, that his Intention was, to persuade the
World, that I reduced ALL BELIEF, the CATHOLIC FAITH (they are his own words)
to One Single Article and no more. For if he had given but the least hint, that
I allowed of Two, all the wit and strength of Argument contained in Unitarians,
Unite, and Cipher, with which he winds up all, had been utterly lost, and
dwindled into palpable Nonsense.

To demonstrate that this was the sense he would be understood in, we are but
to observe what he says again, page 50. of his Socinianism Unmasked, where he
tells his Readers, That I, and my Friends, have new-modell'd the Apostles
Creed; yea indeed, have presented them with ONE Article, instead of TWELVE. And
hence we may see what Sincerity there is in the Reason he brings to prove that
he did not exclude the Article of the Deity. For, says he, p. 6. That is a
Principle of Natural Religion.

Answ. Ergo, He did not in positive words, without any exception, say, I
reduced All Belief, the Catholic Faith, to one single Article, and no more.
But to make good his Promise, not to resemble me in the little Artifices of
Evading, he wipes his Mouth, and says at the bottom of this Page, But the
Reader sees his [the Vindicator's] shuffling. Whilst the Article of One God is
a part of ALL Belief, a part of the Catholic Faith, ALL which he affirmed I
excluded, but the one Article concerning the Messiah, every one will see where
the shuffling is: And if it be not clear enough from those words themselves,
let those above quoted out of page 50. of his Socinianism Unmasked, where he
says, That I have new-modell'd the Apostles Creed, and presented the World with
ONE Article instead of TWELVE, be an Interpretation of them. For if the Article
of One Eternal God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, be one of the Article of the
Apostles Creed, and the one Article I presented them with be not that, it is
plain, he did and would be understood to mean, that by my one Article, I
excluded that of the One Eternal God, which Branch soever of Religion, either
Natural or Revealed, it belongs to.

I do not endeavor to persuade the Reader, as he says, p. 6. that he
misunderstood me; but yet every body will see, that he misrepresented me. And
I challenge him to say, that those Expressions above quoted out of him,
concerning One Article, in the obvious sense of the words, as they stand in his
Accusation of me, were true?

This flies so directly in his Face, that he labors mightily to get it off,
and therefore adds these words, My Discourse did not treat (neither does his
Book run that way) of Principles of Natural Religion, but of the Revealed, and
particularly the Christian: Accordingly this was it which I taxed him with,
That of all the Principles and Articles of Christianity, he chose out but One
as necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian.

Answ. His Book was of -- Atheism, which one may think should make his
Discourse treat of Natural Religion. But I pass by that, and bid him tell me
where he ta^ed me, That of all the Principles and Articles of Christianity I
chose out but One: Let him show in all his Discourse but such a word, or any
thing said like one Article of Christianity, and I will grant that he meant
particularly, but spoke generally; misled his Reader, and left himself a
Subterfuge. But if there be no Expression to be found in him tending that way,
all this is but the covering of one Falsehood with another, which thereby only
becomes the grosser* Though if he had in express words taxed me, That of all
the Principles and Articles of the Christian Religion, I chose out but one,
that would not at all help him, till he further declares, that the Belief of
One God is not an Article of the Christian Religion. For of ALL the Articles of
the Christian Religion, he says, I chose but One; which not being that of a
Deity, his words plainly import, that that was left out among the rest, unless
it be possible for a Man to choose but One Article of the Christian Religion,
viz. That Jesus is the Messiah; and at the same time to choose Two Articles of
the Christian Religion, viz. That there is One Eternal God, and that Jesus is
the Messiah. If he had spoken clearly, and like a fair Man, he should have
said, That he taxed me with choosing but One Article of Revealed Religion. That
had been plain and direct to his purpose: But then he knew the Falsehood of it
would be too obvious: for in the seven Pages wherein he taxes me so much with
One Article, Christianity is several times named, though not once to the
purpose he here pretends. But Revelation is not so much as once mentioned in
them, nor, as I remember, in any of the Pages he bestows upon me.

To conclude, the several Passages above quoted out of him, concerning one sole
Article, are all in general terms, without any the least limitation or
restriction; and as they stand in him, fit to persuade the Reader that I
excluded all other Articles whatsoever, but that one of Jesus the Messiah: And
if in that sense they are not true, they are so many Falsehoods of his repeated
there, to mislead others into a wrong Opinion of me. For if he had had a mind
his Readers should have been rightly informed, why was it not as easy once to
explain himself, as so often to affirm it in general and unrestrained terms?
This all the boasted strength of the Unmasker will not be able to get him out
of. This very well becomes one who so loudly charges me with Shuffling. Having
repeated the same thing over and over again, in as general terms as was
possible, without any the least limitation in the whole Discourse, to have
nothing else to plead when required to prove it, but that it was meant in a
limited sense, in an Unmasker, is not shuffling. For by this way he may have
the convenience to say and unsay what he pleases; to vent what stuff he thinks
for his turn; and when he is called to an Account for it, reply, He meant no
such thing. Should any one publish, that the Unmasker had but One Article of
Faith, and no more, viz. That the Doctrines in fashion, and likely to procure
Preferment, are alone to be received; That all his Belief was comprised in this
one single Article: And when such a Talker was demanded to prove his Assertion,
should he say, he meant, to except his Belief of the Apostles Creed: Would he
not, notwithstanding such a Plea, be thought a shuffling Liar? And if the
Unmasker can no otherwise prove those universal Propositions above cited, but
by saying, he meant them with a tacit restriction, (for none is expressed) they
will still and for ever remain to be accounted for by his Veracity.

What he says in the next Paragraph, p. 7. of my splitting One Article into
Two, is just of the-same force, and with the same ingenuity. I had said, That
the Belief of One God was necessary; which is not now denied: I had also said,
That the Belief of Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah, together with those
concomitant Articles of his Resurrection, Rule, and coming again to Judge the
World, was necessary, p. 291. And again, p. 301. That God had declared, whoever
would believe Jesus to be the Savior promised, and take him now raised from
the Dead, and constituted the Lord and Judge of all Men, to be their King and
Ruler, shall be saved. This made me say These and Those Articles (in words of
the plural number) more than once; Evidence enough to any but a Caviller, that
I contended not for one single Article and no more. And to mind him of it, I in
my Vindication, reprinted one of those places where I had done so; and that he
might not, according to his manner, overlook what does not please him, the
words, THESE ARE ARTICLES, were printed in great Characters. Whereupon he makes
this Remark, p. 7. And though since he has tried to split this One into Two,
page 28. yet he labors in vain: For to believe Jesus to be the Messiah,
amounts to the same with believing him to be King and Ruler; his being Anointed
(i. e. being the Messiah) including that in it: Yet he has the vanity to add in
great Characters, THESE ARE ARTICLES; as if the putting them into these great
letters, would make One Article Two.

Answ. Though no Letters will make One Article Two; yet that there is One God,
and Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who rose again from the Dead, ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand of God, shall come to judge the
Quick and the Dead, are more than One Article, and may very properly be called
THESE ARTICLES, without splitting One into Two.

What, in my Reasonableness of Christianity, I have said of One Article, I
shall always own; and in what sense I said it, is easy to be understood; and
with a Man of the least Candor, whose Aim was Truth, and not Wrangling, it
would not have occasioned one word of Dispute. But as for this Unmasker, who
made it his business not to convince me of any Mistakes in my Opinion, but
barely to mis-represent me; my business at present with him, is, to show the
World, that what he has captiously and scurrilously said of me relating to One
Article, is false; and that he neither has nor can prove one of those
Assertions concerning it, above cited out of him in his own words. Nor let him
pretend a Meaning against his direct Words: Such a Caviller as he, who would
shelter himself under the pretense of a Meaning, whereof there are no
Footsteps, whose Disputes are only Calumnies directed against the Author,
without examining the Truth of Falsehood of what I had published, is not to
expect the Allowances one would make to a fair and ingenuous Adversary, who
showed so much Concern for Truth, that he treated of it with a Seriousness due
to the weightiness of the Matter, and used other Arguments besides Obloquy,
Clamor and Falsehoods, against what he thought Error. And therefore I again
positively demand of him to prove these words of his to be true, or confess
that he cannot: Viz.

III.
That I contend for One Article of Faith, with the exclusion and defiance of
all the rest.

Two other Instances of this sort of Arguments I gave in the 29th. Page of my
Vindication, out of the 115th. and 119th. Pages of his Thoughts concerning the
Causes of Atheism, and I here demand of him again to show, since he has not
thought fit hitherto to give any Answer to it,

IV.
Where I urge, that there must be nothing in Christianity, that is not plain,
and exactly levelled to all Men's Mother Wit, and every common Apprehension.

Or where he finds, in my Reasonanableness of Christianity, this other
Proposition:

V.
That the very manner of every thing in Christianity must be clear and
intelligible; every thing must immediately be comprehended by the weakest
Noddle, or else it is no part of Religion, espicially of Christianity.

These things he must prove that I have said: I put it again upon him to show
where I said them, or else to confess the Forgery: For till he does one or
the other, he shall be sure to have these, with a large Catalogue of other
Falsehoods, laid before him.

Page 25. of his Socinianism Unmasked, he endeavors to make good his saying,
that I set up One Article, with defiance of all the rest, in these words; For
what is excluding them wholly, but defying them? Wherefore, seeing he utterly
excludes all the rest, by representing them as USELESS to the making ^ Man a
Christian, which is the design of his whole Undertaking, it is manifest that he
defies them.

Answ. This at least is manifest from hence, that the Unmasker knows not, or
cares not what he says. For whoever, but he, thought that a bare Exclusion, or
passing by, was Defiance? If he understands it so, I would advise him not to
seek Preferment. For Exclusions will happen; and if every Exclusion be
Defiance, a Man had need be well assured of his own good Temper, who shall not
think his Peace and Charity in danger, amongst so many Enemies that are at
defiance with him? Defiance, if with any propriety it can be spoken of an
Article of Faith, must signify a professed Enmity to it. For in its proper
use, which is to Persons, it signifies an open and declared Enmity raised to
that height, that he in whom it is, challenges the Party defied to Battle, that
may there wreek his hatred on his Enemy in his Destruction. So that my Defiance
of all the rest remains still to be proved.

But, Secondly, There is another thing manifest from these words of his, viz.
That notwithstanding his great Brags in his first Paragraph, his main Skill
lies, in ^ansying what would be for his turn, and then confidently fathering it
upon me. It never entered into my Thoughts, nor, I think, into any body's else,
(I must always except the acute Unmasker, who makes no difference between
Useful and Necessary) that all but the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Faith were useless to make a Man a Christian; though, if it be true, that the
Belief of the Fundamentals alone (be they few or many) is all that is necessary
to his being made a Christian, all that may any way persuade him to believe
them, may certainly be useful toward the making him a Christian: And therefore
here again I must propose to him, and leave it with him to be showed, Where it
is,

VI.
I have represented all the rest as useless to the making a Man a Christian?
And, How it appears, that this is the design of my whole Undertaking?

In his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism, he says, page 115. what
makes him contend for one single Article with the exclusion of all the rest? He
pretends it is this, that all Men ought to understand their Religion. This
reasoning I disowned p. 26. of my Vindication, and intimated p. 27. that he
should have quoted the Page where I so pretended. To this p. 26. he tells me
with great confidence, and in abundance of words, as we shall see by and by,
that I had done so: As if repetition were a Proof. He had done better to have
quoted one place, where I so pretend. Indeed p. 27. for want of something
better* he quotes these words of mine out of p. 301. of the Reasonableness of
Christianity. The all merciful God seems herein to have consulted the poor of
this World, and the bulk of Mankind. THESE ARE ARTICLES that the laboring and
illiterate Man may comprehend. I ask whether it be possible for one to bring
any thing more direct against himself? The thing he was to prove was, That I
contended for one single Article with the exclusion of all the rest, because I
pretended, that all Men ought to understand their Religion, i. e. The Reason I
gave, why there was to be but one single Article in Religion with the exclusion
of all the rest, was, because Men ought to understand their Religion, and the
place he brings to prove my contending upon that ground for one single Article
with the exclusion of all the rest, is a passage wherein I speak of more than
one Article, and say these Articles. Whether I said These Articles properly or
improperly, it matters not in the present case (and that we have examined in
another place) it is plain, I meant more than one Article, when I said these
Articles; and did not think, that the laboring and illiterate Man could not
understand them, if they were more than one: And therefore I pretended not,
that there must be but one, because by illiterate Men more than one could not
be understood. The rest of this Paragraph is nothing but a repetition of the
same Assertion without Proof, which with the Unmasker often passes for a way of
proving, but with no body else.

But, that I may keep that distance, which he boasts there is betwixt his and
my way of writing, I shall not say this without Proofs. One instance of his
repetition, of which there is such plenty in his Book, pray take here. His
Business p. 26. is to prove, that I pretended that I contended for one single
Article with the exclusion of all the rest, because all Men ought to understand
their Religion. Page 27. of my Vindication, I denied that I had so pretended.
To convince me that I had, thus he proceeds.

Unmasker. He founds his Conceit of one Article partly upon this, tha^ a
multitude of Doctrines is obscure, and hard to be understood.

Answer. You say it, and had said it before: But I ask you, as I did before,
where I did so?

Unm. And therefore he trusses all up in one Article, that the poor People and
bulk of Mankind may bear it.

Answ. I desire again to know where I made that Inference, and argued so for
one Article.

Unm. This is the scope of a great part of his Book.

Answ. This is saying again, show it once.

Unm. But his Memory does not keep pace with his Invention, and thence he says,
he remembers nothing of this in his Book, Vind. p. 27.

Answ. This is to say, that it is in my Book. You have said it more than once
already; I demand of you to show me where?

Unm. This worthy Writer does not know his own reasoning, that he uses.

Answ. I ask where does he use that reasoning?

Unm. As particularly thus, that he troubles Christian Men with no more, but
one Article: BECAUSE that is intelligible, and all people high and low may
comprehend it.

Answ. We have heard it affirmed by you over and over again, but the question
still is, where is that way of arguing to be found in my Book?

Unm. For he has chosen out, as he thinks, a plain and easy Article. Whereas
the others, which are commonly propounded, are not generally agreed on (he
says), and are dubious and uncertain. But the believing that Jesus was the
Messiah has nothing of doubtfulness, or obscurity in it.

Answ. The word For in the beginning of this Sentence makes it stand, for one
of your Reasons; though it be but a repetition of the same thing in other words.

Unm. THIS the Reader will find to be the drift and design of several of his
Pages.

Answ. This must signify, that I trouble Men with no more but one Article
because one only is intelligible, and then it is but a Repetition. If any thing
else be meant by the word This, it is nothing to the purpose. For that I said,
that all things necessary to be believed are plain in Scripture, and easy to
be understood, I never denied; And should be very sorry, and recant it if I had.

Unm. And the reason, why I did not quote any single one of them, was, because
he insists on it so long together: and spins it out after his way, in p. 301.
of his Reasonableness of Christianity, where he sets down the short, plain,
easy and intelligible Summary (as he calls it) of Religion, couched in a
single Article: He immediately adds; The All^merciful God seems herein to have
consulted the Poor of this World, and the Bulk of Mankind; these are Articles
(whereas he had set down but one) that the laboring and illiterate Man may
comprehend.

Answ. If my insisting on it so long together, was the cause why, in your
Thoughts of the Causes of Atheism, you did not quote any single Passage;
methinks here, in your Socinianism Unmasked, where you knew it was expected of
you, my insisting on it, as you say, so long together, might have afforded at
least one Quotation to your purpose.

Unm. He assigns this as a Ground, why it was God's Pleasure that there should
be but ONE POINT of Faith, BECAUSE thereby Religion may be understood the
better; the generality of the People may comprehend it.

Answ. I hear you say it again, but want a Proof still, and ask where I assign
that Ground?

Unm. This he represents as a great Kindness done by God to Man, whereas the
variety of Articles would be hard to be understood.

Answ. Again the same Cabbage; an Affirmation, but no Proof.

Unm. This he enlarges upon, and flourishes it over after his fashion: and yet
he desires to know, when he said so, p. 29. Vindic.

Answ. And if I did, Let the World here take a Sample of the Unmasker's
Ability, or Truth, who spends above two whole Pages 26, 27. in repetitions of
the same Assertion, without the producing any but one place, for Proof, and
that too against him as I have shown. But he has not yet done with confounding
me by dint of repetition; he goes on.

Unm. Good Sir, let me be permitted to acquaint you, that your Memory is as
defective as your Judgment.

Answ. I thank you for the regard you have had to it; for often repetition is a
good help to a bad memory. In requital, I advise you to have some eye to your
own Memory and Judgment too. For one or both of them seem a little to blame in
the reason you subjoyn to the foregoing words, viz.

Unm. For in the very Vindication you attribute it to the goodness and
condescension of the Almighty, that he requires nothing as absolutely necessary
to be believed, but what is suited to vulgar capacities, and the comprehension
of illiterate Men.

Answ. I will for the Unmasker's sake put this Argument of his into a
Syllogism. If the Vindicator in his Vindication attributes it to the goodness
and condescenssion of the Almighty, that he requires nothing to be believed,
but what is suited to vulgar Capacities, and the comprehension of illiterate
Men, then he did in his Reasonableness of Christianity pretend, that the reason
why he contended for one Article with the exclusion of all the rest was,
because all Men ought to understand their Religion.

But the Vindicator in his Vindication attributes it to the goodness and
condescension of Almighty God, that he requires nothing to be believed, but
what is suited to vulgar Capacities, and the comprehension of illiterate Men.

Ergo in his Reasonableness of Christianity, he pretended, that the reason why
he contended for one Article with the exclusion of all the rest was because all
Men ought to understand their Religion.

This was the Proposition to be proved, and which as he confesses here p. 26. I
denied to remember to be in my Reasonableness of Christianity. Who can but
admire his Logic!

But besides the strength of Judgment, which you have showed in this clear and
cogent reasoning, does not your Memory too deserve its due applause? You tell
me in your Socinianism Unmasked, that in p. 29. of my Vindication, I desired to
know when I said so. To which desire of mine you reply in these words before
cited, Good Sir, Let me be permitted to acquaint you that your Memory is as
defective as your Judgment; for in the very Vindication you attribute it to the
goodness and condescension of the Almighty, that he requires nothing as
absolutely necessary to be believed, but what is suited to vulgar Capacities,
and the comprehension of illiterate Men, p. 30.

Sure the Unmasker thinks himself at cross questions. I ask him in the 29th.
Page of my Vindication, WHEN I said so: And he answers, that I had said so in
the 30th. Page of my Vindication, i. e. when I writ the 29th. Page, I asked the
question when I had said what he charged me with saying, and I am answered, I
had said it in the 30th. Page, which was not yet written, i. e. I ask the
question to day WHEN I had said so: and I am answered, I had said it to Morrow.
As apposite, and convincing an Answer to make good his charge, as if he had
said to Morrow I found a Horse-shooe. But perhaps this judicious Disputant will
ease himself of this difficulty by looking again into the 29th. p. of my
Vindication, out of which he cites these words for mine, I desire to know WHEN
I said so. But my words in that place, are I desire to know WHERE I said so; a
mark of his exactness in quoting, when he vouchsafes to do it. For Unmaskers,
when they turn Disputants, think it the best way to talk at large, and charge
home in generals. But do not often find it convenient to quote Pages, set down
words, and come to particulars. But if he had quoted my words right, his Answer
had been just as pertinent. For I ask him WHERE in my Reasonableness of
Christianity I had said so: And he answers, I had said so in my Vindication.
For where in my question refers to my Reasonableness of Christianity, which the
Unmasker had seen, and charged with this saying; and could not referr to my
Vindication, which he had not yet seen; nor to a passage in it which was not
then written. But this is nothing with an Unmasker, therefore what is yet
worse, those words of mine, Vindic. p. 29. relate not to the passage he is here
proving I had said; but to another different from it, as different as it is to
say, that because all Men are to understand their Religion, therefore there is
to be but One Article in it; And to say that there must be nothing in
Christianity, that is not plain and exactly levelled to all Men's Mother Wit:
Both which he falsely charges on me, but it is only to the latter of them, that
my words I desire to know where I said so are applied.

Perhaps the well-meaning Man sees no difference between these two
Propositions, yet I shall take the liberty to ask him again, where I said
either of them, as if they were two: although he should accuse me again of
excepting against the formality of words, and doing so foolish a thing as to
expect, that a disputing Unmasker should account for his words, or any
Proposition he advances. It Is his privilege to plead he did not mean as his
words import, and without any more ado he is assoil'd; and he is the same
Unmasker he was before. But let us hear him out on the Argument he was upon,
for his repetitions on it are not yet done. His next words are,

Unm. It is clear then, that you found your ONE Article on this, that it is
suited to the vulgar Capacities: Whereas the other Articles, mentioned by me,
are obscure and ambiguous, and therefore surpass the comprehension of the
illiterate.

Answ. The latter part indeed is now the first time imputed to me. But all the
rest is nothing but an unproved repetition, though ushered in with it is clear
then; words that should have a Proof going before them.

Unm. But yet you pretend, that you have forgot, that any such thing was said
by you.

Answ. I have indeed ^orgot, and notwithstanding all your pains by so many
repetitions to beat it into my Head, I fear I shall never remember it.

Unm. Which shows that you are careless of your words, and that you forget what
you write.

Answ. So you told me before, and this repeating of it does no more convince
me, than that did.

Unm. What shall we say to such an oblivious Author?

Answ. Show it him in his Book, or else he will never be able to remember, that
it is there, nor any body else b^ able to find it.

Unm. He takes no notice of what falls from his own Pen.

Answ. So you have told him more than once. Try him once with showing it him
amongst other things which fell from his own Pen, and see what then he will
say: That perhaps may refresh his Memory.

Unm. And therefore within a Page or two he confutes himself, and gives himself
the Lie.

Answ. It Is a Fault he deserves to be told of over and over again. But he says,
he shall not be able to find the two Pages, wherein he gives himself the Lie,
unless you set down their Numbers, and the words in them, which confute, and
which are consuted.

I beg my Reader's pardon for laying before him so large a pattern of our
Unmasker's new fashioned Stuff; his fine Tissue of argumentation not easily to
be matched, but by the same Hand. But it lay altogether in p. 26, 27, and 28.
and it was fit the Reader should have this one instance of the Excellencies, he
promises in his first Paragraph in opposition to my Impertinencies,
Incoherencies, weak and feeble struglings. Other Excellencies he there promised
upon the same ground, which I shall give my Reader a taste of, in fit places.
Not but that the whole is of a piece, and one cannot miss some of them in every
Page: But to transcribe them all, would be more than they are worth. If any one
desires more plenty, I send him to his Book it self. But saying a thousand
times not being proving once, it remains upon him still to show,

VII.
Where, in my Reasonableness of Christianity, I pretend that I contend for one
single Article, with the exclusion of all the rest, because all Men ought to
understand their Religion?

And in the next place, where it is that I say,

VIII.
That there must be nothing in Christianity that is not plain and exactly level
to all Men's Mother Wit.

Let us now return to his 8th. Page. For the bundling together, as was fit, all
that he has said in distant places upon the Subject of One Articl. has made me
trespass a little against the Jewish Character of a well-bred Man, recommended
by him to me out of the Mishna. Though I propose to my self to follow him, as
near as I can, step by step, as he proceeds.

In the 110th. and 111th. Pages of his Thoughts concerning the Causes of
Atheism, he gave us a List of his Fundamental Articles: Upon which I thus
applied my self to him, Vind. p. 5. Give me leave now to ask you seriously,
whether these you have here set down under the title of Fundamental Doctrines
are such (when reduced to Propositions) that every one of them is required to
make a Man a Christian, and such as without the actual belief thereof, he
cannot be saved? If they are not so every one of them, you may call them
Fundamental Doctrines as much as you please, they are not of those Doctrines of
Faith, I was speaking of; which are only such as are required to be actually
believed to make a Man a Christian. And again, Vindic. p. 18. I asked him
whether just these neither more nor less were those necessary Articles.

To which we have his Answer, Socinianism Unmasked, p. 8, etc. From p. 8. to
20. he has quoted near Forty Texts of Scripture, of which he says, p. 21. Thus
I have briefly set before the Reader those Evangelical Truths, those Christian
Principles which belong to the very Essence of Christianity: I have proved them
to be such, and I have reduced most of them to certain Propositions, which is a
thing the Vindicator called for.

Answ. Yes; But that was not all the Vindicator called for, and had reason to
expect. For I asked, whether those the Unmasker gave us in his Thoughts
concerning the Causes of Atheism, were the Fundamental Doctrines without an
actual Belief whereof a Man could not be a Christian, just all neither more nor
less? This I had reason to demand from him, or from any one, who questions that
part of my Book, and I shall insist upon till he does it, or confesses he
cannot. For having set down the Articles, which the Scripture upon a diligent
search seemed to me to require as necessary, and only necessary, I shall not
lose my time in examining, what another says against those Fundamentals, which
I have gathered out of the Preachings of our Savior and his Apostles, till he
gives me a List of his Fundamentals, which he will bide by; that so by
comparing them together, I may see which is the true Catalogue of Necessaries.
For after so serious and diligent a search, which has given me Light and
Satisfaction in this great Point, I shall not quit it, and set my self on float
again, at the demand of any one who would have me be of his Faith, without
telling me what it is. Those Fundamentals, the Scripture has so plainly given,
and so evidently determined, that it would be the greatest folly imaginable to
part with this Rule for asking; and give up my self blindly to the Conduct of
one, who either knows not, or will not tell me, what are the Points necessary
to be believed to make me a Christian. He that shall find fault with my
Collection of Fundamentals only to unsettle me, and not to give me a better of
his own, I shall not think worth minding, till, like a fair Man, he puts
himself upon equal terms, and makes up the Defects of mine by a complete one of
his own. For a deficiency or error in one necessary is as fatal, and as
certainly excludes a Man from being a Christian, as in an hundred. When any one
offers me a complete Catalogue of his Fundamentals, he does not unreasonably
demand me to quit mine for nothing: I have then one, that being set by mine, I
may compare them; and so be able to choose the true and perfect one, and
relinquish the other.

He that does not do this, plainly declares, that (without showing me the
certain way to Salvation) he expects that I should depend on him with an
implicit Faith, whilst he reserves to himself the liberty to require of me to
believe, what he shall think fit, as he sees Occasion; and in effect, says
thus, Distrust those Fundamentals which the Preaching of our Savior, and his
Apostles, have showed to be all that is necessary to be believed to make a Man
a Christian, and though I cannot tell you, what are those other Articles, which
are necessary and sufficient to make a Man a Christian, yet take me for your
Guide, and that is as good, as if I made up, in a complete List, the Defects of
your Fundamentals. To which this is a sufficient Answer, Si quid novisti
rectius imperti, si non, his ut ere mecum.

The Unmasker of his own accord, p. 110. of his Thoughts concerning the Causes
of Atheism, sets down several, which he calls Fundamental Doctrines. I ask him,
whether those be all? For answer he adds more to them in his Socinianism
Unmasked: But in a great pet refuses to tell me, whether this Second List of
Fundamentals be complete: And instead of answering so reasonable a Demand, pays
me with ill Language, in these words, page 22. subjoined to those last quoted,
If what I have said will not content him, I am sure I can do nothing that will,
and therefore if he should Capriciously require any thing more, it would be as
great folly in me to comply with it, as it is in him to move it. If I did ask a
Question which troubles you, be not so angry; you your self were the occasion
of it. I proposed my Collection of Fundamentals, which I had with great care
sought; and thought I had found clear in the Scripture; you tell me no, it is
imperfect, and offer me one of your own. I ask whether that be perfect?
Thereupon you grow into Choler, and tell me it is a foolish Question. Why! then
I think it was not very wise in you so forwardly to offer one, unless you had
had one ready, not liable to the same exception. Would you have me so foolish
to take a List of Fundamentals from you, who have not yet one for your self?
nor are yet resolved with your self, what Doctrines are to be put in, or left
out of it? Farther, pray tell me, if you had a settled Collection of
Fundamentals, that you would stand to, why should I take them from you upon
your word, rather than from an Anabaptist, or a Quaker, or an Arminian, or a
Socinian, or a Lutheran, or a Papist? who, I think, are not perfectly agreed
with you, or one another in Fundamentals? and yet there is none amongst them,
that I have not as much reason to believe upon his bare word, as an Unmasker,
who to my certain knowledge will make bold with Truth. If you set up for
Infallibility, you may have some claim to have your bare word taken, before any
other but the Pope. But yet if you do demand to be an unquestionable Proposer
of what is absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, you
must perform it a little better, than hitherto you have done. For it is not
enough sometimes to give us Texts of Scripture; Sometimes Propositions of your
own framing; and sometimes Texts of Scripture out of which they are to be
framed as p. 14. you say, These and the like places afford us such Fundamental
and Necessary Doctrines as these: And again, p. 16. after the naming several
other Texts of Scripture, you add which places yield us such Propositions as
these, and then in both places set down, what you think fit to draw out of
them. And Page 15. you have these words: And here likewise it were easy to
show that Adoption, Justification, Pardon of Sins, etc. which are Privileges
and Benefits bestowed upon us by the Messiah, are Necessary Matters of our
Belief. By all which, as well as the whole frame, wherein you make show of
giving us your Fundamental Articles, it is plain, that what you have given us
there, is nothing less than a complete Collection of Fundamentals, even in your
own Opinion of it.

But Good Sir, why is it a foolish Question in me? you have found fault with my
Summary for being short: The defect in my Collection of Necessary Articles has
raised your Zeal into so severe Censures, and drawn upon me from you so heavy a
Condemnation, that if half that you have said of me be true, I am in a very ill
case, for having so curtailed the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity. Is it
folly then for me to ask from you a complete Creed? If it be so dangerous (as
certainly it is) to fail in any necessary Article of Faith, why is it folly in
me to be instant with you to give me them all? Or why is it folly in you to
grant so reasonable a Demand? a short Faith, defective in Necessaries, is no
more tolerable in you, than in me; nay, much more inexcuseable, if it were for
no other reason, but this, that you rest in it your self, and would impose it
on others; and yet do not your self know or believe it to be complete. For if
you do, why dare you not say so, and give it us all entire in plain
Propositions? and not, as you have in great measure done here, give only the
Texts of Scripture, from whence, you say, necessary Articles are to be drawn;
which is too great an uncertainty for Doctrines absolutely necessary. For
possibly all Men do not understand those Texts alike, and some may draw
Articles out of them quite different from your Systeme; and so though they
agree in the same Texts, may not agree in the same Fundamentals: and till you
have set down plainly and distinctly your Articles, that you think contained in
them, cannot tell whether you will allow them to be Christians, or no. For you
know, Sir, several Inferences are often drawn from the same Text; and the
different Systems of dissenting (I was going to say Christians, but that none
must be so, but those who receive your Collection of Fundamentals, when you
please to give it them) Professors, are all founded on the Scripture.

Why, I beseech you, is mine a foolish Question to ask, What are the necessary
Articles of Faith? It Is of no less consequence than, nor much different from
the Jaylor's Question in the 16th. of the Acts, What shall I do to be saved?
and that was not, that ever I heard counted by any one a foolish Question. You
grant there are Articles necessary to be believed for Salvation: would it not
then be Wisdom to know them? nay, is it not our Duty to know and believe them?
If not, why do you with so much outcry reprehend me, for not knowing them? why
do you fill your Books with such variety of Invectives, as if you could never
say enough, nor bad enough, against me, for having left out some of them? And
if it be so dangerous, so criminal to miss any of them, why is it a folly in me
to move you to give me a complete List?

If Fundamentals are to be known, easy to be known (as without doubt they are)
then a Catalogue may be given of them. But if they are not, if it cannot
certainly be determined which are they; but the doubtful knowledge of them
depends upon guesses, why may not I be permitted to follow my guesses, as well
as you yours? Or why, of all others, must you prescribe your guesses to me,
when there are so many, that are as ready to prescribe as you, and of as good
Authority? The pretense indeed, and clamor is Religion, and the Saving of
Souls: But your Business it is plain is nothing, but to overrule, and prescribe,
and be hearkened to as a Dictator; and not to inform, teach and instruct in the
sure way to Salvation. Why else do you so start and fling, when I desire to
know of you, what is necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, when
this is the only material thing in Controversy between us, and my Mistakes in
it has made you begin a quarrel with me, and let loose your Pen against me in
no ordinary way of reprehension?

Besides in this way which you take, you will be in no better a case than I.
For another having as good a claim to have his guesses give the rule, as you
yours; or to have his System received, as well as you yours, he will complain
of you, as well, and upon as good grounds, as you do of me, and (if he have but
as much Zeal for his Orthodoxy as you show for yours) in as civil, well-bred
and Christian-like Language.

In the next place, pray tell me, why would it be folly in you to comply with
what I require of you? Would it not be useful to me to be set right in this
Matter, if so, why is it folly in you to set me right? Consider me, if you
please, as one of your Parishioners, who (after you have resolved which
Catalogue of Fundamentals to give him, either that in your Thoughts of the
Causes of Atheism; or this other here in your Socinianism Unmasked, for they
are not both the same, nor either of them perfect) asked you, are these all
Fundamental Articles necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian; and
are there no more but these? would you answer him, that it was folly in you to
comply with him, in what he desired? Is it of no moment to know, what is
required of Men to be believed; without a belief of which they are not
Christians, nor can be saved? And is it folly in a Minister of the Gospel to
inform one committed to his Instruction in so material a Point as this, which
distinguishes Believers from Unbelievers? Is it folly in one whose Business it
is to bring Men to be Christians, and to Salvation, to resolve a Question by
which they may know, whether they are Christians or no, and without a
resolution of which they cannot certainly know their Condition and the state
they are in? Is it besides your Commission and Business, and therefore a folly
to extend your care of Souls so far as this, to those who are committed to your
Charge?

Sir, I have a Title to demand this of you, as if I were your Parishioner: You
have forced your self upon me for a Teacher in this very Point, as if you
wanted a Parishioner to instruct: and therefore I demand it of you, and shall
insist upon it, till you either do it, or confess you cannot. Nor shall it
excuse you to say it is capriciously required. For this is no otherwise
capricious, than all Questions are capricious to a Man that cannot answer them:
and such an one I think this is to you. For if you could answer it, no body can
doubt, but that you would; and that with confidence: For no body will suspect
it is the want of that makes you so reserved. This is indeed a frequent way of
answering Questions by men, that cannot otherwise cover the Absurdities of
their Opinions, and their insolence of expecting to be believed upon their bare
words, by saying they are capriciously asked, and deserved no other Answer.

But how far soever Capriciousness (when proved, for saying is not enough) may
excuse from answering a material Question, yet your own words here will clear
this from being a capricious Question in me. For that those Texts of Scripture,
which you have set down, do not upon your own Grounds contain all the
Fundamental Doctrines of Religion; all that is necessary to be believed to make
a Man a Christian, what you say a little lower, in this very Page, as well as
in other places, does demonstrate, Your words are, I think I have sufficiently
proved, that there are other Doctrines besides that [Jesus is the Messiah]
which are required to be believed to make a Man a Christian; why did the
Apostles write these Doctrines? was it not that those they writ to, might give
their assent to them? This Argument for the necessity of believing the Texts
you cite, from their being set down in the New Testament you urged thus, p. 9.
Is this set down to no purpose in these inspired Epistles? Is it not requisite
that we should know it and believe? And again p. 29. They are in our Bibles to
that very purpose to be believed. If then it be necessary to know, and believe
those Texts of Scripture, you have collected, because the Apostles writ them,
and they were not set down to no purpose. And they are in our Bibles on purpose
to be believed, I have reason to demand of you other Texts, besides those you
have enumerated, as containing Points necessary to be believed: because there
are other Texts which the Apostles writ, and were not set down to no purpose,
and are in our Bibles on purpose to be believed, as well as those which you
have cited.

Another reason of doubting, and consequently of demanding, whether those
Propositions, you have set down for Fundamental Doctrines, be every one of them
necessary to be believed, and all that are necessary to be believed to make a
Man a Christian, I have from your next Argument which joined to the former
stands thus, p. 22. Why did the Apostles write these Doctrines? Was it not that
those they writ to might give their assent to them? nay, did they not require
assent to them? Yes verily, for this is to be proved from the Nature of the
things contained in those Doctrines which are such as had immediate respect to
the Occasion, Author, Way, Means and Issue of their Redemption and Salvation.
If therefore all things which have an immediate respect to the Occasion,
Author, Way, Means, and Issue of Men's Redemption and Salvation are those, and
those only which are necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, may a
Man not justly doubt, whether those Propositions which the Unmasker has set
down, contain all those things, and whether there be not other things contained
in other Texts of Scripture, or in some of those cited by him, but otherwise
understood, that have as immediately a respect to the Occasion, Author, Way,
Means, and Issue of Men's Redemption and Salvation, as those he has set down?
And therefore I have reason to demand a compleater List. For at best, to tell
us, that all things that have an immediate respect to the Occasion, Author,
Way, Means, and Issue Issue of Men's Redemption and Salvation, is but a general
Description of Fundamentals, with which some may think some Articles agree, and
others others: And the terms immediate respect may give ground enough for
difference about them to those, who agree, that the rest of your Description is
right. My demand therefore is not a general Description of Fundamentals, but
for the Reasons abovementioned, the particular Articles themselves, which are
necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian.

It is not my Business at p^^sent to examine the validity of these Arguments of
his, to prove all the Propositions to be necessary to be believed, which he has
here in his Socinianism Unmasked, set down as such. The use I make of them now,
is to show the reason, they afford me to doubt, that those Propositions, which
he has given us for Doctrines necessary to be believed, are either not all
such, or more than all, by his own rule: And therefore I must desire him to
give us a compleater Creed, that we may know, what in his sense is necessary,
and enough to make a Man a Christian.

Nor will it be sufficient in this case to do, what he tells us, that he has
done, in these words, p. 21. I have briefly set before the Reader, these
Evangelical Truths, Those Christian Principles which belong to the very Essence
of Christianity -- and I have reduced most of them to certain Propositions,
which is a thing the Vindicator called for, p. 16. With Submission, I think, he
mistakes the Vindicator. What I called for was, not that most of them, should
be reduced to certain Propositions, but that all of them should: and the reason
of my demanding that was plain, viz. that then having the Unmasker's Creed in
clear and distinct Propositions, I might be able to examine, whether it was,
what God in the Scriptures indispensibly required of every Man to make him a
Christian, that so I might thereby correct the Errors or Defects of what I at
present apprehended the Scripture taught me in the case.

The Unmasker endeavors to excuse himself from answering my Question by
another exception against it, p. 24. in these words. Surely none but this
Upstart Racovian will have the confidence to deny that these Articles of Faith
are such as are necessary to constitute a Christian, as to the Intellectual and
Doctrinal part of Christianity, such as must IN SOME MEASURE be known and
assented to by him. Not that a Man is supposed every moment to actually exert
his assent and belief for none of the Moral Virtues, none of the Evangelical
Graces are exerted thus always. Wherefore that Question in p. 16. (though he
says he asks it seriously) might have been spared, Whether every one of these
Fundamentals is required to be believed to make a Man a Christian, and such as
without the actual belief thereof he cannot be saved? Here is seriousness
pretended when there is none, for the Design is only to Cavil, and (if he can)
to expose my Assertion. But he is not able to do it, for all his Critical
Demands are answered in these few words, viz. That in the Intellectual (as well
as Moral Endowments) are never supposed to be always in act: They are exerted
upon Occasion, not all of them at a time. And therefore he mistakes if he
thinks, or rather as he Objects without thinking, that these Doctrines if they
be Fundamental and Necessary, must be always actually believed. No Man besides
himself ever started such a thing.

This terrible long Combat has the Unmasker managed with his own Shadow, to
confound the Seriousness of my Question, and as he says himself, is come off
not only safe and sound, but triumphant. But for all that, Sir, may not a Man's
Question be serious, though he should chance to express it ill? I think you and
I were not best to set up for Critics in Language, and Nicety of Expression,
for fear we should set the World a Laughing. Yet for this once, I shall take
the liberty to defend mine here. For I demand in what Expression of mine, I
said or supposed, that a man should every moment actually exert his assent to
any Proposition required to be believed? Cannot a Man say, that the Unmasker
cannot be admitted to any Preferment in the Church of England without an actual
assent to, or Subscribing of the 39 Articles, unless it be supposed that he
must every moment from the time he first read, assented to, and subscribed
those Articles, till he received Institution and Induction, actually exert his
assent to every one of them, and repeat his Subscription? In the same sense it
is literally true, that a Man cannot be admitted into the Church of Christ or
into Heaven, without actually believing all the Articles necessary to make a
Man a Christian, without supposing, that he must actually exert that assent
every moment from the time, that he first gave it, till the moment that he is
admitted into Heaven. He may Eat, Drink, make Bargains, study Euclid, and think
of other things between; nay, sometimes Sleep, and neither think of those
Articles nor any thing else, and yet it be true, that he shall not be admitted
into the Church, or Heaven, without an actual assent to them: That Condition of
an actual assent he has performed, and until he recall that assent by actual
Unbelief it stands good, and though a Lunacy or Lethargy should seize on him
presently after, and he should never think of it again as long as he lived, yet
it is literally true, he is not saved without an actual assent. You might
therefore have spared your pains in saying, That none of the Moral Virtues,
none of the Evangelical, Graces are exerted THUS always, till you had met with
some body who had said THUS, That I did so I think would have entered into no
bodies thoughts but yours, it being evident from p. 298, and 300. of my Book,
that by Actual I meant Explicit. You should rather have given a direct Answer
to my Question, which I here again seriously ask you, viz. Whether,

IX.
Those you called Fundamental Doctrines, in your Thoughts concerning the Causes
of Atheism, or those Christian Principles which belong to the very Essence of
Christianity, so many as you have given us of them in your Socinianism Unmasked
(for you may take which of your two Creeds you please) are Just those, neither
more nor less, that are every one of them required to be believed to make a Man
a Christian, and such, as without the actual or (since that word displeases
you) the explicit belief whereof he cannot be saved.

When you have answered this Question, we shall then see which of us two is
nearest the right? But if you shall forbear Railing, which I fear you take for
arguing, against that Summary of Faith, which our Savior and his Apostles
taught, and which only they proposed to their Hearers to be believed to make
them Christians, till you have found another perfect Creed of only necessary
Articles, that you dare own for such; you are like to have a large time of
Silence. Before I leave the Passage above cited, I must desire the Reader to
take notice of what he says concerning his List of Fundamentals, viz. That
these his Articles of Faith necessary to constitute a Christian, are such as
must IN SOME MEASURE be known and assented to by him. A very wary Expression
concerning Fundamentals. The Question is about Articles necessary to be
explicitly believed to make a Man a Christian. These in his List the Unmasker
tells us are necessary to constitute a Christian, and must IN SOME MEASURE be
known and assented to, I would now fain know of the Reader whether he
understands hereby, that the Unmasker means, that these his necessary Articles
must be explicitly believed or not! If he means an explicit Knowledge and
Belief, why does he puzzle his Reader by so improper a way of speaking? for
what is as complete and perfect as it ought to be, cannot properly be said to
be in some Measure. If his in some Measure falls short of explicitly knowing
and believing his Fundamentals, his necessary Articles are such as a Man may be
a Christian without explicitly knowing and believing, i. e. are no
Fundamentals, no necessary Articles at all. Thus Men, uncertain what to say,
betray themselves by their great Caution.

Having pronounced it Folly in himself to make up the defects of my short, and
therefore so much blamed Collection of Fundamentals, by a full one of his own,
though his Attempt shows he would if he could, he goes on thus, p. 22. From
what I [the Unmasker] have said it is evident, that the Vindicator is grossly
mistaken when he says, Whatever Doctrine the Apostles required to be believed
to make a Man a Christian, are to be found in those places of Scripture which
he has quoted in his Book. And a little lower, I think I have sufficiently
proved that there are other Doctrines besides that, which are required to be
believed to make a Man a Christian. Answ. Whatever you have proved, or (as you
never fail to do) boast you have proved, will signify nothing till you have
proved one of these Propositions, and have shown either,

X.
That what our Savior and his Apostles preached and admitted Men into the
Church for believing, is not all that is absolutely required to make a Man a
Christian. Or,

That the believing him to be the Messiah, was not the only Article they
insisted on to those, who acknowledged one God; and upon the belief whereof
they admitted Converts into the Church, in any one of those many places quoted
by me out of the History of the New Testament.

I say, any one; For though it be evident throughout the whole Gospel and the
Acts, that this was the one Doctrine of Faith, which in all their Preachings
every where, they principally drive at: Yet if it were not so, but that in
other places they taught other things, that would not prove, that those other
things were Articles of Faith absolutely necessarily required to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, unless it had been so said. Because if it appears, that
ever any one was admitted into the Church by our Savior or his Apostles,
without having that Article explicitly laid before him, and without his
explicit assent to it, you must grant, that an explicit assent to that Article
is not necessary to make a Man a Christian: Unless you will say, that our
Savior, and his Apostles admitted Men into the Church, that were not qualified
with such a Faith, as was absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian, which
is as much as to say, that they allowed, and pronounced Men to be Christians,
who were not Christians. For he, that wants what is necessary to make a Man a
Christian, can no more be a Christian, than he, that wants what is necessary to
make him a Man, can be a Man. For what is necessary to the being of any thing
is Essential to its being; and any thing may be as well without its Essence, as
without any thing that is necessary to its being: and so a Man be a Man without
being a Man, and a Christian a Christian without being a Christian; and an
Unmasker may prove this, without proving it. You may therefore set up, by your
unquestionable Authority, what Articles you please, as necessary to be believed
to make a Man a Christian; If our Savior, and his Apostles admitted Converts
into the Church without preaching those your Articles to them; or requiring an
Explicit assent to what they did not Preach, and explicitly lay down, I shall
prefer their Authority to yours; and think it was rather by them, than by you,
that God promulgated the Law of Faith; and manifested, what that Faith was,
upon which he would receive penitent Converts.

And though by his Apostles our Savior taught a great many other Truths, for
the explaining this Fundamental Article of the Law of Faith, that Jesus is the
Messiah; some whereof have a nearer, and some a more remote connection with it,
and so cannot be denied by any Christian, who sees that connection, or knows
they are so taught: yet an explicit belief of any one of them is no more
necessarily required to make a Man a Christian, than an explicit belief of all
those Truths which have a connection with the being of a God, or are revealed by
him, is necessarily required to make a Man not to be an Atheist: Though none of
them can be denied by any one, who sees that connection, or acknowledges that
revelation, without his being an Atheist. All these Truths taught us from God,
either by Reason, or Revelation, are of great use, to enlighten our Minds,
confirm our Faith, stir up our Affections, etc. And the more we see of them,
the more we shall see, admire, and magnify the Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, and
Love of God in the Work of our Redemption. This will oblige us to search, and
study the Scripture, wherein it is contained and laid open to us.

All that we find in the Revelation of the New Testament, being the declared
Will and Mind of our Lord and Master the Messiah, whom we have taken to be our
King, we are bound to receive as Right and Truth, or else we are not his
Subjects, we do not believe him to be the Messiah our King, but cast him off,
and with the Jews say, we will not have this Man reign over us. But it is still
what we ^ind in the Scripture, not in this or that System; what we sincerely
seeking to know the Will of our Lord, discover to be his Mind. Where it is
spoken plainly we cannot miss it, and it is evident, he requires our assent:
where there is obscurity either in the Expressions themselves, or by reason of
the seeming contrariety of other Passages, there a fair endeavor, as much as
our Circumstances will permit, secures us from a guilty Disobedience to his
Will, or a sinful Error in Faith, which way soever our enry resolves the doubt,
or perhaps leaves it unresolved. If he had required more of us in those Points,
he would have declared his Will plainer to us; and discovered the Truth
contained in those obscure, or seemingly contradictory places, as clearly, and
as uniformly as he did that Fundamental Article, that we were to believe him to
be the Messiah our King.

As Men we have God for our King, and are under the Law of Reason: As
Christians, we have Jesus the Messiah for our King, and are under the Law
revealed by him in the Gospel. And though every Christian, both as a Deist and
a Christian, be obliged to study both the Law of Nature and the Revealed Law,
that in them he may know the Will of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, yet in neither of these Laws is there to be found a Select Set of
Fundamentals, distinct from the rest which are to make him, a Deist or a
Christian. But he that believes one Eternal invisible God, his Lord and King,
ceases thereby to be an Atheist; and he that believes Jesus to be the Messiah
his King, ordained by God thereby becomes a Christian, is delivered from the
Power of Darkness, and is Translated into the Kingdom of the Son of God, is
actually within the Covenant of Grace, and has that Faith; which shall be
imputed to him for Righteousness, and if he continues in his Allegiance to this
his King, shall receive the reward, Eternal Life.

He that Considers this, will not be so hot as the Unmasker, to contend for a
Number of Fundamental Articles all necessary every one of them to be explicitly
believed, by every one, for Salvation, without knowing them himself, or being
able to enumerate them to another. Can there be any thing more absurd, than to
say, there are several Fundamental Articles, each of which every Man must
explicitly believe upon pain of Damnation, and yet not to be able to say, which
they be? The Unmasker has set down no small Number; but yet dares not say,
these are all. On the contrary, he has plainly confessed, there are more: but
will not, i. e. cannot tell what they are, that remain behind. Nay, has given a
general Description of his Fundamental Articles, by which it is not evident,
but there may be ten times as many, as those he had named; and amongst them (if
he durst or could name them) probably several, that many a good Christian, who
died in the Faith, and is now in Heaven, never once thought of; and others,
which many, of as good Authority as he, would from their different Systems,
certainly deny and contradict.

This, as great an Absurdity as it is, cannot be otherwise, whilst Men will
take upon them to alter the terms of the Gospel; and when it is evident, that
our Savior, and his Apostles received Men into the Church, and pronounced them
Believers, for taking him to be the Messiah their King and Deliverer sent by
God, have the boldness to say, this is not enough. But when you would know of
them what then is enough, they cannot tell you. The reason whereof is visible,
viz. Because they being able to produce no other reason for their Collection of
Fundamental Articles to prove them necessary to be believed, but because they
are of Divine Authority and contained in the Holy Scriptures, and are, as the
Unmasker says, writ there on purpose to be believed, they know not where to
stop, when they have once begun. Those Texts that they leave out, or from which
they deduce none of them, being of the same Divine Authority, and so upon that
Account equally Fundamental, with what they have culled out, though not so well
suited to their particular Systems.

Hence come those endless and unreasonable Contentions about Fundamentals,
whilst each censures the Defect, Redundancy, or Falsehood of what others
require, as necessary to be believed; and yet he himself gives not a Catalogue
of his own Fundamentals, which he will say is sufficient and complete. Nor is
it to be wondered, since in this way it is impossible to stop short of putting
every Proposition divinely revealed into the List of Fundamentals; all of them
being of Divine, and so of equal Authority, and upon that account equally
necessary to be believed by every one who is a Christian; though they are not
all necessary to be believed to make any one a Christian. For the New
Testament, containing the Laws of the Messiah's Kingdom, in regard of all the
Actions both of Mind and Body of all his Subjects, every Christian is bound by
his Allegiance to him, to believe all that he says in it to be true, as well as
to assent, that all that he commands in it is just and good: And what
Negligence, Perverseness, or Guilt there is in his mistaking in the one, or
failing in his obedience to the other, That this Righteous Judge of all Men,
who cannot be deceived, will at the last day lay open, and reward accordingly.

It Is no wonder therefore, there has been such fierce Contests, and such cruel
Havoc made amongst Christians about Fundamentals: Whilst every one would set
up his System upon pain of Fire and Faggot in this, and Hell Fire in the other
World; Though at the same time, whilst he is exercising the utmost Barbarities
against others to prove himself a true Christian, he professes himself so
ignorant that he cannot tell, or so uncharitable, that he will not tell, what
Articles are absolutely necessary, and sufficient to make a Man a Christian. If
there be any such Fundamentals, as it is certain there are, it is as certain they
must be very plain. Why then does every one urge and make a stir about
Fundamentals, and no body give a List of them? But because, (as I have said)
upon the usual Grounds, they cannot. For I will be bold to say, that every one,
who considers the matter, will see, that either only the Article of his being
the Messiah their King, which alone our Savior and his Apostles preached to
the Unconverted World, and received those that believed it into the Church, is
the only necessary Article to be believed by a Theist to make him a Christian;
Or else that all the Truths contained in the New Testament, are necessary
Articles to be believed to make a Man a Christian; And that between these two
it is impossible any where to stand. The reason whereof is plain. Because
either the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, i. e. the taking him to be our
King, makes us Subjects and Denizons of his Kingdom, i. e. Christians; Or else
an explicit knowledge of, and actual Obedience to the Laws of his Kingdom is
what is required to make us Subjects; Which, I think, is what was never said of
any other Kingdom. For a Man must be a Subject before he is bound to obey.

Let us suppose it will be said here, that an Obedience to the Laws of Christ's
Kingdom, is what is necessary to make us Subjects of it, without which we
cannot be admitted into it, i. e. be Christians: And if so, this Obedience must
be Universal; I mean, it must be the same sort of Obedience to all the Laws of
this Kingdom: Which since no body says is in any one such as is wholly free
from Error or Frailty, this Obedience can only lie in a sincere disposition and
purpose of Mind to obey every one of the Laws of the Messiah delivered in the
New Testament, to the utmost of our Power. Now believing right being one part
of that Obedience, as well as acting right is the other part, the Obedience of
assent must be implicitly to all that is delivered there; That it is true. But
for as much as the particular acts of an explicit assent cannot go any farther
than his understanding, who is to assent, What he understands to be the Truth
delivered by our Savior, or the Apostles commissioned by him, and assisted by
his Spirit, That he must necessarily believe: It becomes a Fundamental Article
to him, and he cannot refuse his assent to it, without renouncing his
Allegiance. For he that denies any of the Doctrines that Christ has delivered,
to be true, denies him to be sent from God, and consequently to be the Messiah,
and so ceases to be a Christian. From whence it is evident, that if any more be
necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, than the believing Jesus to
be the Messiah, and thereby taking him for our King; It cannot be any set
bundle of Fundamentals culled out of the Scripture, with an omission of the
rest, according as best suits any ones Fancy, System, or Interest: But it must
be an explicit belief of all those Propositions, which he according to the best
of his understanding, really apprehends to be contained, and meant in the
Scripture; and an implicit belief of all the rest, which he is ready to
believe, as soon as it shall please God, upon his use of the means, to
enlighten him, and make them clear to his understanding. So that in effect,
almost every particular Man in this sense has, or may have, a distinct
Catalogue of Fundamentals, each whereof it is necessary for him explicitly to
believe, now that he is a Christian; whereof if he should disbelieve, or deny
any one, he would cast off his Allegiance, disfranchise himself, and be no
longer a Subject of Christ's Kingdom. But in this sense no body can tell what
is Fundamental to another, what is necessary for another Man to believe. This
Catalogue of Fundamentals every one alone can make for himself: No body can fix
it for him; no body can collect or prescribe it to another: But this is
according as God has dealt to every one the measure of Light and Faith; and
has opened each Man's Understanding, that he may understand the Scriptures.
Whoever has used wha^ means he is capable of, for the informing of himself,
with a readiness to believe and obey what shall be taught and prescribed by
Jesus his Lord and King, is a true and faithful Subject of Christ's Kingdom;
and cannot be thought to fail in any thing necessary to Salvation.

Supposing a Man and his Wife, barely by seeing the wonderful things that Moses
did, should have been persuaded to put* themselves under his Government; Or by
reading his Law, and liking it; or by any other Motive, had been prevailed on
sincerely to take him for their Ruler and Lawgiver, and accordingly (renouncing
their former Idolatry and Heathenish Pollutions) in token thereof had by
Baptism and Circumcision, the initiating Ceremonies, solemnly entered
themselves into that Communion under the Law of Moses; had they not thereby
been made Denizons of the Commonwealth of Israel, and invested with all the
Privileges and Prerogatives of true Children of Abraham, leaving to their
Posterity a right to their share in the Promised Land, though they had died
before they had performed any other Act of Obedience to that Law; nay, though
they had not known whose Son Moses was, nor how he had delivered the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, nor whither he was leading them? I do not say it is
likely they should be so far ignorant: But whether they were or no, 'twas
enough, that they took him for their Prince and Ruler, with a purpose to obey
him, to submit themselves entirely to his Commands and Conduct; And did nothing
afterward, whereby they disowned or rejected his Authority over them. In that
respect, none of his Laws were greater, or more necessary to be submitted to
one than another, though the matter of one might be of much greater Consequence
than of another. But a Disobedience to any Law of the least Consequence, if it
carry with it a disowning of the Authority that made it, forfeits all, and cuts
off such an Offender from that Commonwealth, and all the Privileges of it.

This is the case, in respect of other Matters of Faith, to those who believe
Jesus to be the Messiah, and take him to be their King sent from God, and so
are already Christians. It Is not the opinion, that any one may have of the
weightiness of the Matter, (if they are, without their own fault ignorant that
our Savior has revealed it) that shall disfranchise them, and make them
forfeit their Interest in his Kingdom: they may be still good Subjects, though
they do not believe a great many things, which Creed-makers may think necessary
to be believed. That which is required of them is a sincere endeavor to know
his Mind declared in the Gospel, and an explicit belief of all that they
understand to be so. Not to believe what he has revealed, whether in a lighter
or more weighty Matter, calls his veracity into Question, destroys his Mission,
denies his Authority, and is a flat disowning him to be the Messiah; And so
overturns that Fundamental, and Necessary Article whereby a Man is a Christian.
But this cannot be done by a Man's Ignorance, or unwilful Mistake of any of the
Truths published by our Savior himself, or his authorized and inspired
Ministers in the New Testament. Whilst a Man knows not that it was his Will or
Meaning, his Allegiance is safe, though he believe the contrary.

If this were not so, it is impossible, that any one should be a Christian. For
in some things we are ignorant, and err all, not knowing the Scriptures. For
the holy inspired Writings, being all of the same Divine Authority, must all
equally in every Article be Fundamental and necessary to be believed; if that
be a reason, that makes any one Proposition in it necessary to be believed. But
the Law of Faith, the Covenant of the Gospel, being a Covenant of Grace, and
not of Natural Right or Debt, nothing can be absolutely necessary to be
believed, but what by this new Law of Faith God of his good pleasure has made
to be so. And this it is plain by the preaching of our Savior and his Apostles,
to all that believed not already in him, was only the believing the only true
God, and Jesus to be the Messiah, whom he has sent. The performance of this
puts a Man within the Covenant, and is that which God will impute to him for
Righteousness. All the other acts of assent to other Truths, taught by our
Savior, and his Apostles, are not what make a Man a Christian; but are
necessary acts of Obedience to be performed by one, who is a Christian; and
therefore being a Christian, ought to live by the Laws of Christ's Kingdom.

Nor are we without some glimpse of Light, why it has pleased God of his
Grace, that the believing Jesus to be the Messiah should be that Faith which he
would impute to Men for Righteousness. It Is evident from the Scripture, that
our Savior despised the Shame and endured the Cross for the Joy that was set
before him; Which joy, it is also plain, was a Kingdom, But in this Kingdom
which his Father had appointed to him, he could have none but voluntary
Subjects, such as leaving the Kingdom of Darkness, and of the Prince of this
World, with all the Pleasures, Pomps and Vanities thereof, would put themselves
under his Dominion, and translate themselves into his Kingdom; which they did
by believing and owning him to be the Messiah their King, and thereby taking
him to rule over them. For the Faith for which God justi^ieth, is not an empty
Speculation, but a Faith joined with Repentance, and working by Love. And for
this, which was in effect to return to God himself, and to their natural
Allegiance due to him, and advance as much as lay in them the Glory of the
Kingdom, which he had promised his Son, God was pleased to declare he would
accept them, receive them to Grace, and blot out all their former
Transgressions.

This is evidently the Covenant of Grace as delivered in the Scriptures: And if
this be not, I desire any one to tell me what it is, and what are the terms of
it. It Is a Law of Faith, whereby God has promised to forgive all our Sins upon
our Repentance, and believing something; and to impute that Faith to us for
Righteousness, Now I ask what it is by the Law of Faith we are required to
believe? for till that be known, the Law of Faith is not distinctly known, nor
the terms of the Covenant upon which the Almerciful God graciously offers us
Salvation. And if any one will say this is not known, nay, is not easily, and
certainly to be known under the Gospel, I desire him to tell me what the
greatest Enemies of Christianity can say worse against it? For a way proposed
to Salvation, that does not certainly lead thither, or is proposed so as not to
be known, are very little different as to their consequence; and Mankind would
be left to wander in darkness and uncertainty with the one as well as the other.

I do not write this for Controversies sake; for had I minded Victory, I would
not have given the Unmasker this new Matter of exception. I know whatever is
said, he must be bawling for his fashionable and profitable Orthodoxy, and cry
out against this too which I have here added, as Socinianism, and cast that
Name upon all that differs from what is held by those, he would recommend his
Zeal to in Writing. I call it bawling, for whether what he has said be
Reasoning, I shall referr to those of his own Brotherhood, if he be of any
Brotherhood, and there be any that will join with him in his Set of
Fundamentals, when his Creed is made.

Had I minded nothing but how to deal with him, I had tied him up short to his
List of Fundamentals, without affording him Topics of declaiming against what
I have here said. But I have enlarged on this point, for the sake of such
Readers, who with a love of truth read Books of this kind, and endeavor to
inform themselves in the things of their everlasting concernment: It being of
greater consideration with me, to give any light and satisfaction to one single
Person, who is really concerned to understand, and be convinced of the Religion
he professes, than what a Thousand fashionable or titular Professors of any
sort of Orthodoxy shall say or think of me, for not doing as they do, i. e. for
not saying after others, without understanding what is said, or upon what
Grounds; or caring to understand it.

Let us now consider his Argument, to prove the Articles he has given us to be
Fundamentals. In his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism, p. 119. he
argues from 1 Timothy iii. 16. where, he says, Christianity is called a Mystery,
that all things in Christianity are not plain, and exactly level to every
common apprehension; that every thing in Christianity is not clear, and
intelligible and comprehensible by the weakest Noddle. Let us take this for
proved, as much as he pleases, and then let us see the force of this subtle
Disputant's Argument, for the necessity there is, that every Christian Man
should believe those, which he has given us for Fundamental Articles out of the
Epistles. The Reason of that Obligation, and the Necessity of every Man and
Woman's believing them, he has laid in this, that they are to be found in the
Epistles, or in the Bible. This Argument for them we have over and over again
in his Socinianism Unmasked, as here, p. 9. thus; Are they set down to no
purpose in these inspired Epistles. Why did the Apostles write these Doctrines,
was it not, that those they writ to, might give their assent to them? P. 22.
They are in our Bibles for that very purpose to be believed. p. 25. Now I ask,
can any one more directly invalidate all he says here for the necessity of
believing his Articles? Can any one more apparently write booty than by saying
that these his Doctrines, these his Fundamental Articles (which are after his
fashion set down between the 8. and 20. Pages of this his First Chapter) are of
necessity to be believed by every one, before he can be a Christian, because
they are in the Epistles and in the Bible; and yet to affirm that in
Christianity, i. e. in the Epistles and in the Bible there are Mysteries, there
are things not plain, not clear, not intelligible to common apprehensions. If
his Articles, some of which contain Mysteries, are necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, because they are in the Bible; than according to this
rule it is necessary for many Men to believe, what is not intelligible to them;
what their Noddles cannot apprehend (as the Unmasker is pleased to turn the
Supposition of vulgar Peoples understanding the Fundamentals of their Religion
into ridicule) i. e. it is necessary for many Men to do, what is impossible for
them to do, before they can be Christians. But if there be several things in
the Bible, and in the Epistles, that it is not necessary for Men to believe to
make them Christians; then all the Unmasker's Arguments from their being in the
Epistles is no Proof, that all his Articles are necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, because they are set down in the Epistles; much less,
because he thinks they may be drawn according to his Sys^em out of what is set
down in the Epistles. Let him therefore either confess these and the like
Questions, Why did the Apostles write these? was it not that those they writ
to, might give their assent to them? Why should not every one of these
Evangelical Truths be believed and embraced? They are in our Bibles for that
very purpose, and the like, to be impertinent and ridiculous: Let him cease to
propose them with so much ostentation, for they can serve only to mislead
unwary Readers: Or let him unsay what he has said of things not plain to common
apprehensions, not clear and intelligible. Let him recant what he has said of
Mysteries in Christianity. For I ask with him, p. 8. where can we be informed
but in the sacred and inspired writings? It is ridiculous to urge, that any
thing is necessary to be explicitly believed to make a Man a Christian, because
it is writ in the Epistles and in the Bible; Unless he confess that there is no
Mystery, no thing not plain not intelligible to Vulgar understanding, in the
Epistles or in the Bible.

This is so evident, that the Unmasker himself, who p. 119. of his Thoughts
concerning the Causes of Atheism, thought it ridiculous to suppose, that the
Vulgar should understand Christianity, is here of another Mind: And, p. 30.
says of his Evangelical Doctrines and Articles necessary to be assented to,
that they are intelligible and plain; There is no Ambiguity and Doubtfulness in
them; They shine with their own light, and to an unprejudiced eye are plain,
evident and illustrious.

To draw the Unmasker out of the Clouds, and prevent his hiding himself in the
doubtfulness of his Expressions, I shall desire him to say directly, whether
the Articles, which are necessary to be believed, to make a Man a Christian,
and particularly those he has set down for such, are all plain and
intelligible, and such as may be understood and comprehended (I will not say in
the Unmasker's ridiculous way, by the weakest Noddles, but) by every illiterate
Countryman and Woman capable of Church Communion?

If he says yes; Then all Mysteries are excluded out of his Articles necessary
to be believed to make a Man a Christian. For that which can be comprehended by
every Day-Labourer, every poor Spinster, that is a Member of the Church, cannot
be a Mystery. And if what such illiterate People cannot understand, be required
to be believed to make them Christians, the greatest part of Mankind are shut
out from being Christians.

But the Unmasker has provided an Answer in these words, p. 31. There is, says
he, a difficulty in the Doctrine of the Trinity, and several Truths of the
Gospel, as to the exact manner of the things themselves, which we shall never
be able to comprehend, at least on this side of Heaven: But there is no
difficulty as to the reality and certainty of them, because we know they are
revealed to us by God in the Holy Scripture.

Which Answer of difficulty in the manner, and no difficulty in the reality,
having the appearance of a distinction, looks like Learning; but when it comes
to be applied to the case in hand will scarce afford us sense.

The Question is about a Proposition to be believed, which must first
necessarily be understood. For a Man cannot possibly give his assent to any
Affirmation or Negation, unless he understand the terms as they are joined in
that Proposition, and has a Conception of the thing affirmed or denied, and
also a Conception of the thing concerning which it is affirmed or denied as
they are there put together. But let the Proposition be what it will, there is
no more to be understood than is expressed in the terms of that Proposition. If
it be a Proposition concerning a Matter of Fact, it is enough to conceive, and
believe the Matter of Fact. If it be a Proposition concerning the manner of the
Fact, the manner of the Fact must also be believed, as it is intelligibly
expressed in that Proposition, v. g. should this Proposition (...) be offered
as an Article of Faith to an illiterate Countryman of England, he could not
believe it: Because, though a true Proposition, yet it being proposed in words
whose meaning he understood not, he could not give any assent to it. Put it
into English, he understands what is meant by the Dead shall rise. For he can
conceive, that the same Man, who was dead and senseless, should be alive again;
As well as he can, that the same Man, who is now in a Lethargy, should awake
again; or the same Man that now is out of his sight, and he knows not whether
he be alive or dead, should return, and be with him again: And so he is capable
of believing it, though he conceives nothing of the manner how a Man revives,
wakes, or moves. But none of these manners of those actions being included in
those Propositions, the Proposition concerning the Matter of Fact (if it imply
no contradiction in it) may be believed; and so all that is required may be
done, whatever difficulty may be as to the exact manner how it is brought about.

But where the Proposition is about the manner, the belief too must be of the
manner. v. g. The Article is, The Dead shall be raised with spiritual Bodies.
And then the belief must be as well of this manner of the Fact, as of the Fact
it self. So that what is said here by the Unmasker about the manner signifies
nothing at all in the case. What is understood to be expressed in each
Proposition, whether it be of the manner, or not of the manner, is (by its
being a Revelation from God) to be believed, as far as it is understood: But no
more is required to be believed concerning any Article, than is contained in
that Article.

What the Unmasker, for the removing of Difficulties, adds farther in these
words, But there is no difficulty as to the reality and certainty of the truths
of the Gospel. Because we know, they are revealed to us by God in the Holy
Scripture, is yet farther from signifying any thing to the purpose, than the
former. The Question is about understanding; And, in what sense they are
understood, believing several Propositions, or Articles of Faith, which are to
be found in the Scripture. To this, the Unmasker says, there can be no
difficulty at all as to their reality and certainty; because they are revealed
by God. Which amounts to no more but this, That there is no difficulty at all
in understanding and believing this Proposition, that whatever is revealed by
God is really and certainly true. But is the understanding and believing this
single Proposition, the understanding and believing all the Articles of Faith
necessary to be believed? Is this all the explicit Faith a Christian need have?
If so, then a Christian need explicitly believe no more but this one
Proposition, viz. That all the Propositions between the two Covers of his Bible
are certainly true. But I imagine the Unmasker will not think the believing
this one Proposition is a sufficient belief of all those Fundamental Articles,
which he has given us as necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian.
For if that will serve the turn, I conclude he may make his Set of Fundamentals
as large and express to his System as he pleases; Calvinists, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Socinians, will all thus own the belief of them; viz. That all
that God has revealed in the Scripture is really and certainly true.

But if believing this Proposition, that all that is revealed by God in the
Scripture is true, be not all the Faith which the Unmasker requires, what he
says about the reality and certainty of all Truths revealed by God removes
nothing of the difficulty. A Proposition of Divine Authority is found in the
Scripture: it is agreed presently between him and me, that it contains a real
certain truth: But the difficulty is, what is the Truth it contains, to which
he, and I must assent. v. g. The Profession of Faith made by the Eunuch in
these words, Jesus Christ is the Son of God, upon which he was admitted into
the Church as a Christian, I believe contains a real and certain Truth. Is that
enough? no says the Unmasker, p. 87. it includes in it that Christ was God; and
therefore it is not enough for me to believe, that these words contain a real
certain truth; But I must believe they contain this truth, that Jesus Christ is
God; That the Eunuch spoke them in that sense, and in that sense I must assent
to them: Whereas they appear to me to be spoken, and meant here, as well as in
several other places of the New Testament, in this sense, viz. That Jesus
Christ is the Messiah, and in that sense in this place I assent to them. The
meaning then of these words as spoken by the Eunuch is the difficulty: And I
desire the Unmasker, by the Application of what he has said here, to remove
that difficulty. For granting all Revelation from God to be really and
certainly true (as certainly it is) how does the believing that general truth
remove any difficulty about the sense and interpretation of any particular
Proposition found in any passage of the Holy Scriptures? Or is it possible for
any Man to understand it in one sense, and believe it in another; because it is
a Divine Revelation, that has reallity and certainty in it? Thus much as to
what the Unmasker says of the Fundamentals he has given us, p. 30. viz. That No
true Lover of God and Truth need doubt of any of them: For there is no
ambiguity and doubtfulness in them. If the distinction he has used of
difficulty as to the exact manner, and difficulty as to the reality and
certainty of Gospel Truths, will remove all ambiguity and doubtfulness from all
those Texts of Scripture, from whence he and others deduce Fundamental
Articles, so that they will be plain and intelligible to every Man in the sense
he understands them, he has done great Service to Christianity.

But he seems to distrust that himself, in the following words. They shine,
says he, with their own light, and to an unprejudiced eye are plain evident and
illustrious, and they would always continue so, if some ill minded Men did not
perplex and entangle them. I see the Matter would go very smooth, if the
Unmasker might be the sole authentic Interpreter of Scripture. He is wisely of
that Judge's Mind, who was against hearing the Counsel on the other side,
because they always perplexed the Cause.

But if those who differ from the Unmasker, shall in their turns call him the
Prejudiced and Ill-minded Man, who perplexes these Matters (as they may with as
much Authority as he) we are but where we were; Each must understand for
himself the best he can; till the Unmasker be received as the only unprejudiced
Man, to whose Dictates every one without Examination is with an implicit Faith
to submit.

Here again, p. 32. The Unmasker puts upon me, what I never said, and therefore
I must desire him to show, where it is, that I pretend,

XI.
That this Proposition, that Jesus is the Messiah, is more intelligible than
any of those he has named.

In his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism, p. 120. he argues that this
Proposition [ Jesus is the Messiah] has more difficulty in it than the Article
of the Holy Trinity. And his Proofs are worthy of an Unmasker. For, says he,
Here is an Hebrew word first to be explained, or (as he has this strong
Argument again, Socinianism Unmasked, p. 32.) Here first the Name Jesus, which
is of Hebrew extraction, though since Grecized must be expounded.

Answ. Jesus being a proper Name, only denoting a certain Person, needs not to
be expounded, of what extraction soever it be. Is this Proposition, Jonathan
was the Son of Saul King of Israel, any thing the harder, because the three
proper Names in it, Jonathan, Saul and Israel are of Hebrew extraction? And is
it not as easy and as level to the understanding of the Vulgar as this, Arthur
was the Son of Henry King of England, though neither of these Names be of
Hebrew extraction? Or cannot any Vulgar Capacity understand this Proposition,
John Edwards writ a Book, Entitled, Socinianism Unmasked, till the Name John,
which is of Hebrew extraction, be explained to him? If this be so, Parents were
best beware how hereafter they give their Children Scripture Names, if they
cannot understand what they say to one another about them, till these Names of
Hebrew extraction are expounded to them; And every Proposition, that is in
Writings and Contracts made concerning Persons, that have Names of Hebrew
extractions, become thereby as hard to be understood as the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity.

His next Argument is just of the same size. The word Messiah must, he says, be
explained too. Of what Extraction soever it be, there needs no more Explication
of it than what our English Bible gives of it, where it is plain to any vulgar
capacity, that it was used to denote that King and Deliverer whom God had
promised. So that this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, has no more
difficulty in it, than this, Jesus is the promised King and Deliverer; Or than
this, Cyrus was King and Deliverer of Persia: Which I think requires not much
depth of Hebrew to be understood. He that understood this Proposition, and took
Cyrus for his King, was a Subject and a Member of his Kingdom; And he that
understands the other, and takes Jesus to be his King, is his Subject and a
Member of his Kingdom. But if this be as hard as it is to some Men to
understand the Doctrine of the Trinity, I fear many of the Kings in the World
have but few true Subjects. To believe Jesus to be the Messiah, is (as he has
been told over and over again) to take him for our King and Ruler, promised and
sent by God. This is that, which will make any one from a Jew or Heathen to be
a Christian. In this sense it is very intelligible to vulgar Capacities. Those
who so understand and believe it, are so far from pronouncing those words as a
spell (as the Unmasker ridiculously suggests, p. 33.) that they thereby become
Christians.

But what if I tell the Unmasker, that there is one Mr. Edwards, who (when he
speaks his Mind, without considering how it will make for or against him) in
another place, thinks this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, very easy and
intelligible? To convince him of it, I shall desire him to turn to the 74th.
Page of his Socinianism Unmasked, where he will find that Mr. Edwards without
any great search into Hebrew Extractions, interprets Jesus the Messiah to
signify this, That Jesus of Nazareth was that eminent and extraordinary Person
prophesied of long before, and that he was sent and commissioned by God: Which
I think is no very hard Proposition to be understood. But it is no strange
thing, that that which was very easy to an Unmasker in one place, should be
terrible hard in another; where want of something better requires to have it so.

Another Argument that he uses to prove the Articles he has given us to be
necessary to Salvation, ( p. 22.) is because they are Doctrines which contain
things that in their Nature have an immediate respect to the Occasion, Author,
Way, End, Means and Issue of Men's Redemption and Salvation. And here I desire
him to prove,

XII.
That every one of his Articles contains things so immediately relating to the
Occasion, Author, Way, Means and Issue of our Redemption and Salvation, that no
body can be saved without understanding the Texts from whence he draws them, in
the very same sense that he does; And explicitly believing all these
Propositions that he has deduced, and all that he will deduce from Scripture,
when he shall please to complete his Creed.

Page 23. He says of his Fundamentals, not without good reason THEREFORE I
called them Essential and Integral parts of our Christian and Evangelical
Faith: And why the Vindicator fleers at these terms, p. 18. I know no reason,
but that he cannot confute the Application of them.

Answ. One would think by the word therefore, which he uses here, that in the
precedent Paragraph, he had produced some reason to justify his ridiculous use
of those terms in his Thoughts concerning Atheism, p. 111. But nothing therein
will be found tending to it. Indeed the foregoing Paragraph begins with these
words, Thus I have briefly set before the Reader those Evangelical Truths,
those Christian Principles, which belong to the very essence of Christianity.
Amongst these there is the word Essence: But that from thence, or any thing
else in that Paragraph, the Unmasker could with good sense, or any sense at
all, infer as he does, not without good reason, THEREFORE, I called them the
ESSENTIAL and INTEGRAL parts of our Christian and Evangelical Faith, requires
an extraordinary sort of Logic to make out. What, I beseech you, is your good
reason too here, upon which you infer Therefore, etc? For it is impossible for
any one but an Unmasker, to find one word justifying his use of the terms
Essential and Integral. But it would be a great restraint to the running of the
Unmasker's Pen, if you should not allow him the free use of illative Particles,
where there are no Promises to support them: And if you should not take
Affirmations without Proof for reasoning, you at once strike off above three
quarters of his Book; and he will often, for several Pages toget^er, have
nothing to say. As for Example, from p. 28. to p. 35.

But to show, that I did not without reason say his use of the terms Essential
and Integral, in the place before quoted, was ridiculous, I must mind my
Reader, that page 109. of his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism, he
having said that the Epistolary Writings are fraught with other Fundamentals
besides that one which I mention, and then having set them down, he closes his
Catalogue of them thus: These are Matters of Faith contained in the Epistles,
and they are Essential and Integral parts of the Gospel it self, p. 111. Now
what could be more ridiculous, than where the question is about Fundamental
Doctrines, which are the Essentials of Christian Religion, without an assent to
which a Man cannot be a Christian, and so he himself calls them, p. 21. of his
Socinianism Unmasked, that he should close the List he had made of Fundamental
Doctrines, i. e. Essential Points of the Christian Religion, with telling his
Reader, These are Essential and Integral parts of the Gospel it self? i. e.
these which I have given you for Fundamental, for Essential Doctrines of the
Gospel are the Fundamental and not Fundamental, Essential and not Essential
parts of the Gospel mixed together. For integral parts, in all the Writers I
have met with, besides the Unmasker, are contra-distinguished to Essential; and
signify such parts as the thing can be without, but without them will not be
so complete and entire as with them. Just such an accuteness as our Unmasker
would any one show, who taking upon him to set down the parts Essential to a
Man, without the having of which he could not be a Man, should name the Soul,
the Head, the Heart, Lungs, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Arms,
Legs, Hair and Nails; and to make all sure, should conclude with these words,
these are Parts contained in a Man, and are Essential and Integral Parts of a
Man himself, i. e. they are Parts, some without which he cannot be a Man, and
others which though they make the Man entire, yet he may be a Man without them;
As a Man ceases not to be a Man, though he want a Nail, a Finger, or an Arm,
which are Integral Parts of a Man. Risum teneatis? If the Unmasker can make any
better sense of his Essential and Integral Parts of the Gospel it self; I will
ask his Pardon for my Laughing: Till then he must not be angry, if the Reader
and I laugh too. Besides I must tell him, That those which he has set down are
not the Integral Parts of the Christian Faith; any more than the Head, the
Trunk, and the Arms, Hands and Thighs are the Integral Parts of a Man: For a
Man is not entire without the Legs and Feet too. They are some of the Integral
Parts indeed; But cannot be called the Integral Parts, where any that go to
make up the whole Man are l^ft out. Nor those the Integral, but some of the
Integral Parts of the Christian Faith, out of which any of the Doctrines
proposed in the New Testament are omitted: For whatever is there proposed, is
proposed to be believed, and so is a part of the Christian Faith.

Before I leave his Catalogue of the Essential and Integral Parts of the
Gospel, which he has given us, instead of one containing the Articles necessary
to be believed to make a Man a Christian, I must take notice of what he says,
whilst he is making it, p. 9. Why then is there a Treatise published to tell
the World that the bare belief of a Messiah is all that is required of a
Christian. As if there were no difference between believing a Messiah, and
believing Jesus to be the Messiah: No difference between required of a
Christian, and required to make a Man a Christian. As if you should say,
renouncing his former Idolatry, and being Circumcised and Baptized into Moses,
was all that was required to make a Man an Israelite; Therefore it was all that
was required of an Israelite. For these two Falsehoods has he in this one short
Sentence, thought fit slily to Father upon me the humble imitator of the
Jesuits, as he is pleased to call me. And therefore I must desire him to show,

XIII.
Where the World is told in the Treatise that I published, That the bare belief
of a Messiah is all that is required of a Christian?

The Six next Pages, i. e. from 28. to the End of his Second Chapter, being
taken up with nothing but Pulpit Oratory out of its place; and without any
reply, applied or applicable to any thing I have said in my Vindication; I
shall pass by, till he shows any thing in them that is so.

In page 36. This Giant in Argument, falls on me, and mauls me unmercifully
about the Epistles. He begins thus; The Gentleman is not without his Evasions,
and he sees it is high time to make use of them. This puts him in some
disorder. For when he comes to speak of my mentioning his ill treatment of the
Epistles -- you may observe that he begins to grow warmer than before. Now this
meek Man is nettled, and one may perceive he is sensible of the Scandal that he
has given to good People by his slighting the Epistolary Writings of the Holy
Apostles, yet he is so cunning as to disguise his Passion as well as he can.
Let all this impertinent and inconsistent stuff be so. I am angry, and cannot
disguise it; I am cunning and would disguise it; But yet the quick-sighted
Unmasker has found me out, that I am nettled. What does all this notable
Prologue of Hictius Doctius, of a Cunning Man, and in effect no Cunning Man, in
disorder, warmed, nettled, in a passion tend to? but only to show, that these
following words of mine, p. 19. of my Vindication, viz. I require you to
publish to the World those Passages which show my contempt of the Epistles are
so full of heat and disorder, that they need no other Answer, But what need I,
good Sir, do this, when you have done it your self? A Reply, I own, very soft,
and whether I may not say, very silly, let the Reader judge. The Unmasker
having accused me of contemning the Epistles, my Reply in my Vindicat. p. 19.
was thus; Sir, when your Angry Fit is over, and the abatement of your Passion
has given way to the return of your Sincerity, I shall beg you to read this
Passage in the 297. p. of my Book. These holy Writers ( viz. the Penmen of the
Epistles) inspired from above, writ nothing but Truth; and in most places very
weighty Truths to us now, for the expounding, clearing and confirming of the
Christian Doctrine, and establishing those in it, who had embraced it. And
again, p. 299. the other Parts [ i. e. besides the Gospels and the Acts] of
DIVINE REVELATION are Objects of Faith, and are so to be received; They are
Truths of which none, that is once known to be such, i. e. revealed, may or
ought to be disbelieved. And if this does not satisfy you, that I have as high
a Veneration for the Epistles, as you, or any one can have, I require you to
publish to the World those PASSAGES, which show my contempt of them. After such
direct words of mine, expressing my veneration for that part of Divine
Revel^^on, which is contained in the Epistles, any one but an Unmasker would
blush to charge me with contempt of them, without alleging, when summoned to
it, any word in my Book to justify that charge.

If hardness of Forehead, were strength of Brains, 'twere two to one of his
side against any Man I ever yet heard of. I require him to publish to the World
those Passages, that show my contempt of the Epistles, and he answers me, he
need not do it, for I have done it my self. Whoever had common sense would
understand, that what I demanded was, that he should show the World where,
amongst all I had published, there were any Passages, that expressed contempt
of the Epistles: For it was not expected, he should quote Passages of mine,
that I had never published. And this accute Unmasker (to this) says, I had
published them my self. So that the reason why he cannot find them is, because
I have published them my self. But, says he, I appeal to the Reader, whether
(after your tedious Collections out of the four Evangelists) your passing by
the Epistles, and neglecting wholly what the Apostles say in them, be not
publishing to the World your contempt of them? I demand of him to publish to
the World those Passages, which show my contempt of the Epistles: And he
answers, he need not, I have done it my self. How does that appear? I have
passed by the Epistles, says he. My passing them by then, are Passages
published against the Epistles? For publishing of Passages is what you said you
need not do, and what I had done. So that the Passages I have published,
containing a contempt of the Epistles, are extant in my saying nothing of them?
Surely this same passing by has done some very shrewd displeasure to our poor
Unmasker, that he so starts whenever it is but named, and cannot think it
contains less than Exclusion, Defiance and Contempt. Here therefore the
Proposition remaining to be proved by you is,

XIV.
That one cannot pass by any thing without contempt of it.

And when you have proved it, I shall then ask you, what will become of all
those parts of Scripture; all those Chapters and Verses, that you have passed
by in your Collection of Fundamental Articles? Those that you have vouchsafed
to set down, you tell us are in the Bible on purpose to be believed. What must
become of all the rest, which you have omitted? Are they there not to be
believed? And must the Reader understand your passing them by to be a
publishing to the World your contempt of them? If so, you have Unmasked your
self: If not, but you may pass by some parts of Scripture, nay whole Epistles,
as you have those of St. James, and St. Jude, without contempt; Why may not I
without contempt pass by others; But because you have a liberty to do what you
will, and I must do but what you in your good pleasure will allow me? But if I
ask you whence you have this Privilege above others; You will have nothing to
say, except it be according to your usual Skill in Divining, that you know my
Heart, and the Thoughts that are in it, which you find not like yours, right,
and orthodox, and good; But always evil and perverse, such as I dare not own,
but hypocritically either say nothing of, or declare against; But yet with all
my cunning I cannot hide them from you; your all knowing penetration always
finds them out; You know them, or you guess at them, as is best for your turn,
and that is as good: And then presently I am confounded. I doubt whether the
World has ever had any two-eyed Man your equal for penetration and a quick
sight. The telling by the Spectators looks, what Card he guesses, is nothing to
what you can do. You take the height of an Author's Parts, by numbering the
Pages of his Book; You can spy an Heresy in him by his saying not a syllable of
it; Distinguish him from the Orthodox by his understanding places of Scripture,
just as several of the Orthodox do; You can repeat by heart whole Leaves of
what is in his Mind to say, before he speaks a word of it; You can discover
Designs before they are hatched, and all the Intrigues of carrying them on by
those who never thought of them. All this, and more you can do, by the Spirit
of Orthodoxy, or which is as certain, by your own good Spirit of Invention
informing you. Is not this to be an errant Conjurer?

But to your Reply. You say, after my TEDIOUS Collection out of the four
Evangelists, my passing by the Epistles, and neglecting wholly what the
Apostles say, etc. I wondered at first why you mentioned not the Acts here, as
well as the four Evangelists. For I have not, as you have in other places
observed, been sparing of Collections out of the Acts too. But there was it
seems a Necessity here for your omitting it: For that would have stood too near
what followed, in these words; and neglecting wholly what the Apostles say. For
if it appeared to the Reader, out of your own Confession, that I allowed and
built upon the Divine Authority of what the Apostles say in the Acts, he could
not so easily be mislead into an Opinion, that I contemned what they say in
their Epistles. But this is but a slight touch of your Leger-de-main.

And now I ask the Reader what he will think of a Minister of the Gospel, who
cannot bear the Texts of Scripture I have produced, nor my Quotations out of
the four Evangelists? This which in his Thoughts of the Causes of Atheism, p.
114. was want of Vivacity and Elevation of Mind, want of a Vein of Sense and
Reason, yea and of Elocution too, is here in his Socinianism Unmasked, a
tedious Collection out of the four Evangelists. Those places I have quoted, lie
heavy it seems upon his Stomach, and are too many to be got off. But it was my
business not to omit one of them; that the Reader might have a full view of the
whole tenor of the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles to the
Unconverted Jews and Gentiles; and might therein see what Faith they were
Converted to, and upon their assent to which they were pronounced Believers and
admitted into the Christian Church. But the Unmasker complains there are too
many of them: He thinks the Gospel, the good News of Salvation tedious from the
Mouth of our Savior and his Apostles: He is of opinion, That before the
Epistles were writ, and without believing precisely what he thinks ^it to cull
out of them, there could be no Christians; And if we had nothing but the four
Evangelists, we could not be saved. And yet it is plain, that every single one
of the Four contains the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and at least they all together
contain all that is necessary to Salvation. If any one doubt of this, I referr
him to Mr. Chillingworth for Satisfaction, who has abundantly proved it.

His following words (were he not the same Unmasker all through) would be
beyond Parallel. But let us hear why the Vindicator did not attempt to Collect
any Articles out of these Writings, He assigns this as one Reason: The Epistles
being writ to those who were already Believers, it could not be supposed that
they were writ to them to teach them Fundamentals, p. 13, 14. Vindic. Certainly
no Man would have conjectured that he would have used such an Evasion as this.
I will say that for him, he goes beyond all surmises, he is above all
Conjectures, he has a faculty which no Creature on Earth can ever fathom. Thus
far the Unmasker, in his Oratorical strain. In what follows he comes to his
closer reasoning against what I had said. His words are, Do we not know that
the four Gospels were writ to and for Believers, as well as Unbelievers? Answ.
I grant it. Now let us see your Inference: Therefore what these holy Historians
recorded, that our Savior and his Apostles said and preached to Unbelievers,
was said and preached to Believers. The Discourse which our Savior had with
the Woman of Samaria, and her Townsmen, was addressed to Believers; because St.
John writ his Gospel (wherein it is recorded as a part of our Savior's
History) for Believers as well as Unbelievers. St. Peter's Preaching to
Cornelius and St. Paul's Preaching at Antioch, at Thessalonica, at Corinth,
etc. was not to Unbelievers, for their Conversion; Because St. Luke dedicates
his History of the Acts of the Apostles to Theophilus, who was a Christian, as
the Unmasker strenuously proves in this Paragraph. Just as if he should say,
that the Discourses which Caesar records he had upon several Occasions with the
Gauls were not addressed to the Gauls alone, but to the Romans also; because
his Commentaries were writ for the Romans as well as others: Or that the
Sayings of the Ancient Greeks and Romans in Plutarch, were not spoke by them to
their Contemporaries only, because they are recorded by him for the benefit of
Posterity.

I perused the Preachings of our Savior and his Apostles to the Unconverted
World, to see what they taught and required to be believed to make Men
Christians: And these all I set down, and leave the World to be judge what they
contained. The Epistles which were all written to those who had embraced the
Faith, and were all Christians already, I thought would not so distinctly show,
what were those Doctrines, which were absolutely necessary to make Men
Christians; they being not writ to convert Unbelievers, but to build up those,
who were already Believers, in their most holy Faith. This is plainly expressed
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, V. 11, etc* Of whom, i. e. Christ, we have many
things to say and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are all dull of hearing. For
when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such
as have need of Milk and not of strong Meat. For every one that uses milk is
unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a Babe: But strong meat
belongs to him that is of full age, even those who by reason of use have
their senses exercised, to discern both good and bad. Therefore leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying
again the foundation of Repentance from dead Works, and of Faith toward God
and of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of hands, and of the
resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal Judgment. Here the Apostle shows what
was his Design in writing this Epistle: Not to teach them the Fundamental
Doctrines of the Christian Religion, but to lead them on to more Perfection;
That is, to greater degrees of Knowledge of the wise Design and wonderful
Contrivance and carrying on of the Gospel and the Evidence of it; which he
makes out in this Epistle, by showing its Correspondence with the Old
Testament, and particularly with the Economy of the Mosaical Constitution.
Here I might ask the Unmasker, whether those many things which St. Paul tells
the Hebrews he had to say of Christ, (hard to be uttered to them, because they
were dull of hearing) had not an immediate respect to the Occasion, Author,
Way, Means, or Issue of their Redemption and Salvation; And therefore, whether
they were such things without the knowledge of which they could not be saved,
as the Unmasker says of such things, p. 23. And the like I might ask him
concerning those things which the Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Ep. Chap.
III. 2. that they were not yet able to bear. For much to the same purpose, he
speaks to the Corinthians, Ep. 1. Chapter III. as in the above cited places he did
to the Hebrews; That he as a wise Master Builder had laid the Foundation: And
that Foundation, he himself tells us, is Jesus the Messiah, and that there is
no other Foundation to be laid. And that in this he laid the Foundation of
Christianity at Corinth, St. Luke records, Act XVIII. 4. in these words; Paul
at Corinth reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath Day, and testified to the
Jews that Jesus was the Messiah. Upon which Foundation he tells them there
might be a Superstructure. But that what is built on the Foundation is not the
Foundation, I think I need not prove. He further tells them, that he had
desired to build upon this Foundation; But withal says, he had fed them till
then with Milk, and not with Meat: because they were Babes, and had not been
able to bear it, neither were they yet able. And therefore this Epistle we see
is almost wholly spent in Reproofs of their Miscarriages, and in Exhortations
and Instructions relating to Practice, and very little said in it for the
explaining any part of the great Mystery of Salvation contained in the Gospel.

By these Passages we may see (were it not evident to common sense it self from
the Nature of things) that the design of these Epistles was not to lay the
Foundations, or teach the Principles of the Christian Religion; they being writ
to those who had received them, and were Christians already. The same holds in
all the other Epistles: And therefore the Epistles seemed not to me the
properest parts of Scripture, to give us that Foundation distinct from all the
Superstructures built on it; Because in the Epistles, the latter was the thing
proposed, rather than the former. For the main intention of the Apostles in
writing their Epistles, could not be to do what was done already; to lay down
barely the Foundations of Christianity to those who were Christians already;
but to build upon it some ^arther Explication of it, which either their
particular Circumstances, or a general evidencing of the Truth, Wisdom,
Excellencies, and Privileges, etc. of the Gospel required. This was the reason
that persuaded me to take the Articles of Faith absolutely necessary to be
received to make a Man a Christian, only from the Preachings of our Savior and
his Apostles to the Unconverted World, as laid down in the Historical Part of
the New Testament. And I thought it a good Reason. It being past doubt, that
they in their Preachings proposed to the Unconverted all that was necessary to
be believed to make them Christians. And also, that that Faith, upon a
Profession whereof any one was admitted into the Church as a Believer, had all
that was necessary in it to make him a Christian; because if it wanted any
thing necessary, he had necessarily not been admitted; unless we can suppose,
that any one was admitted into the Christian Church by our Savior, and his
Apostles, who was not yet a Christian; or pronounced a Believer, who yet wanted
something necessary to make him a Believer, i. e. was a Believer and not a
Believer at the same time. But what those Articles were, which had been
Preached to those, to whom the Epistles were writ, and upon the Belief whereof
they had been admitted into the Christian Church, and became as they are called
Believers, Saints, Faithful, Elect, etc. could not be collected out of the
Epistles. This, though it were my reason, and must be a reason to every one,
who would make this Enquiry; and the Unmasker quotes the place where I told him
it was my reason; Yet he according to his never erring Illumination, flatly
tells me, p. 38. that it was not, and adds, Here then is want of Sincerity,
etc. I must desire him therefore to prove what he says, p. 38. viz.

XV.
That by the same Argument that I would persuade that the Fundamentals are not
to be sought for in the Epistles, he can prove that they are not to be sought
for in the Gospels and in the Acts; because even these were writ to those that
believed.

And next I desire him to prove, what he also says in the same Page, viz.

XVI.
That the Epistles being writ to those that believed, was not an Argument that
I did make use of.

He tells us, p. 38. That it is the Argument whereby I would persuade, and in
the very same Page, a few Lines lower, says, That it is not the Argument I did
make use of. Who, but an arrant Unmasker, would contradict himself so flatly in
the same breath? And yet upon that he raises a Complaint of my want of
Sincerity.

For want of Sincerity in one of us, we need not go far for an Instance. The
next Paragraph, p. 38. -- 40. affords us a gross one of it; Wherein the
Unmasker argues strongly, not against any thing I had said, but against an
Untruth of his own setting up. Toward the latter end of the Paragraph, p. 40.
he has these words; It is manifest that the Apostles in their Epistles taught
Fundamentals, which is contrary to what this Gentleman says, that such a thing
could not be supposed; And therefore the Unmasker has taken a great deal of
pains to show, that there are Fundamental Doctrines to be found in the
Epistles; as if I had denied it. And to lead the Reader into an Opinion, that I
had said so, he sets down these words, could not be supposed, as if they were
my words. And so they are, but not to that purpose. And therefore he did well
not to quote the Page, lest the Reader, by barely turning to the place, should
have a clear sight of Falsehood, instead of that Sincerity which he would make
the Reader believe is wanting in me. My words, p. 294. Of the Reasonableness of
Christianity are, NOR CAN IT BE SUPPOSED, that the sending of such Fundamentals
was the reason of the Apostles writing to any of them. And a little lower; The
Epistles therefore being all written to those who were already Believers and
Christians, the occasion and end of writing them could not be to instruct them
in that which was necessary to make them Christians. The thing then that I
denied, was not, that there were any Fundamentals in the Epistles. For p. 295.
I have these express words; I do not deny but the great Doctrines of the
Christian Faith are dropped here and there, and scattered up and down in most of
them. And therefore he might have spared his Endeavors in the next Paragraph
to prove, that there may be Fundamentals found in the Epistles, till he finds
some body that denies it. And here again, I must repeat my usual Question, that
with this sincere Writer is so often necessary, viz.

XVII.
Where it is that I say that it cannot be supposed that there are Fundamental
Articles in the Epistles?

If he hopes to shift it off, by the word taught; which seems fallaciously put
in, as if he meant, that there were some Fundamental Articles taught necessary
to be believed to make them Christians, in the Epistles, which those who they
were writ to knew not before, in this sense I do deny it, and then this will be
the

XVII.
Proposition remaining upon him to prove, viz.

That there are Fundamental Articles necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian taught in the Epistles which those, who they were writ to, knew not
before.

The former part of his next Paragraph, p. 40. runs thus: Hear another feigned
Ground of his omitting the Epistles, viz. Because the Fundamental Articles are
here promiscuously and without distinction mixed with other Truths. p. 14. But
who sees not that this is a mere Elusion? For on the same account he might have
forborne to search for Fundamental Articles in the Gospels, for they do not lie
there together, but are dispersed up and down: The Doctrinal and Historical
Parts are mixed with one another, but he pretends to sever them. Why then did
he not make a Separation between the Doctrines in the Epistles, and those other
Matters that are treated of there? He has nothing to reply to this, and
therefore we must again look upon what he has suggested as a cast of his
shuffling faculty.

The Argument contained in these words is this. A Man cannot well distinguish
Fundamental from Non-fundamental Doctrines in the Epistles, where they are
promiscuously mixed with Non-fundamental Doctrines* Therefore he cannot well
distinguish Fundamental Doctrines from others in the Gospels, and the Acts,
where they are mixed with Matters of Fact. As if he should say, one cannot well
distinguish a Batchellour of Divinity from other Divines, where several of them
stand together promiscuously in the same Habit; Therefore one cannot
distinguish a Batchellour of Divinity from a Billingsgate Orator, where they
stand together in their distinct habits. Or that it is as easy to distinguish
^ine Gold, from that of a little lower Allay, where several pieces of each are
mixed together; as it is to distinguish pieces of fine Gold from pieces of
Silver, which they are mixed among.

But it seems the Unmasker thinks it is as easy to distinguish between
Fundamental and not Fundamental Doctrines, in a writing of the same Author,
where they are promiscuously mixed together, as it is to distinguish between a
Fundamental Doctrine of Faith, and a relation of Matter of Fact, where they are
intermixedly reported in the same History. When he has proved this, the
Unmasker will have more reason to tax me with Elusion, Shuffling and Feigning,
in the reason I gave for not collecting Fundamentals out of the Epistles. Till
then, all that noise must stand amongst those ridiculous Airs of Triumph and
Victory, which he so often gives himself, without the least Advantage to his
Cause, or Edification of his Reader, though he should a thousand times say that
I have nothing to reply.

In the latter part of this Paragraph, he says, That necessary Truths,
Fundamental Principles, may be distinguished from those, that are not such, in
the Epistolary Writings, by the Nature and Importance of them, by their
immediate respect to the Author, and means of our Salvation. Answ. If this be
so, I desire him to give me a definitive Collection of Fundamentals out of the
Epistles, as I have given one out of the Gospels and the Acts. If he cannot do
that; It Is plain he has here given a distinguishing mark of Fundamentals, by
which he himself cannot distinguish them. But yet I am the Shuffler.

The Argument in the next Paragraph, p. 41. is this.

Necessary Doctrines of Faith, such as God absolutely demands to be believed
for Justification, may be distinguished from Rules of Holy Living, with which
they are mixed in the Epistles; Therefore Doctrines of Faith necessary, and not
necessary, to be believed to make a Man a Christian may be distinguished, as
they stand mixed in the Epistles. Which is as good sense as to say, Lambs and
Kids may be easily distinguished in the same Pen, where they are together; by
their different Natures: Therefore the Lambs I absolutely demand of you, as
necessary to satisfy me, may be distinguished from others in the same Pen,
where they are mixed without any distinction. Doctrines of Faith, and Precepts
of Practice, are as distinguishable as doing and believing: And those as easily
discernible one from another, as thinking and walking: But Doctrinal
Propositions, all of them of Divine Revelation, are of the same Authority, and
of the same Species, in respect of the necessity of believing them; And will be
eternally undistinguishable into necessary and not necessary to be believed,
till there be some other way found, to distinguish them, than that they are in
a Book, which is all of Divine Revelation. Though therefore Doctrines of Faith,
and Rules of Practice are very distinguishable in the Epistles; yet it does not
follow from thence, that Fundamental and not Fundamental Doctrines, Points
necessary, and not necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, are easily
distinguishable in the Epistles. Which therefore remains to be proved: And it
remains incumbent upon him,

XVIII.
To set down the Marks, whereby the Doctrines delivered in the Epistles, may
easily and exactly be distinguished into Fundamental, and not Fundamental
Articles of Faith.

All the rest of that Paragraph, containing nothing against me, must be bound
up with a great deal of the like stuff, which the Unmasker has put into his
Book, to show the World, he does not imitate me in Impertinencies,
Incoherences, and trifling Excursions, as he boasts in his first Paragraph.
Only I shall desire the Reader to take the whole Passage concerning this
Matter, as it stands in my Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 295. I do not
deny, but the great Doctrines of the Christian Faith are dropped here and there,
and scattered up and down in most of them. But it is not in the Epistles we are
to learn, what are the Fundamental Articles of Faith, where they are
promiscuously, and without distinction, mixed with other Truths, and
Discourses, which were (though for Edification indeed yet) only occasional. We
shall find and discern those great, and necessary Points best in the Preaching
of our Savior and his Apostles, to those who were yet Strangers and ignorant
of the Faith, to bring them in, and convert them to it. And then let him read
these words which the Unmasker has quoted out of them, It is not in the
Epistles that we are to learn, what are the Fundamental Articles of Faith, they
were written for the resolving of Doubts, and reforming of Mistakes; With his
Introduction of them in these words, He commands the Reader not to stir a jot
further than the Acts. If I should ask him, where that Command appears, he must
have recourse to his old shift, that he did not mean as he said, or else stand
Convicted of a malicious Untruth. An Orator is not bound to speak strict Truth,
though a Disputant be. But this Unmasker's Writing against me, will excuse him
from being of the latter: And then why may not Falsehoods pass for Rhetorical
flourishes, in one who has been used to popular Haranguing; to which Men are
not generally so severe, as strictly to examine them, and expect that they
should always be found to contain nothing but precise Truth, and strict
Reasoning? But yet I must not forget to put upon his Score, this other
Proposition of his, which he has, p. 42. and ask him to show,

XIX.
Where it is that I command my Reader not to stir a jot farther than the Acts?

In the next two Paragraphs, p. 42. -- 46. The Unmasker is at his natural Play
of Declaiming without Proving. It Is pity the Mishna, out of which he takes his
good breeding, as it told him that a well-bred and well-taught Man answers to
the first in the first place, had not given him this Rule too about Order, viz.
That Proving should go before Condemning; Else all the fierce Exaggerations,
ill Language can heap up, are but empty Scurility. But it is no wonder that the
Jewish Doctors, should not provide Rules for a Christian Divine turned
Unmasker. For where a Cause is to be maintained, and a Book to be writ, and
Arguments are not at hand, yet something must be found to fill it; Railing in
such cases is much easier than Reasoning, especially where a Man's Parts lie
that way.

The first of these Paragraphs, p. 42. he begins thus; But let us hear further
what this Vindicator says to excuse his rejection of the Doctrines contained
in the Epistles, and his putting us off with one Article of Faith: And then he
quotes these following words of mine: What if the Author designed his Treatise,
as the Title shows, chiefly for those who were not yet thoroughly and firmly
Christians, purposing to work upon those, who either wholly disbelieved, or
doubted of the Truth of the Christian Religion?

Answ. This, as he has put it, is a downright Falsehood. For the words he
quotes, were not used by me to excuse my rejection of the Doctrines contained
in the Epistles, or to prove there was but one Article. But as a reason why I
omitted the mention of Satisfaction.

To demonstrate this, I shall set down the whole Passage as it is, p. 6. of my
Vindication; where it runs thus:

But what will become of me that I have not mentioned Satisfaction!

Possibly this Reverend Gentleman would have had Charity enough for a known
Writer of the Brotherhood to have found it by an Innuendo in those words above
quoted, of laying down his Life for another. But every thing is to be strained
here the other way. For the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
is of necessity to be represented as a Socinian; Or else his Book may be read;
and the Truths in it, which Mr. Edwards likes not, be received; and People put
upon examining. Thus one, as full of happy Conjectures and Suspicions as this
Gentleman, might be apt to argue. But what if the Author designed his Treatise,
as the Title shows, chiefly for those who were not yet thoroughly or firmly
Christians; Proposing to work on those who either wholly disbelieved or doubted
of the Truth of the Christian Religion?

To this he tells me, p. 43. that my Title says nothing for me, i. e. shows
not, that I designed my Book for those that disbelieved or doubted of the
Christian Religion.

Answ. I thought that a title that professed the Reasonableness of any Doctrine
showed it was intended for those that were not ^ully satisfied of the
Reasonableness of it; unless Books are to be writ to convince those of any
thing, who are convinced already. But possibly this may be the Unmasker's way:
And if one should judge by his manner of treating this Subject, with
Declamation instead of Argument, one would think, that he meant it for no body,
but those who were of his Mind already. I thought therefore, The Reasonableness
of Christianity as delivered in the Scripture, a proper Title to signify whom
it was chiefly meant for: And, I thank God, I can with satisfaction say it has
not wanted its effect upon some of them. But the Unmasker proves for all that,
that I could not design it chiefly for Disbelievers or Doubters of the
Christian Religion. For, says he, p. 43. How those that wholly disregard and
disbelieve the Scriptures of the New Testament, as Gentiles, Jews, Mahometans
and Atheists do (I crave leave to put in Theists instead of Atheists, for a
reason presently to be mentioned) are like to attend to the Reasonableness of
Christianity as delivered in the Scripture is not to be conceived; And
therefore we look upon this as all mere Sham and Sophistry. Answ. Though the
Unmasker teaches good breeding out of the Mishna, yet I thought he had been a
Minister of the Gospel, and had taught Christianity out of the Scripture. Why!
Good Sir, would you teach Jews and Mahometans Christianity out of the Talmud
and Alcoran; because they are the Books, that at present they attend to and
believe? Or would you, laying by the Authority of all Books, Preach Religion to
Infidels in your own Name, and by your own Authority; laying aside the
Scripture? Is it not to be conceived, no not by a Christian Divine, that the
way to make Unbelievers Christians, is to show them the Reasonableness of the
Religion contained in the Scripture? But it seems the Unmasker has a peculiar
way of Preaching and propagating Christianity without the Scripture, as some
Men have a peculiar way of disputing without Reason.

In the beginning of this Paragraph, p. 43. the Unmasker, that is always a fair
Interpreter of my meaning, and never fails to know it better than I do, tells
me, That by those, that wholly disbelieve, I must mean Atheists, Turks, Jews
and Pagans; and by those that are not firmly Christians, a few weak Christians.
But did our Unmasker never hear of Unbelievers under a denomination distinct
from that of Atheists, Turks, Jews, and Pagans? Whilst the Pulpit and the Press
have so often had up the Name of Theists or Deists, has that Name wholly escaped
him? 'Twas these I chiefly designed, and I believe no body of all that read my
Vindication, but the Unmasker mistook me, if he did. But there at least, p. 9.
he might have found the Name, as of a sort of Unbelievers not unknown amongst
us. But whatever he thought, it was convenient and a sort of Prudence in him
(when he would persuade others, that I had not a Design which I say I had) to
lessen as much as he could, and cover the need of any such Design, and so make
it, that I could not intend my Book to work upon those, that disbelieved, or
did not firmly believe; by insinuating there were few or none such amongst us.
Hence he says that by those that are not thoroughly and firmly Christians, I
mean a FEW weak Christians; as well as under those, who wholly disbelieve he
left the Theists out of my meaning. I am very glad to hear from the Unmasker,
that there are but few weak Christians, few that have Doubts about the Truth of
Christianity amongst us. But if there be not a great number of Deists, and that
the preventing their increase be no^ worth every true Christian's Care and
Endeavors, those who have been so loud against them have been much to blame;
and I wish to God there were no reason for their Complaints. For these
therefore I take the liberty to say, as I did before, that I chiefly designed
my Book; And shall not be ashamed of this Sophistry as you call it, if it can
be Sophistry to allege a Matter of Fact that I know; Till you have Arguments
to convince me, that you know my intention in publishing it, better than I do
my self. And I shall think it still no blameable Prudence, however you exclaim
against Prudence, (as perhaps you have some reason) that I mentioned only those
Advantages, that all Christians are agreed in; And that I observed that command
of the Apostle, Romans XIV. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, but not
to doubtful Disputations; without being a Socinian. I think I did not amiss,
that I offered to the belief of those that stood off, that, and only that,
which our Savior and his Apostles preached for the reducing the Unconverted
World. And would any one think he in earnest went about to persuade Men to be
Christians, who should use that as an Argument to recommend the Gospel, which
he has observed Men to lay hold on as an Objection against it? To urge such
Points of Controversy as Necessary Articles of Faith, when we see our Savior
and the Apostles urged them not as necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians, is (by our own Authority) to add Prejudices to Prejudices, and to
block up our own way to those Men, whom we would have access to, and prevail
upon.

I have repeated this again out of the 7th. Page of my Vindication, where there
is more to the same purpose; That the Reader may see how fully the Unmasker has
answered it.

Because I said, Would any one blame my Prudence if I mentioned only those
Advantages, which all Christians are agreed in. The Unmasker adds, p. 44.
Socinian Christians, and then as if the naming of that had gained him his
Point, he goes on victoriously thus, He has bethought himself better since he
first. Published his Notions, and (as the result of that) he now begins to
resolve, what he writ, into Prudence. I know whence he had this Method (and
it is likely he has taken more than this from the same hands) viz. from the
Missionary Jesuits, that went to Preach the Gospel to the People of China. We
are told, that they instructed them in some Matters relating to our Savior;
they let them know that Jesus was the Messiah, the Person promised to be sent
into* the World; But they concealed his Sufferings and Death, and they would
not let them know any thing of his Passion and Crucifixion. So our Author
(their humble Imitator) undertakes to instruct the World in Christianity, with
an omission of its Principal Articles, and more especially that of the
Advantage we have by Christ's Death, which was the prime thing designed in his
coming into the World. This he calls Prudence: So that to hide from the People
the main Articles of the Christian Religion, to disguise the Faith of the
Gospel, to betray Christianity it self, is according to this excellent Writer,
the Cardinal Virtue of Prudence. May we be delivered then, say I, from a
Prudential Racovian. And there ends the rattling for this time; not to be
outdone by any Piece of Clock-work in the Town. When he is once set a going, he
runs on like an Alarm, always in the same strain of noisy empty Declamation
(wherein every thing is supposed and nothing proved) till his own weight has
brought him to the Ground? And then, being wound up with some new Topic, takes
another run, whether it makes for or against him it matters not; he has laid
about him with ill Language, let it light where it will, and the Vindicator is
paid off.

That I may keep the due distance in our different ways of Writing, I shall
show the Reader, that I say not this at random; but that the place affords me
occasion to say so. He begins this Paragraph with these words, p. 42. Let us
hear farther what this Vindicator says to excuse his rejection of the Doctrines
contained in the Epistles. This rejection of the Doctrines contained in the
Epistles, was the not mentioning the Satisfaction of Christ, amongst those
Advantages I showed, that the World received by his coming. This appears by the
words he here quotes, as my excuse for that omission. In which place, I also
produced some Passages in my Book which sounded like it, some words of
Scripture that are used to prove it; But this will not content him: I am for
all that, a Betrayer of Christianity and Contemner of the Epis^les. Why?
Because I did not out of them name Satisfaction. If you will have the truth of
it, Sir, there is not any such word in any one of the Epistles, or other Books
of the New Testament, in my Bible, as Satisfying or Satisfaction made by our
Savior; and so I could not put it into my Christianity as delivered in the
Scripture. If mine be not a true Bible, I desire you to furnish me with one
that is more Orthodox; or if the Translators have hid that main Article of the
Christian Religion, they are the betrayers of Christianity, and Contemners of
the Epistles, who did not put it there; and not I, who did not take a word from
thence, which they did not put there. For truly, I am not a Maker of Creeds;
nor dare add either to the Scripture, or to the Fundamental Articles of the
Christian Religion.

But you will say Satisfaction, though not named in the Epistles, yet may
plainly be collected out of them. Answ. And so it may out of several places in
my Reasonableness of Christianity, some whereof, which I took out of the
Gospels, I mentioned in my Vindication, p. 5. and others of them which I took
out of the Epistles, which I shall point out to you now: As p. 74. I say the
Design of our Savior's coming was to be OFFERED up; And p. 158. I speak of the
Work of our REDEMPTION; words which in the Epistles are taken to imply
Satisfaction. And therefore if that be enough, I see not, but I may be free
from betraying Christianity; But if it be necessary to Name the word
Satisfaction, and he that does not so is a Betrayer of Christianity, you will
do well to consider how you will acquit the Holy Apostles, from that bold
Imputation; which if it be extended as far as it will go, will scarce come
short of Blasphemy; For I do not remember that our Savior has any where named
Satisfaction, or implied it plainer in any words than those I have quoted from
him. And he, I hope, will escape the Intemperance of your Tongue.

You tell me, I had my Prudence from the Missionary Jesuits in China* who
concealed our Savior's Suffering and Death; because I undertake to ininstruct
the World in Christianity, with an omission of its Principal Articles. And I
pray, Sir, from whom did you learn your Prudence, when taking upon you to teach
the Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, in your Thoughts concerning the
Causes of Atheism, you left out several, that you have been pleased since to
add in your Socinianism Unmasked? Or if I, as you say here, betray Christianity
by this Omission of this Principal Article; What do you, who are a Professed
Teacher of it, if you omit any principal Article; Which your Prudence is so
wary in, that you will not say you have given us all that are necessary to
Salvation, in that List you have last published? I pray who acts best the
Jesuit (whose humble Imitator you say I am) you or I; when pretending to give a
Catalogue of Fundamentals, you have not reduced them to direct Propositions;
but have left some of them indefinite, to be collected as every one pleases;
and instead of telling us it is a perfect Catalogue of Fundamentals, plainly
shuffle it off, and tell me, p. 22. If that will not content me, you are sure
you can do nothing that will; If I require more, it is Folly in you to comply
with me? One part of what you here say, I own to you, savours not much of the
Skill of a Jesuit. You confess your inability, and I believe it to be perfectly
true; That if what you have done already (which is nothing at all) will not
content me, you are sure, you can do nothing that will content me, or any
reasonable Man, that shall demand of you a complete Catalogue of Fundamentals.
But you make it up pretty well, with a Confidence becoming one of that Order.
For he must have rubbed his Forehead hard, who in the same Treatise, where he so
severely condemns the Imperfection of my List of Fundamentals, confesses that
he cannot give a complete Catalogue of his own.

You publish to the World in this 44, and the next Page, that I hide from the
People the main Articles of the Christian Religion; I disguise the faith of the
Gospel, betray Christianity it self, and imitate the Jesuits that went t^
Preach the Gospel to the People of China, by my Omission of its principal or
main Articles.

Answ. I know not how I disguise the Faith of the Gospel, etc. in imitation of
the Jesuits in China; unless taking Men off from the Inventions of Men, and
recommending to them the Reading and Study of the Holy Scripture to find what
the Gospel is and requires, be a disguising of the Faith of the Gospel, a
betraying of Christianity, and an imitating of the Jesuits. Besides, Sir, if
one may ask you, in what School did you learn that prudent warine^s and
reserve, which so eminently appears, p. 24. of your Socinianism Unmasked, in
these words: These Articles (meaning those which you had before enumerated as
Fundamental) of Faith, are such as must IN SOME MEASURE be known and assented
to by a Christian, such as must GENERALLY be received, and embraced by him? You
will do well the next time to set down, how far your Fundamentals must be
known, assented to, and received; to avoid the suspicion, that there is a
little more of Jesuitism in these Expressions, in some measure known and
assented to, and generally received and embraced, than what becomes a sincere
Protestant Preacher of the Gospel. For your speaking so doubtfully of knowing
and assenting to those, which you give us for Fundamental Doctrines, which
belong (as you say) to the very essence of Christianity, will hardly escape
being imputed to your want of Knowledge, or want of Sincerity. And indeed the
word General is in familiar use with you, and stands you in good stead, when
you would say something, you know not what, as I shall have occasion to remark
to you when I come to your 91 Page.

Further, I do not remember where it was, that I mentioned or undertook to set
down all the principal or main Articles of Christianity. To change the ^^rms of
the Question from Articles necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian,
into principal or main Articles, looks a little Jesuitical. But to pass by
that; The Apostles when they went to preach the Gospel to People as much
Strangers to it, as the Chinese were, when the Europeans came first amongst
them, Did they hide from the People the main Articles of the Christian
Religion, disguise the Faith of the Gospel, and betray Christianity it self? If
they did not, I am sure I have not: For I have not omitted any of the main
Articles which they Preached to the Unbelieving World. Those I have set down,
with so much care not to omit any of them, that you blame me for it more than
once, and call it tedious. However you are pleased to acquit or condemn the
Apostles in the case by your Supreme Determination, I am very indifferent. If
you think fit to condemn them for disguising or betraying the Christian
Religion, because they said no more of Satisfaction, than I have done, in their
Preaching at first to their Unbelieving Auditors, Jews or Heathens, to make
them as I think Christians (for that I am now speaking of) I shall not be sorry
to be found in their Company under what censure soever. If you are pleased
graciously to take off this your censure from them, for this omission, I shall
claim a share in the same Indulgence.

But to come to what perhaps you will think your self a little more concerned
not to censure, than what the Apostles did so long since; for you have given
instances of being very apt to make bold with the Dead; Pray tell me, does the
Church of England admit People into the Church of Christ at hap-hazard? Or
without proposing, and requiring a Profession of all, that is necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christian? If she does not, I desire you to turn to
the Baptism of those of riper Years in our Liturgy: Where the Priest asking the
Convert particularly, whether he believes the Apostles Creed, which he repeats
to him; Upon his Profession that he does, and that he desires to be baptized
into that Faith, without one word of any other Articles, Baptizes him; and then
declares him a Christian, in these words: We receive this Person into the
Congregation of Christ's Flock, and sign him with the sign of the Cross, in
token that he shall not be ashamed -- to CONTINUE Christ's faithful Soldier and
Servant. In all this there is not one word of Satisfaction, no more than in my
Book, nor so much neither. And here I ask you, whether for this omission, you
will pronounce that the Church of* England disguises the Faith of the Gospel?
However you think fit to treat me, yet methinks you should not let your self
loose so freely against our first Reformers, and the Fathers of our Church ever
since, as to call them Betrayers of Christianity it self, because they think
not so much necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, as you are
pleased to put down in your Articles; but omit, as well as I, your main Article
of Satisfaction.

Having thus notably harangued upon the occasion of my saying, Would any one
blame my Prudence, and thereby made me a Socinian, a Jesuit, and a Betrayer of
Christianity it self, he has in that answered all that such a Miscreant as I do
or can say; and so passes by all the Reasons I gave, for what I did; without
any other notice or answer, but only denying a Matter of Fact, which I only can
know, and he cannot, viz. My design in Printing my Reasonableness of
Christianity.

In the next Paragraph, p. 45. in answer to these words of St. Paul, Romans XIV.
1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, but not to doubtful Disputations,
which I brought as a reason, why I mentioned not Satisfaction amongst the
Benefits received by the coming of our Savior; Because, as I tell him in my
Vindication, p. 5. My Reasonableness of Christianity, as the title shows, was
designed chiefly for those who were not yet thoroughly or firmly Christians. He
replies, and I desire him to prove it.

XX.
That I pretend a design of my Book which was never so much as thought of, till
I was solicited by my Brethren to Vindicate it.

All the rest in this Paragraph being either nothing to this place of the
Romans, or what I have answered elsewhere, needs no farther Answer.

The next two Paragraphs, p. 46.^49. are meant for an Answer to something I had
said concerning the Apostles Creed, upon the occasion of his chargeing my Book
with Socinianism. They begin thus.

This Author of the New Christianity. Answ. This New Christianity is as old as
the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, and a little older than the
Unmasker's System. Wisely objects that the Apostles Creed has none of those
Articles which I mentioned, p. 12, 13. Answ. If that Author wisely objects, the
Unmasker would have done well to have replied wisely. But for a Man wisely to
reply it is in the first place requisite, that the Objection be truly and
fairly set down in its full force, and not represented short, and as will best
serve the Answerers turn to reply to. This is neither wise nor honest: And this
first part of a wise Reply the Unmasker has failed in. This will appear from my
words and the occasion of them. The Unmasker had accused my Book of
Socinianism, for omitting some Points, which he urged as necessary Articles of
Faith. To which I answered, That he had done so only to give it an ill Name,
not because it was Socinian, for he had no more reason to charge it with
Socinianism for the Omissions he mentions, than the Apostles Creed. These are
my words, which he should have either set down out of p. 12. which he quotes,
or at least given the Objection as I put it, if he had meant to have cleared it
by a fair Answer. But he, instead thereof, contents himself that I object, that
the Apostles Creed has none of those Articles and Doctrines which the Unmasker
mentioned. Answ. This at best is but a part of my Objection, and not to the
purpose. I there meant, without the rest joined to it; which it has pleased the
Unmasker according to his laudable way to conceal. My Objection therefore
stands thus,

That the same Articles, for the Omission whereof the Unmasker charges my Book
with Socinianism, being also omitted in the Apostles Creed, he has no more
reason to Charge my Book with Socinianism, for the Omissions mentioned, than he
has to charge the Apostles Creed with Socinianism.

To this Objection of mine, let us now see how he answers, p. 47.

Nor does any considerate Man wonder at it [i. e. That the Apostles Creed has
none of those Articles and Doctrines which he had mention'd] For the Creed is a
form of outward Profession, which is chiefly to be made in the Public
Assemblies, when Prayers are put up in the Church and the Holy Scriptures are
read. Then this Abridgment of Faith is properly used, or when there is not
generally time or opportunity to make any Enlargement. But we are not to think
it expressly contains in it all the necessary and weighty Points, all the
important Doctrines of Belief, it being only designed to be an Abstract.

Answ. Another indispensible requiquisite in a wise Reply is, that it should be
pertinent. Now what can there be more impertinent, than to confess the Matter
of Fact upon which the Objection is grounded, but instead of destroying the
Inference drawn from that Matter of Fact, only amuse the Reader with wrong
Reasons, why that Matter of Fact was so?

No considerate Man, he says, does wonder that the Articles and Doctrines he
mentioned, are omitted in the Apostles Creed: Because that Creed is a form of
outward Profession. Answ. A Profession! of what I beseech you? Is it a Form to
be used for Form's sake? I thought it had been a Profession of something, even
of the Christian Faith: And if it be so, any considerate Man may wonder
necessary Articles of the Christian Faith should be lest out of it. For how it
can be an outward Profession of the Christian Faith, without containing the
Christian Faith, I do not see; unless a Man can outwardly profess the Christian
Faith in words, that do not contain or express it, i. e. profess the Christian
Faith, when he does not profess it. But he says, it is a Profession chiefly to
be made use of in Assemblies. Answ. Do those solemn Assemblies privilege it
from containing the necessary Articles of the Christian Religion? This proves
not that it does not, or was not designed to contain all Articles necessary to
be believed to make a Man a Christian; unless the Unmasker can prove that a
From of outward Profession of the Christian Faith, that contains all such
necessary Articles, cannot be made use of in the Public Assemblies. In the
Public Assemblies, says he, when Prayers are put up by the Church and the Holy
Scriptures are read, then this Abridgment of Faith is properly used; or when
there is not generally time or opportunity to make an Enlargement. Answ. But
that which contains not what is absolutely necessary to be believed to make a
Man a Christian, can no where be properly used as a form of outward Profession
of the Christian Faith, and least of all in the solemn Public Assemblies. All
the sense I can make of this is, That this Abridgment of the Christian Faith,
i. e. imperfect Collection (as the Unmasker will have it) of some of the
Fundamental Articles of Christianity in the Apostles Creed, which omits the
greatest part of them, is made use of as a form of outward Profession of but
part of the Christian Faith in the Public Assemblies, when by reason of
reading of the Scripture and Prayers, there is not time or opportunity for a
full and perfect Profession of it.

It Is strange the Christian Church should not find time nor opportunity in
Sixteen hundred Years to make, in any of her Public Assemblies, a Profession
of so much of her Faith as is necessary to make a Man a Christian. But pray
tell me, has the Church any such full and complete form of Faith, that has in
it all those Propositions, you have given us for necessary Articles (not to say
any thing of those which you have reserved to your self in your own Breast, and
will not communicate) of which the Apostles Creed is only a scanty form, a
brief imperfect abstract, used only to save time in the Crowd of other pressing
Occasions, that are always in have to be dispatched? If she has, the Unmasker
will do well to produce it. If the Church has no such complete form, besides
the Apostle's Creed, any where, of Fundamental Articles, he will do well to
leave talking idly of this Abstract, as he goes on to do in the following
words:

But, says he, we are not to think that it expressly contains in it all the
necessary and weighty Points, all the important Doctrines of our Belief, it
being only designed to be an Abstract. Answ. Of what, I beseech you, is it an
Abstract? For here the Unmasker stops short, and as one that knows not well
what to say, speaks not out what it is an Abstract of; But provides himself a
Subterfuge in the generality of the preceding terms of necessary and weighty
Points, and Important Doctrines, jumbled together; which can be there of no
other use, but to cover his Ignorance, or Sophistry. For the Question being
only about necessary Points, to what purpose are weighty and important
Doctrines joined to them; unless he will say, that there is no difference
between necessary and weighty Points, Fundamental and important Doctrines? And
if so, then the distinction of Points into necessary and not necessary, will be
foolish and impertinent; And all the Doctrines contained in the Bible will be
absolutely necessary to be explicitly believed by every Man to make him a
Christian. But taking it for granted, that the diction of Truths contained in
the Gospel into Points absolutely necessary, and not absolutely necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, is good; I desire the Unmasker to tell us,
what the Apostles Creed is an Abstract of. He will perhaps answer, that he has
told us already in this very Page, where he says it is an Abridgment of Faith,
and he has said true in words, but saying those words by rote after others,
without understanding them, he has said so in a sense, that is not true. For he
supposes it an Abridgment of Faith, by containing only a few of the necessary
Articles of Faith, and leaving out the far greater part of them; And so takes a
part of a thing for an Abridgment of it; Whereas an Abridgment, or Abstract of
any thing, is the whole in little, and if it be of a Science or Doctrine, the
Abridgment consists in the essent^al or necessary Parts of it; contracted into
a narrower compass, than where it lies diffused in the ordinary way of
delivery, amongst a great number of Transitions, Explanations, Illustrations,
Proofs, Reasonings, Corollaries, etc. All which, though they make a part of the
Discourse wherein that Doctrine is delivered, are lest out in the Abridgment of
it, wherein all the necessary parts of it are drawn together into a less room.
But though an Abridgment need to contain none but the essential and necessary
parts, yet all those it ought to contain; Or else it will not be an Abridgment
or Abstract of that thing, but an Abridgment only of a part of it. I think it
could not be said to be an Abridgment of the Law contained in an Act of
Parliament, wherein any of the things required by that Act were omitted; which
yet commonly may be reduced into a very narrow compass, when stripped of all the
Motives, Ends, Enacting Forms, etc. expressed in the Act it self. If this does
not satisfy the Unmasker what is properly an Abridgment; I shall referr him to
Mr. Chillingworth, who I think will be allowed to understand sense, and to
speak it properly, at least as well as the Unmasker. And what he says, happens
to be in the very same Question between Knot the Jesuit, and him; that is here
between the Unmasker, and me: It Is but putting the Unmasker in the Jesuit's
place, and my self (if it may be allowed me without Vanity) in Mr.
Chillingworth's the Protestants, and Mr. Chillingworth's very words, Chap. IV..
65. will exactly serve for my Answer. You trifle affectedly, confounding the
Apostles Belief of the whole Religion of Christ, as it comprehends both what we
are to do, and what we are to believe, with that part of it which contains not
Duties of Obedience, but only the necessary Articles of simple Faith. Now,
though the Apostles Belief be in the former sense, a larger thing than that
which we call the Apostles Creed; Yet in the latter sense of the word, the
Creed (I say) is a full Comprehension of their Belief, which you your self have
formerly confessed, though somewhat fearfully and inconstantly. And here again
unwillingness to speak the Truth makes you speak that which is hardly sense,
and call it an Abridgment of some Articles of Faith. For I demand those some
Articles which you speak of, which are they? Those that are out of the Creed,
or those that are in it? Those that are in it, it comprehends at large, and
therefore it is not an Abridgment of them. Those that are out of it, it
comprehends not at all, and therefore it is not an Abridgment of them. If you
would call it now an Abridgment of Faith, this would be sense; and signify
thus much; That all the necessary Articles of the Christian Faith are comprised
in it. For this is the proper Duty of Abridgments, to leave out nothing
necessary. So that in Mr. Chillingworth's judgment of an Abridgment, it is not
sense to say as you do, p. 47. That we are not to think that the Apostles Creed
expressly contains in it all the necessary Points of our Belief, it being only
designed to be an Abstract, or an Abridgment of Faith. But on the contrary, we
must conclude it contains in it all the necessary Articles of Faith, for that
very reason, because it is an Abridgment of Faith, as the Unmasker calls it.
But whether this, that Mr. Chillingworth has given us here, be the nature of an
Abridgment, or no; this is certain, that the Apostles Creed cannot be a form of
Profession of the Christian Faith, if any part of the Faith necessary to make a
Man a Christian be left out of it: And yet such a Profession of Faith would the
Unmasker have this Abridgment of Faith to be. For a little lower in the 47. p.
he says in express terms, That if a Man believe no more than is in express
terms in the Apostles Creed, his Faith will not be the Faith of a Christian.
Wherein he does great Honor to the Primitive Church, and particularly to the
Church of England. The Primitive Church admitted converted Heathens to Baptism,
upon the Faith contained in the Apostles Creed: A bare Profession of that
Faith, and no more, was required of them to be received into the Church and
made Members of Christ's Body. How little different the Faith of the Ancient
Church was from the Faith I have mentioned, may be seen in these words of
Tertullian; Regula fidei una omnino est, sola, immobilis, irreformabilis,
Credendi scilicet in unicum deum omnipotentem Mundi conditorem, and filium ejus
Iesum Christum, natum ex Virgin Maria, Crucifixum sub Pontio Pilato, tertia
die resuscitatum a Mortuis, receptum in Coelis, Sedentem nunc ad dextram
Patris, Venturum judicare vivos and Mortuos per carnis etiam resurrectionem.
Hac lege fidei manente, caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt
novitatem correctionis, Tert. de Virg. Velan, in Principio. This was the Faith
that in Tertullian's time sufficed to make a Christian. And the Church of
England, as I have remarked already, only proposes the Articles of the Apostles
Creed* to the Convert to be baptized, and upon his Professing a Belief of them,
asks whether he will be Baptized in THIS FAITH, which (if we will believe the
Unmasker) is not the Faith of a Christian. However the Church, without any more
ado, upon the Profession of THIS FAITH, and no other, Baptizes them into it. So
that the Ancient Church, if the Unmasker may be believed, baptized Converts
into that Faith which is not the Faith of a Christian. And the Church of
England, when she Baptizes any one, makes him not a Christian. For he that is
Baptized only into a Faith that is not the Faith of a Christian, I would fain
know how he can thereby be made a Christian? So that if the Omissions, which he
so much blames in my Book, make me a Socinian, I see not how the Church of
England will escape that Censure; Since those Omissions are in that very
Confession of Faith, which she proposes, and upon a Profession whereof she
Baptizes those whom she designs to make Christians. But it seems that the
Unmasker (who has made bold to Unmask her too) reasons right, that the Church
of England is mistaken, and makes none but Socinian Christians, or (as he is
pleased now to declare) no Christians at all. Which if true, the Unmasker were
best look to it, whether he himself be a Christian, or no: For it is to be
feared, he was baptized only into that Faith, which he himself confesses is not
the Faith of a Christian.

But he brings himself off in these following words; All matters of Faith in
some manner may be reduced to this brief Platform of Belief. Answ. If that be
enough to make him a true and an Orthodox Christian, he does not consider whom
in this way he brings off with him: For I think he cannot deny, that all
Matters of Faith in some manner may be reduced to that Abstract of Faith which
I have given, as well as to that brief Platform in the Apostles Creed. So that
for ought I see, by this rule, we are Christians, or not Christians; Orthodox
or not Orthodox, equally together.

But yet he says in the next words, When he calls it an Abstract or
Abbreviature, it is implied, that there are more Truths to be known and
assented to by a Christian in order to making him really so, than what we meet
with here. The quite contrary whereof (as has been shown) is implied by its
being called an Abstract. But what is that to the purpose? It Is not sit
Abstracts and Abbreviatures should stand in Unmasker's way. They are Sounds Men
have used for what they pleased, and why may not the Unmasker do so too; And
use them in a Sense, that may make the Apostles Creed be only a broken scrap of
the Christian Faith? However in great Condescension, being willing to do the
Apostles Creed what honor he could, he says, That all Matters of Faith in some
manner may be reduced to this brief Platform of Belief: But yet when it is set
in competition with the Creed, which he himself is making (for it is not yet
finished) it is by no means to be allowed as sufficient to make a Man a
Christian. There are more Truths to be known and assented to in order to make a
Man really a Christian. Which what they are, the Church of England shall know,
when this new Reformer thinks fit: And then she may be able to propose to
those, who are not yet so, a Collection of Articles of Belief, and Baptize them
anew into a Faith, which will really make them Christians; But hitherto, if the
Unmasker may be credited, she has failed in it.

Yet he craves leave to tell me in the following words, p. 48. That the
Apostles Creed has more in it than I or my Brethren will subscribe to. Were it
not the Undoubted Privilege of the Unmasker to know me better than I do my
self, (for he is always telling me something of my self which I did not know) I
would in my turn crave leave to tell him, that this is the Faith I was baptized
into, no one tittle whereof I have renounced, that I know; And that I
heretofore thought, that gave me title to be a Christian. But the Unmasker has
otherwise determined: And I know not now where to find a Christian. For the
Belief of the Apostles Creed will not it seems make a Man one: And what other
Belief will, it does not yet please the Unmasker to tell us. But yet as to the
Subscribing to the Apostles Creed, I must take leave to say, however the
Unmasker may be right in the Faith, he is out in the Morals of a Christian; It
being against the Charity of one, that is really so, to pronounce, as he does,
peremptorily in a thing, that he cannot know; and to affirm positively what I
know to be a downright Falsehood. But what others will do it is not my talent
to determine: That belongs to the Unmasker. Though as to all that are my
Brethren in the Christian Faith, I may answer for them too, that they will also
with me do that without which in that sense they cannot be my Brethren.

P. 49. The Unmasker smartly convinces me of no small Blunder in these words.
But was it not judiciously said by this Writer, that it is well for the
Compilers of the Creed, that they lived not in my days. P. 12. I tell you
Friend, it was impossible they should, for the Learned Usher, and Vossius, and
others, have proved that that Symbol was drawn up not at once, but that some
Articles of it were adjoined many years after, far beyond the extent of any
Man's Life, and therefore the Compilers of the Creed could not live in my days,
nor could I live in theirs. Answ. But it seems that had they lived altogether,
you could have lived in their days. But, says he, I let this pass, as one of
the Blunders of our thoughtful and musing Author. Answ. And I tell you Friend,
that unless it were to show your reading in Usher and Vossius, you had been
better let this Blunder of mine alone. Does not the Unmasker give here a clear
Proof, that he is no Changeling? Whatever Argument he takes in hand, weighty or
trivial, material or not material to the thing in question, he brings it to the
same sort of sense and force. He would show me guilty of an absurdity in
saying, It was well for the Compilers of the Creed, that they lived not in his
days. This he proves to be a Blunder; because they all lived not in one
another days; Therefore it was an absurdity to suppose they might all live in
his days. As if there were any greater absurdity to bring the Compilers, who
lived possibly within a few Centuries of one another by a Supposition into one
time, than it is to bring the Unmasker, and any one of them who lived a
Thousand Years distant one from another, by a Supposition to be Contemporaries;
For it is by reason of the Compilers living at a distance one from another, that
he proves it impossible for him to be their Contemporary. As if it were not as
impossible in Fact for him who was not born till above a Thousand Years after
to live in any of their Days, as it is for any one of them to live in either of
those Compilers days that died before him. The Supposition of their living
together is as easy of one as the other, at what distance soever they lived,
and how many soever there were of them. This being so, I think it had been
better for the Unmasker to have let alone the Blunder, and showed (which was
his Business) that he does not accuse the Compilers of the Creed of being all
over Socinianized, as well as he does me, since they were as guilty as I of the
omission of those Articles (viz. That Christ is the Word of God. That God was
incarnate. The eternal and ineffable Generation of the Son of God. That the Son
is in the Father, and Father in the Son, which expresses their Unity) for the
omission whereof, the Unmasker laid Socinianism to my Charge. So that it
remains still upon his Score to show,

XXI.
Why these Omissions in the Apostles Creed not as well make that Abstract, as
my Abridgment of Faith to be Socinian.

Page 53. The Unmasker desires the Reader to observe, that this lank Faith of
mine is in a manner no other than the Faith of a Turk. And I desire the Reader
to observe, that this Faith of mine, was all that our Savior and his Apostles
preached to the Unbelieving World. And this our Unmasker cannot deny; As I
think will appear to any one, who observes what he says, p. 76, and 77. of his
Socinianism Unmasked. And that they preached nothing but a Faith, that was in a
manner no other than the Faith of a Turk; I think none amongst Christians, but
this bold Vnmasker, will have the irreverence profanely to say.

He tells us, p. 54. That the Musselmen (or as he has for the Information of
his Reader very pertinently proved, should be writ Moslemim, without which,
perhaps we should not have known his Skill in Arabic), or in plain English the
Mahometans believe that Christ is a good Man, and not above the Nature of a
Man, and sent of God to give instruction to the World: And my Faith, he says,
is of the very same Scantling. This I shall desire him to prove, or which in
other words he insinuates in this, and the neighboring Pages, viz.

XXII.
That that Faith which I have affirmed to be the Faith, which is required to
make a Man a Christian, is no other, than what Turks believe, and is contained
in the Alchoran.

Or, as he expresses it himself, p. 55.

That a Turk according to me is a Christian, for I make the same Faith serve
them both.

And particularly to show where it is I say,

XXIII.
That Christ is not above the Nature of a Man, or have made that a necessary
Article of the Christian Faith.

And next where it is,

XXIV.
That I speak as meanly of Christ's Suffering on the Cross, and Death, as if
there were no such thing?

For thus he says of me, p. 54. I seem to have consulted the Mohammedan Bible,
which did say Christ did not suffer on the Cross, did not Die. For I, and my
Allies, speak as meanly of these Articles, as if there were no such thing.

To show our Vnmasker's Veracity in this case, I shall trouble my Reader with
some Passages out of my Reasonableness of Christianity, page 61. When we
consider that he was to fill out the time foretold of his Ministry, and after a
life Illustrious in Miracles, and good Works, attended with Humility, Meekness,
Patience and SVFFERING, and every way conformable to the Prophecies of him,
should be led as a Sheep to the Slaughter; and with all quiet and submission be
brought to the CROSS, though there were no Guilt or Fault found in him. And p.
74. Contrary to the design of his coming, which was to be OFFERED up a Lamb
blameless and void of offense. And p. 116. Laying down his life, both for Jews
and Gentiles. P. 178. Given up to Contempt, Torment and Death. But say what I
will, when the Vnmasker thinks fit to have it so, it is speaking out of the
Mohammedan Bible, That Christ did not suffer on the Cross, did not Die; or at
least, is speaking as meanly of these Articles, as if no such thing had been.

His next Slander is, p. 55. in these words; This Gentleman presents the World
with a very ill notion of Faith, for the very Devils are capable of all that
Faith, which he says makes a Christian. It is not strange, that the Vnmasker
should misrepresent the Faith, which I say makes a Christian; when it seems to
be his whole Design to misrepresent my meaning every where. The frequency of
his doing it, I have showed in abundance of instances, to which I shall add an
eminent one here; which shows what a fair Champion he is for Truth and Religion.

Page 196. of my Reasonableness of Christianity, I give this account of the
Faith, which makes a Christian; That it is Men's entering themselves in the
Kingdom of God; owning and professing themselves the Subjects of Jesus, whom
they believe to be the Messiah, and receive for their Lord and King: For that
was to be baptized in his Name. This sense of believing Christ to be the
Messiah, that is to take him for our King and Lord, who is to be obeyed, I have
expressed over and over again; as p. 209. my words are, That as many of them,
as would believe Jesus the Son of God (whom he sent into the World) to be the
Messiah the promised Deliverer, and would receive him for their King and Ruler,
should have all their past Sins, Disobedience, and Rebellion forgiven them. And
if for the future they lived in sincere Obedience to his Law, to the utmost of
their Power, the Sins of humane frailty for the time to come, as well as those
of their past lives, should for his Son's sake, because they gave themselves up
to him to be his Subjects, be forgiven them; And so their Faith, which made
them be baptized into his Name (i. e. enroll themselves in the Kingdom of Jesus
the Messiah, and profess themselves his Subjects; and consequently live by the
Laws of his Kingdom) should be accounted to them for Righteousness. Which
Account of what is necessary, I close with these words: This is the FAITH for
which God of his free Grace Justifies sinful Man. And is this the Faith of
Devils?

To the same purpose, p. 214. are these words. The chief End of his coming was
to be a King, and as such to be received by those, who would be his Subjects in
the Kingdom, which he came to erect. And again, p. 212. Only those, who have
believed Jesus to be the Messiah, and taken him for their King, with a sincere
endeavor after righteousness in obeying his Law, shall have their past Sins
not imputed to them. And so again, p. 213. and 227. and in several other
places: Of which I shall add but this one more, p. 228. It Is not enough to
believe him to be the Messiah, unless we obey his Laws, and take him to be our
King to reign over us. Can the Devils thus believe him to be the Messiah? Yet
this is that which by these, and abundance of other places, I have showed to be
the meaning of believing him to be the Messiah.

Besides, I have expressly distinguished the Faith which makes a Christian, from
that which the Devils have; by proving, that to the believing Jesus to be the
Messiah must be joined repentance, or else it will not make them true
Christians; And what this repentance is, may be seen at large in p. 193, etc.
some Expressions whereof I shall here set down: As p. 198. Repentance does not
consist in one single Act of Sorrow (though that being first, and leading,
gives Denomination to the whole), but in doing Works meet for Repentance; in a
sincere Obedience to the Law of Christ the remainder of our Lives. Again: To
distinguish the Faith of a Christian from that of Devils, I say expressly out of
St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, That which avails is Faith, but Faith
working by Love; and that Faith without Works, i. e. the Works of sincere
Obedience to the Law and Will of Christ, is not sufficient for our
Justification. And p. 222. That to inherit eternal Life, we must love the Lord
our God, with all our Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Strength, and with
all our Mind; An^ 230. Love Christ in keeping his Commandments.

This, and a great deal more to this purpose, may be seen in my Reasonableness
of Christianity; particularly where I answer that Objection about the Faith of
Devils, which I handle from p. 193. to p. 251. and therein at large show
wherein the Faith of Devils comes short of the Justifying Faith, which makes a
Christian. And yet the good, the sincere, the candid Unmasker, with his
becoming Confidence, tells his Readers here, p. 55. That I present the World
with a very ill notion of Faith: For the very Devils are capable of all that
Faith, which I say makes a Christian Man.

To prevent this Calumny, I in more places than one distinguished between Faith
in a strict sense, as it is a bare assent to any Proposition, and that which is
called Evangelical Faith, in a larger sense of the word; which comprehends
under it something more than a bare simple assent, as p. 43. I mean this is all
is required to be believed by those who acknowledge but one Eternal invisible
God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth: For that there is something more required
to Salvation, besides believing we shall see hereafter. P. 47. All I say that
was to be believed for Justification. For that this was not all that was
required to be done for Justification, we shall see hereafter. P. 92. Obeying
the Law of the Messiah their King being no less required than their believing
that Jesus was the Messiah, the King and Deliverer, that was promised them,
Page 192. As far as mere believing could make them Members of Christ's Body. By
these, and more the like Passages in my Book, my meaning is so evident, that no
body, but an Unmasker, would have said, that when I spoke of believing as a
bare Speculative assent to any Proposition as true, I affirmed that was all
that was required of a Christian for Justification: Though that in the strict
sense of the word is all that is done in believing. And therefore, I say, as
far as mere believing could make them Members of Christ's Body; plainly
signifying, as much as words can, that the Faith, for which they were
justified, included something more than a bare assent. This appears not only
from these words of mine, p. 196. St. Paul often in his Epistles, puts Faith
for the whole Duty of a Christian; but from my so often, and almost everywhere
interpreting believing him to be the Messiah, by taking him to be our King;
whereby is meant not a bare idle Speculation, a bare notional persuasion of any
truth whatsoever floating in our Brains; but an active Principle of Life, a
Faith working by Love and Obedience. To take him to be our King, carries with
it a right disposition of the will to honor, and obey him, joined to that
assent wherewith Believers embrace this Fundamental Truth, that Jesus was the
Person, who was by God sent to be their King; he that was promised to be their
Prince and Savior.

But for all this, the Unmasker, p. 56. Confidently tells his Reader that I say
no such thing. His words are, But besides this Historical Faith (as it is
generally called by Divines) which is giving Credit to Evangelical Truths, as
barely revealed, there must be something else added to make up the true
Substantial Faith of a Christian. With the assent of the Understanding, must be
joined the consent or approbation of the Will. All those Divine Truths, which
the Intellect assents to must be allowed of by this Elective Power of the Soul.
True Evangelical Faith is a hearty acception of the Messiah, as he is offered
in the Gospel. It is a sincere and impartial submission to all things required
by the Evangelical Law which is contained in the Epistles as well as the other
Writings. And to this practical assent and choice there must be added likewise
a firm Trust and reliance in the blessed Author of our Salvation. But this late
Undertaker who attempted to give us a more perfect account than ever was before
of Christianity, as it is delivered in the Scriptures, brings us no tidings of
any such Faith belonging to Christianity, or discovered to us in the
Scriptures. Which gives us to understand that he verily believes there is no
such Christian Faith, for in some of his numerous Pages (especially 191. and
192, etc.) where he speaks so much of Belief and Faith, he might have taken
occasion to insert one word about this complete Faith of the Gospel.

Though the places above quoted out of my Reasonableness of Christianity, and
the whole tenor of the latter part of it, show the falsehood of what the
Unmasker here says; Yet I will set down one Passage more out of it, and then
ask our Unmasker, when he has read them, whether he has the brow to say
again, that I bring no tidings of any such Faith? My words are Reasonableness
of Christianity, p. 244. Faith in the Promises of God, relying and acquiescing
in his Word and Faithfulness, the Almighty takes well at our hands, as a great
mark of Homage, paid by us poor frail Creatures to his Goodness and Truth, as
well as to his Power and Wisdom; and accepts it as an Acknowledgment of his
peculiar Providence and Benignity to us. And therefore our Savior tells us,
John XII. 44. He that believes on me believes not on me, but on him that sent
me. The Works of Nature show his Wisdom and Power: But it is his peculiar care
of Mankind, most eminently discovered in his Promises to them, that shows his
Bounty and Goodness: And consequently engages their Hearts in Love and
Affection to him. This oblation of an heart fixed with dependence and affection
on him, is the most acceptable Tribute we can pay him; the Foundation of true
Devotion; and Life of all Religion. What a Value he puts on this depending on
his Word, and resting satisfied on his Promises, we have an example in Abraham;
whose Faith was counted to him for Righteousness; As we have before remarked
out of Romans IV. and his relying firmly on the Promise of God, without any doubt
of its Performance; gave him the Name, of the Father of the Faithful; And
gained him so much favor with the Almighty, that he was called the Friend of
God: The Highest and most Glorious Title can be bestowed on a Creature.

The great outcry he makes against me in his two next Sections, p. 57.^60. as
if I intended to introduce Ignorance and Popery, is to be entertained rather as
the noise of a petulant Scold, saying the worst things she could think of, than
as the arguing of a Man of sense or sincerity. All this mighty Accusation is
grounded upon these Falsehoods, That I make it my great business to beat Men off
from Divine Truths; That I cry down all Articles of the Christian Faith but
one; That I will not suffer Men to look into Christianity; That I blast the
Epistolary Wri^ings. I shall add no more to what I have already said about the
Epistles, but those few words out of my Reasonableness of Christianity* p. 295.
The Epistles resolving Doubts, and reforming Mistakes, are of great Advantage
to our Knowledge and Practice. And p. 229. An explicit belief of what God
requires of those, who will enter into, and receive the benefits of the New
Covenant, is absolutely required. The other parts of Divine Revelation are
Objects of Faith, and are so to be received. They are Truths whereof none that
is once known to be such [ i. e. of Divine Revelation] may or ought to be
disbelieved.

And as for that other Saying of his, That I will not suffer Men to look into
Christianity; I desire to know where that Christianity is locked up, which I
will not suffer Men to look into. My Christianity, I confess, is contained in
the written Word of God: And that I am so far from hindering any one to look
into, that I every where appeal to it, and have quoted so much of it, that the
Unmasker complains of being overlaid with it, and tells me it is tedious. All
Divine Revelation, I say, p. 300. requires the Obedience of Faith; And that
every one is to receive all the parts of it, with a docility and disposition
prepared to embrace and assent to all Truths coming from God; and submit his
Mind to whatever shall appear to him to bear that Character. I speak in the
next Page of Men's endeavoring to understand it, and of their interpreting one
place by another. This and the whole Design of my Book shows, That I think it
every Christian's Duty to read, search, and study the Holy Scriptures: and make
this their great Business: And yet the good Unmasker in a fit of Zeal displays
his Throat, and cries out, p. 59. Hear O ye Heavens, and give ear, O Earth,
judge whether this be not the way to introduce Darkness and Ignorance into
Christendom; whether this be not blinding of Men's Eyes, etc. For this mighty
Pathos ends not there. And all things considered, I know not whether he had not
reason, in his want of Arguments, this way to pour out his concern. For neither
the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, nor the Apostles Creed, nor any
thing else being with him the Faith of a Christian, i. e. sufficient to make a
Christian, but just his set of Fundamental Articles (when he himself knows what
they be) In fine, nothing being Christianity but just his System, it is time to
cry out, Help Neighbors, hold fast Friends; Knowledge, Religion, Christianity
is gone, if this be once permitted, that the People should read and understand
the Scripture for themselves, as God shall enlighten their Understandings in
the use of the means; and not be forced to depend upon me, and upon my
choosing, and my Interpretation, for the necessary Points they are to believe
to make them Christians: If I the great Unmasker, have not the sole Power to
decree, what is, or is not Fundamental, and People be not bound to receive it
for such, Faith and the Gospel are given up; Darkness and Barbarism will be
brought in upon us by this Writer's Contrivance. For, he is an underhand Factor
for that Communion, which cries up ignorance for the Mother of Devotion and
Religion, i. e. in plain English for Popery. For to this and nothing else tends
all that sputter he makes in the Sections before mentioned.

I do not think there was ever a more through-paced Declaimer than our
Unmasker. He leaves out nothing that he thinks will make an affrighting noise
in the Ears of his Orthodox Hearers, though all the blame and censure he pours
out upon others, light only on himself. For let me ask this Zealous Upholder of
Light and Knowledge, does he think it reasonable that any one, who is not a
Christian, should be suffered to be undisturbed in his Parish? Nay, does he
think fit, that any such should live free from the Lash of the Magistrate, or
from the Persecution of the Ecclesiastical Power? He seems to talk with another
Air, p. 65. In the next place, I ask, whether any one is a Christian who has
not the Faith of a Christian? Thirdly, I ask, whether he has the Faith of a
Christian, who does not explicitly believe all the Fundamental Articles of
Christianity? And to conclude, I ask him, whether all those that he has set
down are not Fundamental necessary Articles? When the Unmasker has fairly
answered these Questions, it will be seen who is for Popery, and the Ignorance
and Tyranny that accompanies it.

The Unmasker is for making and imposing Articles of Faith: But he is for this
Power in himself. He likes not Popery (which is nothing but the Tyranny and
imposing upon Men's Understandings, Faith, and Consciences) in the hands of the
old Gentleman at Rome: But it would, he thinks, do admirably well in his own
hands. And who can blame him for it? Would not that be an excellent way to
propagate Light and Knowledge, by tying up all Men to a bundle of Articles of
his own culling? Or rather to the Authority of Christ and his Apostles residing
in him? For he does not, nor ever will, give us a full view of Fundamentals of
his Christianity: But like the Church of Rome, to secure our Dependence,
reserves to himself a Power of declaring others, and defining what is Matter of
Faith, as he shall see occasion.

Now therefore vail your Bonnets to the Unmasker, all you that have a Mind to
be Christians: Break not your Heads about the Scriptures, to examine what they
require of you: Submit your Faith implicitly to the Unmasker, he will
understand and find out the necessary Points for you to believe. Take them,
just so many as he thinks fit to deliver them to you: This is the way to be
knowing Christians. But be sure, ask not whether those he is pleased to deliver
be every one of them Fundamental, and all the fundamental Articles necessary to
be believed to make a Man a Christian: Such a capricious Question spoils all;
Overturns Christianity, which is entrusted to the Unmasker's sole keeping, to
be dispensed out as he thinks fit. I^ you refuse an implicit Faith to him, he
will presently find you have it for the whore of Babylon; he will smell out
Popery in it immediately: For he has a very shrewd Scent, and you will be
discovered to be an Underhand Factor for the Church of Rome.

But if the Unmasker were such an Enemy, as he pretends, to those Factors; I
wonder he should, in what he has said concerning the Apostles Creed, so exactly
jump with Knot the Jesuit. If any one doubt of this, I desire him to look into
the Fourth Chapter of Knot's Charity maintained, and there he will see, how
well our Unmasker and that Jesuit agree in Argument; nay, and Expressions too.
But yet I do not think him so far guilty, as to be employed as an Underhand
Factor for Popery. Every Body will, I suppose, be ready to pronounce him so far
an Innocent, as to clear him from that. The Cunning of his Design goes not
beyond the laying out of his preaching Oratory, for the setting up his own
System; and making that the sole Christianity. To that end, he would be glad to
have the Power of interpreting Scripture, of defining and declaring Articles of
Faith, and imposing them. This which makes the absolute Power of the Pope he
would not I think establish at Rome; but it is plain he would have it himself,
if he could get it, for the Support of the Christianity of his System. An
implicit Faith, if he might have the Management of it, and the taking
Fundamentals upon Trust from his Authority, would be of excellent Use. Such a
Power in his Hands, would spread Truth and Knowledge in the World, i. e. his
own Orthodoxy, and Set of Opinions. But if a Man differs, nay, questions any
thing of that, whether it be absolutely necessary to make one a Christian, it is
immediately a Contrivance to let in Popery, and to bring Darkness and Barbarism
into the Christian World. But I must tell the Innocent Unmasker, whether he
designs it or no, That if his calling his System the only Christianity, can
bring the World to receive from him Articles of Faith of his own choosing, as
Fundamentals necessary to be believed by all Men to make them Christians, which
Christ and his Apostles did not propose to all Men to make them Christians, he
does only set up Popery in another Guise, and lay the Foundatians of Ignorance,
Darkness, and Barbarism, in the Christian World. For all the Ignorance and
Blindness, that Popery introduced, was only upon this Foundation. And if he
does not see this (as there is Reason to excuse his Innocence) 'twould be no
hard matter to demonstrate it; If that were at present the Question between us.
But there are a great many other Propositions to be proved by him, before we
come to that new Matter of Debate.

But before I quit these Paragraphs, I must go on with our Unmasker's Account,
and desire him to show where it is

XXV.
That I make it my Business to beat Men off from taking notice of any Divine
Truths?

Next, where it is

XXVI.
That I cry down all Articles of Christian Faith but one?

Next, how it appears

XXVII.
That I will not suffer Mankind to look into Christianity?

Again, where it is

XXVIII.
That I labor industriously to keep People in Ignorance; Or tell them, That
there is no necessity of knowing any other Doctrines of the Bible?

These and several others of the like strain, particularly concerning One
Article, and the Epistles; (which are his common places) are to be found in his
59. and 60. Pages. And all this out of a Presumption, that his System is the
only Christianity; And that if Men were not pressed, and persuaded to receive
that, just every Article of it, upon pain of Damnation; Christianity would be
lost: And not to do this, is to promote Ignorance, and contemn the Bible. But
he fears where no fear is. If his Orthodoxy be the truth, and conformable to
the Scriptures, the laying the Foundation only where our Savior and his
Apostles have laid it, will not overturn it. And to show him, that it is so, I
desire him again to consider what I said in p. 8. of my Vindication: Which,
because I do not remember, he any where takes notice of in his Reply, I will
here offer again to his consideration: Convince but Men of the Mission of Jesus
Christ; make them but see the Truth, Simplicity and Reasonableness of what he
himself has taught, and required to be believed by his Followers, and you need
not doubt, but being once fully persuaded of his Doctrine and the Advantages,
which all Christians agree are received by him, such Converts will not lay by
the Scriptures; But by a constant reading and study of them, will get all the
Light they can from this Divine Revelation; and nourish themselves up in the
words of Faith and good Doctrine, as St. Paul speaks to Timothy.

If the reading and study of the Scripture were more pressed than it is, and
Men were fairly sent to the Bible to find their Religion; and not the Bible put
into their hands only to find the Opinions of their peculiar Sect or Party,
Christendom would have more Christians, and those that are, would be more
knowing, and more in the right than now they are. That which hinders this, is
that select bundle of Doctrines, which it has pleased every Sect to draw out of
the Scriptures, or their own inventions, with an Omission (and as our Unmasker
would say, a Contempt) of all the rest. These choice Truths (as the Unmasker
calls his) are to be the standing Orthodoxy of that Party, from which none of
that Church must recede without the forfeiture of their Christianity, and the
loss of eternal Life. But whilst People keep firm to these, they are in the
Church, and the Way to Salvation. Which in effect, what is it but to encourage
ignorance, laziness, and neglect of the Scriptures? For what need they be at
the pains of constantly reading the Bible? Or perplex their Heads with
considering and weighing what is there delivered, when believing as the Church
believes, or saying after, or not contradicting their Domine, or Teacher,
serves the turn?

Further, I desire it may be considered what Name that mere Mockshew of
recommending to Men the study of the Scripture deserves; if, when they read it,
they must understand it just as he (that would be, and they are too apt,
contrary to the Command of Christ, to call their Master) tells them. If they
find any thing in the Word of God, that leads them into Opinions, that he does
not allow; If any thing they meet with in Holy Writ seems to them to thwart or
shake the received Doctrines, the very proposing of their Doubts renders them
suspected: Reasoning about them, and not acquiescing in what ever is said to
them, is interpreted want of due respect and deference to the Authority of
their Spiritual Guides: Disrepute and Censures follow: And if in pursuance of
their own Light, they persist in what they think the Scripture teaches them,
they are turned out of the Church, delivered to Satan, and no longer allowed
to be Christians. And is thus a sincere and rightly directed study of the
Scriptures, that Men may understand and profit thereby, encouraged? This is the
Consequence of Men's assuming to themselves a Power of declaring Fundamentals,
i. e. of setting up a Christianity of their own making. For how else can they
turn Men, of as unblameable Lives as others of their Members, out of the Church
of Christ (for so they count their Communion) for Opinions, unless those
Opinions were concluded inconsistent with Christianity? Thus Systems, the
Inventions of Men, are turned into so many opposite Gospels; and nothing is
truth in each Sect, but what just suits with them. So that the Scripture serves
but like a Nose of Wax, to be turned and bent, just as may sit the contrary
Orthodoxies of different Societies. For it is these several Systems that to each
Party are the just Standards of Truth, and the meaning of the Scripture is to
be measured only by them. Whoever relinquishes any of those distinguishing
Points, immediately ceases to be a Christian.

This is the Way that the Unmasker would have Truth and Religion preserved,
Light and Knowledge propagated. But here too the differing Sects giving equal
Authority to their own Orthodoxies will be quits with him. For as far as I can
observe, the same Genius seems to influence them all; even those who pretend
most to freedom, the Socinians themselves. For when it is observed how positive
and eager they are in their Disputes; how forward to have their Interpretations
of Scripture received for Authentic, though to others in several places they
seem very much strained; How impatient they are of Contradiction; and with what
disrespect and roughness they often treat their Opposers; May it not be
suspected that this so visible warmth in their present Circumstances, and Zeal
for their Orthodoxy, would (had they the Power) work in them, as it does in
others? They in their turns would I fear be ready, with their Set of
Fundamentals; which they would be as forward to impose on others, as others
have been to impose contrary Fundamentals on them.

This is and always will be the unavoidable effect of intruding on our
Savior's Authority, and requiring more now as necessary to be believed to make
a Man a Christian, than was at first required by our Savior and his Apostles.
What else can be expected among Christians, but their tearing, and being torn
in pieces by one another; whilst every Sect assumes to it self a Power of
declaring Fundamentals, and severally thus narrow Christianity to their
distinct Systems? He that has a mind to see how Fundamentals come to be framed
and fashioned, and upon what Motives and Considerations they are often taken
up, or laid down, according to the Humors, Interests, or Designs of the Heads
of Parties, as if they were things depending on Men's pleasure, and to be suited
to their convenience, may find an Example worth his notice, in the Life of Mr.
Baxter, Part II. p. 197. -- 205.

Whenever Men take upon them to go beyond those Fundamental Articles of
Christianity, which are to be found in the Preachings of our Savior and his
Apostles, where will they stop? Whenever any Set of Men will require more as
necessary to be believed to make Men of their Church, i. e. in their sense
Christians, than what our Savior and his Apostles proposed to those, whom they
made Christians, and admitted into the Church of Christ; however they may
pretend to recommend the Scripture to their People, in effect no more of it is
recommended to them, than just comports with what the Leaders of that Sect have
resolved Christianity shall consist in.

It Is no wonder therefore there is so much Ignorance amongst Christians, and so
much vain outcry against it; whilst almost every distinct Society of Christians
Magisterially ascribes Orthodoxy to a select Set of Fundamentals distinct from
those proposed in the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, which in no
one Point must be questioned by any of its Communion. By this means their
People are never sent to the Holy Scriptures, that true Fountain of Light, but
hoodwinked: A Veil is cast over their eyes, and then they are bid read the
Bible* They must make it all chime to their Churches Fundamentals, or else they
were better let it alone. For if they find any thing there against the received
Doctrines, though they hold it and express it, in the very terms the Holy Ghost
has delivered it in, that will not excuse them. Heresy will be their lot, and
they shall be treated accordingly. And thus we see how, amongst other good
effects, Creed-making always has, and always will necessarily produce and
propagate Ignorance in the World, however each Party blame others for it. And
therefore, I have often wondered to hear Men of several Churches so heartily
exclaim against the implicit Faith of the Church of Rome; when the same
implicit Faith is as much practiced and required in their own, though not so
openly professed, and ingenuously owned there.

In the next Section, the Unmasker questions the Sincerity of mine, and
professes the greatness of his concern for the Salvation of Men's Souls. And
tells me of my Reflection on him upon that account, in the 9th. Page of my
Vindication. Answ. I wish he would for the right Information of the Reader
every where set down, what he has any thing to say to in my Book, or my Defense
of it, and save me the Labor of repeating it. My words in that place are, Some
Men will not bear, that any one should speak of Religion, but according to the
Model, that they themselves have made of it. Nay, though he proposes it upon
the very terms, and in the very words, which our Savior and his Apostles
preached it in; yet he shall not escape Censures and the severest insinuations.
To deviate in the least, or to omit any thing contained in their Articles is
Heresy, under the most invidious Names in fashion; and it is well if he escapes
being a downright Atheist. Whether this be the Way for Teachers to make
themselves hearkened to as Men in Earnest in Religion, and really concerned for
the Salvation of Men's Souls I leave them to consider. What Success it has had
toward persuading Men of the truth of Christianity, their own Complaints of
the prevalency of Atheism on the one hand, and the number of Deists on the
other sufficiently show.

I have set down this Passage at large, both as a confirmation of what I said
but just now; as also to show, that the Reflection, I there made, needed some
other Answer than a bare Profession of his regard to the Salvation of Men's
Souls. The assuming an undue Authority to his own Opinions, and using manifest
Untruths in the defense of them, I am sure is no mark that the directing Men
right in the way to Salvation is his chief aim. And I wish, that the greater
Liberties of that sort, which he has again taken in his Socinianism Unmasked,
and which I have so often laid open, had not confirmed that Reflection. I
should have been glad, that any thing in my Book had been fairly controverted,
and brought to the touch, whether it had or had not been con^uted. The matter
of it would have deserved a serious debate (if any had been necessary) in the
words of Sobriety and the Charitable temper of the Gospel, as I desired in my
Pre^ace: And that would not have mis-become the Vnmasker's Function. But it did
not consist, it seems, with his Design. Christian Charity would not have
allowed those ill-meant Conjectures, and groundless Censures, which were
necessary to his purpose; and therefore he took a shorter course, than to
confute my Book, and thereby convince me and others. He makes it his business
to rail at it, and the Author of it; that that might be taken for a
confutation. For, by what he has hitherto done, arguing seems not to be his
Talent. And thus far who can but allow his Wisdom? But whether it be that
Wisdom that is from above, first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy, I shall leave to other Readers to judge.

His saying nothing to that other Reflection, which his manner of expressing
himself drew from me, would make one suspect it favored not altogether of the
Wisdom of the Gospel; nor showed an over great Care of the Salvation of Souls.
My Words, Vindic. p. 25. are I know not how better to show my Care of his
Credit, than by entreating him, that when he takes next in hand such a Subject
as this, wherein the Salvation of Souls is concerned, he would treat it a
little more seriously, and with a little more Candor; lest Men should find in
his Writings another Cause of Atheism, which in this Treatise he has not
thought fit to mention. Ostentation of Wit in General, he has made a Cause of
Atheism, p. 28. But the World will tell him; That frothy light Discourses
concerning the serious Matters of Religion, and Ostentation of trifling
mis-becoming Wit, in those who come as Ambassadors from God, under the title of
Successors of the Apostles in the great Commission of the Gospel, is none of
the least Causes of Atheism. But this advice I am now satisfied (by his Second
Part of the same Strain) was very improper for him; and no more reasonable,
than if one should advise a Bu^^oon to talk gravely; who has nothing left to
draw attention, if he should lay by his scurrility.

The remainder of this 4th. Chapter, p. 61.^67. being spent in showing, why the
Socinians are for a few Articles of Faith, being a Matter that I am not
concerned in; I leave to that forward Gentleman to examine, who examined Mr.
Edwards's Exceptions against the Reasonableness of Christianity; and who, as
the Unmasker informs me, p. 64. was chosen to vindicate my attempt, etc.

If the Unmasker knows that he was so Chosen, it is well. If I had known of
such a choice, I should have desired that somebody should have been chosen to
Vindicate my attempt, who had understood it better. The Unmasker and Examiner
are each of them so full of themselves, and their own Systems, that I think
they may be a fit match one for another; And so I leave these Cocks of the
Game, to try it out in an endless battle of wrangling (till Death them depart)
which of them has made the true and exact Collection of Fundamentals; And whose
System of the two ought to be the prevailing Orthodoxy, and be received for
Scripture. Only I warn the Examiner to look to himself; For the Unmasker has
the whiphand of him, and gives him to understand, p. 65. that if he cannot do
it himself by the strength of his Lungs, the vehemence of his Oratory, and
endless attacks of his Repetitions, the Ecclesiastical Power, and the Civil
Magistrates lash have in store demonstrative Arguments to convince him that his
[the Vnmasker's] System is the only true Christianity.

By the way, I must not forget to mind the Unmasker here again, that he has a
very unlucky hand at guessing. For, whereas he names Socinus as one from whom I
received my Platform, and says that Crellius gave me my Kue; it so falls out,
that they are two Authors of whom I never read a Page. I say not this, as if I
thought it a fault if I had, for I think I should have much better spent my
time in them, than in the Writings of our learned Unmasker.

I was sure there was no offending the Unmasker without the guilt of Atheism;
only he here, p. 69. very mercifully lays it upon my Book, and not upon my
Design. The tendency of it to Irreligion and Atheism, he has proved in an
Eloquent Harangue (for he is such an Orator he cannot stir a foot without a
Speech) made as he bids us suppose by the Atheistical Rabble. And who can deny,
but he has chose a fit Employment for himself? Where could there be found a
better Speech-maker for the Atheistical Rabble? But let us hear him: For though
he would give the Atheistical Rabble the Credit of it, yet it is the Unmasker
speaks. And because it is pity such a pattern of Rhetoric and Reason should be
lost, I have for my Reader's Edification, set it all down verbatim.

We are beholding to this worthy Adventurer for ridding the World of so great
an Encumbrance, viz. That huge Mass and unweildy Body of Christianity, which
took up so much room. Now we see that it was this bulk and not that of Mankind
which he had an eye to, when he so often mentioned this latter. This is a
Physician for our turn indeed: We like this Chemical Operator that does not
trouble us with a parcel of heavy Drugs of no value, but contracts it all into
a few Spirits, nay does his business with a single drop. We have been in
bondage a long time to Creeds and Catechisms, Systems and Confessions; we have
been plagued with a tedious Beadroll of Articles, which our Reverend Divines
have told us we must make the Matter of our Faith. Yea, so it is, both
Conformists and Nonconformists (though disagreeing in some other things) have
agreed in this to molest and Crucify us. But this noble Writer (we thank him)
has set us free; and eased us by bringing down all the Christian Faith into
one Point. We have heard some Men talk of Epistolary Composures of the New
Testament, as if great Matters were contained in them, as if the great
Mysteries of Christianity (as they call them) were unfolded there: But we could
never make any thing of them; and now we find that this Writer is partly of our
Opinion. He tells us that these are Letters sent upon occasion, but we are not
to look for our Religion (for now for this Gentleman's sake we begin to talk of
Religion) in these places. We believe it, and we believe that there is no
Religion but in those very Chapters and Verses, which he has set down in his
Treatise. What need we have any other part of the New Testament? That is Bible
enough, if not too much. Happy, thrice happy shall this Author be perpetually
esteemed by us, we will Chronicle him as our Friend and Benefactor. It is not
our way to Saint People: Otherwise we would certainly canonize this Gentleman;
and when our hand is in, his pair of Booksellers for their being so Beneficial
to the World in publishing so rich a Treasure. It was a blessed day when this
hopeful Birth saw the Light, for hereby all the Orthodox Creed-Makers and
Systematick Men are ruined for ever. In brief, if we be for any Christianity,
it shall be this Author's; for that agrees with us singularly well, it being so
short, all couched in four words neither more nor less. It is a very fine
Compendium, and we are infinitely obliged to this great Reformer for it. We are
glad at heart that Christianity is brought so low by this worthy Penman, for
this is a good presage that it will dwindle into nothing. What! But one
Article, and that so brief too! We like such a Faith, and such a Religion,
because it is so near to none.

He has no sooner done, but as it deserved, he cries out, Euge Sophos. And is
not the Reader, quoth he, satisfied that such Language as this has real truth
in it? Does not he perceive, that the discarding all the Articles but ONE makes
way for the casting off that too? Answ. It Is but supposing that the Reader is a
civil ^entleman, and answers Yes, to these two Questions, and then it is
Demonstration, that by this Speech he has irrefragably proved the tendency of
my Book to Irreligion and Atheism.

I remember Chillingworth somewhere puts up this Request to his Adversary Knot:
Sir, I beseech you, when you write again, do us the favor to write nothing but
Syllogisms. For I find it still an extreme trouble to find out the concealed
Propositions, which are to connect the parts of your Enthymems. As now for
Example, I profess to you I have done my best endeavor to find some Glue, or
Sodder, or Cement, or Thread, or any thing to tie the Antecedent and this
Consequent together. The Unmasker agrees so much in a great part of his Opinion
with that Jesuit (as I have showed already) and does so infinitely out-doe him
in spinning Ropes of Sand, and a course Thread of Inconsistencies, which runs
quite through his Book, That it is with great justice, I put him here in the
Jesuits place, and address the same Request to him.

His very next words give me a fresh reason to do it: For thus he argues* p.
72. May we not expect, that those, who deal thus with the Creed, i. e. Discard
all the Articles of it but one, will use the same Method in reducing the ten
Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, Abbreviate the former into one Precept, and
the latter into one Petition? Answ. If he will tell me where this Creed, he
speaks of, is, it will be much more easy to answer his Demand. Whilst his
Creed, which he here speaks of, is yet no where, it is ridiculous for him to
ask Questions about it. The Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, I know
where to find, in express words set down by themselves, with peculiar marks of
distinction. Which is the Lord's Prayer we are plainly taught, by this Command
of our Savior, Luke XI. 1. When we pray, SAY, Our Father, etc. In the same
manner and words we are taught what we should believe, to make us his Disciples
by his Command to the Apostles what they should Preach, Mat. X. 7. As ye go
preach SAYING. What were they to say? Only this, the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. Or, as St. Luke expresses it, IX. 2. They were sent to preach the Kingdom
of God, and to heal the Sick; Which, what it was we have sufficiently
explained. But this Creed of the Unmasker, which he talks of, where is it? Let
him show it us distinctly set out from the rest of the Scripture. If he knows
where it is, let him produce it, or leave talking of it, till he can. It Is not
the Apostles Creed, that is evident. For that Creed he has discarded from being
the Standard of Christian Faith, and has told the World in words at length,
That if a Man believes no more than is in express terms in the Apostles Creed,
his Faith will not be the Faith of a Christian. Nay, it is plain, that Creed has
in the Unmasker's Opinion, the same tendency to Atheism and Irreligion, that my
Summary has. For the Apostles Creed reducing the Forty, or perhaps Four hundred
Fundamental Articles of his Christian Creed, to Twelve; and leaving out the
greatest part of those necessary ones which he has already, and will hereafter
in good time give us, does as much dispose Men to serve the Decalogue, and the
Lord's Prayer just so; as my reducing those Twelve to Two. For so many at least
he has granted to be in my Summary, viz. The Article of one God, Maker of
Heaven and Earth, and the other of Jesus the Messiah; though he every where
calls them but ONE: Which, whether it be to show, with what love and regard to
truth he continues, and consequently began this Controversy; or whether it be
to beguile and startle unwary, or confirm prejudiced Readers, I shall leave to
others to judge. It Is evident he thinks his Cause would be mightily maimed, if
he were forced to leave out the charge of ONE Article; and he would not know
what to do for Wit or Argument, if he should call them two. For then the whole
weight and edge of his strong and sharp reasoning in his Thoughts concerning
the Causes of Atheism, p. 122. would be lost. There you have it in these words;
When the Catholic Faith is thus brought down to one single Article, it will
soon be reduced to none; the Unit will dwindle into a Cipher. And here again,
it makes the whole Argument of his Atheistical Speech, which he winds up with
these convincing words; We are glad to hear, that Christianity is brought so
low by this worthy Penman; for this is a good Presage, that it will dwindle
into nothing. What! ONE Article, and that so brief too: We like such a Faith
and such a Religion, because it is so near NONE. But I must tell this Writer of
equal Wit, Sense, and Modesty, That this Religion, which he thus makes a dull
Farce of, and calls near none, is that very Religion, which our Savior Jesus
Christ and his Apostles preached for the Conversion and Salvation of Mankind;
no one Article whereof, which they proposed as necessary to be received by
Unbelievers to make them Christians, is omitted. And I ask him, whether it be
his Errand, as one of our Savior's Ambassadors to turn it thus into Ridicule?
For till he has shown, that they Preached otherwise, and more than what the
Spirit of Truth has recorded of their Preaching in their Histories, which I
have faithfully collected, and set down, all that he shall say reflecting upon
the Plainness and Simplicity of their Doctrine, however directed against me,
will by his Atheistical Rabble of all kinds, now they are so well entered and
instructed in it by him, be all turned upon our Savior and his Apostles.

What tendency this, and all his other trifling, in so serious a cause as this
is, has to the propagating of Atheism and Irreligion in this Age, he were best
to consider. This I am sure, the Doctrine of but one Article, (if the Author
and finisher of our Faith, and those he guided by his Spirit, had Preached but
one Article) has no more tendency to Atheism, than their Doctrine of one God.
But the Unmasker every where talks, as if the Strength of our Religion lay in
the number of its Articles; and would be presently routed, if it had but a few:
And therefore he has mustered up a pretty full band of them, and has a reserve
of the Lord knows how many more, which shall be forthcoming upon occasion. But
I shall desire to mind this Learned Divine, who is so afraid what will become
of his Religion, if it should propose but one or a few Articles as necessary to
be believed to make a Man a Christian, that the Strength and Security of our
Religion lies in the Divine Authority of those who first promulgated the terms
of admittance into the Church, and not in the Multitude of Articles supposed by
some necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian: And I would have him
remember, when he goes next to make use of this strong Argument of ONE
dwindling into a Cipher, that One is as remote as a Million from none. And if
this be not so, I desire to know whether his way of arguing will not prove
Pagan Polytheism to be more remote from Atheism than Christianity. He will do
well to try the force of his Speech, in the Mouth of an Heathen, complaining of
the tendency of Christianity to Atheism, by reducing his great number of Gods
to but one, which was so near none and would therefore soon be reduced to none.

The Unmasker seems to be upon the same Topic where he so pathetically
complains of the Socinians, p. 66. in these words. Is it not enough to rob us
of our God, by denying Christ to be so; But, must they spoil us of all the
other Articles of Christian Faith but one? Have a better heart* good Sir, for I
assure you, no body can rob you of your God, but by your own consent; Nor spoil
you of any of the Articles of your Faith. If you look for them where God has
placed them, in the Holy Scripture; and take them as he has framed and
fashioned them there; there you will always find them safe and sound. But if
they come out of an Artificer's Shop, and be of humane Invention, I cannot
answer for them: They may, for ought I know, be nothing but an Idol of your own
setting up; which may be pulled down, should you cry out never so much, Great
is Diana of the Ephesians.

He, who considers this Argument of one and none, as managed by the Unmasker,
and observes his Pathetical way of reasoning all through his Book, must
confess, that he has got the very Philosopher's Stone in disputing. That which
would be worthless Lead in others, he turns into pure Gold; His Oratory changes
its Nature, and gives it the noble Tincture: So that what in plain reasoning
would be Nonsense, let him but put it into a Speech, or an Exclamation, and
there it becomes strong Argument. Whether this be not so, I desire Mode and
Figure may decide. And to those I shall desire he would reduce the Proofs,
which p. 73. he says, he has given of these following Propositions, viz.

XXIX.
That I have corrupted Men's Minds.

XXX.
That I have depraved the Gospel.

XXXI.
That I have abused Christianity.

For all these three, p. 73. he affirms of me without Proof, and without
Honesty.

Whether it be from confusion of Thought, or unfairness of Design; either
because he has not clear distinct notions of what he would say, or finds it not
to his purpose to speak them clearly out, or both together; so it is, that the
Unmasker very seldom, but when he rails, delivers himself so that one can
certainly tell what he would have.

The Question is, what is absolutely necessary to be believed by every one to
make him a Christian. It has been clearly made out from an exact Survey of the
History of our Savior and his Apostles, that the whole aim of all their
Preaching every where was to convince the unbelieving World of these two great
Truths. First, That there was one Eternal invisible God, Maker of Heaven and
Earth; And next, That Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, the promised King, and
Savior. And that upon Men's believing these two Articles they were Baptized,
and admitted into the Church, i. e. received as Subjects of Christ's Kingdom,
and pronounced Believers. From whence it unavoidably follows, that these two
are the only Truths necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian.

This Matter of Fact is so evident from the whole tenor of the four Gospels,
and the Acts; And presses so hard, that the Unmasker, who contends for a great
number of other Points necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian,
thinks himself concerned to give some Answer to it: But in his usual way full
of Uncertainty and Confusion. To clear this Matter, he lays down four
Particulars. The First is, p. 74. That the believing Jesus to be the promised
Messiah, was the first step to Christianity.

The Second, p. 76. That though this one Proposition (viz. of Jesus the
Messiah) be mentioned alone in some places, yet there is reason to think, and
be persuaded, that at the same time other Matters of Faith were proposed.

The Third, p. 76. That though there are several Parts and Members of the
Christian Faith, yet they do not all occur in any one place of Scripture.

The Fourth, p. 78. That Christianity was erected by degrees.

These particulars he tells us, p. 74. he offers to clear an Objection. To see
therefore whether they are pertinent or no, we must examine what the Objection
is as he puts it. I think it might have been put in a few words: This I am
sure, it ought to have been put very clear and distinct. But the Unmasker has
been pleased to give it us, p. 73. as follows. Because I designed these
Papers for the satisfying of the Reader's Doubts, about any thing occurring
concerning the Matter before us, and for the establishing of his wavering Mind,
I will here (before I pass to the Second general Head of my Discourse) answer a
Query or Objection, which some and not without some show of Ground may be apt
to start. How comes it to pass, they will say, that this Article of Faith, viz.
That Jesus is the Messiah or Christ, is so often repeated in the New Testament?
Why is this sometimes urged without the mentioning of any other Article of
Belief? Does not this plainly show that this is all that is required to be
believed as necessary to make a Man a Christian? May we not infer from the
frequent and sole repetition of this Article in several places of the
Evangelists and the Acts, that there is no other Point of Faith of absolute
necessity; but that this alone is sufficient to constitute a Man a true Member
of Christ.

By which he shows, that he is uncertain which way to put the Objection, so as
may be easiest to get rid of it: And therefore he has turned it several ways,
and put several Questions about it. As First,

Why this Article of Faith, viz. That Jesus is the Messiah, is so often
repeated in the New Testament.

His next Question is, Why is this sometimes urged without the mentioning any
other Article of Belief, which supposes that sometimes other Articles of Belief
are mentioned with it.

The Third Question is, May we not infer from the frequent and sole repetition
of this Article in several places of the Evangelists and Acts.

Which last Question is in effect, Why is this so frequently and alone repeated
in the Evangelists and the Acts, i. e. in the Preachings of our Savior and his
Apostles to Unbelievers. For of that he must give an account, if he will remove
the difficulty. Which three, though put as one, yet are three as distinct
Questions, and demand a Reason for three as distinct Matters of Fact, as these
three are, viz. frequently proposed; Sometimes proposed alone; and always
proposed alone in the Preachings of our Savior and his Apostles; for so in
truth it was all through the Gospels and the Acts to the unconverted Believers
of one God alone.

These three Questions being thus jumbled together in one Objection, let us see
how the Four particulars he mentions will account for them.

The first of them is this. The believing of Jesus to be the promised Messiah,
was, says he, the first step to Christianity. Let it be so, what do you infer
from thence? The next words show, Therefore this rather than any other Article
was propounded to be believed by all those whom either our Savior or his
Apostles invited to embrace Christianity. Let your Premises be never so true;
and your Deduction of this Proposition be never so regular from them, it is all
lost Labor. This Conclusion is not the Proposition you were to prove. Your
Questions were, why this Article is so often proposed? And in those frequent
repetitions, why sometimes urged alone, and why always proposed alone, viz. to
those whom either our Savior or his Apostles invited to embrace Christianity.
And your Answer is, because the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, was the
first step to Christianity. This therefore remains upon you to be proved,

XXXII.
That because the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, is the first step to
Christianity; therefore this Article is frequently proposed in the New
Testament; Is sometimes proposed without the mentioning any other Article; and
always alone to Unbelievers.

And when you have proved this, I shall desire you to apply it to our present
Controversy.

His next Answer to those Questions is in these words, p. 76. That though this
one Proposition or Article be mentioned alone in some places, yet there is
reason to think and be persuaded that at the same time other Matters of Faith
were proposed. From whence it lies upon him to make out this reasoning, viz.

XXXIII.
That because there is reason to think, and be persuaded, that at the same
time, that this one Article was mentioned alone (as it was sometimes) other
Matters of Faith were proposed. Therefore this Article was often proposed in
the New Testament; Sometimes proposed alone; and always proposed alone in the
Preachings of our Savior and his Apostles to Unbelievers.

This I set down to show the force of his Answer to his Questions: Supposing it
to be true, not that I grant it to be true, That where this one Article is
mentioned alone, we have reason to think, and be persuaded, that at the same
time other Matters of Faith [ i. e. Articles of Faith necessary to be believed
to make a Man a Christian] were proposed: And I doubt not but to show the
contrary.

His Third particular, in Answer to the Question proposed in his Objection
stands thus, p. 76. That though there are several Parts and Members of the
Christian Faith, yet they do not all occur in any one place of the Scripture;
which Answer lays it upon him to prove

XXXIV.
That because the several parts of the Members of the Christian Faith do not
all occur in any one place of Scripture; Therefore this Article, That Jesus was
the Messiah, was often proposed in the New Testament, sometimes proposed alone,
and always proposed alone in the Preachings of our Savior and his Apostles,
through the History of the Evangelists and the Acts.

The Fourth and last Particular, which he tells us is the main Answer to the
Objection, is in these words, Page 78. That Christianity was erected by
degrees. Which requires him to make out this Argument, viz.

XXXV.
That because Christianity was erected by degrees, Therefore this Article, that
Jesus was the Messiah, was often proposed in the New Testament, sometimes
proposed alone, and always proposed alone in the Preachings of our Savior and
his Apostles to Unbelievers, recorded in the History of the Evangelists and
Acts.

For, as I said before, in these three Questions he has put his Objection; To
which he tells us this is the main Answer.

Of these four Particulars it is that he says, p. 74. To clear this Objection,
and to give a full and satisfactory Answer to all doubts in this Affair, I
offer these ensuing particulars, which will lead the Reader to the right
understanding of the whole case.

How well they have cleared the Objection, may be seen by barely setting them
down as Answers to these Questions, wherein he puts the Objection.

This is all I have hitherto done: Whereby is very visible how well (supposing
them true) they clear the Objection; and how pertinently they are brought to
answer those Questions wherein his Objection is contained. Perhaps it will be
said, that neither these, nor any thing else can be an apposite Answer to those
Questions put so together. I answer, I am of the same mind. But if the Unmasker
through ignorance or shuffling will talk thus confusedly, he must answer for
it. He calls all his three Questions one Objection over and over again: And
therefore which of those Questions it does or does not lie in, I shall not
trouble my self to divine: Since I think he himself cannot tell. For, which
ever he takes of them, it will involve him in equal Difficulties. I now proceed
to examine his particulars themselves, and the truth contained in them. The
first, page 74. stands thus.

1. The believing of Jesus to be the promised Messiah was the first step to
Christianity. It was that which made way for the embracing of all the other
Articles, a Passage to all the rest. Answ. If this be, as he would have it,
only the leading Article amongst a great many other equally necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christian; This is a reason, why it should be
constantly preached in the first place. But this is no reason, why this alone
should be so often repeated, and the other necessary Points not be once
mentioned. For I desire to know, what those other Articles are, that in the
Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles are repeated or urged besides this?

In the next place, if it be true, that this Article, viz. That Jesus is the
Messiah, was only the first in order, amongst a great many Articles as
necessary to be believed; how comes it to pass, that barely upon the Proposal
and believing of this, Men were admitted into the Church as Believers? The
History of the New Testament is full of instances of this, as Act. VIII. 5. 12.
13. IX* and in other places.

Though it be true what the Unmasker says here, That if they did not give
Credit to this in the first place, that Jesus of Nazareth was that Eminent and
Extraordinary Person prophe^ied of long before, and that he was sent and
Commissioned by God, there could be no hope that they would attend to any other
Proposals relating to the Christian Religion; yet what he subjoins, That this
is the true reason, why that Article was constantly propounded to be believed
by all that looked toward Christianity, and why it is mentioned so often ^n
the Evangelical Writing is not true. For First, this supposes that there were
other Articles joined with it. This he should have first proved, and then given
the reason of it; And not, as he does here, suppose what is in the Question,
and then give a reason, why it is so; and such a reason that is inconsistent
with the Matter of Fact, that is every where recorded in Holy Writ. For if the
true reason, why the Preaching of this Article, that Jesus was the Messiah, as
it is recorded in the History of the New Testament, were only to make way for
the other Articles, one must needs think, that either our Savior and his
Apostles (with reverence be it spoken) were very strange Preachers; Or that the
Evangelists, and Author of the Acts were very strange Historians. The first
were to instruct the World in a new Religion consisting of a great number of
Articles, says the Unmasker, necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian, i. e. a great number of Propositions making a large System, every
one whereof is so necessary for a Man to understand, and believe, that if any
one be omitted, he cannot be of that Religion. What now did our Savior and his
Apostles do? Why, if the Unmasker may be believed, they went up and down with
danger of their Lives, and Preached to the World* What did they Preach? Even
this single Proposition to make way for the rest, viz. This is the Eminent Man
sent from God to teach you other things, which amounts to no more but this,
That Jesus was the Person which was to teach them the true Religion, but that
true Religion it self is not to be found in all their Preaching; nay, scarce a
word of it. Can there be any thing more ridiculous, than this? And yet this was
all they Preached; if it be true, that this was all which they meant by the
Preaching every where Jesus to be the Messiah; And if it were only an
Introduction and a making way for the Doctrines of the Gospel. But it is plain
it was called the Gospel it self. Let the Unmasker, as a true Successor of the
Apostles, go and Preach the Gospel as the Apostles did, to some part of the
Heathen World, where the Name of Christ is not known: Would not he himself, and
every body think, he was very foolishly employed, if he should tell them
nothing but this, that Jesus was the Person promised and sent from God to
reveal the true Religion; But should teach them nothing of that true Religion,
but this Preliminary Article? Such the Unmasker makes all the Preaching
recorded in the New Testament, for the Conversion of the Unbelieving World. He
makes the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, to be no more but this;
that the great Prophet promised to the World was come, and that Jesus was he:
But what his Doctrine was, that they were silent in, and taught not one Article
of it. But the Unmasker mis-represents it: For as to his accusing the
Historians, the Evangelists, and Writers of the Acts of the Apostles, for their
shameful omission of the whole Doctrine of the Christian Religion, to save his
Hypothesis, as he does under his next Head in these words, That though this one
Proposition be mentioned alone in some places, yet there is reason to think and
be persuaded, that at the same time other Matters of Faith were proposed; I
shall show how bold he makes with those inspired Historians, when I come to
consider that particular.

How ridiculous, how senseless this bold Unmasker and Reformer of the History
of the New Testament makes the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, as it
stands recorded of them by infallible Writers, is visible. But taking it as in
truth it is there, we shall have a quite other view of it. Our Savior Preached
every where the Kingdom of God, and by his Miracles declared himself to be the
King of that Kingdom. The Apostles Preached the same, and after his Ascension
openly avowed him to be the Prince and Savior promised. But Preached not this,
as a bare Speculative Article of simple belief. But that Men might receive him
for their King, and become his Subjects. When they told the World that he was
the Christ, it was not as the Unmasker will have it; Believe this Man to be a
Prophet, and then he will teach you his new Religion; which when you have
received and embraced, all and every Article thereof, which are a great number,
you will then be Christians, if you be not ignorant or incredulous of any of
them. But it was, Believe this Man to be your King sent from God: Take him for
such, with a resolution to observe the Laws he has given you, and you are his
Subjects; you are Christians. For those, that truly did so, made themselves his
Subjects: And to continue so there was no more required than a sincere
endeavor to know his Will in all things, and to obey it. Such a Preaching as
this of Jesus to be the Messiah; the King and Deliverer that God Almighty had
promised to Mankind, and now had effectually sent to be their Prince and Ruler;
was not a simple preparation to the Gospel: But when received with the
Obedience of Faith, was the very receiving of the Gospel; and had all that was
requisite to make Men Christians. And without it be so understood, no body can
clear the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles from that incredible
Impersection; or their Historians from that unpardonable negligence, and not
doing either what they ought, or what they undertook; which our Unmasker has
so impiously charged upon them, as will appear yet plainer in what I have to
say to the Vnmasker's next Particular. For as to the remainder of this
Paragraph, it contains nothing but his censure and contempt of me, for not
being of his Mind; for not seeing as he sees, i. e. in effect not laying that
blame, which he does either on the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles;
or on the inspired Writings of their Historians, to make them comply with his
System, and the Christianity he would make.

The Unmasker 's Second Particular, p. 76. tells us, That though this One
Proposition or Article be mentioned alone in some places, yet there is reason
to think, and be persuaded, that at the same time other Matters of Faith were
proposed. For it is confessed by all intelligent and observing Men, that the
History of the Scripture is concise; and that in relating of Matter of Fact
many Passages are omitted by the Sacred Penmen. Wherefore though but this one
Article of belief, (because it is a Leading one, and makes way for the rest) be
expressly mentioned in some of the Gospels, yet we must not conclude thence,
that no other Matter of Faith, was required to be admitted of. For things are
briefly set down in the Evangelical Records, and we must suppose many things
which are not in direct terms related.

Answ. The Vnmasker here keeps to his usual custom of speaking in doubtful
terms. He says, that where this one Article, that Jesus is the Messiah, is
alone recorded in the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, We have reason
to be persuaded, that at the same time other Matters of Faith were proposed. If
this be to his purpose, by Matters of Faith must be meant Fundamental Articles
of Faith, absolutely necessary to be believed by every Man to make him a
Christian. That such Matters of Faith are omitted in the History of the
Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles by the Sacred Historians, this, he
says, we have reason to be persuaded of.

Answ. They need be good Reasons to persuade a rational Man, that the
Evangelists in their History of our Savior and his Apostles (if they were but
ordinarily fair and prudent Men) did, in an History published to instruct the
World in a new Religion, leave out the necessary and Fundamental parts of that
Religion. But let them be considered as inspired Writers, under the Conduct of
the infallible Spirit of God, putting them upon, and directing them in the
writing of this History of the Gospel, and then it is impossible for any
Christian, but the Unmasker, to think, that they made any such gross Omissions,
contrary to the design of their Writing, without a Demonstration to convince
him of it. Now all the reason that our Unmasker gives is this: That it is
confessed by all intelligent and observing Men, that the History of the
Scripture is concise, and that in relating Matters of Fact, many Passages are
omitted by the Sacred Penmen.

Answ. The Unmasker might have spared the Confession of intelligent and
observing Men, after so plain a Declaration of St. John himself, Chap. XX. 31.
Many other things did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not
written in this Book. And again, XXI. 25. There are also many other things that
Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I suppose the world
could not contain the Books that should be written. There needs therefore no
opinion of intelligent and observing Men to convince us, that the History of
the Gospel is so far Concise, that a great many Matters of Fact are omitted,
and a great many less material Circumstances, even of those that are set down.
But will any intelligent or observing Man, any one that bears the Name of a
Christian, have the Impudence to say, that the inspired Writers, in the
relation they give us of what Christ and his Apostles Preached to Unbelievers
to convert them to the Faith, omitted the Fundamental Articles which those
Preachers proposed to make Men Christians; and without a belief of which they
could not be Christians?

The Unmasker talks after his wonted fashion; seems to say something, which
when examined proves nothing to his Purpose. He tells us, That in some places
where the Article of Jesus the Messiah is mentioned alone, at the same time
other matters of Faith were proposed. I ask, were these other matters of Faith
all the Unmasker's necessary Articles? If not, what are those other matters of
Faith to the Unmasker's Purpose? As for Example, in St. Peter's Sermon, Act.
II. Other matters of Faith were proposed with the Article of Jesus the Messiah.
But what does this make for His Fundamental Articles? Were They all proposed
with the Articles of Jesus the Messiah? If not, Unbelievers were converted and
brought into the Church without the Unmasker's necessary Articles. Three
Thousand were added to the Church by this one Sermon. I pass by now St. Luke's
not mentioning a Syllable of the greatest part of the Unmasker's necessary
Articles; and shall consider only, how long that Sermon may have been. It Is
plain from v. 15. that it began not till about Nine in the Morning, and from v.
41. that before Night Three Thousand were converted and Baptized. Now, I ask
the Unmasker, whether so small a Number of Hours as St. Peter must necessarily
employ in Preaching to them were sufficient to instruct such a mixed Multitude
so fully in all those Articles, which he has proposed as necessary to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, as that every one of those Three Thousand,
that were that day Baptized, did understand and explicitly believe every one of
those his Articles, just in the sense of our Unmasker's System? Not to mention
those remaining Articles which the Unmasker will not be able in twice as many
Months to find and declare to us.

He says, That in some places where the Article of Jesus the Messiah is
mentioned alone, at the same time other matters of Faith were proposed. Let us
take this for so at present, yet this helps not the Unmasker's case. The
Fundamental Articles, that were proposed by our Savior and his Apostles,
necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, are not set down; but only
this single one of Jesus the Messiah: Therefore will any one dare to say that
they are omitted every where by the Evangelists? Did the Historians of the
Gospel make their relation so concise and short, that giving an account in so
many places of the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles for the Conversion
of the Unbelieving World, they did not in any one place, nor in in all of them
together, set down the necessary Points of that Faith, which their Unbelieving
Hearers were converted to? If they did not, how can their Histories be called
the Gospels of Jesus Christ? Or how can they serve to the end for which they
were written? Which was, to publish to the World the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
that Men might be brought into his Religion? Now I challenge the Unmasker to
show me not out of any one place, but out of all the Preachings of our Savior
and his Apostles, recorded in the four Gospels, and the Acts, all those
Propositions which he has reckoned up as Fundamental Articles of Faith. If they
are not to be found there, it is plain, that either they are not Articles of
Faith necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian; or else, that those
inspired Writers have given us an account of the Gospel, or Christian Religion,
wherein the greatest part of Doctrines necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian are wholly omitted: Which in short is to say, that the Christianity
which is recorded in the Gospels and the Acts, is not that Christianity, which
is sufficient to make a Man a Christian. This (as absurd and impious as it is)
is what our Unmasker charges upon the Conciseness, (as he is pleased to call
it) of the Evangelical History. And this we must take upon his word; Though
these inspired Writers tell us the direct contrary. For St. Luke in his Preface
to his Gospel, tells Theophilus, that having a perfect knowledge OF ALL THINGS,
the Design of his Writing was to set them in order, that he might know the
certainty of those things, that were believed amongst Christians. And his
History of the Acts begins thus, The former Treatise [i. e. his Gospel] have I
made, O Theophilus, of ALL that Jesus began to do and to teach. So that how
concise soever the Unmasker will have his History to be, he professes it to
contain ALL that Jesus taught. Which ALL must, in the narrowest sense, that can
be given it, contain at least all things necessary to make a Man a Christian.
'Twould else be a very lame and imperfect History of ALL that Jesus taught; if
the Faith contained in it were not sufficient to make a Man a Christian. This
indeed, as the Unmasker has been pleased to term it, would be a very lank
Faith, a very lank Gospel.

St. John also says thus of his History of the Gospel, Chapter XX. 30, 31. Many
other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his Disciples, which are not
written in this Book: So far his History is by his own Confession concise. But
these, says he, are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Messiah
the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name. As
concise as it was, there was yet (if the Apostle's word may be taken for it
against the Unm^sker's) enough contained in his Gospel, for the procuring of
eternal life to those who believed it. And whether it was that one Article that
he there sets down, viz. That Jesus was the Messiah, or that Set of Articles
which the Unm^sker gives us, I shall leave to this Modern Divine to resolve.
And if he thinks still, that all the Articles he has set down in his Roll, are
necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, I must desire him to show
them to me in St. John's Gospel, or else to convince the World, that St. John
was mistaken, when he said, that he had written his Gospel, that Men might
believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God, and that believing they might
have life thorugh his Name.

So that granting the History of the Scripture to be so concise as the Unmasker
would have it, viz. That in some places the infallible Writers, recording the
Discourses of our Savior and his Apostles, omitted all the other Fundamental
Articles proposed by them to be believed to make Men Christians, but this one,
that Jesus was the Messiah; Yet this will not remove the Objection that lies
against his other Fundamentals, which are not to be found in the Histories of
the Four Evangelists; nay, which are not to be found in every one of them. If
every one of them contains the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and consequently all
things necessary to Salvation, Whether this will not be a new ground of
Accusation against me, and give the Unmasker a right to charge me with laying
by three of the Gospels with contempt, as well as he did before charge me with
a contempt of the Epistles, must be left to his sovereign Authority to
determine.

Having showed, that allowing all he says here to be as he would have it, yet
it clears not the Objection, that lies against his Fundamentals; I shall now
examine what truth there is, in what he here pretends, viz. that though the one
Article, that Jesus is the Messiah, be mentioned alone in some places, yet we
have reason to be persuaded from the conciseness of the Scripture History, that
there were at the same time joined with it other necessary Articles of Faith in
the Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles.

It is to be observed, that the Unmasker builds upon this false Supposition,
that in some places other necessary Articles of Faith joined with that of Jesus
the Messiah, are by the Evangelists mentioned to be proposed by our Savior and
his Apostles, as necessary to be believed to make those they Preached to
Christians. For his saying, that in some places that one necessary Article is
mentioned alone, implies that in other places it is not mentioned alone, but
joined with other necessary Articles. And then it will remain upon him to show,

XXXVI.
In what place either of the Gospels or of the Acts, other Articles of Faith
are joined with this, and proposed as necessary to be believed to make Men
Christians.

The Unmasker, it is probable, will tell us, that the Article of Christ's
Resurrection is sometimes joined with this of the Messiah, as particularly in
that first Sermon of St. Peter, Acts II. by which there were Three Thousand
added to the Church at one time. Answ. This Sermon well considered, will
explain to us both the Preaching of the Apostles, what it was that they
proposed to their unbelieving Auditors to make them Christians; and also the
manner of St. Luke's recording their Sermons. It Is true, that here are
delivered by St. Peter many other Matters of Faith besides that of Jesus being
the Messiah: For all that he said being of Divine Authority, is Matter of
Faith, and may not be disbelieved. The first Part of his Discourse, is to prove
to the Jews, that what they had observed of Extraordinary at that time amongst
the Disciples, who spoke variety of Tongues, did not proceed from Wine, but
from the Holy Ghost; And that this was the pouring out of the Spirit prophesied
of by the Prophet Joel. This is all Matter of Faith, and is written, that it
might be believed: But yet, I think, that neither the Unmasker, nor any body
else will say, that this is such a necessary Article of Faith, that no Man
could without an explicit belief of it, be a Christian: Though being a
Declaration of the Holy Ghost by St. Peter, it is so much a Matter of Faith,
that no body, to whom it is now proposed, can deny it and be a Christian. And
thus all the Scripture of the New Testament, given by Divine Inspiration is
Matter of Faith, and necessary to be believed by all Christians to whom it is
proposed. But yet I do not think any one so unreasonable as to say, that every
Proposition in the New Testament is a Fundamental Article of Faith, which is
required explicitly to be believed to make a Man a Christian.

Here now is a matter of Faith joined, in the same Sermon, with this
Fundamental Article that Jesus is the Messiah; And reported by the Sacred
Historian so at large, that it takes up a Third part of St. Peter's Sermon
recorded by St. Luke; And yet it is such a matter of Faith, as is not contained
in the Unmasker's Catalogue of necessary Articles. I must ask him then, whether
St. Luke were so concise an Historian, that he would so at large set down a
matter of Faith proposed by St. Peter, that was not necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, and wholly leave out the very mention of all the
Unmasker's additional necessary Articles, if indeed they were necessary to be
believed to make Men Christians? I know not how any one could charge the
Historian with greater unfaithfulness, or greater folly. But this the Unmasker
sticks not at, to preserve to himself the Power of appointing, what shall, and
what shall not be necessary Articles; and of making his System the Christianity
necessary, and only necessary to be received.

The next thing that St. Peter proceeds to in this his Sermon is, to declare to
the Unbelieving Jews, that Jesus of Nazareth, who had done Miracles amongst
them, whom they had Crucified and put to Death, and whom God had raised again
from the Dead, was the Messiah.

Here indeed our Savior's Crucifixion, Death, and Resurrection are mentioned:
And if they were no where else recorded, are matters of Faith; which, with all
the rest of the New Testament, ought to be believed by every Christian to whom
it is thus proposed; as a part of Divine Revelation. But that these were not
here proposed to the Unbelieving Jews, as the Fundamental Articles, which St.
Peter principally aimed at, and endeavored to convince them of, is evident
from hence; That they are made use of as Arguments to persuade them of this
Fundamental Truth, viz. That Jesus was the Messiah, whom they ought to take for
their Lord and Ruler. For whatsoever is brought as an Argument to prove another
Truth, cannot be thought to be the principal thing aimed at in that
argumentation; though it may have so strong and immediate a connection with the
Conclusion, that you cannot deny it without denying even what is inferred from
it, and is therefore the fitter to be an Argument to prove it. But that our
Savior's Crucifixion, Death, and Resurrection, were used here as Arguments to
persuade them into a belief of this Fundamental Article, that Jesus was the
Messiah; and not as Propositions of a new Faith they were to receive; is
evident from hence, that they Preached here to those who knew the Death and
Crucifixion of Jesus, as well as Peter: And therefore these could not be
proposed to them as new Articles of Faith to be believed: But those Matters of
Fact, being what the Jews knew already, were a good Argument joined with his
Resurrection to convince them of that truth, which he endeavored to give them
a Belief of. And therefore he rightly inferred from these Facts joined
together, this Conclusion, the believing whereof would make them Christians.
Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that
same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, Lord and Christ. To the making good this
sole Proposition his whole Discourse tended: This was the sole Truth he
labored to convince them of: This the Faith he endeavored to bring them into;
which as soon as they had received with Repentance, they were by Baptism
admitted into the Church, and three Thousand at once made Christians.

Here St. Luke's own Confession, without that of intelligent and observing men,
which the Unmasker has recourse to, might have satisfied him again, that in
relating matters of Fact, many passages are omitted by the sacred Penmen. For
says St. Luke here v. 40. And with many other words, which are not set down.

One would at first sight, wonder why the Unmasker neglects these demonstrative
Authorities of the Holy Penmen themselves, where they own their Omissions, to
tell, us, that it is confessed by all intelligent and observing men, that in
relating matters of Fact, many Passages are omitted by the sacred Penmen. St.
John in what he says of his Gospel, directly professes large Omissions, and so
does St. Luke here. But these Omissions would not serve the Unmasker's turn:
For they are directly against him, and what he would have: And therefore he had
reason to pass them by. For St. John, in that passage above cited, Chapter XX. 30,
31. tells us, that how much soever he had left out of his History, he had
incerted that, which was enough to be believed to eternal Life. But these are
written that ye might believe, and believing ye might have life. But this is
not all he assures us of, viz. That he had recorded all that was necessary to
be believed to eternal Life: But he in express words, tells us what is that ALL
that is necessary to be believed to eternal Life; and for the Proof of which
Proposition alone, he writ all the rest of his Gospel, viz. That we might
believe. What? Even this. That Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing this we might have life through his Name.

This may serve for a Key to us, in reading the History of the New Testament;
And show us, why this Article that Jesus was the Messiah, is no where omitted,
though a great part of the Arguments used to convince Men of it, nay very often
the whole Discourse* made to lead Men into the Belief of it, be entirely
omitted. The Spirit of God directed them every where to set down the Article,
which was absolutely necessary to be believed to make Men Christians; So that
That could no ways be doubted of nor mistaken; But the Arguments, and
Evidences, which were to lead Men into this Faith, would be sufficient, if they
were once found any where, though scattered here and there in those Writings,
whereof that infallible Spirit was the Author. This preserved the Decorum used
in all Histories, and avoided those continual large and unnecessary
Repetitions, which our critical Unmasker might have called tedious, with juster
Reason, than he does the Repetition of this short Proposition, that Jesus is
the Messiah; which I set down no oftener in my Book, than the Holy Ghost thought
fit to insert in the History of the New Testament, as concise as it is. But
this it seems to our Nice Unmasker, is tedious, tedious and offensive. And if a
Christian and a Successor of the Apostles cannot bear the being so often told,
what it was, that our Savior and his Apostles every where preached to the
Believers of one God, though it be contained in one short Proposition; What
cause of Exception, and disgust would it have been to Heathen Readers, some
whereof might perhaps have been as Critical as the Unmasker, if this sacred
History had in every Page been filled with the repeated Discourses of the
Apostles, all of them every where to the same purpose, viz. to persuade Men to
believe, that Jesus was the Messiah? It was necessary even by the Laws of
History, as often as their preaching any where was mentioned to tell to what
purpose they spoke; which being always to convince Men of this one Fundamental
Truth, it is no wonder, we find it so often repeated. But the Arguments and
Reasonings, with which this one Point is urged, are, as they ought to be, in
most places left out. A constant Repetition of them had been superfluous, and
consequently might justly have been blamed as tedious. But there is enough
recorded abundantly to convince any rational Man, any one not wilfully blind,
that he is that promised Savior. And in this we have a reason of the Omissions
in the History of the New Testament; which were no other than such, as became
prudent, as well as faithful Writers. Much less did that Conciseness (with
which the Vnmasker would cover his bold Censure of the Gospels and the Acts,
and as it seems, lay them by with Contempt) make the holy Writers omit any
thing, in the preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, absolutely necessary
to be known, and believed to make Men Christians.

Conformable hereunto, we shall find St. Luke writes his History of the Acts of
the Apostles. In the beginning of it he sets down at large some of the
Discourses made to the unbelieving Jews. But in most other Places, unless it be
where there was something particular in the Circumstances of the Matter, he
contents himself to tell to what purpose they spoke: Which was every where only
this, That Jesus was the Messiah. Nay, St. Luke in the first Speech of St.
Peter, Act. 11. which he thought fit to give us a great part of, yet owns the
Omission of several things, that the Apostle said. For having expressed this
Fundamental Doctrine, That Jesus was the Messiah, and recorded several of the
Arguments wherewith St. Peter urged it for the Conversion of the unbelieving
Jews his Auditors, he adds v. 40. And with many other words did he testify and
exhort saying, Save your selves from this untoward Generation. Here he
confesses, that he omitted a great deal which St. Peter had said to persuade
them. To what? To that which in other words he had just said before v. 38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, i. e.
Believe Jesus to be the Messiah, take him as such for your Lord and King, and
reform your Lives by a sincere Resolution of Obedience to his Laws.

Thus we have an account of the Omissions in the Records of Matters of Fact in
the New Testament. But will the Unmasker say, that the preaching of those
Articles, that he has given us as necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian, was part of those Matters of Fact, which have been omitted in the
History of the New Testament? Can any one think that the Corruption and
Degeneracy of humane Nature, with the true Original of it (the Defection of our
first Parents) the Propagation of Sin and Mortality, our Restoration and
Reconciliation by Christ's blood, the Eminency and Excellency of his
Priesthood, the Efficacy of his Death, the full Satisfaction thereby made to
divine Justice, and his being made an all-sufficient Sacrifice for Sin, our
Justification by Christ's Righteousness, Election, Adoption, etc. were all
proposed, and that too in the Sense of our Authors System, by our Savior and
his Apostles, as Fundamental Articles of Faith, necessary to be explicitly
believed by every Man, to make him a Christian, in all their Discourses to
Unbelievers; And yet that the inspired Penmen of those Histories every where,
left the mention of these Fundamental Articles wholly out? This would have been
to have writ not a concise, but an imperfect History of all, that Jesus and his
Apostles taught.

What an account would it have been of the Gospel, as it was first preached and
propagated, if the greatest part of the necessary Doctrines of it were wholly
left out, and a Man could not find from one end to the other of this whole
History, that Religion, which is necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian? And yet this is that, which under the Notion of their being concise,
the Vnmasker would persuade us to have been done by St. Luke and the other
Evangelists in their Histories. And it is no less than what he plainly says in
his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism, p. 109. Where to aggravate my
Fault in passing by the Epistles, and to show the Necessity of searchin them
for Fundamentals, he in words blames me; But in effect, condemns the Sacred
History contained in the Gospels and the Acts. It is most evident, says he, to
any thinking Man, that the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity
purposely omits the Epistolary Writings of the Apostles, because they are
fraught with other Fundamental Doctrines besides that one which he mentions.
There we are instructed concerning these grand heads of Christian Divinity.
Here i. e. in the Epistles, says he, There are Discoveries concerning
Satisfaction, etc. and in the close of his List of his Grand Heads, as he calls
them, some whereof I have above set down out of him, he adds, These are the
Matters of Faith contained in the Epistles. By all which Expressions he plainly
signifies, that these, which he calls Fundamental Doctrines, are none of those,
we are instructed in, in the Gospels and the Acts; that they are not discovered
nor contained in the historical Writings of the Evangelists. Whereby he
confesses, that either our Savior and his Apostles did not propose them in
their Preachings to their unbelieving Hearers; or else, that the several
faithful Writers of their History, wilfully, i. e. unfaithfully, every where
omitted them in the account they have left us of those Preachings; Which could
scarce possibly be done by them all, and every where, without an actual
Combination amongst them to smother the greatest and most material parts of our
Savior's and his Apostles Discourses. For what else did they, if all that the
Unmasker has set down in his List be Fundamental Doctrines; every one of them
absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian; which our
Savior and his Apostles every where preached to make Men Christians; but yet
St. Luke and the other Evangelists, by a very guilty, and unpardonable
Conciseness, every where omitted them; and throughout their whole History never
once tell us, they were so much as proposed; much less that they were those
Articles, which the Apostles labored to establish and convince Men of every
where, before they admitted them to Baptism? Nay, the far greatest part of them
the History, they writ, does not any where so much as once mention? How after
such an Imputation as this the Unmasker will clear himself from laying by the
four Gospels and the Acts with contempt let him look; if my not collecting
Fundamentals out of the Epistles had that Guilt in it. For I never denied all
the Fundamental Doctrines to be there; but only said, that there they were not
easy to be found out; and distinguished from Doctrines not Fundamental.
Whereas our good Vnmasker charges the historical Books of the New Testament
with a total Omission of the far greatest part of those Fundamental Doctrines
of Christianity, which he says are absolutely necessary to be believed to make
a Man a Christian.

To convince the Reader what was absolutely required to be believed to make a
Man a Christian, and thereby clear the holy Writers from the Unmasker's
Slander, any one need but look a little further into the History of the Acts,
and observe St. Luke's Method in the Writing of it. In the beginning (as we
observed before) and in some few other places, he sets down at large the
Discourses made by the Preachers of Christianity to their unbelieving Auditors.
But in the Process of his History, he generally contents himself to relate,
what it was their Discourses drive at; what was the Doctrine they endeavored
to convince their unbelieving Hearers of, to make them Believers. This we may
observe is never omitted. This is every where set down. Thus Acts V. 42. he
tells us, that daily in the Temple, and in every house the Apostles ceased not
to teach, and to preach JESUS THE MESSIAH. The particulars of their Discourses
he omits, and the Arguments they used to induce Men to believe he omits: But
never fails to inform us carefully what it was the Apostles taught and
preached, and would have Men believe. The account he gives us of St. Paul's
Preaching at Thessalonica, is this: That three Sabbath Days he REASONED with
the Jews out of the Scriptures, OPENING and ALLEGING that the Messiah must
needs have Suffered and risen again from the Dead; and that Jesus was the
Messiah, Act. XVII. 2, 3. At Corinth, That he REASONED in the Synagogue every
Sabbath, and PERSUADED the Jews and the Greeks, and TESTIFIED that Jesus was
the Messiah. XVIII. 4, 5. That Apollos mightily convinced the Jews, SHOWING BY
THE SCRIPTURES that Jesus was the Messiah, XVIII. 27.

By these, and the like places, we may be satisfied what it was that the
Apostles Taught and Preached, even this one Proposition that Jesus was the
Messiah; For this was the sole Proposition they reasoned about; this alone they
testified, and they showed out of the Scriptures; and of this alone they
endeavored to convince the Jews and the Greeks, that believed one God. So that
it is plain from hence, that St. Luke omitted nothing, that the Apostles Taught
and Preached; none of those Doctrines, that it was necessary to convince
Unbelievers of, to make them Christians: Though he in most places omitted, as
was fit, the Passages of Scripture which they alleged, and the Arguments those
inspired Preachers used to persuade Men to believe and embrace that Doctrine.

Another convincing Argument, to show that St. Luke omitted none of those
Fundamental Doctrines which the Apostles any where proposed as necessary to be
believed, is from that different account he gives us of their Preaching in
other places, and to Auditors otherwise disposed. Where the Apostles had to do
with Idolatrous Heathens, who were not yet come to the knowledge of the only
true God, there he tells us they proposed also the Article of the one Invisible
God, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And this we find recorded in him out of their
Preaching to the Lystrians, Act. XIV. and to the Athenians, Act. XVII. In the
later of which St. Luke, to convince his Reader that he out of conciseness
omits none of those Fundamental Articles, that were any where proposed by the
Preachers of the Gospel as necessary to be believed to make Men Christians,
sets down not only the Article of Jesus the Messiah, but that also of the one
invisible God, Creator of all things, which (if any necessary one might) this
of all other Fundamental Articles might by an Author, that affected brevity,
with the fairest excuse have been omitted, as being implied in that other of
the Messiah ordained by God. Indeed, in the Story of what Paul and Barnabas
said at Lystra, the Article of the Messiah is not mentioned. Not that St. Luke
omitted that Fundamental Article, where the Apostles taught it: But they having
here begun their Preaching with that of the one living God, they had not, as
appears, time to proceed farther, and propose to them what yet remained to make
them Christians: But they were, by the instigation of the Jews, fallen upon,
and Paul stoned, before he could come to open to them this other Fundamental
Article of the Gospel.

This by the way shows the Unmasker's Mistake in his first Particular, p. 74.
where he says (as he does here again in his second Particular, which we are now
examining) that believing Jesus to be the Messiah is the first step to
Christianity; and therefore this, rather than any other, was propounded to be
believed by all those, whom either our Savior, or the Apostles, invited to
embrace Christianity. The contrary whereof appears here; Where the Article of
one God is proposed in the first place, to those whose Unbelief made such a
proposal necessary. And therefore if his Reason (which he uses again here, p.
76.) were good, viz. That the Article of the Messiah is expressly mentioned
alone, because it is a leading Article and makes way for the rest, this Reason
would rather conclude for the Article of one God: And that alone should be
expressly mentioned instead of the other. Since as he argues for the other, p.
74. if they did not believe this in the first place, viz. That there was one
God, there could be no hopes that they would attend unto any other Proposal
relating to the Christian Religion. The Vanity and Falsehood of which reasoning,
viz. That the Article of Jesus the Messiah was every where propounded rather
than any other, because it was the leading Article, we see in the History of
St. Paul's Preaching to the Athenians. St. Luke mentions more than one Article,
where more than one was proposed by St. Paul; though the first of them was that
leading Article of one God, which if not received in the first place, there
could be no hope they would attend to the rest.

Something the Unmasker would make of this Argument of a leading Article for
want of a better, though he knows not what. In his first particular, p. 74. he
makes use of it to show, why there was but that one Article proposed by the
first Preachers of the Gospel, and how well that succeeds with him we have
seen. For this is Demonstration, that if there were but that one proposed by
our Savior and the Apostles, there was but that one necessary to be believed
to make Men Christians: Unless he will impiously say that our Savior and the
Apostles went about Preaching to no purpose. For if they proposed not all that
was necessary to make Men Christians, 'twas in vain for them to Preach, and
others to Hear; if when they heard and believed all that was proposed to them,
they were not yet Christians: For if any Article was omitted in the Proposal,
which was necessary to make a Man a Christian, though they believed all that
was proposed to them, they could not yet be Christians; unless a Man can from
an Infidel become a Christian, without doing what is necessary to make him a
Christian.

Further, if his Argument of its being a leading Article proves, that that
alone was proposed, It is a Contradiction to give it as a Reason, why it was
set down alone, by the Historian where it was not proposed alone by the
Preacher, but other necessary matters of Faith were proposed with it; unless it
can be true that this Article of Jesus is the Messiah, was proposed alone by
our Savior and his Apostles, because it was a leading Article, and was
mentioned alone in the History of what they preached, because it was a leading
Article, though it were not proposed alone, but jointly with other necessary
matters of Faith. For this is the use he makes here again, p. 76. of his
leading Article under his second Particular, viz. To show why the Historians
mentioned this necessary Article, of Jesus the Messiah, alone, in places where
the Preachers of the Gospel proposed it not alone, but with other necessary
Articles. But in this latter case it has no show of a Reason at all. It may be
granted as reasonable for the Teachers of any Religion not to go any farther,
where they see the first Article which they propose is rejected, where the
leading Truth, on which all the rest depends, is not received. But it can be no
reason at all for an Historian who writes the History of these first Preachers,
to set down only the one first and leading Article and omit all the rest, in
instances where more were not only proposed, but believed and embraced, and
upon that the Hearers and Believers admitted into the Church. It Is not for
Historians to put any distinction between leading or not leading Articles; But
if they will give a true and useful account of the Religion, whose Original
they are writing, and of the Converts made to it, they must tell, not one, but
all those necessary Articles, upon assent to which Converts were Baptized into
that Religion, and admitted into the Church. Whoever says otherwise, accuses
them of falsifying the Story, misleading the Readers, and giving a wrong
account of the Religion which they pretend to teach the World, and to preserve
and propagate to future Ages. This (if it were so) no pretense of conciseness
could excuse or palliate.

There is yet remaining one Consideration, which were sufficient of it self to
convince us, that it was the sole Article of Faith which was preached; And that
if there had been other Articles necessary to be known and believed by
Converts, they could not upon any pretense of conciseness be supposed to be
omitted: And that is the Commissions of those, that were sent to Preach the
Gospel. Which since the Sacred Historians mention, they cannot be supposed to
leave out any of the material and main Heads of those Commissions.

St. Luke records it, Chapter IV. 43. that our Savior says of himself, I must go
unto the other Towns to tell the good news of the Kingdom, for ((...)) upon
this Errand am I SENT. This St. Mark calls simply Preaching. This Preaching
what it contained St. Matthew tells us, Chapter IV. 23. And Jesus went about all
Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the good news of the
Kingdom, and healing all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Diseases amongst
the People. Here we have his Commission, or End of his being sent, and the
Execution of it: Both terminating in this, that he declared the good News that
the Kingdom of the Messiah was come; and gave them to understand by the
Miracles he did, that he himself was he. Nor does St. Matthew seem to affect
such conciseness, that he would have left it out, if the Gospel had contained
any other Fundamental Parts, necessary to be believed to make Men Christians.
For he here says, all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Disease, when
either of them might have been better left out, than any necessary Article of
the Gospel to make his History concise.

We see what our Savior was sent for. In the next place, let us look into the
Commission he gave the Apostles, when he sent them to Preach the Gospel. We
have it in the X. of St. Matthew, in these words; Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye go PREACH, SAYING THE KINGDOM
OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND. Heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast
out Devils: Freely have ye received freely give. Provide neither Gold, nor
Silver, nor Brass in your Purses; nor Scrip in your journey; neither two Coats,
neither Shoes nor yet Staves (for the Workman is worthy of his meat). And into
whatsoever City or Town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there
abide till ye go thence. And when ye come into any house salute it. And if the
house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: But if it be not worthy, let your
peace return to you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words;
When ye depart out of that house or City, shake off the dust of your feet.
Verily, I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and
Gomorrha, in the day of judgment, than for that City. Behold, I send you forth
as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless
as Doves. But beware of Men, for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and
they will scourge you in their Synagogues. And ye shall be brought before
Governors, and Kings for my sake, for a Testimony against them and the
Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak; for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it
is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. And
the Brother shall deliver up the Brother to Death, and the Father the Child:
and the Children shall rise up against the Parents, and cause them to be put to
Death. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Name's sake: But he that
endures to the end shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this City,
flee ye into another: For verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over
the Cities of Israel till the Son of man be come. The Disciple is not above his
Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple that he
be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord. If they have called the Master
of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?
Fear them not therefore: For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, that
speak ye in light: And what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the house
tops. And fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul:
But rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and body in Hell. Are
not two Sparrows sold for a farthing; And one of them shall not fall on the
ground without your Father? But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparrows. Whosoever
therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father
which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also
deny before my Father which is in Heaven. Think not that I am come to send
peace on Earth; I came not to send peace but a sword. For I am come to set a
man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and
the Daughter-in Law against the Mother in Law. And a man's foes shall be they
of his own household. He that loves Father and Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me. And he that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of
me. And he that takes not his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of
me: He that finds his life shall lose it: And he that loses his life for my
sake shall find it. He that receives you receives me, and he that receives
me receives him that sent me. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous
man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. And it
came to pass when Jesus had made an end of Commanding his twelve Disciples.

This is the Commission our Savior gave the Apostles when he sent them abroad
to recover, and save the l^st Sheep of the house of Israel. And will any of the
Unmasker's intelligent and observing Men say, that the History of the Scripture
is so concise, that any passages, any essential, any material, nay any parts at
all of the Apostles Commission are here omitted by the Sacred Penman? This
Commission is set down so at full, and so particularly, that S. Matthew, who
was one of them to whom it was given, seems not to have left out one word of
all, that our Savior gave them in charge. And it is so large, even to every
particular Article of their Instructions, that I doubt not but my citing so
much, verbatim out of the Sacred Text, will here again be troublesome to the
Unmasker. But whether he will venture again to call it tedious, must be as
Nature or Caution happen to have the better on it. Can any one who reads this
Commission, unless he has the Brains as well as the Brow of an Unmasker,
allege that the conciseness of the History of the Scripture has concealed from
us those Fundamental Doctrines, which our Savior and his Apostles Preached;
but the Sacred Historians thought fit by consent, for unconceivable Reasons, to
leave out in the Narrative they give us, of those Preachings? This Passage here
wholly confuteth that. They could Preach nothing, but what they were sent to
Preach: And that we see is contained in these few words, Preach, saying the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the
Dead, cast out Devils, i. e. Acquaint them, that the Kingdom of the Messiah is
come, and let them know by the Miracles, you do in my Name, that I am that King
and Deliverer they expect. If there were any other necessary Articles, that
were to be believed, for the saving of the lost Sheep they were sent to, can
one think that St. Matthew, who sets down so minutely every Circumstance of
their Commission, would have omitted the most important, and material of it? He
was an ear Witness, and one that was sent; And so (without supposing him
inspired) could not be misled by the short account he might receive from
others, who by their own, or others forgetfulness might have dropped those other
Fundamental Articles, that the Apostles were ordered to Preach.

The very like account St. Luke gives us of our Saviors Commission to the
Seventy, Chapter X. 1, -- 16. After these things the Lord appointed other seventy
also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place
whither he himself would come. Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly
is great, but the laborers are few: Pray ye therefore the Lord of the h^rvest,
that he would send forth laborers into his harvest. Go your ways: behold, I
send you forth as Lambs among Wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor
shoes: and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye enter, first
say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall
rest upon it; if not, it shall return to you again. And in the same house
remain eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is worthy
of his hire. Go not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter and
they receive you, eat such things as are set before you. And heal the sick that
are therein, and SAY UNTO THEM, THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS COME NIGH UNTO YOU. But
in whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into
the streets of the same and say, Even the very dust of your city which cleaves
on us, we do wipe off against you: Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that
the Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. But I say unto you, that it shall be
more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city. Woe unto thee Chorazin,
Woe unto thee Bethsaida: For if the mighty works had been done in Tire and
Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tire and
Sidon at the judgment than for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to
Heaven, shall be thrust down to Hell. He that hears you, hears me: and he
that despises you despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me.

Our Savior's Commission here to the Seventy, whom he sent to Preach, is so
exactly conformable to that which he had before given to the Twelve Apostles,
that there needs but this one thing more to be observed, to convince any one,
that they were sent to convert their Hearers to this sole belief, that the
Kingdom of the Messiah was come, and that Jesus was the Messiah. And that the
Historians of the New Testament are not so concise in their account of this
Matter, that they would have omitted any other necessary Articles of Belief,
that had been given the Seventy in Commission. That which I mean is, the
Kingdom of the Messiah is twice mentioned in it to be come, v. 9. and 11. If
there were other Articles given them by our Savior to propose to their
Hearers, St. Luke must be very fond of this one Article, when for conciseness
sake, leaving out the other Fundamental Articles that our Savior gave them in
charge to Preach, he repeats this more than once.

The Unmasker's Third Particular, p. 76. begins thus; This also must be thought
of, that though there are several parts and members of the Christian Faith, yet
they do not all occur in any one place of Scripture. Something is in it
(whether owing to his Will, or Understanding, I shall not enquire) that the
Unmasker always delivers himself in doubtful, and ambiguous terms. It had been
as easy for him to have said, There are several Articles of the Christian
Faith, necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, as to say (as he
does here) There are several parts and members of the Christian Faith. But as
an evidence of the clearness of his Notions, or the fairness of his Arguing, he
always rests in generals. There are, I grant, several parts and members of the
Christian Faith, which do no more occur in any one place of Scripture, than the
whole New Testament can be said to occur in any one place of Scripture. For
every Proposition delivered in the New Testament for Divine Revelation, is a
part and member of the Christian Faith. But it is not those parts and members of
the Christian Faith we are speaking of; But only such parts and members of the
Christian Faith, as are absolutely necessary to be believed by every Man,
before he can be a Christian. And in that sense I deny his Assertion to be
true, viz. That they do not occur in any one place of Scripture. For they do
all occur in that first Sermon of St. Peter, Act. II. 11. by which Three
Thousand were at that time brought into the Church, and that in these words,
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that
same Jesus, whom you have Crucified, Lord and Christ. Repent and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ. Here is the Doctrine of Jesus the
Messiah, the Lord, and of Repentance proposed, to those who already believe one
God; Which I say, are all the parts of the Christian Faith necessary to be
received to make a Man a Christian. To suppose, as the Unmasker does here, that
more is required, is to beg, not prove the Question.

If he disputes this Collection of mine out of that Sermon of St. Peter, I will
give him a more authentic Collection of the necessary parts of the Christian
Faith from an Author that he will not question. Let him look into Act. 20. 20,
etc. and there he will find St. Paul saying thus to the Elders of Ephesus, whom
he was taking his last leave of, with an Assurance, that he should never see
them again. I have kept back nothing that was profitable unto you. But have
showed you, and have taught you publicly and from house to house, testifying
both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. If St. Paul knew what was necessary to make a
Christian, here it is: Here he (if he knew how to do it, for it is plain from
his words he designed to do it) has put it together. But there is a greater yet
than St. Paul, who has brought all the parts of Faith necessary to Salvation
into one place, I mean our Savior himself, Ioh. XVII. 13. in these words. This
is Life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent.

But the Unmasker goes on. Therefore when in some places, only one single part
of the Christian Faith is made mention of, as necessarily to be embraced in
order to Salvation, we must be careful not to take it alone, but to supply it
from several other Places, which make mention of other necessary and
indispensable points of belief. I will give the Reader a plain instance of
this, Romans X. 9. If thou shall believe in thy heart, that God has raised him (
i. e. the Lord Jesus) from the dead thou shall be saved. Here one Article of
Faith, viz. the belief of Christ's resurrection (because it is of so great
Importance in Christianity) is only mentioned: But all the rest must be
supposed, because they are mentioned in other places.

Answ. One would wonder that any one conversant in holy Writ, with ever so
little Attention; much more that an Expounder of the Scriptures should so
mistake the sense and style of the Scripture. Believing Jesus to be the Messiah
with a lively Faith, i. e. as I have showed, taking him to be our King, with a
sincere submission to the Laws of his Kingdom, is all that is required to make
a Man a Christian; for this includes repentance too. The believing him
therefore to be the Messiah, is very often, and with great reason, put both for
Faith and Repentance too; which are sometimes set down singly, where one is put
for both, as implying the other: And sometimes they are both mentioned; and
then Faith, as contradistinguish'd to Repentance, is taken for a simple Assent
of the mind to this Truth that Jesus is the Messiah. Now this Faith is
variously expressed in Scripture.

There are some particulars in the History of our Savior allowed to be so
peculiarly appropriated to the Messiah, such incommunicable marks of him, that
to believe them of Jesus of Nazareth was in effect the same, as to believe him
to be the Messiah, and so are put to express it. The principal of these is his
Resurrection from the dead, which being the great: and demonstrative Proof of
his being the Messiah, it is not at all strange, that the believing his
Resurrection should be put for believing him to be the Messiah: Since the
declaring his Resurrection was a declaring him to be the Messiah. For thus St.
Paul argues, Act. XIII. 32, 33. We declare unto you good tidings, or we preach
the Gospel to you, for so the word signifies, how that the promise that was
made unto the Fathers, God has fullfilled the same unto us their children, in
that he has raised up Jesus again. The force of which Argument lies in this,
that if Jesus was raised from the dead, then he was certainly the Messiah: And
thus the promise of the Messiah was fullfilled in raising Jesus from the dead.
The like Argument St. Paul uses, 1 Cor. XV. 17. If Christ be not raised, your
faith is vain, you are yet in your Sins. i. e. If Jesus be not risen from the
dead, he is not the Messiah, your believing it is in vain, and you will receive
no benefit by that Faith. And so likewise from the same Argument of his
Resurrection, he at Thessalonica proves him to be the Messiah, Act. XVII. 2, 3.
And Paul, as his manner was, went into the Synagogue, and three Sabbath Days
reasoned with the Jews out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging that the
Messiah must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead: And that this
Jesus whom I preach unto you is the Messiah.

The necessary Connection of these two, that if he rose from the dead he was
the Messiah; And if he rose not from the dead he was not the Messiah; The chief
Priest and Pharisees, that had prosecuted him to Death, understood very well,
who therefore came together unto Pilate saying, Sir, we remember that that
deceiver said, whilst he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again.
Command therefore that the Sepulcher be made sure unto the third day, least his
disciples come by night and steal him away, and say unto the people, he is
risen from the dead: So the last error shall be worse than the first. The error
they here speak of, it is plain, was the opinion, that he was the Messiah. To
stop that Belief, which his Miracles had procured him amongst the People, they
had got him put to Death: But if after that, it should be believed, that he
rose again from the dead, this demonstration that he was the Messiah, would but
establish what they had labored to destroy, by his Death: Since no one, who
believed his Resurrection, could doubt of his being the Messiah.

It Is not at all therefore to be wondered, that his Resurrection, his
Ascension, his Rule and Dominion, and his coming to judge the quick and the
dead, which are Characteristical marks of the Messiah, and belong peculiarly to
him, should sometimes in Scripture be put alone as sufficient descriptions of
the Messiah; And the believing them of him put for believing him to be the
Messiah. Thus, Acts X. our Savior in Peter's Discourse to Cornelius, when he
brought him the Gospel, is described to be the Messiah, by his Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, Dominion, and coming to judge the quick and the dead.

These, (which in my Reasonableness of Christianity, I have upon this ground
taken the Liberty to call concomitant Articles) where they are set alone for
the Faith to which Salvation is promised, plainly signify the believing Jesus
to be the Messiah, that Fundamental Article which has the promise of Life; And
so give no Foundation at all for what the Unmasker says, in these words. Here
one Article of Faith, viz. The belief of Christ's Resurrection (because it is
of so great Importance in Christianity) is only mentioned; but all the rest
must be supposed, because they are mentioned in other places.

Answ. If all the rest be of absolute, and indispensible Necessity to be
believed to make a Man a Christian, all the rest are every one of them of equal
importance. For things of equal Necessity to any end, are of equal Importance
to that end. But here the Truth forced its way unawares from the Unmasker. Our
Savior's Resurrection, for the reason I have given, is truly of great
importance in Christianity; so great, that his being or not being the Messiah
stands or falls with it: So that these two important Articles are inseparable,
and in effect make but one. For since that time, believe one and you believe
both; Deny one of them and you can believe neither. If the Unmasker can show me
any one of the Articles in his List, which is not of this great importance
mentioned alone with a promise of Salvation for believing it, I will grant him
to have some color for what he says here. But where is to be found in the
Scripture any such Expression as this; If thou shall believe with thy heart the
corruption and degeneracy of humane nature, thou shall be saved? or the like?
This place therefore out of the Romans makes not for, but against his List of
necessary Articles. One of them alone he cannot show me any where set down,
with a Supposition of the rest, as having Salvation promised to it. Though it
be true, that that one which alone is absolutely necessary to be superadded to
the Belief of one God, is in diverse places differently expressed.

That which he subjoins, as a Consequence of what he had said, is a farther
Proof of this. And consequently, says he, if we would give an impartial account
of our belief, we must consult those places: And they are not all together, but
dispersed here and there: Wherefore we must look them out, and acquaint our
selves with the several particulars, which make up our belief, and render it
entire and consummate.

Answ. Never was Man constanter to a loose way of talking. The Question is only
about Articles necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian: And here he
talks of the several particulars, which make up our belief, and render it
entire and consummate; Confounding as he did before essential and integral
parts, which it seems he cannot distinguish. Our Faith is true and saving, when
it is such as God by the new Covenant requires it to be: But it is not entire
and consummate, till we explicitly believe all the Truths contained in the
Word of God. For the whole Revelation of Truth in the Scripture, being the
proper and entire Object of Faith. Our Faith cannot be entire and consummate,
till it be adequate to its proper Object, which is the whole divine Revelation
contained in the Scripture: And so to make our Faith entire and consummate, we
must not look out those places, which he says, are not all together. To talk of
looking out, and culling of places is Nonsense, where the whole Scripture alone
can make up our belief, and render it entire and consummate: Which no one, I
think, can hope for in this frail State of Ignorance and Error. To make the
Unmasker speak Sense, ^ and to the purpose, here, we must understand him thus.
That if we will give an impartial Account of the Articles, that are necessary
to be believed to make a Man a Christian, we must consult those places where
they are, for they are not all together, but dispersed here and there,
wherefore we must look them out, and acquaint our selves with the several
particulars which make up the Fundamental Articles of our belief, and will
render a Catalogue of them entire and consummate. If his Supposition be true, I
grant his Method to be reasonable, and upon that I join issue with him. Let him
thus give us an impartial Account of our belief: Let him acquaint us with the
several particulars, which make up a Christian's belief, and render it entire
and consummate. Till he has done this, let him not talk thus in the air of a
Method, that will not do: Let him not reproach me, as he does, for not taking a
course, by which he himself cannot do, what he reviles me for failing in. But
our hasty Author, says he, took another course, and thereby deceived himself
and unhappily deceived others. If it be so, I desire the Unmasker to take the
course he proposes, and thereby undeceive me, and others; and acquaint us with
the several particulars which make up a Christian's belief, and render it
entire and consummate. For I am willing to be undeceived: But till he has done
that, and shown us by the success of it, that his course is better, he cannot
blame us for ^ollowing that course we have done.

I come now to his Fourth and last particular, p. 78. which he says, is the
main Answer to the Objection, and therefore I shall set it down in his own
words entire as it stands together. This, says he, must be born in our Minds,
that Christianity was erected by degrees, according to that Prediction and
Promise of our Savior, that the Spirit should teach them all things, Joh. XIV.
26. and that he should guide them into all truth, Joh. XVI. 13. viz. after his
departure and ascension, when the Holy Ghost was to be sent in a special manner
to enlighten Men's minds, and to discover to them the great Mysteries of
Christianity. This is to be noted by us, as that which gives great light in the
present case. The discovery of the Doctrines of the Gospel was gradual. It was
by certain steps that Christianity climbed to its height. We are not to think
then that all the necessary Doctrines of the Christian Religion were clearly
published to the World in our Savior's time. Not but that all that were
necessary for that time were published: But some which were necessary for the
succeeding one were not then discovered or at least not fully. They had
ordinarily no belief, before Christ's Death and Resurrection, of those
Substantial Articles, i. e. that he should die and rise again; But we read in
the Acts, and in the Epistles, that these were formal Articles of Faith
afterward, and are ever since necessary to complete the Christian belief. So
as to other great Verities, the Gospel increased by degrees, and was not
perfect at once. Which furnishes us with a reason why most of the choicest and
sublimest truths of Christianity are to be met with in the Epistles of the
Apostles, they being such Doctrines as were not clearly discovered and opened
in the Gospels and the Acts. Thus far the Vnmasker.

I thought hitherto, that the Covenant of Grace in Christ Jesus had been but
one, immutably the same: But our Vnmasker here makes two, or I know not how
many. For I cannot tell how to conceive, that the Conditions of any Covenant
should be changed, and the Covenant remain the same: Every change of Conditions
in my apprehension makes a new and another Covenant. We are not to think, says
the Vnmasker, That all the necessary Doctrines of the Christian Religion were
clearly published to the World in our Savior's time; not but that all that
were necessary for that time were published: But some which were necessary for
the Succeeding one, were not then discovered; or at least not fully. Answ. The
Unmasker, constant to himself, speaks here doubtfully, and cannot tell whether
he should say that the Articles necessary to Succeeding times, were discovered
in our Savior's time, or no: And therefore, that he may provide himself a
retreat, in the doubt he is in, he says, they were not clearly published; they
were not then discovered, or at least not fully. But we must desire him to pull
off his Mask, and to that purpose.

1o. I ask him how he can tell, that all the necessary Doctrines were obscurely
published or in part discovered; for an obscure publishing, a Discovery in
part, is opposed to, and intimated in not clearly published, not fully
discovered. And if a clear and full Discovery be all that he denies to them, I
ask

XXXVII.
Which those Fundamental Articles are, which were obscurely published, but not
fully discovered, in our Savior's time?

And next, I shall desire him to tell me

XXXVIII.
Whether there are any Articles necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian, that were not discovered at all in our Savior's time, and which
they are.

If he cannot show these distinctly, it is plain he talks at random about them:
But he has no clear and distinct conception of those that were published, or
not published; clearly or obscurely discovered, in our Savior's time. It was
necessary for him to say something, for those his pretended necessary Articles,
which are not to be ^ound any where proposed in the Preaching of our Savior
and his Apostles to their yet Unbelieving Auditors; And therefore he says, We
are not to think all the necessary Doctrines of the Christian Religion were
clearly published to the World in our Savior's time. But he barely says it,
without giving any Reason, why we are not to think so. It is enough that it is
necessary to his Hypothesis. He says we are not to think so, and we are
presently bound not to think so. Else from another Man, that did not usurp an
Authority over our Thoughts, it would have required some Reason to make them
think, that something more was required to make a Man a Christian after than in
our Savior's time. For, as I take it, it is not a very probable, much less a
self-evident Proposition, to be received without Proof, That there was
something necessary for that time, to make a Man a Christian, and something
more that was necessary to make a Man a Christian in the succeeding time.

However, since this great Master says we ought to think so, let us in
obedience think so as well as we can; till he vouchsafes to give us some Reason
to think, that there was more required to be believed to make a Man a Christian
in the succeeding time, than in our Savior's. This, instead of removing, does
but increase the Difficulty: For if more were necessary to be believed to make
a Man a Christian after our Savior's time, than was during his life; how comes
it, that no more was proposed by the Apostles in their Preaching to Unbelievers
for the making them Christians, after our Savior's Death, than there was
before: Even this one Article, that he was the Messiah? For I desire the
Unmasker to show me any of those other Articles mentioned in his List (except
the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, which were intervening Matters
of Fact, evidencing him to be the Messiah) that were proposed by the Apostles
after our Savior's time to their Unbelieving Hearers, to make them Christians.
This one Doctrine, that Jesus was the Messiah, was that, which was proposed in
our Savior's time to be believed, as necessary to make a Man a Christian: The
same Doctrine was likewise what was proposed afterward, in the Preaching of
the Apostles to Unbelievers, to make them Christians.

I grant this was more clearly proposed after than in our Savior's time; But
in both of them it was all that was proposed to the Believers of one God, to
make them Christians. Let him show, that there were any other proposed in or
after our Savior's time to be believed, to make Unbelievers Christians. If he
means by necessary Articles published to the World, the other Doctrines
contained in the Epistles; I grant they are all of them necessary Articles to
be believed by every Christian, as far as he understands them. But I deny, that
they were proposed to those they were writ to, as necessary to make them
Christians, for this demonstrative Reason: Because they were Christians
already. For Example, many Doctrines proving, and explaining, and giving a
farther Light into the Gospel, are published in the Epistles to the Corinthians
and Thessalonians. These are all of Divine Authority, and none of them may be
disbelieved by any one who is a Christian: But yet what was proposed or
published to both the Corinthians and Thessalonians to make them Christians,
was only this Doctrine that Jesus was the Messiah: As may be seen, Act. XVII.
and XVIII. This then was the Doctrine necessary to make men Christians in our
Savior's time; And this the only Doctrine necessary to make Unbelievers
Christians after our Savior's time. The only difference was, that it was more
clearly proposed after than before his Ascension: The Reason whereof has been
sufficiently explained. But any other Doctrine but this, proposed clearly or
obscurely, in or after our Savior's time, as necessary to be believed to make
Unbelievers Christians, That remains yet to be shown.

When the Unmasker speaks of the Doctrines that were necessary for the
succeeding time after our Savior, he is in doubt whether he should say they
were, or were not discovered in our Savior's time; and how far they were then
discovered: And therefore he says, some of them were not then ^^^cover'd, or at
least not fully. We must here excuse the doubtfulness of his talking concerning
the discovery of his other necessary Articles. For how could he say they were
discovered, or not discovered, clearly or obscurely, fully or not fully, when
he does not yet know them all, nor can tell us, what those necessary Articles
are? If he does know them let him give us a List of them, and then we shall see
easily whether they were at all published or discovered in our Savior's time.
If there are some of them, that were not at all discovered in our Savior's
time, let him speak it out, and leave shifting: And if some of those, that were
not necessary for our Savior's time, but for the succeeding one only were yet
discovered in our Savior's time, why were they not necessary to be believed in
that time? But the truth is, he knows not what these Doctrines necessary for
Succeeding times are, and therefore can say nothing positive about their
Discovery. And for those that he has set down, as soon as he shall name any one
of them, to be of the number of those not necessary for our Savior's time, but
necessary for the Succeeding one, it will presently appear, either that it was
discovered in our Savior's time; And then it was as necessary for his time as
the Succeeding: Or else that it was not discovered in his time, nor to several
Converts after his time, before they were made Christians; And therefore it was
no more necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian in the Succeeding,
than it was in our Savior's time. However, general Positions and Distinctions
without a Foundation, serve for show, and to beguile unwary and inattentive
Readers.

2o. Having thus minded him that the Question is about Articles of Faith
necessary to be explicitly and distinctly believed to make a Man a Christian; I
then, in the next place, demand of him to tell me,

XXXIX.
Whether or no all the Articles necessary now to be distinctly and explicitly
believed to make any Man a Christian, were distinctly and explicitly published
or discovered in our Savior's time.

And then I shall desire to know of him,

XL.
A Reason why they were not.

Those that he instances in of Christ's Death and Resurrection, will not help
him one jot: For they are not new Doctrines revealed, new Mysteries discovered;
but Matters of Fact, which happened to our Savior in their due time, to
complete in him the Character and Predictions of the Messiah, and demonstrate
him to be the Deliverer promised. These are recorded of him by the Spirit of
God in holy Writ; but are no more necessary to be believed to make a Man a
Christian, than any other part of Divine Revelation, but as far as they have an
immediate Connection with his being the Messiah, and cannot be denied without
denying him to be the Messiah: And therefore this Article of his Resurrection
(which supposes his Death) and such other Propositions as are convertible with
his being the Messiah, are, as they very well may be, put for his being the
Messiah; and as I have showed, proposed to be believed in the place of it.

All that is revealed in Scripture has a consequential necessity of being
believed by all those, to whom it is proposed: Because it is of Divine
Authority, one part as much as another. And in this sense, all the Divine
Truths in the inspired Writings are Fundamental and necessary to be believed.
But then this will destroy our Vnmasker's select Number of Fundamental
Articles: And the choicest and sublimest Truths of Christianity, which he tells
us, are to be met with in the Epistles, will not be more necessary to be
believed, than any, which he may think the commonest or meanest Truths in any
of the Epistles or the Gospels. Whatsoever part of Divine Revelation, whether
revealed before, or in, or after our Savior's time; whether it contain
(according to the distinction of our Unmasker's nice palate) choice or common;
sublime or not sublime Truths; is necessary to be believed by every one, to
whom it is proposed, as far as he under^tands, what is proposed. But God by
Jesus Christ has entered into a Covenant of Grace with Mankind; a Covenant of
Faith, instead of that of Works, wherein some Truths are absolutely necessary
to be explicitly believed by them to make Men Christians; and therefore those
Truths are necessary to be known, and consequently necessary to be proposed to
them to make them Christians. This is peculiar to them to make Men Christians.
For all Men, as Men, are under a necessary obligation to believe what God
proposes to them to be believed: But there being certain distinguishing Truths,
which belong to the Covenant of the Gospel, which if Men know not, they cannot
be Christians; and they being some of them such as cannot be known without
being proposed; those and those only are the necessary Doctrines of
Christianity I speak of; without a knowledge of, and assent to which, no Man
can be a Christian.

To come therefore to a clear decision of this Controversy, I desire the
Unmasker to tell me,

XLI.
What those Doctrines are which are absolutely necessary to be proposed to
every Man to make him a Christian.

XLII.
1o. Whether they are all the Truths of Divine Revelation contained in the
Bible.

For, I grant his Argument (which in another place he uses for some of them,
and truly belongs to them all) viz. That they were revealed and written there
on purpose to be believed, and that it is indispensibly necessary for
Christians to believe them.

XLIII.
2o. Or whether it be only that one Article of Jesus being the Messiah, which
the History of our Savior and his Apostles Preaching has with such a peculiar
distinction every where proposed.

XLIV.
3o. Or whether the Doctrines necessary to be proposed to every one to make him
a Christian, be any set of Truths between these two.

And if he says this latter, then I must ask him,

XLV.
What they are? that we may see why those rather than any other contained in
the New Testament, are necessary to be proposed to every Man to make him a
Christian; And if they are not every one proposed to him, and assented to by
him, he cannot be a Christian.

The Vnmasker makes a great noise, and hopes to give his unwary, though
well-meaning Readers, odd Thoughts, and strong Impressions against my Book, by
declaiming against my lank Faith, and my narrowing of Christianity to one
Article; which, as he says, is the next way to reduce it to none. But when it
is considered, it will be found, that it is he that narrows Christianity. The
Unmasker, as if he were Arbiter and Dispenser of the Oracles of God, takes upon
him to single out some Texts of Scripture; and, where the words of Scripture
will not serve his turn, to impose on us his Interpretations and Deductions as
necessary Articles of Faith; which is in Effect to make them of equal Authority
with the unquestionable Word of God. And thus, partly in the words of the
Scripture, and partly in words of his own, he makes a Set of Fundamentals, with
an Exclusion of all the other Truths delivered, by the Spirit of God in the
Bible: Though all the rest be of the same Divine Authority, and Original; and
ought therefore all equally, as far as they are understood, by every Christian
to be believed. I tell him, and I desire him to take notice of it: God has no
where given him an Authority thus to garble the inspired Writings of the Holy
Scriptures. Every part of it is his Word, and ought every part of it to be
believed by every Christian Man, according as God shall enable him to
understand it. It ought not to be narrowed to the Cut of the Vnmasker's
peculiar System: It Is a Presumption of the highest Nature, for him thus to
pretend according to his own Fancy to establish a Set of Fundamental Articles.
This is to diminish the Authority of the Word of God, to set up his own; and
create a reverence to his System, from which the several parts of Divine
Revelations are to receive their Weight, Dignity and Authority. Those Passages
of Holy Writ which suit with that, are Fundamental, Choice, Sublime and
Necessary: The rest of the Scripture (as of no great moment) is not
Fundamental, is not necessary to be believed, may be neglected, or must be
tortured to comply with an Analogy of Faith of his own making. But though he
pretend to a certain Set of Fundamentals; yet to show the Vanity, and Impudence
of that pretense, he cannot tell us which they are; and therefore in vain
contends for a Creed he knows not, and is yet no where. He neither does, and
which is more, I tell him he never can give us a Collection of his Fundamentals
gathered upon his Principles out of the Scripture, with the rejection of all
the rest as not Fundamental. He does not observe the difference there is
between what is necessary to be believed by every Man to make him a Christian,
and what is required to be believed by every Christian. The first of these is
what by the Covenant of the Gospel is necessary to be known, and consequently
to be proposed to every Man to make him a Christian: The latter is no less than
the whole Revelation of God; all the Divine Truths contained in Holy Scripture;
which every Christian Man is under a necessity to believe, so far as it shall
please God upon his serious and constant endeavors to enlighten his Mind to
understand them.

The Preaching of our Savior and his Apostles, has sufficiently taught us what
is necessary to be proposed to every Man to make him a Christian. He that
believes him to be the promised Messiah, takes Jesus for his King, and
repenting of his former Sins, sincerely resolves to live for the future in
obedience to his Laws is a Subject of his Kingdom, is a Christian. If he be
not, I desire the Unmasker to tell me, what more is requisite to make him so.
Till he does that, I rest satisfied, that this is all that was at first, and is
still necessary to make a Man a Christian.

This, though it be contained in a few words, and those not hard to be
understood; though it be in one voluntary act of the Mind relinquishing all
irregular Courses, and submitting it self to the rule of him, whom God had sent
to be our King, and promised to be our Savior; Yet it having relation to the
Race of Mankind from the First Man Adam to the End of the World, it being a
Contrivance, wherein God has displaid so much of his Wisdom and Goodness to the
corrupt and lost Sons of Men, and it being a Design to which the Almighty had a
peculiar regard in the whole Constitution and Economy of the Jews, as well as
in the Prophecies and History of the Old Testament; This was a Foundation
capable of large Superstructures. 1. In explaining the Occasion, Necessity, Use
and End of his coming. 2. Next, in proving him to be the Person promised; by a
Correspondence of his Birth, Life, Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection, to all
those Prophecies and Types of him, which had given the expectation of such a
Deliverer, and to those Descriptions of him whereby he might be known, when he
did come. 3. In the discovery of the Sort, Constitution, Extent, and Management
of his Kingdom. 4. In showing from what we are delivered by him, and how that
Deliverance is wrought out, and what are the Consequences of it.

These, and a great many more the like, afford great numbers of Truths
delivered both in the Historical, Epistolary, and Prophetical Writings of the
New Testament, wherein the Mysteries of the Gospel hidden from former Ages were
discovered; and that more fully, I grant, after the pouring out of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles. But could no body take Christ for their promised King,
and resolve to obey him, unless he understood all the Truths that concerned his
Kingdom, or, as I may say, Mysteries of State of it? The truth of the contrary
is manifest out of the plain and uniform Preaching of the Apostles, after they
had received the Holy Ghost, that was to guide them into all Truth. Nay, after
the writing of those Epistles, wherein were contained the Unmasker's Sublimest
Truths; They every where proposed to Unbelievers Jesus the Messiah to be their
King, Ordained of God; and to this joined Repentance: And this alone they
Preached for the Conversion of their Unbelieving Hearers. As soon as any one
assented to this, he was pronounced a Believer; And these inspired Rulers of
the Church, these infallible Preachers of the Gospel, admitted him into
Christ's Kingdom by Baptism. And this after, long after our Savior's
Ascension, when (as our Unmasker expresses it) the Holy Ghost was to be sent in
a special manner to enlighten men's Minds, and to discover to them the great
Mysteries of Christianity, even as long as the Apostles lived: And what others
were to do, who afterward were to Preach the Gospel; St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor.
III. 11. Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, even Jesus the
Messiah. Though upon this Foundation Men might build variously, things that
would, or would not hold the touch; Yet however, as long as they kept firm to
this Foundation, they should be saved, as appears in the following Verses.

And indeed, if all the Doctrines of the Gospel, which are contained in the
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, were necessary to be understood, and
explicitly believed, in the true sense of those that delivered them, to make a
Man a Christian; I doubt whether ever any one, even to this day, was a true
Christian: Though I believe the Unmasker will not deny but that, e're this,
Christianity (as he expresses it) is by certain steps climbed to its height.

But for this, the Unmasker has found a convenient and wise remedy. It Is but
for him to have the Power to declare, which of the Doctrines delivered in Holy
Writ are, and which are not necessary to be believed, with an additional Power
to add others of his own, that he cannot find there, and the business is done.
For unless this be allowed him, his System cannot stand: Unless his
Interpretations be received for authentic Revelation, we cannot have all
Doctrines necessary for our time; In truth, we cannot be Christians. For to
this only, what he says concerning the gradual discovery of the Doctrines of
the Gospel tends. We are not to think, says he, that all the necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Religion were clearly published to the World in our
Savior's time. Not but that all that were necessary for that time were
published: But some that were necessary for the succeeding one were not then
discovered, or at least not fully.

I must here ask the Unmasker a short Question, or two; as First,

XLVI.
Are not all the Doctrines necessary for our time contained in his System?

Next,

XLVII.
Can all the Doctrines necessary for our time, be proposed in the express words
of the Scripture?

When he has answered these two plain Questions (and an Answer to them, I shall
expect) the World will then see, what he designs by Doctrines necessary for our
Savior's time, and Doctrines necessary for succeeding times; whether he means
any thing else by it, but the setting up his System, as the exact Standard of
the Gospel; and the true and unalterable Measure of Christianity, in which it
has climbed to its height.

Let not good and sincere Christians be deceived, nor perplexed by this Maker
of another Christianity, than what the infallible Spirit of God has lest us in
the Scriptures. It Is evident from thence, that whoever takes Jesus the Messiah
for his King, with a Resolution to live by his Laws, and does sincerely repent
as often as he transgresses any of them, is his Subject; All such are
Christians. What they are to know, or believe more concerning him, and his
Kingdom, when they are his Subjects, he has left upon Record in the great and
Sacred Code, and Constitutions of his Kingdom, I mean in the Holy Scriptures.
All that is contained therein, as coming from the God of Truth, they are to
receive as Truth, and embrace as such. But since it is impossible explicitly to
believe any Proposition of the Christian Doctrine but what men understand, or
in any other sense than we understand it to have been delivered in; An explicit
belief is, or can be required in no Man, of more than what he understands of
that Doctrine. And thus, whatsoever upon fair Endeavors, he understands to be
contained in that Doctrine, is necessary to him to be believed: Nor can he
continue a Subject of Christ upon other terms.

What he is persuaded is the meaning of Christ his King, in any Expression he
finds in the Sacred Code; That by his Allegiance he is bound to submit his Mind
to receive for true, or else he denies the Authority of Christ, and refuses to
believe him; nor can be excused by calling any one on Earth Master. And hence
it is evidently impossible for a Christian to understand any Text in one sense,
and believe it in another, by whomsoever dictated.

All that is contained in the inspired Writings, is all of Divine Authority,
must all be allowed for such, and received for Divine and infallible Truth, by
every Subject of Christ's Kingdom, i. e. every Christian. How comes then the
Unmasker to distinguish these Dictates of the Holy Spirit into necessary and
not necessary Truths? I desire him to produce his Commission, whereby he has
the Power given him to tell, which of the Divine Truths contained in the Holy
Scripture are of necessity to be believed, and which not. Who made him a Judge
or Divider between them? Who gave him this Power over the Oracles of God; to
set up one, and debase another at his pleasure? Some, as he thinks sit, are the
choicest Truths. And what I beseech him are the other? Who made him a Chuser,
where no body can pick and choose? Every proposition there, as far as any
Christian can understand it, is indispensibly necessary to be believed: And
farther than he does understand it, it is impossible for him to believe it. The
Laws of Christ's Kingdom do not require Impossibilities, for they are all
reasonable, just and good.

Some of the Truths delivered in Holy Writ are very plain: It Is impossible, I
think, to mistake their Meaning: And those certainly are all necessary to be
explicitly believed. Others have more Difficulty in them, and are not easy to
be understood. Is the Unmasker appointed Christ's Vicegerent here, or the Holy
Ghost's Interpreter, with Authority to pronounce which of these are necessary
to be believed, and in what Sense, and which not* The Obscurity that is to be
found in several passages of the Scripture, the difficulties that cover and
perplex the meaning of several Texts, demand of every Christian Study,
Diligence, and Attention, in reading and hearing the Scriptures; in comparing,
and examining them; and receiving what light he can from all manner of helps,
to understand these Books wherein are contained the Words of Life. This the
Unmaker, and every one is to do for himself; and thereby find out, what is
necessary for him to believe. But I do not know that the Unmasker is to
understand, and interpret for me, more than I for him. If he has such a power I
desire him to produce it. Till then I can acknowledge no other infallible, but
that guide, which he directs me to himself here in these Words, According to
our Savior's promise, the Holy Ghost was to be sent in a special manner to
enlighten men's minds, and to discover to them the great mysteries of
Christianity. For whether by men he here means those on whom the Holy Ghost was
so eminently poured out, Act. II. Or whether he means by these Words, that
special Assistance of the Holy Ghost, whereby particular men to the end of the
World, are to be lead into the Truth, by opening their understandings, that
they may understand the Scriptures (for he always loves to speak doubtfully and
indefinitely) I know no other infallible guide, but the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures. Nor has God left it in my choice, to take any Man for such. If he
had, I should think the Unmasker the unlikeliest to be he, and the last Man in
the World to be chosen for that* Guide: And herein, I appeal to any sober
Christian, who has read what the Unmasker has with so little Truth and Decency
(for it is not always men's fault if they have not Sense) writ upon this
Question, whether he would not be of the same mind?

But yet as very an Unmasker as he is, he will be extremely apt to call you
Names, nay to declare you no Christian; and boldly affirm you have no
Christianity, if you will not swallow it just as it is of his Cooking. You must
take it just as he has been pleased to dose it; no more, nor no less, than what
is in his System. He has put himself into the Throne of Christ, and pretends
to tell you, which are, and which are not the indispensable Laws of his
Kingdom. Which parts of his divine Revelation you must necessarily know,
understand, and believe, and in what sense; and which you need not trouble your
head about, but may pass by as not necessary to be believed. He will tell you
that some of his necessary Articles are Mysteries, and yet (as he does p. 115.
of his Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism) that they are easy to be
understood by any Man, when explained to him. In answer to that, I demanded of
him who was to explain them? The Papists I told him, would explain some of them
one way, and the Reformed another; The Remonstrants and Anti-remonstrants give
them different senses; And probably the Trinitarians and Unitarians will
profess, that they understand not each other's Explications. But to this in his
reply he has not vouchsafed to give me any answer. Which yet I expect, and I
will tell him why; Because as there are different Explainers, there will be
different Fundamentals. And therefore, unless he can show his Authority to be
the sole Explainer of Fundamentals, he will in vain make such a pudder about
his Fundamentals. Another Explainer, of as good Authority as he, will set up
others against them. And what then shall we be the better for all this stir,
and noise of Fundamentals? And I desire it may be considered how much of the
Divisions in the Church, and bloody Persecutions amongst Christians, has been
owing to Christianity thus set up against Christianity, in multiplied
Fundamentals and Articles, made necessary by the Infallibility of opposite
Systems. The Unmasker's Zeal wants nothing but Power to make good his to be the
only Christianity, for he has found the Apostles Creed to be defective. He is
as infallible as the Pope, and another as infallible as he; and where Humane
Additions are made to the Terms of the Gospel, Men seldom want Zeal for what is
their own.

To conclude; What was sufficient to make a Man a Christian in our Savior's
time, is sufficient still, viz. the taking him for our King and Lord, ordained
so by God. What was necessary to be believed by all Christians in our Savior's
time as an indispensable Duty, which they owed to their Lord and Master, was
the believing all divine Revelation, as far as every one could understand it:
And just so it is still, neither more nor less. This being so, the Unmasker may
make what use he pleases of his Notion, That Christianity was erected by
Degrees, it will no way (in that sense in which it is true) turn to the
advantage of his select Fundamental necessary Doctrines.

The next Chapter has nothing in it, but his great Bugbear, whereby he hopes
to fright People from Reading my Book, by crying out, Socinianism, Socinianism.
Whereas I challenge him again to show one word of Socinianism in it. But
however it is worth while to write a Book to prove me a Socinian. Truly, I did
not think my self so considerable, that the World need be troubled about me,
whether I were a follower of Socinus, Arminius, Calvin, or any other Leader of
a Sect amongst Christians. A Christian I am sure I am, because I believe Jesus
to be the Messiah, the King and Savior promised, and sent by God: And as a
Subject of his Kingdom, I take the rule of my Faith, and Life, from his Will
declared and left upon Record in the inspired Writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists in the New Testament: Which I endeavor to the utmost of my power,
as is my Duty, to understand in their true sense and meaning. To lead me into
their true meaning, I know (as I have above declared) no infallible Guide, but
the same Holy Spirit, from whom these Writings at first came. If the Unmasker
knows any other infallible Interpreter of Scripture, I desire him to direct me
to him. Till then, I shall think it according to my Master's Rule, not to be
called, nor to call any Man on Earth Master. No Man, I think, has a right to
prescribe to my Faith, or Magisterially to impose his Interpretations or
Opinions on me: Nor is it material to any one what mine are, any farther than
they carry their own Evidence with them. If this, which I think makes me of no
Sect, entitles me to the Name of a Papist, or a Socinian, because the Unmasker
thinks these the worst, and most invidious he can give me; and labors to fix
them on me for no other reason, but because I will not take him for my Master
on Earth, and his System for my Gospel; I shall leave him to recommend himself
to the World by this Skill, who no doubt will have reason to thank him for the
rareness and subtility of his Discovery. For, I think, I am the first Man, that
ever was found out to be at the same time a Socinian, and a Factor for Rome.
But what is too hard for such an Unmasker? I must be what he thinks fit. When
he pleases a Papist, and when he pleases a Socinian, and when he pleases a
Mohammedan. And probably, when he has considered a little better, an Atheist;
for I hardly escaped it when he writ last. My Book, he says, has a tendency to
it; and if he can but go on, as he has done hitherto, from Surmises to
Certainties, by that time he writes next his Discovery will be advanced, and he
will certainly find me an Atheist. Only one thing I dare assure him of, that he
shall never find, that I treat the things of God or Religion so, as if I made
only a Trade, or a Jest of them. But let us now see how at present he proves me
a Socinian.

His first Argument is, my not answering for my leaving out, Matthew. XXVIII. 19.
and John I. 1. Page 82. of his Socinianism Unmasked. This he takes to be a
Confession, that I am a Socinian. I hope he means fairly, and that if it be so
on my side, it must be taken for a standing Rule between us, that where any
thing is not answered, it must be taken for granted. And upon that score, I
must desire him to remember some Passages of my Vindication, which I have
already, and others which I shall mind him of hereafter, which he passed over
in Silence, and has had nothing to say to, which therefore by his own rule, I
shall desire the Reader to observe, that he has granted.

This being premised; I must tell the Unmasker, that I perceive he reads my
Book with the same Understanding that he writes his own. If he had done
otherwise, he might have seen, that I had given him a reason for my omission of
those two, and other plain and obvious Passages and famous Testimonies in the
Evangelists, as he calls them, where I say, p. 11. That if I have le^t out none
of those Passages or Testimonies, which contain what our Savior and his
Apostles preached and required assent to, to make Men Believers, I shall think
my Omissions (let them be what they will) no Faults in the present Case.
Whatever Doctrines Mr. Edwards would have to be believed, to make a Man a
Christian, he will be sure to find them in those Preachings and famous
Testimonies of our Savior and his Apostles I have quoted. And if they are not
there, he may rest satisfied, that they were not proposed by our Savior and
his Apostles, as necessary to be believed to make Men Christ's Disciples. From
which words, any one but an Unmasker, would have understood my Answer to be,
That all that was necessary to be believed to make Men Christians, might be
found in what our Savior and the Apostles proposed to Unbelievers for their
Conversion: But the two Passages abovementioned, as well as a great many others
in the Evangelists, being none of those, I had no reason to take notice of
them. But the Unmasker having out of his good pleasure put it once upon me, as
he does in his Thoughts of the Causes of Atheism, p. 107. That I was an
Epitomizer of the Evangelical Writings, though every one may see I make not
that my Business, yet `tis no matter for that, I must always be accountable to
that fancy of his. But when he has proved,

XLVIII.
That this is not as just a reason for my omitting them, as several other
obvious Passages and famous Testimonies in the Evangelists, which I there
mention, for whose Omission he does not blame me,

I will undertake to give him another Reason, which I know not whether he were
not better let alone.

The next Proof of my being a Socinian is, that I take the Son of God to be an
expression used to signify the Messiah. Slichtingius and Socinus understood it
so, and therefore I am, the Unmasker says, a Socinian. Just as good an
Argument, as that I believe Jesus to be a Prophet, and so do the Mahometans,
therefore I am a Mohammedan: Or thus, The Unmaskert holds that the Apostles
Creed does not contain all things necessary to Salvation, and so says Knot the
Jesuit: Therefore the Unmasker is a Papist. Let me turn the Tables, and by the
same Argument I am Orthodox again. For two Orthodox, Pious and very Eminent
Prelates of our Church, whom, when I follow Authorities, I shall prefer to
Slichtingius and Socinus, understand it as I do, and therefore I am Orthodox.
Nay, it so falls out, that if it were of force either way, the Argument would
weigh most on this side: Since I am not wholly a Stranger to the Writings of
these two Orthodox Bishops, but I never read a Page in either of those
Socinians. The never sufficiently admired and valued Archbishop Tillotson's
words, which I quoted, the Unmasker says, do not necessarily import any such
thing. I know no words that necessarily import any thing to a Caviller. But he
was known to have such clear Thoughts, and so clear a Style; so far from having
any thing doubtful, or fallacious in what he said, that I shall only set down
his words as they are in his Sermon of Sincerity, p. 2. to show his meaning.
Nathaniel, says he, being satisfied, that he [our Saviour] was the Messiah, he
presently owned him for such, calling him THE SON OF GOD, and the King of
Israel.

The words of the other Eminent Prelate, the Bishop of Ely, whom our Church is
still happy in, are these. To be the Son of God, and to be Christ, being but
different Expressions of the same thing: Witness, p. 14. And p. 10. It is the
very same thing to believe that Jesus is the Christ, and to believe that Jesus
is the Son of God, express it how you please. This ALONE is the Faith which can
regenerate a man, and put a divine Spirit into him, that it makes him a
Conqueror over the World as Jesus was. Of this the Unmasker says, that this
Reverend Author speaking only in a general way represents these two as the same
thing, viz. That Jesus is the Christ, and that Jesus is the Son of God, because
these Expressions are applied to the same person, and because they are both
comprehended in one general Name, viz. Jesus. Answ. The Question is whether
these two Expressions, the Son of God, and the Messiah, in the Learned Bishop's
Opinion signify the same thing. If his Opinion had been asked in the Point, I
know not how he could have declared it more clearly. For he says they are
Expressions of the same thing, and that it is the very same thing to believe
that Jesus is the Messiah, and to believe that he is the Son of God; Which
cannot be so, if Messiah and Son of God have different Significations: For then
they will make two distinct Propositions in different Senses, which it can be
no more the same thing to believe, than it is the same thing to believe that
Mr. Edwards is a Notable Preacher, and a Notable Railer; or than it is to
believe one Truth and all Truths. For by the same Reason, that it is the same
thing to believe two distinct Truths, it will be the same thing to believe two
thousand distinct Truths, and consequently all Truths. The Unmasker, that he
might seem to say something, says that the Reverend Author represents these as
the same thing. Answ. The Unmasker never fails, like Midas, to turn every thing
he touches into his own Metal. The Learned Bishop says very directly and
plainly, that to be the Son of God, and to be the Messiah, are Expressions of
the same thing: And the Unmasker says, he represents these Expressions as one
thing. For `tis of Expressions that both the Bishop and he speak: Now,
Expressions can be one thing, but one of these two ways: Either in Sound, and
so these two Expressions are not one; Or insignification, and so they are. And
then the Unmasker says, but in other words, what the Bishop had said before,
viz. That these two to be the Son of God and to be the Messiah, are Expressions
of the same thing. Only the Unmasker has put in the word Represents to amuse
his Reader, as if he had said something, and so indeed he does after his
fashion, i. e. obscurely and fallaciously; which when it comes to be examined,
is but the same thing under show of a difference: Or else, if it has a
different meaning, is demonstratively false. But so it be obscure enough to
deceive a willing Reader, who will not be at the pains to examine what he says,
it serves his turn.

But yet, as if he had said something of weight, he gives Reasons for putting
Represents these two Expressions as one thing, in stead of saying, these two
are but different Expressions of the same thing.

The First of his Reasons is, Because the Reverend Author is here speaking only
in a General way. Answ. What does the Vnmasker mean by a General way? The
Learned Bishop speaks of two particular Expressions applied to our Savior. But
was his Discourse never so general, how could that alter the plain
Signification of his words, viz. That those two are but different Expressions
of the same thing?

2o. Because these Expressions are applied to the same person. Answ. A very
demonstrative Reason, is it not, that therefore they cannot be different
Expressions of the same thing?

3o. And because they are both comprehended in one general Name, viz. Jesus.
Answ. It requires some Skill to put so many Falsehoods in so few words. For
neither both nor either of these Expressions are comprehended in the Name
Jesus: And that Jesus, the Name of a particular Person, should be a general
Name, is a discovery reserved to be found out by this new Logician. However
general is a Learned Word, which when a Man of Learning has used twice, as a
Reason of the same thing, he is covered with Generals. He need not trouble
himself any farther about sense, he may safely talk what Stu^^ he pleases,
without the least Suspicion of his Reader.

Having thus strongly proved just nothing; he proceeds and tells us, p. 91. Yet
it does not follow thence, but that if we will speak strictly and closely, we
must be forced to confess, they are of different Significations. By which words
(if his words have any Signification) he plainly allows, that the Bishop meant
as he says, that these two are but different Expressions of the same thing: But
withal tells him, that if he will speak closely and strictly, he must say, they
are of different Significations. My concernment in the case being only, that in
the Passage alleged, the Reverend Author said, that the Son of God and the
Messiah were different Expressions of the same thing, I have no more to demand
after these words of the Unmasker, he has granted all I would have. But shall
leave it to the decisive Authority of this Superlative Critic to determine,
whether this Learned Bishop, or any one living, besides himself, can understand
the Phrases of the New Testament, and speak strictly and closely concerning
them. Perhaps his being yet alive, may preserve this Eminent Prelate from the
malicious driveling of the Unmasker's Pen, which has bespotted the Ashes of two
of the same Order, who were no mean Ornaments of the English Church; And if
they had been now alive, no body will doubt, but the Unmasker would have
treated them after another fashion.

But let me ask the Unmasker, whether (if either of these Pious Prelates, whose
words I have above quoted, did understand that Phrase of the Son of God to
stand for the Messiah, which they might do without holding any one Socinian
tenet) he will dare to pronounce him a Socinian. This is so ridiculous an
Inference, that I could not but laugh at it. But withal tell him, Vindic. p.
23. That if the sense wherein I understand those Texts be a Mistake, I shall be
beholding to him to set me right: But they are not popular Authorities, or
frightful Names, whereby I judge of Truth or Falsehood. To which I subjoin these
words; You ^ill now no doubt applaud your Conjectures, the Point is gained, and
I am openly a Socinian. Since I will not disown, that I think the Son of God
was a Phrase, that among the Jews in our Savior's time was used for the
Messiah, though the Socinians understand it in the same sense. And therefore I
must certainly be of their Persuasion in every thing else. I admire the
accuteness, force, and fairness of your Reasoning, and so I leave you to
triumph in your Conjectures. Nor has he sailed my expectation: For here, p. 91.
of his Socinianism Unmasked, he upon this erects his Comb, and Crows most
mightily. We may, says he, from hence as well as other Reasons, pronounce him
the same with those Gentlemen (i. e. as he is pleased to call them my good
Patrons and Friends the Racovians) which you may perceive he is very
apprehensive of, and thinks, that this will be reckoned a good Evidence of his
being, what he denied himself to be before. The Point is gained, says he, and
I am openly Socinian. He never uttered truer words in his life, and they are
the Confutation of all his Pretenses to the contrary. This Truth which unwarily
dropped from his Pen, confirms what I have laid to his Charge. Now you have Sung
your Song of Triumph, it is fit you should gain your Victory, by showing,

XLIX.
How my understanding the Son of God to be a Phrase used amongst the Jews in
our Savior's time, to signify the Messiah, proves me to be a Socinian.

Or if you think you have proved it already, I desire you to put your Proof
into a Syllogism: For I confess my self so dull, as not to see any such
Conclusion deducible from my understanding that Phrase as I do, even when you
have proved that I am mistaken in it.

The places which in the New Testament show that the Son of God stands for the
Messiah, are so many, and so clear, that I imagine no body that ever considered
and compared them together, could doubt of their meaning, unless he were an
Vnmasker. Several of them I have Collected and set down in my Reasonableness of
Christianity, p. 25, 26, 27. 29. 34, 35, 36. 41. 50, 51. 53, 54. 60. 95. 101.

First, John the Baptist, Joh. I. 20. when the Jews sent to know who he was,
confessed he himself was not the Messiah. But of Jesus he says, v. 34. after
having several ways in the foregoing Verses declared him to be the Messiah; And
I saw and bare record, that this is the SON OF GOD. And again, Chap. III. 26 --
36. he declaring Jesus to be, and himself not to be the Messiah, he does it in
these Synonymous terms of the Messiah and the Son of God, as appears by
comparing, v. 28. 35, 36.

Nathanael owns him to be the Messiah, in these words, Ioh. I. 50. Thou art the
SON OF GOD, Thou art the King of Israel: Which our Savior in the next Verse
calls Believing, a term, all through the History of our Savior, used for
owning Jesus to be the Messiah. And for confirming that Faith of his, that he
was the Messiah, our Savior further adds, that he should see greater things,
i. e. Should see him do greater Miracles, to evidence that he was the Messiah.

Luke the 4 th. 41. And Devils also came out of many crying, Thou art the
Messiah the Son of God, and he rebuking them suffered them not to speak. And so
again, St. Mark tells us, Chap. III. 11, 12. That unclean Spirits, when they
saw him, fell down before him and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. And
he strictly charged them, that they should not make him known. In both these
places, which relate to different times, and different occasions, the Devils
declare Jesus to be the Son of God. `Tis certain, whatever they meant by it,
they used a Phrase of a known Signification in that Country. And what may we
reasonably think they designed to make known to the People by it? Can we
imagine these unclean Spirits were Promoters of the Gospel, and had a Mind to
acknowledge and publish to the People the Deity of our Savior, which the
Vnmasker would have to be the Signification of the Son of God? Who can
entertain such a thought? No, they were no Friends to our Savior: And
therefore desired to spread a Belief of him, that he was the Messiah, that so
he might by the envy of the Scribes and Pharisees, be disturbed in his
Ministry, and be cut off before he had completed it. And therefore we see our
Savior in both places forbids them to make him known; As he did his Disciples
themselves, for the same Reason. For when St. Peter, Mat. XVI. 16. had owned
Jesus to be the Messiah, in these words; Thou art the Messiah the Son of the
living God. It follows, v. 20. Then charged he his Disciples, that they should
tell no man, that he was Jesus the Messiah. Just as he had forbid the Devils to
make him known, i. e. to be the Messiah. Besides, these words here of St. Peter
can be taken in no other sense, but barely to signify that Jesus was the
Messiah, to make them a proper Answer to our Savior's Question. His first
Question here to his Disciples, v. 13. is, Whom do men say that I the Son of
Man am? The Question is not, of what Original do you think the Messiah when he
comes will be? For then this Question would have been as it is, Mat. XXII. 42.
What think you of the Messiah, whose Son is he? If he had inquired about the
common opinion concerning the Nature and Descent of the Messiah. But his
Question is concerning himself; Whom of all the extraordinary Persons known to
the Jews, or mentioned in their Sacred Writings, the People thought him to be.
That this was the meaning of his Question is evident, from the Answer the
Apostles gave to it; And his further demand, v. 14, 15. They said, some say
thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Ieremias, or one of the
Prophets. He says unto them, But WHOM say ye that I am? The People take me,
some for one of the Prophets, or Extraordinary Messengers from God, and some
for another: But which of them do you take me to be? Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art the Messiah the Son of the living God. In all which Discourse,
it is evident there was not the least Enquiry made by our Savior concerning the
Person, Nature, or Qualifications of the Messiah; but whether the People or his
Apostles thought him, i. e. Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah. To which St.
Peter gave him a direct and plain Answer in the foregoing words, declaring
their Belief of him to be the Messiah: Which is all, that with any manner of
Congruity, could be made the sense of St. Peter's Answer. This alone of it self
were enough to justify my interpretation of St. Peter's words, without the
Authority of St. Mark and St. Luke, both whose words confirm it. For St. Mark
Chap. VIII. 29. renders it, Thou art the Messiah, and St. Luke, Chap. IX. 18.
The Messiah of God. To the like Question, Who art thou, John the Baptist gives
a like Answer, Ioh. I. 19. 20. I am not the Christ. By which Answer, as well as
by the following Verses, it is plain, nothing was understood to be meant by
that Question, but, which of the extraordinary Persons promised to or expected
by the Jews, art thou?

Ioh. XI. 27. The Phrase of the Son of God is made use of by Saint Martha: And
that it was used by her to signi^ie the Messiah, and nothing else is evident
out of the Context. Martha tells our Savior, that if he had been there before
her Brother died, he by that Divine Power, which he had manifested in so many
Miracles which he had done, could have saved his Life; and that now, if our
Savior would ask it of God, he might obtain the Restoration of his Life. Jesus
tells her, he shall rise again: Which words Martha taking to mean, at the
general Resurrection, at the last Day, Jesus thereupon takes occasion to
intimate to her, that he was the Messiah, by telling her, that he was the
Resurrection and the Life, i. e. That the Life, which Mankind should receive at
the general Resurrection, was by and through him. This was a description of the
Messiah. It being a received Opinion amongst the Jews, that when the Messiah.
came, the Just should rise, and live with him for ever. And having made this
Declaration of himself to be the Messiah, he asks Martha, Believe thou this?
What! Not whose Son the Messiah should be; But whether he himself was the
Messiah, by whom Believers should have Eternal Life at the last Day. And to
this, she gives this direct and apposite Answer; Yea, Lord, I believe that thou
art the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the World. The Question
was only whether she was persuaded, that those, who believe in him, should be
raised to eternal Life; That was in effect, whether he was the Messiah: And to
this she answers yea Lord, I believe this of thee; And then she explains what
was contained in that Faith of hers, even this, that he was the Messiah, that
was promised to come, by whom alone Men were to receive eternal Life.

What the Jews also understood by the Son of God is also clear from that
passage at the latter end of XXII. of Luke. They having taken our Savior, and
being very desirous to get a Confession from his own Mouth, that he was the
Messiah, that they might from thence be able to raise a formal, and prevalent
Accusation against him before Pilate; the only thing the Council asked him was,
whether he was the Messiah, v. 67. To which he answers so in the following
Words, that he lets them see, he understood, that the design of their Question
was to entrap him, and not to believe in him, whatever he should declare of
himself: But yet he tells them, Hereafter shall the Son of Man sit on the right
hand of the power of God; Words that to the Jews plainly enough owned him to be
the Messiah: But yet such as could not have any force against him with Pilate.
He having confessed so much, they hope to draw yet a clearer Confession from
him. Then said they all, art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them,
ye say that I am. And they said, what need we any further witness? For we our
selves have heard of his own Mouth. Can any one think that the Doctrine of his
Deity (which is that which the Unmasker accuses me for waveing) was that, which
the Jews designed to accuse our Savior of before Pilate; or that they needed
Witnesses for? Common sense, as well as the current of the whole History shows
the con^^ary. No, it was to accuse him, that (...)owned himself to be the
Messiah, and ^hereby claimed a Title to be King of the Jews. The Son of God was
so known a Name amongst the Jews to stand for the Messiah; that having got that
from his Mouth, they thought they had Proof enough of Treason against him. This
carries with it a clear and easy meaning. But if the Son of God be to be
taken, as the Unmasker would have it, for a Declaration of his Deity, I desire
him to make common, and coherent sense of it.

I shall add one Consideration more to show, that the Son of God was a Form of
Speech then used amongst the Jews to signify the Messiah, from the persons
that used it. uiz. John the Baptist, Nathanael, St. Peter, St. Martha, the
Sanhedrim, and the Centurion, Luke XXVII. 54. Here are Jews, Heathens; Friends,
Enemies; Men, Women; Believers, and Unbelievers; All indifferently use this
Phrase of the Son of God, and apply it to Jesus. The Question between the
Unmasker and me is whether it was used by these several persons, as an
Appellation of the Messiah, (or as the Unmasker would have it) in a quite
different Sense; As such an Application of Divinity to our Savior, that he
that shall deny that to be the meaning of it in the minds of these Speakers,
denies the Divinity of Jesus Christ. For if they did speak it without that
meaning, it is plain it was a Phrase known to have another meaning; or else
they had talked unintelligible Jargon. Now I will ask the Unmasker, whether he
thinks, that the Eternal Generation, or as the Unmasker calls it, Filiation of
Jesus the Son of God, was a Doctrine that had entered into the Thoughts of all
the Persons abovementioned, even of the Roman Centurion, and the Soldiers that
were with him watching Jesus? If he say he does, I suppose he thinks so only
for this time, and for this occasion: And then it will lie upon him to give the
World convincing Reasons for his Opinion, that they may think so too: Or if he
does not think so, he must give up this Argument, and allow that this Phrase,
in these places, does not necessarily import the Deity of our Savior, and the
Doctrine of his eternal Generation: And so a Man may take it to be an
Expression standing for the Messiah, without being a Socinian, any more than he
himself is one.

There is one place, the Unmasker tells us, p. 87. that confutes all the
Surmises about the Identity of these terms. It is, says he, that famous
Confession of Faith, which the Ethiopian E^nuch made when Philip told him he
might be baptized if he believed. This without doubt was said according to that
apprehension which he had of Christ, from Philip's instructing him; for it is
said, he Preached unto him Jesus, v. 35. He had acquainted him that Jesus was
the Christ the anointed of God, and also that he was the Son of God, which
includes in it that he was God. And accordingly this Noble Proselyte gives this
account of his Faith, in order to his being Baptized, in order to his being
admitted a Member of Christ's Church, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God;
Or you may read it according to the Greek, I believe the Son of God to be Jesus
Christ. Where there are these two distinct Propositions.

1o. That Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah

2o. That he is not only the Messiah, but the Son of God.

The Unmasker is every where steadily the same subtle Arguer. Whether he has
proved, that the Son of God, in this Confession of the Eunuch, signifies, what
he would have, we shall examine by and by. This at least is Demonstration, that
this Passage of his overturns his Principles; and reduces his long List of
Fundamentals to two Propositions, the belief whereof is sufficient to make a
Man a Christian. This Noble Proselyte, says the Unmasker, gives this account of
his Faith in order to his being baptized, in order to being admitted a Member
of Christ's Church. And what is that Faith according to the Unmasker? He tells
you there are in it these two distinct Propositions, viz. I believe, 1o. That
Jesus is the Christ the Messiah; 2o. That he is not only the Messiah, but the
Son of God. If this famous Confession, containing but these two Articles were
enough to his being Baptized; If this Faith were sufficient to make this Noble
Proselyte a Christian; what is become of all those other Articles of the
Unmasker's System, without the belief whereof, he in other places tells us a
Man cannot be a Christian? If he had here told us, that Philip had not time nor
opportunity, during his short stay with the Eunuch, to explain to him all the
Vnmasker's System, and make him understand all his Fundamentals; he had had
Reason on his side: And he might have urged it as a Reason why Philip taught
him no more. But nevertheless he had, by allowing the Eunuch's Confession of
Faith sufficient for his Admittance as a Member of Christ's Church, given up
his other Fundamentals as necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian;
even that of the Holy Trinity: And he has at last reduced his necessary
Articles to these two, viz. That Jesus is the Messiah, and that Jesus is the
Son of God. So that after his ridiculous calling mine a lank Faith, I desire
him to consider, what he will now call his own. Mine is next to none, because,
as he says, it is but one Article. If that reasoning be good, his is not far
from none: If consists but in two Articles, which is next to one, and very
little more remote from none than one is. If any one had but as much Wit as the
Unmasker, and could be but as smart upon the number two, as he has been upon an
unit, here were a brave opportunity for him to lay out his Parts; and he might
make vehement Complaints against one, that has thus cramped our Faith,
corrupted men's Minds, depraved the Gospel, and abused Christianity. But if it
should fall out, as I think it will, that the Unmasker's two Articles should
prove to be but One, he has saved another that labor, and he stands painted to
himself with his own Charcoal.

The Unmasker would have the Son of God, in the Confession of the Eunuch, to
signify something different from the Messiah: And his reason is, because else
it would be an absurd Tautology. Answ. There are many Exegetical Expressions
put together in the Scripture, which though they signify the same thing, yet
are not absurd Tautologies. The Unmasker here inverts the Proposition, and
would have it to signify thus. The Son of God is Jesus the Messiah, which is a
Proposition so different from what the Apostles proposed every where else, that
he ought to have given a Reason, why, when every where else they made the
Proposition to be of some thing affirmed of Jesus of Nazareth, the Eunuch
should make the Affirmation to be of something concerning the Son of God: As if
the Eunuch knew very well what the Son of God signified, viz. as the Unmasker
tells us here, that it included or signified God; and that Philip, (who we read
at Samaria preached (...) the Messiah, i. e. instructed them who the Messiah
was) had here taken pains only to instruct him, that this God was Jesus the
Messiah, and to bring him to assent to that Proposition. Whether this be
Natural to conceive, I leave to the Reader.

The Tautology, on which the Unmasker builds his whole Objection, will be quite
removed, if we take Christ here for a proper Name in which way it is used by
the Evangelists and Apostles in other places, and particularly by St. Luke; as
Act. II. 28. III. 6. 20. IV. 10. XXIV. 24, etc. In two of these places, it
cannot with any good sense be taken otherwise; for if it be not in Act. III. 6.
and IV. 10. used as a proper Name, we must read those places thus, Jesus the
Messiah of Nazareth: And I think it is plain in those others cited, as well as
in several other places of the New Testament, that the word Christ is used as a
proper Name. We may easily conceive, that long before the Acts were writ the
Name of Christ, was grown by a familiar use to denote the Person of our
Savior, as much as Jesus. This is so manifest, that it gave a Name to his
Followers, who as St. Luke tells us, XI. 26. were were called Christians; And
that, if Chronologists mistake not, Twenty Years before St. Luke writ his
History of the Apostles; And this so generally, that Agrippa a Jew uses it,
Act. XXVI. 28. And that Christ as the proper Name of our Savior was got as far
as Rome, before St. Luke writ the Acts, appears out of Suetonius, l. 5. And by
that Name he is called in Tacitus, Ann. l. 15. It Is no wonder then, that St.
Luke in Writing this History, should sometimes set it down alone, sometimes
joined with that of Jesus, as a proper Name; which is much easier to conceive
he did here, than that Philip proposed more to the Eunuch to be believed to
make him a Christian, than what in other places was proposed for the Conversion
of others; or than what he himself proposed at Samaria.

His 7th. Chapter is to prove, that I am a Socinian, because I omitted Christ's
Satisfaction. That Matter having been answered, p. 147. where it came properly
under consideration, I shall only observe here, that the great stress of his
Argument lies as it did before; not upon my total omission of it out of my
Book, but on this, that I have no such thing in the place where the Advantages
of Christ's coming are purposely treated of; from whence he will have this to
be an unavoidable Inference, viz. That I was of Opinion, that Christ came not
to satisfy for us. The reason of my omission of it in that place, I told him
was because my Book was chiefly designed for Deists; and therefore I mentioned
only those Advantages, which all Christians must agree in; and in omitting of
that, complied with the Apostle's Rule, Romans XIV. To this he tells me ^latly,
that was not the design of my Book. Whether the Unmasker knows with what design
I published it better than I my self, must be left to the Reader to judge: For
as for his Veracity in what he knows, or knows not, he has given so many
Instances of it, that I may safely referr that to any body. One Instance more
of it may be found in this very Chapter, where he says, I pretend indeed, p. 5.
that in another place of my Book, I mention Christ's restoring all Mankind from
the state of Death, and restoring them to Life, and his laying down his Life
for another, as our Savior Professes he did. These few words this Vindicator
has picked up in his Book since he wrote it. This is all, through his whole
Treatise, that he has dropped concerning that Advantage of Christ's
Incarnation, i. e. Christ's Satisfaction. Answ. But that this is not all that I
dropped through my whole Treatise concerning that Advantage, may appear by those
places abovementioned, p. 157. where I say, that the design of Christ's coming
was to be offered up; and speak of the Work of Redemption; which are
Expressions taken to imply our Savior's Satisfaction: But the Unmasker
thinking I should have quoted them, if there had been any more, besides those
mentioned in my Vindication, upon that Presumption sticks not boldly to affirm,
that there were no more; and so goes on with the Veracity of an Unmasker. If
affirming would do it, nothing could be wanting in his Cause that might be for
his Purpose. Whether he be as good at proving, this Consequence (amongst other
Propositions which remain upon him to be proved) will try, viz.

L.
That if the Satisfaction of Christ be not mentioned in the place where the
Advantages of Christ's coming are purposely treated of, then I am of Opinion,
that Christ came not to satisfy for us.

which is all the Argument of his 7th. Chapter.

His last Chapter, as his first, begins with a Commendation of himself.
Particularly, it boasts his freedom from Bigolism, Dogmatizing, Censoriousness,
and Incharitableness. I think he has drawn himself so well, with his own Pen,
that I shall need referr the Reader only to what he himself has writ in this
Controversy, for his Character.

In the next Paragraph, p. 104. he tells me I laugh at Orthodoxy. Answ. There
is nothing that I think deserves a more serious Esteem than right Opinion (as
the Word signifies) if taken up with the Sense of Love and Truth. But this way
of becoming Orthodox has always Modesty accompanying it, and a fair
Acknowledgment of Fallibility in our selves, as well as a Supposition of Error
in others. On the other side, there is nothing more ridiculous than for any Man
or Company of Men to assume the Title of Orthodoxy to their own set of
Opinions, as if Infallibility were annexed to their Systems, and those were to
be the standing Measure of Truth to all the World; from whence they erect to
themselves a power to censure and condemn others for differing at all from the
Tenets they have pitched upon. The Consideration of humane Frailty ought to
check this Vanity: But since it does not, but that with a sort of Allowance it
shows it self in almost all religious Societies, the playing the trick round,
sufficiently turns it into ridicule. For each Society having an equal right to
a good Opinion of themselves, a Man by passing but a River or a Hill, loses
that Orthodoxy in one Company which pu^^ed him up with such Assurance and
Insolence in another; and is there, with equal Justice, himself exposed to the
like Censures of Error and Heresy, which he was so forward to lay on others at
Home. When it shall appear that Infallibility is intailed upon one set of Men
of any Denomination, or Truth confined to any Spot of Ground, the Name and Use
of Orthodoxy as now it is in Fashion every where, will in that one place be
reasonable. Till then, this ridiculous Cant will be a Foundation too weak to
sustain that Usurpation that is raised upon it. It Is not that I do not think
every one should be persuaded of the Truth of those Opinions he professes. It Is
that I contend for: And it is that which I fear the great Sticklers for
Orthodoxy often fail in. For we see generally that Numbers of them exactly jump
in a whole large Collection of Doctrines, consisting of Abundance of
particulars; as if their Notions were by one common Stamp printed on their
Minds, even to the least Lineament. This is very hard, if not impossible, to be
conceived of those who take up their Opinions only from Conviction. But how
fully soever I am persuaded of the Truth of what I hold, I am in common Justice
to allow the same Sincerity to him that differs from me; And so we are upon
equal Terms. This Persuasion of Truth on each side, invests neither of us with
a right to censure or condemn the other. I have no more reason to treat him ill
for differing from me, than he has to treat me ill for the same cause. Pity him
I may; inform him fairly I ought; but contemn, malign, revile or any otherwise
prejudice him for not thinking just as I do, that I ought not. My Orthodoxy
gives me no more Authority over him, than his (for every one is Orthodox to
himself) gives him over me. When the Word Orthodoxy (which in effect signifies
no more but the Opinions of my Party) is made use of as a pretense to domineer
(as ordinarily it is) it is, and always will be ridiculous.

He says I hate even with a deadly hatred all Catechisms and Confessions, all
Systems, and Models. I do not remember, that I have once mentioned the Word
Catechism, either in my Reasonableness of Christianity, or Vindication. But he
knows I hate them deadly, and I know I do not. And as for Systems and Models,
all that I say of them, in the Pages he quotes to prove my Hatred of them, is
only this, viz. p. 8. of my Vindication Some Men had rather you should write
booty, and cross your own Design of removing Men's Prejudices to Christianity,
than leave out one Title of what they put into their Systems. Some Men will not
bear it, that any one should speak of Religion, but according to the Model that
they themselves have made of it. In neither of which places do I speak against
Systems or Models; but the ill use, that some Men make of them.

He tells me also in the same place, p. 104. that I deride Mysteries. But for
this he has quoted neither words, nor place: And where he does not do that, I
have reason from the frequent Liberties he takes to impute to me, what no where
appears in my Books, to desire the Reader to take what he says not to be true.
For did he mean fairly, he might, by quoting my Words, put all such Matters of
Fact out of doubt; and not force me so often as he does to demand where it is,
as I do now here again,

LI.
Where it is that I deride Mysteries?

His next Words, p. 104. are very remarkable: They are O how he [the
Vindicator] grins at the Spirit of Creed making? p. 18. Vind. the very thoughts
of which do so haunt him, so plague and torment him, that he cannot rest till
it be conjured down. And here by the way, seeing I have mentioned his rancour
against Systematick Books and Writings, I might represent the Misery that is
coming upon all Booksellers if this Gentleman and his Correspondents go on
suc^essfully. Here is an effectual Plot to undermine Stationers' Hall; for all
Systems and Bodies of Divinity, Philosophy, etc. must be cashiered: Whatever
looks like System must not be bought or sold. This will fall heavy on the
Gentlemen of St. Paul 's Churchyard, and other places. Here the Politic
Unmasker seems to threaten me with the Posse of Paul's Churchyard, because my
Book might lessen their Gain in the Sale of Theological Systems. I remember
that Demetrius the Shrinemaker which brought no small gain to the Crafts-men
whom he called together, with the Workmen of like Occupation, and said to this
purpose; Sirs, Ye know, that by this Craft we have our Wealth; Moreover ye see,
and hear, that this Paul has persuaded, and turned away much People saying,
that they be no Gods that are made with hands, so that this our Craft is in
danger to be set at naught. And when they heard these Sayings, they were full
of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Have you,
Sir, who are so good at Speech-making, as a worthy Successor of the
Silver-smith, regulating your Zeal for the Truth, and your writing of Divinity
by the Profit it will bring, made a Speech to this purpose to the Craftsmen,
and told them, that I say, Articles of Faith, and Creeds, and Systems in
Religion cannot be made by Men's Hands or Fancies; But must be just such, and no
other, than what God has given us in the Scriptures? And are they ready to cry
out to your content, Great is Diana of the Ephesians? If you have well warmed
them with your Oratory, it is to be hoped they will heartily join with you, and
bestir themselves, and choose you for their Champion, to prevent the Misery you
tell them is coming upon them, in the loss of the Sale of Systems and Bodies of
Divinity; For, as for Philosophy, which you name too, I think you went a little
too far. Nothing of that kind, as I remember, has been so much as mentioned.
But however, some sort of Orators, when their hands are in, omit nothing true
or false, that may move those that they would work upon. Is not this a worthy
Employment, and becoming a Preacher of the Gospel, to be a Solicitor for
Stationers' Hall? and make the Gain of the Gentlemen of Paul's Churchyard a
Consideration, for or against any Book writ concerning Religion? This, if it
were ever thought on before, no body but an Unmasker, who lays all open, was
ever so foolish as to Publish. But here you have an account of his Zeal: The
views of Gain are to measure the truths of Divinity. Had his Zeal, as he
pretends in the next Paragraph, no other aims, but the defense of the Gospel,
it is probable this Controversy would have been managed after another fashion.

Whether what he says in the next, p. 105. to excuse his so often pretending to
know my Heart and Thoughts, will satisfy the Reader, I shall not trouble my
self. By his so often doing it again in his Socinianism Unmasked, I see he
cannot write without it. And so I leave it to the Judgment of the Readers,
whether he can be allowed to know other Men's thoughts, who in many Occasions
seems not well to know his own. The Railing in the remainder of this Chapter I
shall pass by, as I have done a great deal of the same strain in his Book: Only
to show how well he understands or represents my sense, I shall set down my
Words, as they are in the Pages he quotes, and his Inferences from them.
Vindicat. p. 22. Socin. Unmasked, p. 108. I know not but it may be true, that
the Antitrinitarians and Racovians understand those places as I do: But it is
more than I know, that they do so. I took not my sense of those Texts from
those Writers, but from the Scripture it self, giving Light to its own meaning
by one place compared with another. What in this way appears to me its true
meaning, I shall not decline; because I am told that it is so understood by the
Racovians, whom I never yet read; nor embrace the contrary, though the
generality of Divines I more converse with, should declare for it. If the sense
wherein I understand those Texts be a Mistake, I shall be beholding to you, if
you will set me right. But they are not popular Authorities, or frightful Names
whereby I judge of Truth or Falsehood. The professed Divines of England, you
must know, are but a pitiful sort of Folks with this great Racovian Rabbi. He
tells us plainly, that he is not mindful of what the generality of Divines
declare for, p. 22. He labors so concernedly to ingratiate himself with the
Mobb, the Multitude (which he so often talks of) that he has no regard to
these. The generality of the Rabble are more considerable with him, than the
generality of Divines.

He tells me here of the Generality of Divines. If he had said of the Church of
England, I could have understood him. But he says, The professed Divines of
England; And there being several sorts of Divines in England, who, I think, do
not every where agree in their Interpretations of Scripture; which of them is
it I must have regard to, where they differ? If he cannot tell me that, he
complains here of me for a Fault, which he himself knows not how to mend.
Vindicat. p. 18. Socin. Unmasked, p. 109. The list of Materials for his Creed,
for the Articles are not yet formed, Mr. Edwards closes, p. 111. with these
words, These are the Matters of Faith contained in the Epistles, and they are
Essential and Integral parts of the Gospel it self. What just these? neither
more nor less? l. 4. If you are sure of it, pray let us have them speedily, for
the reconciling of Differences in the Christian Church, which has been so
cruelly torn about the Articles of the Christian Faith, to the great Reproach
of Christian Charity, and Scandal of our true Religion. This Author, as demure
and grave as he would sometimes seem to be, can scoff at the matters of Faith
contained in the Apostles Epistles, p. 18. l. 4, etc.

Does the Vindicator here scoff at the Matters of Faith contained in the
Epistles? Or show the vain Pretenses of the Unmasker; who undertakes to give us
out of the Epistles a Collection of Fundamentals, without being able to say
whether those he sets down be all or no? Vindicat. p. 33. Socin. Unmasked, p.
110. I hope you do not think how contemptibly soever you speak of the Venerable
Mob, as you are pleased to dignifie them, p. 117. that the bulk of Mankind, or
in your Phrase, the Rabble are not concerned in Religion, or ought not to
understand it in order to their Salvation. I remember the Pharisees treated the
Common People with Contempt, and said, Have any of the Rulers or of the
Pharisees believed in him? But this People who knows not the Law are cursed.
But yet these, who in the censure of the Pharisees were cursed, were some of
the Poor, or, if you please to have it so, the Mob, to whom the Gospel was
Preached by our Savior, as he tells John's Disciples, Mat. XI. 5. To Coakse the
Mob, he profanely brings in that place of Scripture. Have any of the Rulers
believed in him?

Where the Profaneness of this is, I do not see; Unless some unknown
Sacredness of the Unmasker's Person make it Profaneness to show, that he like
the Pharisees of old, has a great contempt for the Common People, i. e. the far
greater part of Mankind; as if they and their Salvation were below the regard
of this elevated Rabbi. But this of Profaneness may be well born from him,
since in the next words my mentioning another part of his Carriage is no less
than Irreligion. Vindicat. p. 25. Socin. Unmasked p. 110. He prefers what I say
to him my self to what is offered to him from the Word of God, and makes me
this Complement, that I begin to mend about the close, i. e. when I leave off
quoting of Scripture, and the dull Work was done of going through the History
of the Evangelists and the Acts, which he computes, p. 105. to take up three
Quarters of my Book. Ridiculously and irreligiously he pretends, that I prefer
what he says to me, to what is offered to me from the Word of God, p. 25.

The Matter of Fact is as I relate it, and so is beyond pretense, and for this
I refer the Reader to the 105. and 114. Pages of his Thoughts concerning the
Causes of Atheism. But had I mistaken, I know not how he could have called it
Irreligiously. Make the worst of it that can be, how comes it to be
Irreligious? What is there Divine in an Vnmasker; that one cannot pretend (true
or false) that he prefers what I say, to what is o^^er'd him from the Word of
God, without doing it Irreligiously? Does the very assuming the Power to de^ine
Articles, and determine who are, and who are not Christians, by a Creed not yet
made, erect an Unmasker presently into God's Throne, and bestow on him the
title of Dominus deusque noster, whereby Offenses against him come to be
Irreligious Acts? I have misrepresented his meaning; Let it be so: Where is the
Irreligion of it? Thus it is: The Power of making a Religion for others (and
those that make Creeds do that) being once got into any one's fancy, must at
last make all Oppositions to those Creeds and Creed-maker's Irreligion. Thus we
see in process of time it did in the Church of Rome: But it was in length of
time, and by gentle degrees. The Unmasker, it seems, cannot stay, is in have,
and at one jump leaps into the Chair. He has given us yet but a piece of his
Creed, and yet that is enough to set him above the state of Humane Mistakes or
Frailties, and to mention any such thing in him, is to do Irreligiously.

We may further see, says the Unmasker, p. 110. how counterfeit the
Vindicator's Gravity is, whilst he condemns frothy and light Discourses, p.
26. Vindic. And yet in many Pages together, most irreverently treats a great
part of the Apostolical Writings, and throws aside the main Articles of
Religion as unnecessary. Answ. In my Vindic. p. 19. you may remember these
words, I require you to Publish to the World those Passages which show my
contempt of the Epistles. Why do you not (especially having been so called upon
to do it) set down those words, wherein I most irreverently treat a great part
of the Apostolical Writings? At least why do you not quote those many Pages
wherein I do it? This looks a little suspiciously, that you cannot: And the
more, because you have in this very Page not been sparing to quote places which
you thought to your purpose. I must take leave therefore (if it may be done
without Irreligion) to assure the Reader, that this is another of your many
Mistakes in Matters of Fact, for which you have not so much as the excuse of
Inadvertency: For as he sees, you have been minded of it before. But an
Vnmasker, say what you will to him, will be an Unmasker still.

He closes what he has to say to me in his Socinianism Unmasked, as if he were
in the Pulpit, with an Use of Exhortation. The false Insinuations, it is filled
with, makes the Conclusion of a Piece with the Introduction. As he sets out so
he ends, and therein shows wherein he places his Strength. A custom of making
bold with Truth, is so seldom curable in a grown Man, and the Unmasker shows so
little sense of Shame, where it is charged upon him, beyond a possibility of
clearing himself, that no body is to trouble themselves any farther about that
part of his established Character. Letting therefore that alone to Nature and
Custom, two sure Guides, I shall only entreat him, to prevent his taking
Railing for Argument, (which I fear he too often does) that upon his entrance
every where upon any new Argument, he would set it down in Syllogism, and when
he has done that (that I may know what is to be answered) let him then give
Vent as he pleases, to his noble Vein of Wit and Oratory.

The lifting a Man's self up in his own Opinion, has had the Credit in former
Ages to be thought the lowest Degradation that Humane Nature could well sink it
self to. Hence says the Wise Man, Prove. XXVI. 6. Answer a Fool according to his
folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. Hereby showing, that
Self-conceitedness is a Degree beneath ordinary Folly. And therefore he there
provides a fence against it, to keep even Fools from sinking yet lower, by
falling into it. Whether what was not so in Solomon's days, be now, by length
of time, in ours, grown into a mark of Wisdom and Parts, and an Evidence of
great Performances; I shall not enquire. Mr. Edwards -- who goes beyond all
that ever I yet met with in the Commendation of his own, best knows why he so
extols what he has done in this Controversy. For fear the Praises he has not
been sparing of in his So^inianism Unmasked, should not sufficiently trumpet
out his Worth, or might be forgotten; He in a new Piece entitled, The Socinian
Creed, proclaims again his mighty Deeds, and the Victory he has established to
himself by them, in these words; But he and his Friends (the One-Article-Men)
seem to have made Satisfaction by their profound silence lately, whereby they
acknowledge to the World, that they have nothing to say in Reply to what I laid
to their Charge, and fully proved against them, etc. Socinian Creed, p. 128.
This fresh Testimony of no ordinary Conceit, which Mr. Edwards has of the
Excellency and Strength of his Reasoning in his Socinianism Unmasked, I leave
with him and his Friends to be considered of at their leisure: And if they
think I have mis-applied the term of Conceitedness, to so Wise, Understanding,
and every way accomplished a Disputant (if we may believe himself) I will teach
them a way how he, or any body else, may fully convince me of it. There remains
on his Score marked in this Reply of mine, several Propositions to be proved by
him. If he can but find Arguments to prove them that will bear the setting down
in form, and will so publish them, I will allow my self to be mistaken. Nay,
which is more, if he or any body in the 112. Pages of his Socinianism Unmasked,
can find but Ten Arguments that will bear the test of Syllogism, the true
Touchstone of right Arguing, I will grant that that Treatise deserves all those
Commendations he has bestowed upon it; though it be made up more of his own
Panegyric, than a Confutation of me.

In his Socinian Creed (for a Creedmaker he will be; and whether he has been as
lucky for the Socinians as for the Orthodox, I know not) p. 120. he begins with
me, and that with the same conquering Hand and Skill which can never fail of
Victory; if a Man has but Wit enough to know what Proposition he is able to
Confute, and then make that his Adversary's tenet. But the Repetitions of his
old Song concerning one Article, the Epistles, etc. which occur here again, I
shall only set down, that none of these excellent things may be lost, whereby
this Accute and Unanswerable Writer has so well deserved his own Commendations,
viz. That I say there is but one single Article of the Christian Truth
necessary to be believed and assented to by us, p. 121. That I slight the
Christian Principles, curtail the Articles of our Faith, and ravish
Christianity it self from him, p. 123. And that I turn the Epistles of the
Apostle into Waste Paper, p. 127, etc.

These, and the like Slanders, I have already given an Answer to in my Reply to
his former Book. Only one new one here I cannot pass over in Silence; because
of the remarkable Profaneness which seems to me to be in it, which, I think,
deserves public notice. In my Reasonableness of Christianity, I have laid
together those Passages of our Savior's Life, which seemed to me most
eminently to show his Wisdom, in that Conduct of himself, with that Reserve and
Caution which was necessary to preserve him, and carry him through the
appointed time of his Ministry. Some have thought I had herein done
considerable Service to the Christian Religion, by removing those Objections
which some were apt to make from our Savior's Carriage, not rightly
understood. This Creed-maker tells me, p. 127. That I make our Savior a
Coward: A Word not to be applied to the Savior of the World by a Pious or
Discreet Christian upon any pretense, without great Necessity and sure Grounds.
If he had set down my words, and quoted the Page (which was the least could
have been done to excuse such a Phrase) we should then have seen which of us
two this impious and irreligious Epithete given to the Holy Jesus, has for its
Author. In the mean time, I leave it with him, to be accounted for by his
Piety, to those, who by his Example shall be encouraged to entertain so vile a
thought, or use so profane an Expression of the Captain of our Salvation, who
freely gave himself up to Death for us.

He also says in the same p. 127. that I every where strike at Systems, the
Design of which is to establish one of my own, or to foster Skepticism, by
beating down all others.

For clear Reason or good Sense, I do not think our Creed-maker ever had his
fellow. In the immediate preceding words of the same Sentence, he charges me
with a great Antipathy against Systems; and before he comes to the end of it,
finds out my Design to be the establishing one of my own. So that this my
Antipathy against Systems, makes me in love with one. My Design, he says, is to
establish a System of my own, or to foster Skepticism in beating down all
others. Let my Book, if he pleases, be my System of Christianity. Now is it in
me any more fostering Skepticism, to say my System is true and others not, than
it is in the Creed-maker to say so of all other Systems but his own? For, I
hope, he does not allow any System of Christianity to be true, that differs
from his any more than I do.

But I have spoke against all Systems. Answ. And always shall, so far as they
are set up by particular Men or Parties, as the just Measure of every Man's
Faith, wherein every thing that is contained, is required and imposed to be
believed to make a Man a Christian: Such an Opinion and Use of Systems I shall
always be against; till the Creed-maker shall tell me amongst the Variety of
them which alone is to be received and rested in, in the absence of his Creed;
which is not yet finished, and, I fear, will not as long as I live. That every
Man should receive from others, or make to himself such a System of
Christianity as he found most conformable to the Word of God, according to the
best of his understanding, is what I never spoke against, but think it every
one's Duty to Labor for, and to take all opportunities as long as he lives, by
Studying the Scriptures every day, to perfect.

But this, I fear, will not go easily down with our Author; for then he cannot
be a Creed-maker for others. A thing he shows himself very forward to, how able
to perform it we shall see when his Creed is made. In the mean time, talking
loudly and at Random about Fundamentals, without knowing what is so, may stand
him in some stead.

This being all that is new, which I think my self concerned in, in this
Socinian Creed, I pass on to his Postscript. In the first Page whereof, I find
these words, I found that the Manager of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
had prevailed with a Gentleman to make a Sermon upon my Refutation of that
Treatise, and the Vindication of it. Such a piece of Impertinency as this,
might have been born from a fair Adversary. But the Sample Mr. Edwards has
given of himself in his Socinianism Unmasked, persuades me this ought to be
bound up with what he says of me in his Introduction to that Book in these
words: Among others, they thought and made Choice of a Gentleman, who they knew
would be extraordinary useful to them. And he it is probable was as forward to
be made use of by them, and presently accepted of the Office that was assigned
him; and more there to the same purpose. All which, I know to be utterly false.

It Is pity that one who relies so entirely upon it, should have no better an
Invention. The Socinians set the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. on Work to write that Book, by which Discovery, the World being (as Mr.
Edwards says) let into the project, that Book is confounded, baffled, blown
off, and by this Skilful Artifice there is an end of it. Mr. Bold preaches and
publishes a Sermon without this irrefragable Gentleman's good Leave and Liking:
What now must be done to discredit it and keep it from being read? Why, Mr.
Bold too, was set on Work by the Manager of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
etc. In your whole Storehouse of Stratagems, you that are so great a
Conqueror, Have you but this one Way to destroy a Book which you set your
Mightiness against, but to tell the World it was a Jobb of Journey-work for
some body you do not like? Some other would have done better in this new Case,
had your happy Invention been ready with it: For you are not so bashful or
reserved, but that you may be allowed to be as great a Wit as he who professed
himself ready at any time to say a good or a new thing if he could but think of
it. But in good earnest, Sir, if one should ask you, do you think no Books
contain Truth in them which were Undertaken by the Procuration of a Bookseller?
I desire you to be a little tender in the Point, not knowing how far it may
reach. Ay, but such Booksellers live not at the Lower End of Paternoster Row,
but in Paul's Churchyard, and are the Managers of otherguess Books, than The
Reasonableness of Christianity. And therefore you very rightly subjoin, Indeed
it was a great Masterpiece of Procuration, and we cannot but think that Man
must speak truth, and defend it very Impartially and Substantially, who is thus
brought on to undertake the Cause. And so Mr. Bold's Sermon is found to have
neither Truth nor Sense in it, because it was Printed by a Bookseller at the
lower End of Paternoster Row; for that, I dare say, is all you know of the
Matter. But that is hint enough for a happy Diviner to be sure of the rest, and
with Confidence to report that for certain Matter of Fact, which had never any
being but in the forecasting Side of his Politic Brain.

But whatever were the Reason that moved Mr. B -- to Preach that Sermon, of
which I know nothing; This I am sure, it shows only the Weakness and Malice (I
will not say, and ill Breeding, for that concerns not one of Mr. Edward's
Pitch) of any one who excepts against it, to take notice of any thing more than
what the Author has Published. Therein alone consists the Error, if there be
any; and that alone those meddle with, who write for the sake of Truth. But
poor Cavillers have other Purposes, and therefore must use other Shifts, and
make a bustle about something besides the Argument to prejudice and beguile
unwary Readers.

The only Exception the Creed-maker makes to Mr. Bold's Sermon, is the
Contradiction he imputes to him, in saying, That there is but one Point or
Article necessary to be believed for the making a Man a Christian: And that
there are many Points besides this, which Jesus Christ has taught and
revealed, which every sincere Christian is indispensibly obliged to endeavor
to understand: And, That there are particular Points and Articles, which being
known to be revealed by Christ, Christians must indispensibly assent to. And
where now is there any thing like a Contradiction in this? Let it be granted
for Example, that the Creed-maker's Set of Articles (let their Number be what
they will when he has sound them all out) are necessary to be believed, for the
making a Man a Christian. Is there any contradiction in it to say, There are
many Points besides these, which Jesus Christ has taught and revealed, which
every sincere Christian is indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand? If
this be not so; It is but for any one to be perfect in Mr. Edward's Creed, and
then he may lay by the Bible, and from thenceforth he is absolutely dispensed
with, from studying or understanding any thing more of the Scripture.

But Mr. Edwards's Supremacy, is not yet so far established that he will dare
to say, That Christians are not obliged to endeavor to understand any other
Points revealed in the Scripture, but what are contained in his Creed. He
cannot yet well Discard all the rest of the Scripture; because he has yet need
of it for the completing of his Creed, which is like to secure the Bible to us
for some time yet. For I will be answerable for it, he will not be quickly able
to resolve what Texts of the Scripture do, and what do not contain Points
necessary to be believed. So that I am apt to imagine, that the Creed-maker,
upon Second Thoughts, will allow that Saying, There is but One, or there are
but Twelve, or there are but as many as he shall set down (when he has resolved
which they shall be) necessary to the making a Man a Christian; and the saying,
There are other Points besides contained in the Scripture, which every sincere
Christian is indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand, and must believe
when he knows them to be revealed by Jesus Christ; are two Propositions that
may consist together without a Contradiction.

Every Christian is to partake of that Bread and that Cup which is the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. And is not every sincere Christian
indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand these Words of our Savior's
Institutions, This is my Body, and This is my Blood? And if upon his serious
Endeavor to do it, he does understand them in a literal sense, that Christ
meant that that was really his Body and Blood, and nothing else; must he not
necessarily believe that the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, is changed
really into his Body and Blood, though he does not know how? Or, if having his
Mind set otherwise, he understands the Bread and Wine to be really the Body and
Blood of Christ; without ceasing to be true Bread and Wine; Or else, if he
understands them, that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed given
and received in the Sacrament, in a Spiritual manner; Or lastly, If he
understands our Savior to mean by those words, only the Bread and Wine to be a
Representation of his Body and Blood; In which was soever of these Four, a
Christian understands these words of our Savior to be meant by him, is he not
obliged in that sense to believe them to be true, and assent to them? Or can he
be a Christian, and understand these words to be meant by our Savior, in one
sense, and deny his assent to them as true, in that sense? Would not this be to
deny our Savior's Veracity, and consequently his being the Messiah sent from
God? And yet this is put upon a Christian where he understands the Scripture in
one sense, and is required to believe it in another. From all which it is
evident, that to say there is One, or any Number of Articles necessary to be
known and believed to make a Man a Christian, and that there are others
contained in the Scripture, which a Man is obliged to endeavor to understand,
and obliged also to assent to as he does understand them, is no Contradiction.

To believe Jesus to be the Messiah, and to take him to be his Lord and King,
let us suppose to be that only which is necessary to make a Man a Christian:
May it not yet be necessary for him, being a Christian, to study the Doctrine
and Law of this his Lord and King, and believe that all that he delivered is
true? Is there any Contradiction in holding of this? But this Creed-maker, to
make sure Work, and not to sail of a Contradiction in Mr. Bold's words,
misrepeats them, p. 241. and quite contrary both to what they are in the
Sermon, and what they are as set down by the Creed-maker himself, in the
immediately preceding Page; Mr. Bold says, There are other Points that Jesus
Christ has taught and revealed, which every sincere Christian is indispensibly
obliged to understand, and which being known to be revealed by Christ, he must
indispensibly assent to. From which, the Creed-maker argues thus, p. 240. Now
if there be other Points and particular Articles, and those many, which a
sincere Christian is obliged, and that necessarily and indispensibly to
understand, believe, and assent to, then this Writer has in effect yielded to
that Proposition I maintained, viz. That the belief of one Article is not
sufficient to make a Man a Christian, and consequently he runs counter to the
Proposition he had laid down.

Is there no difference, I beseech you, between being indispensibly obliged to
endeavor to understand, and being indispensibly obliged to understand any
Point? It Is the first of these, Mr. Bold says, and it is the latter of these you
argue from, and so conclude nothing against him; nor can you to your purpose.
For till Mr. Bold says (which he is far from saying) that every sincere
Christian is necessarily and indispensibly obliged to understand all those
Texts of Scripture, from whence you shall have drawn your necessary Articles
(when you have perfected your Creed) in the same sense that you do, you can
conclude nothing against what he has said concerning that one Article, or any
thing that looks like running Counter to it. For it may be enough to constitute
a Man a Christian, and one of Christ's Subjects, to take Jesus to be the
Messiah, his appointed King, and yet without a Contradiction, so that it may be
his indispensible Duty as a Subject of that Kingdom, to endeavor to understand
all the Dictates of his Sovereign, and to assent to the Truth of them, as far
as he understands them.

But that which the good Creed-maker aims at, without which, all his necessary
Articles fall, is that it should be granted him, that every sincere Christian
was necessarily and indispensibly obliged to understand all those parts of
Divine Revelation, from whence he pretends to draw his Articles in their true
meaning, i. e. just as he does. But his infallibility is not yet so
established, but that there will need some proof of that Proposition. And when
he has proved that every sincere Christian is necessarily and indispensibly
obliged to understand those Texts in their true meaning, and that his
Interpretation of them is that true meaning; I shall then ask him, whether
every sincere Christian is not as necessarily and indispensibly obliged to
understand other Texts of Scripture, in their true meaning, though they have no
place in his System?

For Example, To make use of the Instance abovementioned, is not every sincere
Christian necessarily and indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand
these Words of our Savior; This is my body, and this is my blood, that he may
know what he receives in the Sacraments? Does he cease to be a Christian, who
happens not to understand them just as the Creed-maker does? Or may not the old
Gentleman at Rome (who has somewhat the ancienter Title to Infallibility) make
Transubstantiation a Fundamental Article necessarily to be believed, there, as
well as the Creed-maker here makes his Sense of any disputed Text of Scripture
a Fundamental Article necessary to be believed?

Let us suppose Mr. Bold had said that instead of one point, the Right
Knowledge of the Creed-makers One Hundred Points (when he has resolved on them)
does constitute and make a Person a Christian; yet there are many other Points
Jesus Christ has taught and revealed which every sincere Christian is
indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand, and to make a due use of: For
this I think the Creed-maker will not deny. From whence, in the Creed-maker's
Words, I will thus argue. Now if there be other Points and particular Articles,
and those many, which a sincere Christian is obliged, and that necessarily and
indispensibly, to understand and believe, and assent to, then this Writer does
in effect yield to that Proposition which I maintained, viz. That the Belief of
those one hundred Articles is not sufficient to make a Man a Christian. For
this is that which I maintain; That upon this ground, the Belief of the
Articles which he has set down in his List, are not sufficient to make a Man a
Christian; and that upon Mr. Bold's Reason, which the Creed-maker insists on
against one Article, viz. because there are many other Points Jesus Christ has
taught and revealed, which every sincere Christian is as necessarily and
indispensibly obliged to endeavor to understand and make a due use of.

But this Creed-maker is cautious, beyond any of his Predecessors: He will not
be so caught by his own Argument; and therefore is very shy to give you the
precise Articles that every sincere Christian is necessarily and indispensibly
obliged to understand, and give his assent to. Something he is sure there is
that he is indispensibly obliged to understand and assent to, to make him a
Christian; but what that is, he cannot yet tell. So that whether he be a
Christian or no, he does not know, and what other People will think of him,
from his treating of the serious things of Christianity, in so trifling and
scandalous a way, must be left to them.

In the next Paragraph, p. 242. The Creed-maker tells us, Mr. Bold goes on to
confute himself, in saying, a true Christian must assent unto this that Christ
Jesus is God. But this is just such another Confutation of himself as the
beforementioned, i. e. as much as a Falsehood substituted by another Man, can
be a confutation of a Man's self, who has spoken Truth all of a piece. For the
Creed-maker, according to his sure way of baffling his Opponents, so as to
leave them nothing to answer, has here, as he did before, changed Mr. Bold's
words, which in the 35. p. quoted by the Creed-maker stand thus; When a true
Christian understands that Christ Jesus has taught that He is a God, he must
assent unto it. Which is true and conformable to what he had said before; that
every sincere Christian must endeavor to understand the Points taught and
revealed by Jesus Christ, which being known to be revealed by him he must
assent unto.

The like piece of Honesty the Creed-maker shows in the next Paragraph, p. 243.
where he charges Mr. Bold with saying that a true Christian is as much obliged
to believe that the Holy Spirit is God, as to believe that Jesus is the Christ,
p. 40. In which place, Mr. Bold's words are; When a true Christian understands
that Christ Jesus has given this Account of the Holy Spirit, viz, That he is
God; He is as much obliged to believe it, as he is to believe that Jesus is the
Christ. Which is an uncontestable Truth, but such an one as the Creed-maker
himself saw would do him no Service, and therefore he mingles it, and leaves
out half to make it serve his turn. But he that should give a Testimony in the
slight Affairs of Men, and their Temporal Concerns, before a Court of
Judicature, as the Creed-maker does here, and almost every where, in the great
Affairs of Religion, and the Everlasting Concern of Souls, before all Mankind,
would lose his Ears for it. What therefore this worthy Gentleman alleges out
of Mr. Bold, as a Contradiction to himself, being only the Creed-maker's
Contradiction to Truth and clear Matter of Fact, needs no other Answer.

The rest of what he calls Reflections on Mr. Bold's Sermon, being nothing but
either rude and mis-becoming Language of him; Or pitiful Childish Application
to him, to change his Persuasion at the Creed-maker's Entreaty, and give up the
Truth he has owned, in Courtesy to this doubty Combatant, shows the Ability
of the Man. Leave off begging the Question, and superciliously presuming that
you are in the right, and instead of that, show it by Argument; And I dare
answer for Mr. Bold, you will have him, and I promise you with him one Convert
more. But Arguing is not, it seems, this notable Disputant's way. If Boasting
of himself, and contemning others, false Quotations, and feigned Matters of
Fact, which the Reader neither can know, nor is the Question concerned in if he
did know, will not do, there is an end of him; He has shown his excellency in
scurrilous Declamation, and there you have the whole of this unanswerable
Writer. And for this, I appeal to his own Writings in this Controversy, if any
judicious Reader can have the patience to look them over.

In the beginning of his Reflections on Mr. Bold's Sermon, he confidently tells
the World, That he had found that the Manager of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, had prevailed on Mr. Bold to Preach a Sermon upon his
Reflections, etc. And adds, And we cannot but think, that that Man must speak
the truth, and defend it very impartially and substantially, who is thus
brought on to undertake the Cause. And at the latter end, he Addresses himself
to Mr. Bold, as one that is drawn off to be an under Journey-man Worker in
Socinianism. In his gracious Allowance, Mr. Bold is seemingly a Man of some
relish of Religion and Piety, p. 244. He is forced also to own him to be a Man
of Sobriety and Temper, p. 245. A very good rise, to give him out to the World,
in the very next words, as a Man of a profligate Conscience: For so he must be,
who can be drawn off to Preach or Write for Socinianism, when he thinks it a
most dangerous Error, who can dissemble with himself, and choke his inward
Persuasions (as the Creed-maker insinuates that Mr. Bold does in the same
Address to him, p. 248.) and write contrary to his Light. Had the Creed maker
had reason to think in earnest that Mr. Bold was going off to Socinianism, he
might have reasoned with him fairly, as with a Man running into dangerous
Error: Or if he had certainly known that he was by any By-ends prevailed on to
undertake a Cause contrary to his Conscience, he might have some Reason to tell
the World as he does, p. 239. That we cannot think he should speak truth, who
is thus brought to undertake the Cause. If he does not certainly know that Mr.
Bold was THUS brought to undertake the Cause, he could not have shown a more
Villainous and Unchristian Mind than in publishing such a Character of a
Minister of the Gospel, and a worthy Man, upon no other Grounds, but because
it* might be subservient to his ends. He is engaged in a Controversy that by
Argument he cannot maintain; Nor knew any other way from the beginning, to
attack the Book he pretends to write against; but by crying out Socinianism; a
Name he knows in great Disgrace with all other Sects of Christians, and
therefore sufficient to deterr all those who approve, and condemn Books by
hearsay, without examining their Truth themselves, from perusing a Treatise to
which he could affix that imputation. Mr. Bold's Name (who is publicly known
to be no Socinian) he foresees will wipe off that false Imputation, with a
great many of those who are led by Names more than Things. This seems
exceedingly to trouble him, and he labors might and main, to get Mr. Bold to
quit a Book as Socinian, which Mr. Bold knows is not Socinian; because he has
read and considered it.

But though our Creed-maker be mightily concerned that Mr. B -- d should not
appear in the Defense of it* Yet this concern cannot raise him one jot above
that Honesty, Skill and good Breeding, which appears toward others. He manages
this Matter with Mr. B -- d, as he has done the rest of the Controversy, just
in the same strain of Invention, Civility, Wit and good Sense. He tells him,
besides what I have above set down, that he is drawn off to debase himself and
the post, i. e. the Ministry, he is in, p. 245. That he has said very ill
things to the lessening and impairing, yea, to the defaming of that knowledge
and belief of our Savior, and of the Articles of Christianity, which are
necessarily required of us, p. 245. That the Devout and Pious (whereby he means
himself, for one and none is his own beloved Wit and Argument) observing that
Mr. Bold is come to the necessity of but ONE Article of Faith, they expect that
he may in time hold that NONE is necessary, p. 248. That if he writes again in
the same strain, be will write rather like a Turkish Spy, than a Christian
Preacher; That he is a Backslider, and Sailing to Racovia with a side Wind:
Than which, what can there be more Scurrilous or more Malicious? And yet at the
same time, that he outrages him thus, beyond not only what Christian Charity,
but common Civility would allow in an ingenuous Adversary, he makes some
awkward Attempts, to sooth him, with some ill timed Commendations; And would
have his under-valuing Mr. Bold's Animadversions, pass for a Complement to him:
Because he, for that reason, pretends not to believe so crude and shallow a
thing (as he is pleased to call it) to be his. A notable Contrivance to gain
the greater Liberty of Railing at him under another Name, when Mr. B -- d's it
seems is too well known to serve him so well to that purpose. Besides it is of
good use to fill up three or four Pages of his Reflections; a great Convenience
to a Writer, who knows all the ways of baffling his Opponents but Argument, and
who always makes a great deal of stir about Matters foreign to his Subject,
which whether they are granted or denied, make nothing at all to the Truth of
the Question on either side. For what is it to the Shallowness or Depth of the
Animadversions, who writ them? Or to the Truth or Falsehood of Mr. B -- d's
Defense of the Reasonableness of Christianity whether a Layman or a
Churchman; a Socinian, or one of the Church of England answered the
Creed-maker as well as he? Yet this is urged as a matter of great weight. But
yet in reality it amounts to no more but this, that a Man of any Denomination,
who wishes well to the Peace of Christianity, and has observed the horrible
Effects the Christian Religion has felt from the Impositions of Men in Matters
of Faith, may have reason to defend a Book, wherein the Simplicity of the
Gospel, and the Doctrine proposed by our Savior and his Apostles, for the
Conversion of Unbelievers, is made out, though there be not one Word of the
distinguishing Tenants of his Sect in it. But that all those, who under any
Name, are for imposing their own Orthodoxy, as necessary to be believed, and
persecuting those who dissent from them, should be all against it, is not
perhaps very strange.

One thing more I must observe of the Creed-maker on this Occasion: In his
Socinian Creed, Chapter VI. The Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
And his Book, must be judged of by the Characters and Writings of those, who
entertain or commend his Notions. A professed Unitarian has defended it;
therefore he is a Socinian. The Author of A Letter to the Deists, speaks well
of it, Therefore he is a Deist. Another as an Abettor of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, he mentions, p. 125. whose Letters I have never seen: And his
Opinions too are, I suppose, set down there as belonging to me. Whatever is bad
in the Tenets or Writings of these Men infects me. But the Mischief is, Mr.
Bold's Orthodoxy will do me no good: But because he has defended my Book
against Mr. Edwards, all my Faults are become his, and he has a mighty Load of
Accusations laid upon him. Thus contrary Causes serve so good a Natured, so
Charitable and Candid a Writer as the Creed-maker, to the same purpose of
Censure and Railing. But I shall desire him to figure to himself the Loveliness
of that Creature which turns every thing into Venom. What others are, or hold,
who have expressed favorable thoughts of my Book, I think my self not
concerned in. What Opinions others have published, make those in my Book
neither true nor false; and he that for the sake of Truth would confute the
Errors in it, should show their Falsehood and Weakness as they are there: But
they who write for other Ends than Truth, are always busy with other Matters,
and where they can do nothing by Reason and Argument, hope to prevail with
some, by borrowed Prejudices and Party.

Taking therefore the Animadversions, as well as the Sermon, to be his whose
Name they bear, I shall leave to Mr. B -- d, himself to take what Notice he
thinks fit of the little Sense as well as great Impudence of putting his Name
in Print to what is not his; or taking it away from what he has set it to;
whether it belongs to his Bookseller or Answerer. Only I cannot pass by the
palpable falsifying of Mr. B -- d's Words, in the beginning of his Epistle to
the Reader, without mention. Mr. B -- d's Words are, Whereby I came to be
furnished with a truer and more just Notion of the main Design of that TREATISE
and the Good Creed-maker set them down thus, The main Design of MY OWN TREATISE
OR SERMON: A sure way for such a Champion for Truth to secure to himself the
Laurel or the Whetstone.

This irresistible Disputant (who silences all that come in his way, so that
those that would cannot answer him) to make good the mighty Encomiums he has
given himself, ought (one would think) to clear all as he goes, and leave
nothing by the way unanswered, for fear he should fall into the Number of those
poor baffled Wretches whom he with so much scorn reproaches, that they would
answer if they could.

Mr. B -- d begins his Animadversions with this Remark, that our Creed-maker
had said, That I give it over and over again in these formal Words, viz. That
nothing is required to be believed by any Christian Man but this, That Jesus is
the Messiah. To which Mr. B -- d replies, p. 4. in these Words, Though I have
read over the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. with some Attention, I have
not observed those formal Words in any part of that Book, nor any Words that
are capable of that Construction; provided they be considered with the Relation
they have to, and the manifest Dependence they have on what goes before, or
follows after them.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

Whether it was because he would not, or because he could not, let the Reader
judge. But this is down upon his Score already, and it is expected he should
answer to it, or else confess that he cannot. And that there may be a fair
Decision of this Dispute. I expect the same Usage from him, that he should set
down any Proposition of his, I have not answered to, and call on me for an
Answer, if I can. And if I cannot, I promise him to own it in Print.

The Creed-maker had said, That it is most evident to any thinking and
considerate Person, that I purposely omit the Epistolary Writings of the
Apostles, because they are fraught with other Fundamental Doctrines, besides
that which I mention*

To this Mr. B -- d answers, p. 5. That if by Fundamental Articles, Mr. Edwards
means here, all the Propositions delivered in the Epistles, concerning just
those particular Heads he [Mr. Edwards] had there mentioned, it lies upon him
to prove, That Jesus Christ has made it necessary, that every Person must have
an explicit Knowledge and Belief of all those, before he can be a Christian.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

And yet without an Answer to it, all his Talk about Fundamentals, and those
which he pretended to set down in that place, under the Name of Fundamentals,
will signify nothing in the present case; Wherein, by Fundamentals, were meant
such Propositions which every Person must necessarily have an explicit
Knowledge and Belief of, before he can be a Christian.

Mr. B -- d, in the same place, p. 6, and 7. very truly and pertinently adds,
That it did not pertain to [my] undertaking to enquire what Doctrines either in
the Epistles, or the Evangelists and the Acts, were of greatest moment to be
understood by them who are Christians, but what was necessary to be known and
believed to a Person's being a Christian. For there are many important
Doctrines, both in the Gospels and in the Acts, besides this, That Jesus is the
Messiah. But how many soever the Doctrines be, which are taught in the
Epistles, if there be no Doctrine besides this, That Jesus is the Messiah,
taught there as necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, all the
Doctrines taught there will not make any thing against what this Author has
asserted, nor against the Method he has observed; Especially, considering we
have an Account in the Acts of the Apostles, of what those Persons by whom the
Epistles were writ, did teach as necessary to be believed to Peoples being
Christians.

This, and what Mr. B -- d subjoins* That it was not my design to give an
Abstract of any of the inspired Books, is so true, and has so clear Reason in
it, that any but this Writer, would have thought himself concerned to have
answered something to it.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

It not being it seems a Creed-maker's Business to convince Men's Understanding
by Reason, but to impose on their Belief by Authority, or where that is
wanting, by Falsehoods and Bauling. And to such Mr. Bold observes well, p. 8.
that if I had given the like Account of the Epistles, that would have been as
little satisfactory as what I have done already, to those who are resolved not
to distinguish BETWIXT WHAT IS NECESSARY TO BE BELIEVED TO MAKE A MAN A
CHRISTIAN, AND THOSE ARTICLES WHICH ARE TO BE BELIEVED BY THOSE WHO ARE
CHRISTIANS, as they can attain to know, that Christ has taught them.

This Distinction the Creed-maker, no where that I remember, takes any Notice
of; unless it be p. 255. where he has something relating hereunto, which we
shall consider when we come to that place. I shall now go on to show what Mr.
Bold has said, to what he answers not.

Mr. Bold farther tells him, p. 10. That if he will prove any thing in
Opposition to the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. it must be this; That
Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught, that the Belief of some one Article,
or certain Number of Articles distinct from this, That Jesus is the Messiah,
either as exclusive of, or in Conjunction with the Belief of this Article, does
constitute and make a Person a Christian: But that the Belief of this, that
Jesus is the Messiah alone, does not make a Man a Christian

But to this Mr. Edwards irresragably answers nothing.

Mr. Bold also, p. 10. Charges him with his falsely accusing me in these words:
He pretends to contend for one single Article, with the exclusion of all the
rest, for this reason; because all Men ought to understand their Religion. And
again where he says I aim at this, viz. That we must not have any Point of
Doctrine in our Religion, that the Mob does not at the very first naming of it,
perfectly understand and agree to, Mr. Bold has quoted my express words to the
contrary.

But to this, this answerable Gentleman answers nothing.

But if he be such a mighty Disputant, that nothing can stand in his way; I
shall expect his direct Answer to it, among those other Propositions which I
have set down to his Score, and I require him to prove if he can.

The Creed-maker spends Five Pages of his Reflections in a great stir who is
the Author of those Animadversions he is Reflecting on. To which, I tell him,
it matters not to a Lover of Truth, or a Confuter of Errors, who was the
Author; but what they contain. He, who makes such a deal of do about that
which is nothing to the Question, shows he has but little Mind to the Argument;
that his hopes are more in the recommendation of Names and prejudice of
Parties, than in the Strength of his Reasons and the goodness of his Cause. A
Lover of Truth follows That, whoever be for or against it; and can suffer
himself to pass by no Argument of his Adversary, without taking notice of it
either in allowing its force, or giving it a fair Answer. Were the Creed-maker
capable of giving such an Evidence as this, of his Love of Truth, he would not
have passed over the Twenty first Pages of Mr. Bold's Animadversions in
silence. The Falsehoods that are therein charged upon him would have required an
Answer of him, if he could have given any: And I tell him he must give an
Answer, or confess the Falsehoods.

In his 255. p. he comes to take notice of these words of Mr. Bold, in the 21.
Page of his Animadversions, viz. That a Convert to Christianity or a Christian,
must necessarily believe as many Articles as he shall attain to know that
Christ Jesus has taught. Which, says the Creed-maker, wholly invalidates what
he had said before in these words, viz. That Jesus Christ, and his Apostles,
did not teach any thing as necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian,
but only this one Proposition. That Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah. The
reason he (...) to show, That the former of these Propositions, (in Mr. Bold)
invalidates the latter, and that the Animadverter contradicts himself, stands
thus: For, says he, if a Christian must give assent to all the Articles taught
by our Savior in the Gospel, and that necessarily; then all those Propositions
reckoned up in my late Discourse, being taught by Christ or his Apostles, are
necessary to be believed. Answ. And what, I beseech you, becomes of the rest of
the Propositions taught by Christ or his Apostles, which you have not reckoned
up in your late Discourse; Are not they necessary to be believed, if a
Christian must give an assent to ALL the Articles taught by our Savior and his
Apostles?

Sir, If you will argue right from that antecedent, it must stand thus: If a
Christian must give an assent to ALL the Articles taught by our Savior and his
Apostles, and that necessarily; Then all the Propositions in the New Testament,
taught by Christ or his Apostles, are necessarily to be believed. This
Consequence I grant to be true, and necessarily to follow from that antecedent,
and pra^ (...) your best of it: But withal reme^^ber, that it puts an utter end
to your select Number of Fundamentals, and makes all the Truths delivered* in
the New Testament necessary to be explicitly believed by every Christian.

But Sir, I must take notice to you, that if it be uncertain whether he that
Writ the Animadversions, be the same Person that Preached the Sermon, yet it is
very visible that it is the very same Person that reflects on both; Because he
here again uses the same Trick in answering in the Animadversions, the same
thing that had been said in the Sermon, viz. By pretending to argue from words
as Mr. Bold's, when Mr. Bold has said no such thing. The Proposition you argue
from here is this, If a Christian must give assent to all the Articles taught
by our Savior, and that necessarily. But Mr. Bold says no such thing. His
words, as set down by your self are; A Christian must necessarily believe as
many Articles as he shall attain to know that Christ Jesus has taught. And is
there no difference ^^^ween ALL that Christ Jesus has taught; and AS MANY as
any one shall attain to know that Christ Jesus has taught? There is so great a
difference between these two, that one can scarce think even such a Creed-maker
could mistake it. For one of them admits all those to be Christians, who taking
Jesus for the Messiah, their Lord and King, sincerely apply themselves to
understand and obey his Doctrine and Law, and do believe all that they
understand to be taught by him: The other shuts out, if not all Mankind, yet
Nine Hundred Ninety Nine of a Thousand, of those who profess themselves
Christians, from being really so. For he speaks within Compass, who says there
is not one of a Thousand, if there be any one Man at all, who explicitly knows
and believes that all that our Savior and his Apostles taught, i. e. All that
is delivered in the New Testament, in the true ^ence that it is there intended.
For if giving assent to it, in any sense, will serve the turn, our Creed-maker
can have no Exceptions against Socinians, Papists, Lutherans, or any other, who
acknowledging the Scripture to be the Word of God, do yet oppose his System.

But the Creed-maker goes on, p. 255. and endeavors to prove, that what is
necessary to be believed by every Christian, is necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, in these words: But he will say, the belief of those
Propositions, makes not a Man a Christian. Then, I say, they are not necessary
and indispensible; for what is absolutely necessary in Christianity, is
absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian.

Ignorance, or something worse, makes our Creed-maker always speak doubtfully
or obscurely, whenever he pretends to argue; for here absolutely necessary in
Christianity either signifies nothing, but absolutely necessary to make a Man a
Christian; and then it is proving the same Proposition by the same Proposition:
Or else, has a very obscure and doubtful Signification. For, if I ask him
whether it be absolutely necessary in Christianity to obey every one of our
Savior's Commands, what will he answer me? If he answers, NO; I ask him which
of our Savior's Commands is it not in Christianity absolutely necessary to
obey? If he answers, YES; Then I tell him by his rule, there are no Christians;
because there is no one that does in all things obey all our Savior's
Commands, and therein fails to perform what is absolutely necessary in
Christianity; and so by his rule is no Christian. If he answers, Sincere
Endeavor to obey, is all that is absolutely necessary; I reply, And so Sincere
Endeavor to understand, is all that is absolutely necessary: Neither perfect
Obedience, nor perfect Understanding is absolutely necessary in Christianity.

But his Proposition being put in terms clear, and not loose and fallacious,
should stand thus, viz. What is absolutely necessary to every Christian, is
absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian: But then I deny that he can
infer from Mr. Bold's words, that those Propositions ( i. e. which he has set
down as Fundamental or necessary to be believed) ar^ absolutely necessary to be
believed by every Christian. For that indispensible necessity Mr. Bold speaks
of, is not absolute, but conditional. His words are, A Christian must believe
as many Articles as he shall attain to know that Jesus Christ has taught. So
that he places the indispensible necessity of Believing, upon the condition of
attaining to know that Christ taught so. An endeavor to know what Jesus Christ
taught, Mr. B -- dsays truly is absolutely necessary to every one who is a
Christian, and to believe what he has attained to know that Jesus Christ
taught, that also, he says, is absolutely necessary to every Christian. But all
this granted (as true it is) it still remains (and eternally will remain) to be
proved from this (which is all that Mr. Bold says) that something else is
absolutely required to make a Man a Christian, besides the unfeigned taking
Jesus to be the Messiah, his King and Lord, and accordingly, a sincere
resolution to obey and believe all that he commanded and taught.

The Jailor, Acts XVI. 30. in Answer to his Question, what he should do to be
saved; was answered, That he should believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. And the
Text says that the Jailor took them the same hour of the night, and washed
their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his straightway. Now, I will ask
our Creed-maker, whether St. Paul in speaking to him the Word of the Lord,
proposed and explained to him all those Propositions and Fundamental Heads of
Doctrine, which our Creed-maker has set down as necessary to be believed to
make a Man a Christian. Let it be considered, the Jailor was a Heathen, and one
that seems to have no more Sense of Religion or Humanity, than those of that
Calling use to have: For he had let them alone under the Pain of their Stripes
without any Remedy, or so much as the ease of washing them, from the Day
before, till after his Conversion, which was not till after Midnight. And can
any one think that between his asking what he should do to be saved, and his
being baptized, which the Text says, was the same hour and straightway, there
was time enough for St. Paul and Silas to explain to him all the Creed-maker's
Articles, and make such a Man as that, and all his house understand the
Creed-maker's whole System; especially since we hear nothing of it in the
Conversion of these or any others who were brought into the Faith in the whole
History of the Preaching of our Savior and the Apostles? Now let me ask our
Creed-maker, whether the Jailor was not a Christian, when he was baptized; and
whether if he had then immediately died, he had not been saved, without the
Belief of any one Article more than what Paul and Silas had then ^aught him?
Whence it follows, that what was then proposed to him to be believed (which
appears to be nothing but that Jesus was the Messiah) was all that was
absolutely necessary to be believed to make him a Christian; though this
hinders not but that afterward it might be necessary for him, indispensibly
necessary, to believe other Articles, when he attained to the Knowledge that
Christ had taught them. And the reason of it is plain: Because the knowing that
Christ taught any thing, and the not receiving it for true, (which is believing
it) is inconsistent with the believing him to be the Messiah, sent from God to
inlighten and save the World. Every word of Divine Revelation, is absolutely
and indispensibly necessary to be believed, by every Christian, as soon as he
comes to know it to be taught by our Savior or his Apostles, or to be of
Divine Revelation. But yet this is far enough from making it absolutely
necessary to every Christian to know every Text in the Scripture, much less to
understand every Text in the Scripture; and least of all, to understand it as
the Creed-maker is pleased to put his sense upon it.

This the good Creed-maker either will not, or cannot understand: But gives us
a List of Articles culled out of the Scripture by his own Authority, and tells
us those are absolutely necessary to be believed by every one, to make him a
Christian. For what is of absolute Necessity in Christianity, as those he says
are, he tells us is absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian. But when he
is asked whether these are all the Articles of absolute Necessity, to be
believed to make a Man a Christian; This worthy Divine, that takes upon him to
be a Successor of the Apostles, cannot tell. And yet, having taken upon him
also to be a Creed-maker, he must suffer himself to be called upon for it again
and again, till he tells us what is of absolute Necessity to be believed to
make a Man a Christian, or confess that he cannot.

In the mean time, I take the liberty to say, That every Proposition delivered
in the New Testament by our Savior, or his Apostles, and so received by any
Christian as of Divine Revelation, is of as absolute necessity to be assented
to by him, in the Sense he understands it to be taught by them, as any one of
those Propositions enumerated by the Creed-maker: And if he thinks otherwise, I
shall desire him to prove it. The Reason whereof is this, that in divine
Revelation the ground of Faith being only the Authority of the Proposer, where
that is the same, there is no difference in the Obligation or Measure of
believing. Whatever the Messiah that came from God taught, is equally to be
believed by every one who receives him as the Messiah, as soon as he
understands what it was he taught. There is no such thing as garbling his
Doctrine, and making one part of it more necessary to be believed than another,
when it is understood. His saying is, and must be, of unquestionable Authority
to all that receive him as their heavenly King; and carries with it an equal
Obligation of assent to all that he says as true. But since no Body can
explicitly assent to any Proposition of our Savior's as true, but in the Sense
he understands our Savior to have spoken it in, the same Authority of the
Messiah, his King, obliges every one absolutely and indispensibly to believe
every part of the New Testament in that Sense he understands it: For else he
rejects the Authority of the Deliverer, if he refuses his Assent to it in that
Sense which he is persuaded it was delivered in. But the taking him for the
Messiah, his King and Lord, laying upon every one who is his Subject, and
Obligation to endeavor to know his Will in all things, every true Christian is
under an absolute and indispensible necessity, by being his Subject, to study
the Scriptures with an unprejudiced mind, according to that Measure of Time,
Opportunity, and Helps which he has; that in these sacred Writings, he may find
what his Lord and Master has by himself, or by the Mouths of his Apostles,
required of him, either to be believed or done.

The Creed-maker, in the following Page, 256. has these Words; It is worth the
Reader's observing, That notwithstanding I had in twelve Pages together, ( viz.
from the Eighth to the Twentieth) proved that several Propositions are
necessary to be believed by us, in order to our being Christians; yet this
Sham-Animadverter attends not to any one of the particulars which I had
mentioned, nor offers any thing against them, but only in a Lumping way, dooms
them all in those magisterial Words; I do not see any Proof he produces, p. 21.
This is his wonderful way of confuting me, by pretending that he cannot see any
Proof in what I allege; and all the World must be led by his eyes.

Answ. It is worth the Reader's observing, That the Creed-maker does not reply
to what Mr. Bold has said to him, as we have already seen, and shall see more
as we go on; and therefore he has little reason to complain of him, for not
having answered enough. Mr. Bold did well to leave that which was an
insignificant lump, so as it was together: For it is no wonderful thing not to
see any Proof, where there is no Proof. There is indeed, in those Pages the
Creedmaker mentions, much Confidence, much Assertion, a great many Questions
asked, and a great deal said after his Fashion: But for a Proof, I deny there
is any one: And if what I have said in another place already, does not convince
him of it, I challenge him, with all his Eyes and those of the World to boot,
to find out in those Twelve renowned Pages one Proof. Let him set down the
Proposition, and his Proof of its being absolutely and indispensibly necessary
to be believed to make a Man a Christian; And I too, will join with him in his
Testimonial of himself, that he is irrefragable. But I must tell him
beforehand, talking a great deal loosely will not do it.

Mr. Bold and I say we cannot see any Proof in those Twelve Pages: The way to
make us see, or to convince the World that we are blind, is to single out one
Proof out of that Wood of Words there, which you seem to take for Arguments,
and set it down in a Syllogism, which is the fair trial of a Proof or no Proof.
You have indeed a Syllogism in the 23 d. Page, but that is not in those Twelve
Pages you mention. Besides, I have showed in another place, what that proves;
to which I referr you.

In Answer to the Creed-maker's Question, about his other Fundamentals found in
the Epistles; Why did the Apostles Write these Doctrines? Was it not, that
those they Writ to, might give their Assent to them? Mr. Bold, p. 22. replies;
But then it may be asked again, Were not those Persons Christians, to whom the
Apostles writ these Doctrines, and whom they required to Assent to them? Yes,
verily: And if so, What was it that made them Christians, before their Assent
to these Doctrines was required? If it were any thing besides their Believing
Jesus to be the Messiah, it ought to be instanced in, and made out.

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

The next thing in Controversy between Mr. Bold and the Creed-maker, (for I
follow Mr. B -- d's Order,) is about a Matter of Fact, viz. Whether the
Creed-maker has proved, That Jesus Christ and his Apostles have taught, That no
Man can be a Christian, or shall be saved, unless he have an explicit Knowledge
of all those things which have an immediate respect to the Occasion, Author,
Way, Means and Issue of our Salvation, and which are necessary for the knowing
the true Nature and Design of it? This, Mr. Bold, p. 24. tells him he has not
done. To this the Creed-maker replies, p. 258.

And yet the Reader may satisfy himself, that this is the very thing that I
had been proving just before, and indeed, all along in the foregoing Chapter.
Answ. There have been those who have been seven Years proving a thing, which at
last they could not do; And I give you seven Years to prove this Proposition
which you should there have proved, and I must add to your score here, viz.

LII.
That Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, have taught, That no Man can be a
Christian, or can be saved, unless he has an explicit Knowledge of all those
things which have an immediate respect to the Occasion, Author, Way, Means and
Issue of our Salvation, and which are necessary for our knowing the true Nature
and Design of it.

Nor must the poor Excuse, of saying, It was not necessary to add any farther
Medium; and then proceed to another Syllogism, because you had secured that
Proposition before; go for Payment. If you had secured it, as you say, it had
been quite as easy, and much more for your Credit, to have produced the Proof
whereby you had secured it, than to say you had done it; and thereupon to
reproach Mr. Bold with Heedlessness; and to tell the World, that he cares not
what he says. The Rule of fair Dispute, is indispensibly to Prove, where any
thing is Denied. To evade this, is Shuffling; and he that, instead of it,
answers with ill Language, in my Country, is called a Foul-mouthed Wrangler.

To the Creed-maker's Exception to my Demand, about the Actual Belief of all
his Fundamentals in his new Creed; Mr. Bold asks, p. 24. Whether a Man can
believe particular Propositions, and not actually believe them?

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

Mr. Bold, p. 25. farther acknowledges the Creed-maker's Fundamental
Propositions to be in the Bible; and that they are for this purpose there, that
they may be believed; And so, he says, is every other Proposition which is
taught in our Bibles: But asks, How will it thence follow, that no Man can be a
Christian, till he particularly know, and actually assent to every Proposition
in our Bibles?

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

From p. 26, to 30. Mr. B -- d shows, that the Creed-makers Reply, concerning
my not gathering of Fundamentals out of the Epistles, is nothing to the
purpose, and this he demonstratively proves.

And to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

The Creed-maker had falsely said, That I bring no Tidings of an Evangelical
Faith: And thence very readily and charitably inferrs; Which gives us to
understand, that he verily believes there is no such Christian Faith. To this
Mr. Bold thus softly replies, p. 31. I think Mr. Edwards is much mistaken, both
in his Assertion and Inference: And to show that he could not so infer, adds;
If the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. had not brought any
Tidings of such a Faith, I think it could not be thence justly inferred, that
he verily believes there is no such Christian Faith. Because his Enquiry and
Search was not concerning Christian^Faith, considered subjectively, but
objectively; What the Articles be which must be believed, to make a Man a
Christian; and not, with what sort of Faith these Articles are to be believed.

To this the Creed-maker answers, indeed; But it is something as much worse
than nothing, as Falsehood is worse than Silence. His words are, p. 258. It may
be questioned, from what he [the Animadverter] has the confidence to say, p.
31. viz. There is no Enquiry in the Reasonableness of Christianity, concerning
Faith subjectively considered, but only objectively, etc. And thus having set
down Mr. B -- d's Words otherwise than they are; for Mr. Bold does not say
there is no Enquiry, i. e. no Mention, (for so the Creed-maker explains
Enquiries here. For to convince Mr. Bold, that there is an Enquiry, i. e.
Mention of Subjective Faith, he alleges, That Subjective Faith is spoken of in
the 191. and 192. pages of my Book.) But Mr. Bold says, not that Faith
considered subjectively, is not spoken of any where in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. But That the Author's Enquiry and Search, (i. e. the
Author's Search, or Design of his Search) was not concerning Christian Faith
considered subjectively: And thus the Creed-maker imposing on his Reader, by
perverting Mr. Bold's Sense, from what was the Intention of my Enquiry and
Search, to what I had said in it, he goes on, after his scurrilous fashion, to
insult, in these words which follow; I say, it may be guessed from this, what a
Liberty this Writer takes, to assert what he pleases. Answ. To assert what one
pleases, without Truth, and without Certainty, is the worst Character can be
given a Writer: And with Falsehood to charge it on another, is no mean Slander
and Injury to a Man's Neighbor. And yet to these shameful Arts must he be
driven, who finding his strength of managing a Cause, to lie only in Fiction
and Falsehood, has no other but the dull Billinsgate way of covering it, by
endeavoring to divert the Reader's Observation and Censure from himself, by a
confident repeated Imputation of that to his Adversary, which he himself is so
frequent in the Commission of. And of this, the Instances I have given, are a
sufficient Proof: In which I have been at the Pains to set down the Words on
both Sides, and the Pages where they are to be found, for the Reader's full
Satisfaction.

The Cause in Debate between us is of great Weight, and concerns every
Christian* That any Evidence in the Proposal, or Defense of it, can be
sufficient to conquer all Men's Prejudices, is a Vanity to imagine. But this, I
think, I may justly demand of every Reader, that since there are great and
visible Falsehoods on one side or the other, (for the Accusations of this kind
are positive and frequent,) he would examine on which Side they are; And upon
that, I will venture the Cause in any Reader's Judgment, who will be but at the
pains of turning to the Pages marked out to him; And as for him that will not
do that, I care not much what he says.

The Creed-maker's following words, p. 258. have the Natural Mark of their
Author. They are these. How can this Animadverter come off with peremptory
declaring, that Subjective Faith is not enquired into in the Treatise of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. When in another place, p. 35, and 36. he
averrs, That Christian Faith, and Christianity considered Subjectively are the
same. Answ. In which words, there are two manifest ^ntruths; The one is, That
Mr. Bold peremptorily declares, that Subjective Faith is not inquired into, i.
e. Spoken of in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. Whereas Mr. Bold says
in that place, p. 31. If he [ i. e. the Author] had not said one word
concerning Faith subjectively considered. The Creed-maker's other Untruth, is
his saying, That the Animadverter averrs, p. 35. and 36. that Christian Faith
and Christianity considered subjectively are the same* Whereas it is evident,
that Mr. Bold arguing against these words of the Creed-maker, (The belief of
Jesus being the Messiah was one of the first and leading Acts of Christian
Faith) speaks in that place of an act of Faith, as these words of his
demonstrate. Now, I apprehend that Christian Faith and Christianity considered
subjectively (and an ACT* of Christian Faith* I think, cannot be understood in
any other sense) are the very same* I must therefore desire him to set down the
words, wherein the Animadverter peremptorily declares,

LIII.
That subjective Faith is not enquired into, or spoken of, in the Treatise of
the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.

And next to produce the words wherein the Animadverter averrs,

LIVE.
That Christian Faith and Christianity considered subjectively, are the same.

To the Creed maker's saying, That the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. brings us no tidings of Evangelical Faith belonging to
Christianity, Mr. Bold replies; That I have done it in all those Pages where I
speak of taking and accepting Jesus to be our King and Ruler, and particularly
he sets down my words out of p. 301.

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

The Creed-maker says, p. 59. of his Socinianism Unmasked, that the Author of
the Reasonableness of Christianity, tells men again and again, that a Christian
Man, or Member of Christ, needs not know or believe any more than that one
individual Point. To which Mr. Bold thus replies, p. 33. If any Man will show
me those words in any part of the Reasonableness, etc. I shall suspect I was
not awake all the time I was reading that Book: And I am as certain as one
awake can be, that there are several Passages in that Book directly contrary to
these words. And there are some Expressions in the Vindication of the
Reasonableness, etc. one would think, if Mr. Edwards had observed them, they
would have prevented that Mistake.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

Mr. Bold, p. 34. takes notice, that the Creed-maker had not put the Query or
Objection right, which, he says, some, and not without some show of ground, may
be apt to start: And therefore Mr. Bold puts the Query right, viz. Why did
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, require assent to, and belief of this one
Article alone, viz. That Jesus is the Messiah, to constitute and make a Man a
Christian, or true Member of Christ (as it is abundantly evident they did, from
the Reasonableness of Christianity) if the belief of more Articles is
absolutely necessary to make and constitute a Man a Christian.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

And therefore I put the Objection or Query to him again, in Mr. Bold's words,
and expect an Answer to it, viz.

LV.
Why did Jesus Christ and his Apostles require assent to, and belief of this
one Article alone, viz. That Jesus is the Messiah, to make a Man a Christian
(as it is abundantly evident they did from all their Preaching recorded
throughout the whole History of the Evangelists and Acts) if the belief of more
Articles be absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian?

The Creed-maker having made believing Jesus to be the Messiah, only one of the
first and leading Acts of Christian Faith; Mr. Bold, p. 35. rightly tells him,
That Christian Faith must be the belief of something or other: And if it be the
belief of any thing besides this, That Jesus is the Christ or Messiah, that
other thing should be specified; and it should be made appear, that the Belief
that Jesus is the Messiah, without the Belief of that other Proposition, is not
Christian Faith.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

Mr. B -- d, in the four following Pages, 36, -- 39. has excellently explained
the difference between that Faith which constitutes a Man a Christian, and that
Faith whereby one that is a Christian, believes the Doctrines taught by our
Savior; and the ground of that difference, and therein has fully over-turned
this Position, that believing Jesus to be the Messiah, is but a Step, or the
first Step to Christianity.

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

To the Creed-makers supposing that other Matters of Faith were proposed with
this, That Jesus is the Messiah; Mr. Bold replies, That this should be proved,
viz. That other Articles were proposed, as requisite to be believed to make Men
Christians. And p. 40. he gives a Reason why he is of another Mind, viz.
Because there is nothing but this recorded, which was insisted on for that
purpose.

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

Mr. Bold, p. 42. shows, that Romans X. 9. which the Creed-maker brought against
it, confirms the Assertion of the Author of the Reasonableness, etc. concerning
the Faith that makes a Man a Christian.

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

The Creed-maker says, p. 78. This is the main Answer to the Objection, (or
Query above proposed,) viz. That Christianity was erected by degrees. This, Mr.
Bold, p. 43. proves to be nothing to the purpose, by this Reason; viz. Because
what makes one Man a Christian, or ever did make any Man a Christian, will at
any time, to the End of the World, make another Man a Christian; And asks, Will
not that make a Christian now, which made the Apostles themselves Christians?

But to this Mr. Edwards Answers not.

In Answer to his 6th. Chapter, Mr. Bold, p. 45. tells him, It was not my
Business to discourse of the Trinity, or any other particular Doctrines
proposed to be believed by them who are Christians; And that it is no fair and
just Ground to accuse a Man, for rejecting the Dotrines of the Trinity, and
that Jesus is God; Because he does not interpret some particular Texts to the
same purpose others do.

But to this Mr. Edwards answers not.

Indeed he takes notice of these words of Mr. Bold, in this Paragraph, viz.
Hence Mr. Edwards takes occasion to write many Pages about these terms [viz.
Messiah and Son of God] But I do not perceive that he pretends to offer any
Proof that these were not Synonymous terms amongst the Jews at that time, which
is the Point he should have proved, if he designed to invalidate what this
Author says about that matter. To this the Creed-maker replies, p. 257. The
Animadver^er does not so much as offer one syllable ^o disprove what I
delivered, and closely urged on that head. Answer, What need any Answer to
disprove where there is no Proof brought that reaches the Proposition in
Question? If there had been any such Proof, the producing of it, in short, had
been a more convincing Argument to the Reader, than so much bragging of what
has been done. For here are more Words spent (for I have not set them all down)
than would have served to have expressed the Proof of this Proposition, viz.
That the terms abovementioned were not Synonymous amongst the Jews, if there
had been any Proof of it. But having already examined what the Creed-maker
brags he has closely urged, I shall say no more of it here.

To the Creed-makers making me a Socinian, in his Eighth Chapter, for not
naming Christ's Satisfaction amongst the Advantages and Benefits of Christ's
coming into the World; Mr. Bold replies, 1. That it is no Proof, because I
promised not to name every one of them. And the mention of some is no denial of
others. 2. He replies, That Satisfaction is not so strictly to be termed an
Advantage, as the effects and fruits of it are; and that the Doctrine of
Satisfaction instructs us in the way how Christ did by divine Appointment,
obtain those Advantages for us. And this was an Answer that deserved some reply
from the Creed-maker.

But to this he answers not.

Mr. Bold says right, That this is a Doctrine that is of mighty Importance for
a Christian to be well acquainted with. And I will add to it, that it is very
hard for a Christian who reads the Scripture with Attention, and an
unprejudiced Mind, to deny the Satisfaction of Christ: But it being a term not
used by the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, and very variously explained by those
that do use it, and very much stumbled at by those I was there speaking to, who
were such as I there say, who will not take a Blessing, unless they be
instructed what need they had of it, and why it was bestowed upon them; I left
it, with the other disputed Doctrines of Christianity, to be looked into (to
see what it was Christ had taught concerning it) by those who were Christians,
and believed Jesus to be the Savior promised and sent from God. And to those
who yet doubted that he was so, and made this Objection; What need was there of
a Savior? I thought it most reasonable to offer such Particulars only as were
agreed on by all Christians, and were capable of no Dispute, but must be
acknowledged by every body to be needful. This, though the Words above-quoted
out of p. 254, and 256. of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. show to be
my Design; yet the Creed-maker plainly gives me the Lie, and tells me it was
not my Design. All the World are faithless, false, treacherous, hypocritical,
Strainers upon their Reason and Conscience, Dissemblers, Iourney-men, mercenary
Hirelings, except Mr. Edwards: I mean, all the World that opposes him. And must
not one think he is mightily beholding to the Excellency and Readiness of his
own Nature, who is no sooner engaged in Controversy, but he immediately finds
out in his Adversaries these Arts of Equivocation, Lying and Effrontry in
managing of it? Reason and Learning, and acquired Improvements, might else have
let him have gone on with others in the dull and ordinary way of fair arguing;
wherein possibly he might have done no great feats. Must not a rich and fertile
Soil within, and a prompt Genius wherein a Man may readily spy the
Propensities of base and corrupt Nature, be acknowledged to be an excellent
Qualification for a Disputant, to help him to the quick Discovery and laying
open of the Faults of his Opponents; which a Mind otherwise disposed would not
so much as suspect? Mr. Bold without this, could not have been so soon found
out to be a Iourney-man, a Dissembler, an hired Mercenary, and stored with all
those good Qualities wherein he has his full share with me. But why would he
then venture upon Mr. Edwards, who is so very quick-sighted in these matters,
and knows so well what villainous Man is capable of?

I should not here, in this my Vindication, have given the Reader so much of
Mr. Bold's Reasoning, which though clear and strong, yet has more Beauty and
Force as it stands in the whole Piece in his Book; Nor should I have so often
repeated this Remark upon each Passage, viz. to this Mr. Edwards answers not;
had it not been the shortest and properest Comment could be made on that
triumphant Paragraph of his, which begins in the 128. page of his Socinian
Creed, wherein amongst a great deal of no small strutting are these Words; By
their profound silence they acknowledge they have nothing to reply. He that
desires to see more of the same noble strain, may have recourse to that eminent
Place. Besides, it was fit the Reader should have this one taste more of the
Creed-maker's Genius, who passing by in silence all these clear and apposite
Replies of Mr. Bold, loudly complains of him, p. 259. That where he [ Mr. Bold]
finds something that he dares not object against, he shifts it off. And again,
p. 260. That he does not make any offer at Reason, there is not the least
shadow of an Argument. -- As if he were only hired to say something against me
[the Creed-maker] though not at all to the purpose: And truly, any Man may
discern a Mercenary Stroke all along; with a great deal more to the same
purpose. For such Language as this, mixed with Scurrility, neither fit to be
spoken by, nor of a Minister of the Gospel, make up the remainder of his
Postscript. But to prevent this for the future; I demand of him, That if in
either of his Treatises there be any thing against what I have said, in my
Reasonableness of Christianity, which he thinks not fully answered, he will set
down the Proposition in direct Words, and note the Page of his Book where it is
to be found; And I promise him an Answer to it. For as for his Railing, and
other Stuff, besides the Matter, I shall hereafter no more trouble my self to
take notice of it. And so much for Mr. Edwards.

THere is another Gentleman, and of another sort of Make, Parts, and Breeding,
who (as it seems, ashamed of Mr. Edwards's Way of handling Controversies in
Religion) has had something to say of my Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
And so has made it necessary for me to say a Word to him, before I let these
Papers go out of my Hand. It is the Author of The Occasional Paper, Numb. 1.
The 2, 3, and 4 Pages of that Paper, gave me great hopes to meet with a Man who
would examine all the Mistakes which come abroad in Print, with that Temper and
Indifferency, that might set an exact Pattern for Controversy, to those who
would approve themselves to be sincere Contenders for Truth and Knowledge, and
nothing else, in the Disputes they engaged in. Making him Allowance for the
Mistakes that Self-Indulgence is apt to impose upon Humane Frailty, I am apt to
believe he thought his Performances had been such: But I crave leave to
observe, That good and candid Men are often misled, from a fair unbiassed
pursuit of Truth, by an overgreat Zeal for something that they, upon wrong
Grounds, take to be so; And that it is not so easy to be a fair and
unprejudiced Champion for Truth, as some who profess it think it to be. To
acquaint him with the Occasion of this Remark, I must desire him to read and
consider his 19th. Page, and then to tell me.

1. Whether he knows, that the Doctrine proposed in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, etc. was borrowed, as he says, from Hobbs's Leviathan? For I tell
him, I borrowed it only from the Writers of the Four Gospels, and the Acts; and
did not know that those words he quoted out of the Leviathan, were there, or
any thing like them. Nor do I know yet any farther, than as I believe them to
be there, from his Quotation. 2. Whether affirming, as he does positively,
this, which he could not know to be true, and is in it self perfectly false,
were meant to increase or lessen the Credit of the Author of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, etc. in the Opinion of the World? Or is consonant with his own
Rule, p. 3. of putting candid Constructions on what Adversaries say? Or with
what follows, in these words; The more Divine the Cause is, still the greater
should be the Caution. The very Discoursing about Almighty God, or our Holy
Religion, should compose our Passions, and inspire us with Candor and Love. It
is very indecent to handle such Subjects in a manner that betrays Rancour and
Spite. These are Fiends that ought to vanish; and should never mix either with
a Search after Truth, or the Defense of Religion. 3. Whether the Propositions
which he has out of my Book, inserted into his 19th. Page, and says* are
consonant to the words of the Leviathan, were those, of all my Book, which were
likeliest to give the Reader a true and fair Notion of the Doctrine contained
in it? If they were not, I must desire him to remember and beware of his
Fiends. Not but that he will find those Propositions there to be true. But that
neither he nor others may mistake my Book, this is that, in short, which it
says, 1. That there is a Faith that makes Men Christians. 2. That this Faith is
the Believing Jesus of Nazareth to be the Messiah. 3. That the Believing Jesus
to be the Messiah, includes in it a receiving Him for our Lord and King,
promised and sent from God: And so lays upon all his Subjects an absolute and
indisble necessity of assenting to all that they can attain, the Knowledge that
he taught; and of a sincere Obedience to all that he commanded.

This, whether it be the Doctrine of the Leviathan, I know not. This appears to
me out of the New Testament, from whence (as I told him in the Preface) I took
it, to be the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles; And I would not
willingly be mistaken in it. If therefore there be any other Faith besides this
absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian, I shall here again desire this
Gentleman to inform me what it is, i. e. to set down all those Propositions
which are so indispensibly to be believed, (for it is of simple Believing, I
perceive, the Controversy runs) that no Man can be a Believer, i. e. a
Christian, without an Actual Knowledge of, and an Explicit Assent to them. If
he shall do this with that Candor and Fairness he declares to be necessary in
such Matters, I shall own my self obliged to him: For I am in earnest, and I
would not be mistaken in it.

If he shall decline it, I, and the World too, must conclude, that upon a
review of my Doctrine, he is convinced of the Truth of it, and is satisfied
that I am in the right. For it is impossible to think that a Man of that
Fairness and Candor which he solemnly Prefaces his Discourse with, should
continue to condemn the Account I have given of the Faith which I am persuaded
makes a Christian; And yet he himself will not tell me (when I earnestly demand
it of him, as desirous to be rid of my Error, if it be one) what is that more,
which is absolutely required to be believed by every one, before he can be a
Believer; i. e. what is indispensibly necessary to be known, and explicitly
believed to make a Man a Christian.

Another thing which I must desire this Author to examine by those his own
Rules, is, What he says of me, p. 30. where he makes me to have a Prejudice
against the Ministry of the Gospel, and their Office, from what I have said, p.
260, 261, 270. of my Reasonableness, etc. concerning the Priests* of the World,
in our Savior's time; which he calls bitter Reflections.

If he will tell me what is so bitter, in any of those Passages which he has
set down, that is not true, or ought not to be said there, and give me the
Reason why he is offended at it; I promise him to make what Reparation he shall
think fit, to the Memory of those Priests whom he with so much Goodnature
Patronizes, near Seventeen Hundred Years after they have been out of the World;
and is so tenderly concerned for their Reputation, that he excepts against
that, as said against them, which was not. For one of the three Places he sets
down, was not spoken of Priests. But his making my mentioning the Faults of the
Priests of old, in our Savior's time, to be an Exposing the Office of the
Ministers of the Gospel now, and a Vilifying those who are employed in it; I
must desire him to examine, by his own Rules of Love and Candor, and to tell
me, whether I have not reason here again to mind him of his FIENDS, and to
advise him to beware of them? And to show him why I think I have, I crave leave
to ask him those Questions.

1. Whether I do not all along plainly, and in express words, speak of the
Priests of the World, preceding, and in our Savior's time? Nor can my Argument
bear any other sense. 2. Whether all I have said of them be not true? 3.
Whether the representing truly the Carriage of the Jewish, and more-especially
of the Heathen Priests in our Savior's time, as my Argument required, can
expose the Office of the Ministers of the Gospel now? or ought to have such an
Interpretation put upon it? 4. Whether what he says of the Air and Language I
use reaching farther, carry any thing else in it but a Declaration, that he
thinks some Men's Carriage now, has some affinity with what I have truly said
of the Priests of the World before Christianity; and that therefore the Faults
of those should have been let alone, or touched more gently, for fear some
should think these now concerned in it? 5. Whether, in truth, this be not to
accuse them with a Design to draw the Envy of it on me? Whether out of
Good Will to them, or to me, or both, let him look. This I am sure, I have
spoke of none but the Priests before Christianity, both Jewish and Heathen. And
for those of the Jews, what our Savior has pronounced of them, justifies my
Reflections from being bitter; And that the Idolatrous Heathen Priests were
better than they, I believe our Author will not say: And if he were Preaching
against them, as opposing the Ministers of the Gospel, I suppose he would give
as ill a Character of them. But if any one extends my Words farther than to
those they were spoke of, I ask whether that agrees with his Rules of Love and
Candor?
I shall impatiently expect from this Author of The Occasional Paper, an Answer
to these Questions; and hope to find them such as becomes that Temper, and Love
of Truth, which he professes. I long to meet with the Man, who laying aside
Party, and Interest, and Prejudice, appears in Controversy so as to make good
the Character of a Champion of Truth for Truth's sake; A Character not so hard
to be known whom it belongs to, as to be deserved. Whoever is truly such an
one, his Opposition to me will be an Obligation. For he that proposes to
himself the convincing me of an Error, only for Truth's sake, cannot, I know,
mix any Rancour, or Spite, or Ill Will, with it. He will keep himself at a
distance from those Fiends, and be as ready to hear as offer Reason. And two so
disposed, can hardly miss Truth between them, in a fair Enquiry after it; at
least, they will not lose Good-breeding, and especially Charity, a Virtue much
more necessary than the attaining of the Knowledge of obscure Truths, that are
not easy to be found; and probably, therefore, not necessary to be known.

The unbiassed Design of the Writer, purely to defend and propagate Truth,
seems to me to be that alone which legitimates Controversies. I am sure, it
plainly distinguishes such from all others, in their Success and Usefulness. If
a Man, as a sincere Friend to the Person, and to the Truth, labors to bring
another out of Error, there can be nothing more beautiful, nor more beneficial.
If Party, Passion or Vanity direct his Pen, and have an Hand in the
Controversy, there can be nothing more unbecoming, more prejudicial, nor more
odious. What Thoughts I shall have of a Man that shall, as a Christian, go
about to inform me what is necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian,
I have declared, in the Preface to my Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. nor
do I find my self yet altered. He that in Print finds fault with my imperfect
Discovery of that wherein the Faith which makes a Man a Christian consists, and
will not tell me what more is required, will do well to satisfy the World what
they ought to think of him.

FINIS.

