

ASILEAE, IMPENSIS LVDOV. REGIS TYPIS IOANNIS SCHROETERI.

MDC XXV.

SOME THOUGHTS CONCERNING Education.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster-row,
1693.

To Edward Clarke of CHIPLEY, Esquire
SIR;
THese Thoughts concerning Education, which now come abroad into the World, do
of right belong to You, being written several Years since for your sake, and
are no other than what you have already by you in my Letters. I have so little
varied any thing, but only the Order of what was sent you at different Times,
and on several Occasions, that the Reader will easily find, in the Familiarity
and Fashion of the Style, that they were rather the private Conversation of two
Friends, than a Discourse designed for public view.

The Importunity of Friends is the common Apology for Publications Men are
afraid to own themselves forward to. But you know I can truly say, That if some
who having heard of these Papers of mine had not pressed to see them, and
afterward to have them printed, they had lain dormant still in that privacy
they were designed for. But those whose Judgment I deferr much to, telling me,
That they were persuaded, that this rough Draught of mine might be of some use,
if made more public, touched upon what will always he very prevalent with me:
For I think it every Man's indispensible Duty to do all the Service he can to
his Country: And I see not what difference he puts between himself and his
Cattle, who lives without that Thought. This Subject is of so great
Concernment, and a right way of Education is of so general Advantage, that did
I find my Abilities answer my Wishes, I should not have needed Exhortations or
Importunities from others. However, the Meanness of these Papers, and my just
Distrust of them, shall not keep me, by the shame of doing so little, from
contributing my Mite, when there is no more required of me, than my throwing it
into the public Receptacle. And if there be any more of their Size and
Notions, who liked them so well, that they thought them worth printing, I may
flatter my self they will not be lost Labor to every body.

I my self have been consulted of late by so many, who profess themselves at a
loss how to breed their Children, and the early corruption of Youth, is now
become so general a Complaint, that he cannot be thought wholly impertinent,
who brings the Consideration of this Matter on the stage, and offers something,
if it be but to excite others, or afford matter of correction. For Errors in
Education should be less indulged than any: These, like Faults in the first
Concoction, that are never mended in the second or third, carry their
afterward incorrigible Taint with them, through all the parts and stations of
Life.

I am so far from being conceited of any thing I have here offered, that I
should not be sorry, even for your sake, if some one abler and fitter for such
a Task, would in a just Treatise of Education, suited to our English Gentry,
rectify the Mistakes I have made in this; it being much more desirable to me,
that young Gentlemen should be put into (that which every one ought to be
sollicitous about) the best way of being formed and instructed, than that my
Opinion should be received concerning it. You will however, in the mean time
bear me Witness that the Method here proposed has had no ordinary Effects upon
a Gentleman's Son, it was not designed for. I will not say the good Temper of
the Child did not very much contribute to it, but this I think you and the
Parents are satisfied of, that a contrary usage according to the ordinary
disciplining of Children, would not have mended that Temper, nor have brought
him to be in love with his Book, to take a pleasure in Learning, and to desire
as he does to be taught more than those about him think fit always to teach him.

But my Business is not to recommend this Treatise to you, whose Opinion of it
I know already; nor it to the World, either by your Opinion or Patronnge. The
well Educating of their Children is so much the Duty and Concern of Parents,
and the Welfare and Prosperity of the Nation so much depends on it, that I
would have every one lay it seriously to Heart, and after having well examined
and distinguished what Fancy, Custom or Reason advises in the Case, help to
promote that way in the several degrees of Men, which is the easiest, shortest
and likeliest to produce virtuous, useful and able Men in their distinct
Callings: Though that most to be taken Care of, is the Gentleman's Calling, for
if those of that Rank are by their Education once set right, they will quickly
bring all the rest into Order.

I know not whether I have done more than shown my good Wishes toward it, in
this short Disourse; such as it is the World now has it, and if there be any
thing in it worth their acceptance, they owe their thanks to you for it. My
Affection to you gave the first rise to it, and I am pleased that I can leave
to Posterity this Mark of the Friendship has been between us. For I know no
greater Pleasure in this Life, nor a better remembrance to be left behind one
than a long continued Friendship, with an honest, useful and worthy Man, and
lover of his Country. I am,

Sir, Your most humble and most faithful Servant.

SOME THOUGHTS CONCERNING EDUCATION.
. 1. A Sound Mind in a sound Body, is a short, but full description of a Happy
State in this World: He that has these Two, has little more to wish for; and he
that wants either of them, is but little the better for any thing else. Men's
Happiness or Misery is most part of their own making. He, whose Mind directs
not wisely, will never take the right Way; and he, whose Body is crazy and
feeble, will never be able to advance in it. I confess, there are some Men's
Constitutions of Body and Mind so vigorous and well framed by Nature, that they
need not much Assistance from others, but by the strength of their natural
Genius, they are from their Cradles carried toward what is Excellent; and by
the privilege of their happy Constitutions are able to do Wonders: But Examples
of these are but few, and I think I may say, that of all the Men we meet with,
Nine parts of Ten are what they are, Good or Evil, useful or not, by their
Education. It Is that which makes the great difference in Mankind: The little,
and almost insensible Impressions on our tender Infancies, have very important
and lasting Consequences: And there it is, as in the Fountains of some Rivers,
where a gentle application of the hand turns the flexible Waters into Channels,
that make them take quite contrary Courses, and by this little direction given
them at first in the Source, they receive different Tendencies, and arrive at
last, at very remote and distant places.

. 2. Timagine the minds of Children as easily turned this or that way, as Water
it self; and though this be the principal part, and our main care should be
about the inside, yet the clay Cottage is not to be neglected. I shall
therefore begin with the Case, and consider first the Health of the Body,
Health.
as that, which perhaps you may rather expect from that Study, I have been
thought more peculiarly to have applied my self to; and that also, which will
be soonest dispatched, as lying, if I guess not amiss, in a very little compass.

. 3. How necessary Health is to our Business and Happiness: And how requisite a
strong Constitution, able to endure Hardships: and Fatigue, is to one that will
make any Figure in the World, is too obvious to need any Proof.

. 4. The consideration, I shall here have of Health, shall be, not what a
Physician ought to do with a sick or crazy Child; but what the Parents, without
the help of Physic, should do for the preservation and improvement of an
healthy, or at least, nor sickly Constitution in their children: And this
perhaps might be dispatched, all in this one short Rule, viz. That Gentlemen
should use their Children, as the honest Farmers and substantial Yeomen do
theirs. But because the Mothers possible may think this a little too hard, and
the Fathers too short, I shall explain my self more particularly, only laying
down this as a general and certain Observation for the Women to consider, viz.
That most Children's Constitutions, are either spoiled or harmed by Cockering
and Tenderness. Tenderness.


. 5. The First thing to be taken care of, is, That Children be not too warmly
Warmth.
Clad or Covered Winter or summer. The Face, when we are Born, is no less
tender than any other part of the Body: It Is use alone hardens it, and makes it
more able to endure the Cold; and therefore the Scythian Philosopher gave a
very significant Answer to the Athenian, who wondered how he could go Naked in
Frost and Snow. How, said the Scythian can you endure your Face exposed to the
sharp Winter-Air? My Face is used to it, said the Athenian. Think me all Face,
replied the Scythian. Our Bodies will endure any thing, that from the beginning
they are accustomed to. And therefore, amongst other things, I think that when
Nature has so well covered his Head with hair, and strengthened it with a Year
or two's Age, that he can run about, by Day, without a Cap, it is best, that by
night a Child should also lie without one, there being nothing that more
exposes to Headache, Colds, Catarrhs, Coughs, and several other Diseases, than
keeping the Head warm.

. 6. I have said he here, because the principal aim of my Discourse is, how a
young Gentleman should be brought up from his Infancy, which, in all things,
will not so perfectly suit the Education of Daughters, though where the
difference of Sex requires different treatment, 'twill be no hard matter to
distinguish.

. 7. I would also advise his Feet to be Feet.
washed every night in cold Water; and to have his Shoes so thin, that they
might leak and let in Water, when ever he comes near it. Here, I fear, I shall
have the Mistress and Maids too against me; one will think it too filthy, and
the other, perhaps, too much pains to make clean his Stockings. But yet truth
will have it, that his Health is much more worth than all such considerations
and ten-times as much more. And he that considers how Mischievous and Mortal a
thing, taking Wet in the Feet is to those, who have been bred nicely, will wish
he had, with the poor People's Children, gone Barefoot; who, by that means,
come to be so reconciled, by Custom, to wet in their Feet, that they take no
more Cold or Harm by it, than if they were wet in their Hands. And what is it,
I pray, that makes this great difference between the Hands, and the Feet in
others, but only Custom? I doubt not, but if a Man from his Cradle had been
always used to go barefoot, whilst his hands were constantly wrapped up in
warm Mittins, and covered with Hand-shooes, as the Dutch call Gloves; I doubt
not, I say, but such a Custom, would make taking Wet in his Hands, as dangerous
to him, as now taking Wet in their Feet is to a great many others. The way to
prevent this, is, to have his Shoes made so, as to leak Water; and his Feet
washed every Night in cold Water, both for Health and Cleanliness sake. But
begin first in the Spring, with lukewarm, and so colder and colder every Night,
till, in a few days, you come to perfectly cold Water, and then continue it so.
For it is to be observed in Alterations.
this, as in all other Alterations from our ordinary way of Living, the Changes
must be made by gentle and insensible Degrees; and so we may bring our Bodies
to any thing, without pain and without danger. Swiming.


. 8. I shall not need here to mention his learning to Swim, when he is of Age
able to learn, and has any one to teach him. The advantages (besides that of
Swiming) to health, by often bathing in the summer in cold Water, are so many,
that I think nothing need to be said to encourage it, provided this one caution
be used, That he never go into the Water, when Exercise has at all warmed him,
or left any Emotion in his Blood or Pulse. Air.


. 9. Another Thing that is of great Advantage to every One's Health, but
especially Children's, is, to be much in the open Air, and very little as may
be by the Fire, even in Winter. By this he will accustom himself also to Heat
and Cold, Shine and Rain; all which if a Man's Body will not endure, it will
serve him to very little purpose in this World; and when he is grown up, it is
too late to begin to use him to it; it must be got early, and by degrees. Thus
the Body may be brought to bear almost any Thing. If I should advise him to
play in the Wind and the Sun without a Hat, I doubt whether it could be born;
there would a Thousand Objections be made against it, which at last would a
mount to no more, in Truth, than being Sunburned: And if my young Master be to
be kept always in the Shade, and never exposed to the Sun and Wind, for fear of
his Complexion, it may be a good Way to make him a Beau, but not a Man of
Business. And although greater Regard be to be had to Beauty in the Daughters,
yet I will take the Liberty to say, that the more they are in the Air, without
prejudice to their Faces, the stronger and healthier they will be; and the
nearer they come to the Hardships of their Brothers in their Education, the
greater Advantage will they receive from it all the remaining Part of their
Lives.

. 10. Playing in the open Air has but this one Danger in it, that I know; and
that is, That when he is hot with running up and down, he should sit or lie
down on the cold or moist Earth. This, I grant, and drinking cold Drink, when
they are hot with Labor or Exercise, brings more People to the Grave, or to
the Brink of it, by Fevers, and other Diseases, than any Thing I know. These
Mischiefs are easily enough prevented whilst he is little, being then seldom
out of sight: And if, during his Childhood, he be constantly and rigorously
kept from Sitting on the Ground, or drinking any cold Liquor, whilst he is hot,
the Custom of forbearing grown into Habit, will help much to preserve him, when
he is no longer under his Maid's or Tutor's Eye. This is all I think can be
done in the Case; for, as Years increase, Liberty must come with them; and in a
great many Things he must be trusted to his own Conduct, since there cannot
always be a Guard upon him, except what you have put into his own Mind by good
Principles, and established Habits, which is the best and surest, and therefore
most to be taken care of: For from repeated Cautions and Rules, never so often
inculcated, you are not to expect any thing farther than Practice has
established them into Habits.

. 11. One thing the Mention of the Cloths.
Girls brings into my Mind, which must not be forgot; and that is, that your
Son's Cloths be never made strait, especially about the Breast. Let Nature have
scope to fashion the Body as she thinks best; she works of her self a great
deal better, and exacter, than we can direct her: And if Women were themselves
to frame the Bodies of their Children in their Wombs, as they often endeavor
to mend their Shapes when they are out, we should as certainly have no perfect
children born, as we have few well-shaped that are strait-laced or much
tampered with. This Consideration should, methinks, keep busy People (I will
not say ignorant Nurses and Bodice-makers) from meddling in a Matter they
understand not; and they should be afraid to put Nature out of her Way in
fashioning the Parts, when they know not how the least and meanest is made, and
yet I have seen so many Instances of Children receiving great harm from
straitlacing, that I cannot but conclude, there are other Creatures as well as
Monkeys, who little wiser than they destroy their young Ones by senseless
fondness, and too much embracing.

. 12. Narrow Breasts, short and stinking Breath, ill Lungs, and Crookedness,
are the Natural and almost constant Effects of hard Bodice, and Cloths that
pinch. That way of making slender Wastes and fine Shapes, serves but the more
effectually to spoil them. Nor can there indeed but be disproportion in the
Parts, when the nourishment prepared in the several Offices of the Body, cannot
be distributed as Nature designs; and therefore what wonder is it, if it being
laid where it can on some part not so braced, it often makes a Shoulder or a
Hip higher or bigger than its just proportion. It Is generally known, that the
women of China (imagining I know not what kind of beauty in it) by bracing and
binding them hard from their infancy, have very little Feet. I saw a pair of
China Shoes lately, exceedingly disproportioned to the Feet of one of the same
Age amongst us; their Women's Shoes would scarce be big enough for one of our
little Girls. Besides this, it is observed, That their women are also very
little and short lived, whereas the Men are of the ordinary Stature of other
Men, and live to a proportionable Age. These Defects in the Female Sex in that
Country, are by some, imputed to the unreasonable binding of their Feet,
whereby the free Circulation of the Blood is hindered, and the Growth and Health
of the whole Body suffers. And how often do we see, that some small part of the
Foot being injured by a Wrench or a Blow, the whole Leg and thigh thereby lose
their Strength and Nourishment, and dwindle away? How much greater
Inconveniences may we expect, when the Thorax, wherein is placed the Heart and
Seat of Life, is unnaturally compressed, and hindered from its due Expansion?

. 13. As for his Diet, it ought to be Diet.
very plain and simple. Flesh once a Day, and of one Sort at a Meal, is enough.
Beef, Mutton, Veal, etc. without other Sauce than Hunger, is best; and great
care should be used, that he eat Bread plentifully, both alone and with every
thing else. And whatever he eats that is solid, make him chew it well. We
English are often negligent herein; from whence follow Indigestion, and other
great Inconveniences.

. 14. For Breakfast and Supper, Milk, Milk-Pottage, Water Gruel, Flummery, and
twenty other Things that we are wont to make in England, are very fit for
Children: Only, in all these let Care be taken that they be plain, and without
much mixture, and very sparingly seasoned with Sugar, or rather none at all;
especially all Spice, and other Things that may heat the Blood, are carefully
to be avoided. Be sparing also of Salt in the Seasoning of all his Victuals,
and use him not to highseasoned Meats: Our Palates like the Seasoning and
Cookery they are set to, and an over much Use of Salt, besides that it
occasions thirst, and overmuch Drinking, has other ill Effects upon the Body.
I should think that a good Piece of well made, and well baked Brown Bread,
sometimes with, and sometimes without Butter or Cheese, would be often the best
Breakfast for my young Master. I am sure it is as wholesome, and will make him as
strong a Man as greater Delicacies: And if he be used to it, it will be
pleasant to him. If he at any Time calls for Victuals between Meals, use him to
nothing but dry Bread; if he be hungry more than wanton, Bread alone will down;
and if he be not hungry, it is not fit he should eat. By this you will obtain
two good effects; 1. That by Custom he will come to be in love with Bread; for,
as I said, our Palates are pleased with the Things we are used to. Another Good
you will gain hereby is, That you will not teach him to eat more, nor oftener
than Nature requires. I do not think that all People's Appetites are alike;
some have naturally stronger, and some weaker Stomachs. But this I think, that
many are made Gormans and Gluttons by Custom, that were not so by Nature; and I
see in some Countries Men as lusty and strong that eat but two Meals a Day, as
others that have for their Stomachs by a constant Usage, like Larms, to call on
them for four or five: and therefore, if it should not be thought too severe, I
should judge it most convenient that he should have nothing but Bread too for
Breakfast: You cannot imagine of what Force Custom is: And I impute a great
part of our Diseases in England to our eating too much Flesh, and too little
Bread.

. 15. As to his Meals, I should think Meals.
it best, that, as much as can be conveniently avoided, they should not be kept
constantly to an Hour; for when Custom has fixed his Eating to certain stated
Periods, his stomach will expect Victuals at the usual Hour; and if he passes
it, either grow indisposed, and as it were peevish, or lose its Appetite. In
short, I think it best he should eat Flesh but once a Day, plain Flesh, and of
one Sort at a time; and whilst young, Spoon-meat also once a Day; and if you
please, once a Day Cheese or Butter with his Bread; but I would have no Time
kept constantly to, but rather varied almost every Day. And if betwixt these
which I call Meals he will eat, let him have, as often as he calls for it, good
dry Bread. If any one think this too hard and sparing a Diet for a Child, let
them know, that a Child will never starve, nor want Nourishment, who, besides
Flesh once a Day, and other Things once or twice more, may have good Bread and
Beer as often as he has a Stomach. Nor let any One think this unsuitable to one
of Estate and Condition: A Gentleman in any Age ought to be so bred, as to be
fitted to bear Arms, and be a Soldier; but he that in this breeds his Son so,
as if he designed him to sleep over his Life in the Plenty and Ease of a full
Fortune he intends to leave him, little considers the Examples he has seen, nor
the Age he lives in.

. 16. His Drink should be only Small Drink.
Beer; and that too he should never be suffered to have between Meals, but
after he had eat a Piece of Bread. The Reasons why I say this are these:

. 17. 1. More Fevers and Surfeits are got by People's Drinking when they are
hot, than by any one Thing I know; therefore, if by Play he be hot and dry,
Bread will ill go down, and so if he cannot have Drink, but upon that
Condition, he will be forced to forbear. For, if he be very hot, he should by
no means drink; at least, a good piece of Bread first to be eaten, will gain
Time to warm the Beer Bloodhot, which then he may drink safely. If he be very
dry, it will go down so warmed, and quench his Thirst better: And if he will
not drink it so warmed, Abstaining will not hurt him. Besides, This will teach
him to forbear, which is an Habit of greatest Use for Health of Body and Mind
too.

. 18. 2. Not being permitted to drink without eating, will prevent the Custom
of having the Cup often at his Nose; a dangerous Beginning, and Preparation to
Good-fellowship. Men often bring Habitual Hunger and Thirst on themselves by
Custom; and if you please to try, you may, though he be weaned from it, bring
him, by Use, to such a Necessity again of Drinking in the Night, that he will
not be able to sleep without it: And it being the Lullaby used by Nurses, to
still crying Children, I believe Mothers generally find some Difficulty to wean
their Children from Drinking in the Night, when they first take them home.
Believe it, Custom prevails as much by Day as by Night; and you may, if you
please, bring any One to be Thirsty every Hour.

I once lived in an House, where, to appease a froward Child, they gave him
Drink as often as he cried; so that he was constantly bibbing: And though he
could not speak, yet he drunk more in Twenty four Hours than I did. Try it when
you please, you may with Small, as well as with Strong Beer, drink your self
into a Drought. The great Thing to be minded in Education is, what Habits you
settle; and therefore in this, as all other Things, do not begin to make any
Thing customary, the Practice whereof you would not have continue, and
increase. It is convenient for Health and Sobriety, to drink no more than
Natural Thirst requires: And he that eats not Salt Meats, nor drinks Strong
Drink, will seldom thirst between Meals, unless he has been accustomed to such
unseasonable Drinking.

. 19. Above all, Take great Care Strong Drink.
that he seldom, if ever, taste any Wine, or Strong Drink. There is nothing so
ordinarily given Children in England, and nothing so destructive to them. They
ought never to drink any Strong Liquor, but when they need it as a Cordial, and
the Doctor prescribes it. And in this Case it is, that Servants are most
narrowly to be watched, and most severely to be reprehended when they
transgress. Those mean Sort of People, placing a great Part of their Happiness
in Strong Drink, are always forward to make Court to my young Master, by
offering him that, which they love best themselves; and finding themselves made
merry by it, they foolishly think 'twill do the Child no Harm. This you are
Carefully to have your Eye upon, and restrain with all the Skill and Industry
you can, there being nothing that lays a surer Foundation of Mischief, both to
Body and Mind, than Childrens being used to Strong Drink; especially, to drink
in private, with the Servants.

. 20. Fruit makes one of the most Fruit
difficult Chapters in the Government of Health, especially that of Children.
Our first Parents ventured Paradise for it, and it is no Wonder our Children
cannot stand the Temptation, though it cost them their Health. The Regulation
of this cannot come under any one General Rule. For I am by no Means of their
Mind, who would keep Children almost wholly from Fruit, as a Thing totally
unwholesome for them: By which strict Way they make them but the more ravenous
after it; and to eat Good and Bad, Ripe or Unripe, all that they can get,
whenever they come at it. Melons, Peaches, most sorts of Plumbs, and all sorts
of Grapes in England. I think Children should be wholly kept from, as having a
very tempting Taste, in a very unwholesome Juice; so that, if it were possible,
they should never so much as see them, or know there were any such Thing. But
Straw-berries, Cherries, Goose-berries, or Currants, when through ripe, I think
may be very safely allowed them, and that with a pretty liberal Hand, if they
be eaten with these Cautions 1. Not after Meals, as we usually do, when the
Stomach is already full of other food: But I think they should be eaten rather
before, or between Meals, and Children should have them for their Breakfasts.
2. Bread eaten with them. 3. Perfectly ripe. If they are thus eaten, I imagine
them rather conducing, than hurtful to our Health: Summer-Fruits being suited
to the hot Season of the Year, they come in and refresh our Stomachs,
languishing and fainting under it: And therefore I should not be altogether so
strict in this Point, as some are to their Children; who being kept so very
short, instead of a moderate Quantity of well-chosen Fruit, which being allowed
them, would content them, whenever they can get loose, or bribe a Servant to
supply them, satisfy their Longing with any Trash they can get, and eat to a
Surfeit.

Apples and Pears too, which are through ripe, and have been gathered some
Time, I think may be safely eaten at any Time, and in pretty large Quantities;
especially Apples, which never did any Body hurt, that I have heard, after
October.

Fruits also dried without Sugar, I think very wholesome: But Sweetmeats of all
Kinds to be avoided; which, whether they do more Harm to the Maker, or Eater,
is not easy to tell. This I am sure, It is one of the most inconvenient Ways
of Expense that Vanity has yet found out; and so I leave them to the Ladies.

. 21. Of all that looks soft and effeminate, Sleep.
nothing is more to be indulged Children than Sleep: In this alone they are to
be permitted to have their full Satisfaction, nothing contributing more to the
Growth and Health of Children than Sleep. All that is to be regulated in it is,
in what Part of the Twenty four Hours they should take it: Which will easily be
resolved, by only saying, That it is of great Use to accustom them to rise
early in the Morning. It is best so to do, for Health: And he that, from his
Childhood, has by a settled Custom, made Rising betimes easy and familiar to
him, will not, when he is a Man, waste the best and most useful Part of his
Life in Drowziness, and Lying a bed. If Children therefore are to be called up
early in the Morning, it will follow of Course, that they must go to Bed
betimes; where by they will be accustomed to avoid the unhealthy and unsafe
Hours of Debauchery, which are those of the Evenings: And they who keep good
Hours, seldom are guilty of any great Disorders. I do not say this, as if your
Son, when grown up, should never be in Company past Eight, nor ever chat over a
Glass of Wine till Midnight. You are now, by the Accustoming of his tender
Years, to indispose him to those Inconveniences, as much as you can: And that
will be no small Advantage, that Contrary Practice having made Sitting up
uneasy to him, it will make him often avoid, and very seldom propose
Mid-night-Revels. But if it should not reach so far, but Fashion and Company
should prevail, and make him live as others do about Twenty, it is worth the
while to accustom him to Early Rising, and Early Going to Bed between this and
that, for the present Improvement of his Health, and other Advantages.

. 22 Let his Bed be hard, and rather Bed.
Quilts than Feathers. Hard Lodging strengthens the Parts; whereas being buried
every Night in Feathers melts and dissolves the Body, is often the Cause of
Weakness, and the Forerunner of an early Grave: And besides the Stone, which
has often its Rise from this warm wrapping of the Reins, several other
Indispositions; and that which is the Root of them all, a tender weakly
Constitution, is very much owing to Downe-Beds. Besides, He that is used to
hard Lodging at home, will not miss his Sleep (where he has most need of it) in
his Travels abroad, for want of his soft Bed and his Pillows laid in order; and
therefore I think it would not be amiss to make his Bed after different
Fashions, sometimes lay his Head higher, sometimes lower, that he may not feel
every little Change, he must be sure to meet with, who is not designed to lie
always in my young Master's Bed at home, and to have his Maid lay all Things in
print, and tuck him in warm. The great Cordial of Nature is Sleep; he that
misses that, will suffer by it: And he is very unfortunate, who can take his
Cordial only in his Mother's fine Gilt Cup, and not in a Wooden Dish. He that
can sleep soundly, takes the Cordial; and it matters not whether it be on a
soft Bed, or the hard Boards; it is Sleep only that is the Thing necessary.

. 23. One thing more there is, which Costiveness.
has a great Influence upon the Health, and that is, Going to Stool regularly.
People that are very loose, have seldom strong Thoughts, or strong Bodies: But
the Cure of this, both by Diet and Medicine, being much more easy than the
contrary Evil, there needs not much to be said about it; for if it come to
threaten, either by its Violence, or Duration, it will soon enough, and
sometimes too soon, make a Physician be sent for; and if it be moderate or
short, it is commonly best to leave it to Nature. On the other Side,
Costiveness has too its ill Effects, and is much harder to be dealt with by
Physic; purging Medicines, which seem to give Relief, rather increasing than
removing the Evil.

. 24. It having been an Inconvenience, I had a particular Reason to enquire
into; and not finding the Cure of it in Books, I set my Thoughts on work,
believing, that greater Changes than that might be made in our Bodies, if we
took the right Course, and proceeded by Rational Steps.

1. Then I considered, that Going to Stool, was the effect of certain Motions
of the Body, especially of the Perristaltick Motion of the Guts.

2. I considered, that several Motions, that were not perfectly voluntary,
might yet by Use and constant Application be brought to be Habitual, if by an
unintermitted Custom, they were at certain Seasons endeavored to be constantly
produced.

3. I had observed some Men, who by taking after Supper a Pipe of Tabaco, never
failed of a Stool, and began to doubt with my self, whether it were not more
Custom, than the Tabaco, that gave them the benefit of Nature; or at least, if
the Tabaco did it, it was rather by exciting a vigorous Motion in the Guts,
than by any purging Quality, for then it would have had other Effects.

Having thus once got the Opinion, that is was possible to make it habitual;
the next thing was to consider, what Way and Means was the likeliest to obtain
it.

4. Then I guessed, that if a Man, after his first Eating in the Morning, would
presently solicit Nature, and try, whether he could strain himself so, as to
obtain a Stool, he might in time, by a constant Application, bring it to be
Habitual.

. 25. The Reasons that made me choose this time, were,

1. Because the Stomach being then empty, if it received any thing grateful to
it (for I would never, but in case of necessity, have any one eat, but what he
likes, and when he has an Appetite) it was apt to embrace it close by a strong
Constriction of its Fibers, which Constriction, I supposed, might probably be
continued on in the Guts, and so increase their peristaltick Motion, as we see
in the Ileus, that an inverted Motion, being begun any where below, continues
it self all the whole length, and makes even the Stomach obey that irregular
Motion.

3. Because when Men eat, they usually relax their Thoughts, and the Spirits,
then free from other Employments, are more vigorously distributed into the
lower Belly, which thereby contribute to the same effect.

3. Because, when ever Men have leisure to eat, they have leisure enough also
to make so much court to Madam Cloacina, as would be necessary to our present
purpose; but else, in the variety of Humane Affairs and Accidents, it was
impossible to affix it to any hour certain, whereby the Custom would be
interrupted. Whereas Men in health, seldom failing to eat once a Day, though the
Hour changed, the Custom might still be preserved.

. 26. Upon these Grounds, the Experiment began to be tried, and I have known
none, who have been steady in the prosecution of it, and taken care to go
constantly to the necessary House, after their first Eating, when ever that
happened, whether they found themselves called on or no, and there endeavored
to put Nature upon her Duty, but in a few Months obtained the desired success,
and brought Nature to so regular an habit, that they seldom ever failed of a
Stool, after their first Eating, unless it were by their own neglect. For,
whether they have any Motion or no, if they go to the Place, and do their part,
they are sure to have Nature very obedient.

. 27. I would therefore advise, that this Course should be taken with a Child
every day, presently after he has eaten his Breakfast. Let him be set upon the
Stool, as if disburthening were as much in his power, as filling his Belly; and
let not him, or his Maid know any thing to the Contrary, but that it is so; and
if he be forced to endeavor, by being hindered from his play, or Eating again,
till he has been effectually at Stool, or at least done his utmost, I doubt
not, but in a little while it will become natural to him. For there is reason
to suspect, that Children being usually intent on their Play and very heedless
of any thing else, often let pass those Motions of Nature, when she calls them
but gently, and so they neglecting the seasonable Offers, do by degrees bring
themselves into an Habitual Costiveness. That by his Method Costiveness may be
prevented, I do more than guess, having known, by the Constant Practice of it
for some time, a Child brought to have a Stool regularly after his Breakfast
every Morning.

. 28. How far any grown People will think fit to make trial of it, I know not,
though I cannot but say, that considering the many Evils that come from that
Defect, of a requisite easing of Nature, I scarce know any thing more conducing
to the Preservation of Health than this is. Once in Four and Twenty hours, I
think, is enough, and no body, I guess, will think it too much; and by this
means, it is to be obtained without Physic, which commonly proves very
ineffectual, in the cure of a settled and habitual Costiveness.

. 29. This is all I have to trouble Physic.
you with concerning his Management, in the ordinary Course of his Health; and
perhaps it will be expected from me, that I should give some Directions of
Physic to prevent Diseases. For which I have only this one very sacredly to be
observed: Never to give Children any Physic for prevention. The observation of
what I have already advised, will, I suppose, do that better than Apothecarie's
Drugs and Medicines; Have a great care of tampering that way, least, instead of
preventing, you draw on Diseases. Nor even upon every little Indisposition is
Physic to be given, or the Physician to be called to Children, especially if
he be a Busy-man, that will presently fill their Windows with Gally-pots, and
their Stomachs with Drugs. It is safer to leave them wholly to Nature, than to
put them into the hands of one, forward to tamper, or that thinks Children are
to be cured in ordinary Distempers, by any thing but Diet, or by a Method very
little distant from it. It seeming suitable both to my Reason and Experience,
that the tender Constitutions of Children, should have as little done to them,
as is possible, and as the absolute necessity of the Case requires. A little
cold, stilled red Popywater, which is the true Surfeit-water, with Ease, and
Abstinence from Flesh, often puts an end to several Distempers in the
beginning, which by too forward Applications, might have been made lusty
Diseases. When such a gentle. Treatment will not prevent the growing Mischief,
but that it will turn into a formed Disease, it will be time to seek the Advice
of some sober and discreet Physician. In this part, I hope, I shall find an
easy belief, and no body can have a pretense to doubt the Advice of one, who
has spent some time in the Study of Physic, when he counsels you not to be too
forward in making use of Physic and Physicians.

. 30. And thus I have done with what concerns the Body and Health, which
reduces it self to these few and easily observable Rules. Plenty of open Air,
Exercise and Sleep; Plain Diet, no Wine or Strong Drink, and very little or no
Physic; not too Warm and straight Clothing, especially the Head and Feet kept
cold, and the Feet often used to cold Water, and exposed to wet.

. 31. Due care being had to keep Mind.
the Body in Strength and Vigor, so that it may be able to obey and execute the
Orders of the Mind. The next and principal Business is, to set the Mind right,
that on all Occasions it may be disposed, to do nothing, but what may be
suitable to the Dignity and Excellency of a rational Creature.

. 32. If what I have said in the beginning of this Discourse, be true, as I do
not doubt but it is, viz. That the difference to be found in the Manners and
Abilities of Men, is owing more to their Education, than to any thing else, we
have reason to conclude, that great care is to be had of the forming Children's
Minds, and giving them that seasoning early, which shall influence their Lives
always after. For when they do well or ill, the Praise or Blame will be laid
there; and when any thing is done untowardly, the common Saying will pass upon
them, That it is suitable to their Breeding.

. 33. As the Strength of the Body lies chiefly in being able to endure
Hardships, so also does that of the Mind. And the great Principle and
Foundation of all Virtue and Worth, is placed in this, That a Man is able to
deny himself his own Desires, cross his own Inclinations, and purely follow
what Reason directs as best, though the appetite lean the other way. Early.


. 34. The great Mistake I have observed in People's breeding their Children has
been, that this has not been taken care enough of in its due Season. That the
Mind has not been made obedient to Rules, and pliant to Reason, when at first
it was most tender, most easy to be bowed. Parents, being wisely ordained by
Nature to love their Children, are very apt, if Reason watch not that natural
Affection very warily; are apt, I say, to let it run into fondness. They love
their little ones, and it is their Duty: But they often, with them, cherish
their Faults too. They must not be crossed, forsooth; they must be permitted to
have their Wills in all things, and they being in their Infancies not capable
of great Vices, their Parents think, they may safely enough indulge their
little irregularities, and make themselves Sport with that pretty perverseness,
which, they think, well enough becomes that innocent Age. But to a fond Parent,
that would not have his Child corrected for a perverse Trick, but excused it,
saying, It was a small matter; Solon very well replied, Ay, but Custom is a
great one.

. 35. The Fondling must be taught to strike, and call Names; must have what he
Cries for, and do what he pleases. Thus Parents, by humoring and cockering them
when little, corrupt the Principles of Nature in their Children, and wonder
afterward to taste the bitter Waters, when they themselves have poisoned the
Fountain. For when their Children are grown up, and these ill Habits with them;
when they are now too big to be dandled, and their Parents can no longer make
use of them, as Play-things, then they complain, that the Brats are untoward
and perverse; then they are offended to see them wilful, and are troubled with
those ill Humors, which they themselves inspired and cherished in them. And
then perhaps, too late, would be glad to get out those Weeds, which their own
hands have planted, and which now have taken too deep root to be easily
extirpated. For he that has been used to have his Will in every thing, as long
as he was in Coats, why would we think it strange, that he should desire it,
and contend for it still, when he is in Breeches? Indeed, as he grows more
toward a Man, Age shows his Faults the more, so that there be few Parents then
so blind, as not to see them; few so insensible as not to feel the ill Effects
of their own indulgence. He had the Will of his Maid before he could Speak or
Go; he had the Mastery of his Parents ever since he could Prattle; and why now
he is grown up, is Stronger and Wiser than he was then, why now of a sudden
must he be restrained and Curbed? Why must he at seven, fourteen, or twenty
Years old, lose the Privilege which the parent's indulgence, till then, so
largely allowed him? Try it in a Dog or an Horse, or any other Creature, and
see whether the ill and resty Tricks, they have learned when young, are easily
to be mended when they are knit; and yet none of those Creatures are half so
wilful and proud, or half so desirous to be Masters of themselves and others,
as Man.

. 36. We are generally wise enough to begin with them when they are very young,
and Discipline betimes those other Creatures we would make useful to us. They
are only our own Offspring, that we neglect in this Point; and having made
them ill Children, we foolishly expect they should be good Men. For if the
Child must have Grapes or Sugarplumbs, when he has a Mind to them, rather than
make the poor Baby cry, or be out of Humor, why when he is grown up, must he
not be satisfied too, if his Desires carry him to Wine or Women? They are
Objects as suitable to the longing of one of more Years, as what he cried for
when little, was to the inclinations of a Child. The having Desires suitable to
the Apprehensions and Relish of those several Ages is not the Fault: but the
not having them subject to the Rules and Restraints of Reason: The Difference
lies not in the having or not having Appetites, but in the Power to govern and
deny our selves in them. And he, that is not used to submit his Will to the
Reason of others, when he is young, will scarce hearken or submit to his own
Reason, when he is of an Age to make use of it. And what a kind of a Man such
an one is like to prove, is easy to foresee.

. 37. It seems plain to me, that the Craving.
Principle of all Virtue and Excellency, lies in a power of denying our selves
the satisfaction of our own Desires, where Reason does not authorize them. This
Power is to be got and improved by Custom, made easy and familiar by an early
Practice. If therefore I might be heard, I would advise, that contrary to the
ordinary way, Children should be used to submit their Desires, and go without
their Longings, even from their very Cradles. The first thing they should learn
to know should be, that they were not to have any thing, because it pleased
them, but because it was thought fit for them. If things suitable to their
Wants were supplied to them, so that they were never suffered to have what they
once cried for, they would learn to be content without it, would never with
Bawling and Peevishness contend for Mastery, nor be half so uneasy to
themselves and others, as they are, because from the first beginning, they are
not thus handled. If they were never suffered to obtain their desire by the
Impatience they expressed for it, they would no more cry for other Things, than
they do for the Moon.

. 38. I say not this, as if Children were not to be indulged in any Thing; or
that I expected they should, in Hanging-Sleeves, have the Reason and Conduct of
Counselors. I consider them as Children that must be tenderly used, that must
play, and have Play-things. That which I mean, is, That whenever they crave
what was not fit for them to have or do, they should not be permitted it,
because they were little, and desired it: Nay, Whatever they were importunate
for, they should be sure, for that very Reason, to be denied. I have seen
Children at a Table, who, whatever was there, never asked for any thing, but
contentedly took, what was given them: And at another Place I have seen others
cry for every Thing they saw, must be served out of every Dish, and that first
too. What made this vast Difference but this; That one was accustomed to have
what they called or cried for; the other to go without it? The younger they
are, the less, I think, are their unruly and disorderly Appetites to be
complied with; and the less Reason they have of their own, the more are they to
be under the Absolute Power and Restraint of those, in whose Hands they are.
From which, I confess, it will follow, That none but discreet People should be
about them. If the World commonly does otherwise, I cannot help that: I am
saying what I think should be; which, if it were already in Fashion, I should
not need to trouble the World with a Discourse on this Subject. But yet I doubt
not, but when it is considered, there will be Others of Opinion with me, That
the sooner this Way is begun with Children, the easier it will be for them, and
their Governors too. And, that this ought to be observed as an inviolable
Maxim, That whatever once is denied them, they are certainly not to obtain by
Crying or Importunity, unless one has a Mind to teach them to be impatient, and
troublesome, by rewarding them for it, when they are so.

. 39. Those therefore that intend Early.
ever to govern their Children, should begin it whilst they are very little;
and look, that they perfectly comply with the will of their Parents. Would you
have your Son obedient to you when past a Child? Be sure then to establish the
Authority of a Father as soon as he is capable of Submission, and can
understand in whose Power he is. If you would have him stand in awe of you,
imprint it in his Infancy; and, as he approaches more to a Man, admit him
nearer to your Familiarity; so shall you have him your obedient Subject (as is
fit) whilst he is a Child, and your affectionate Friend when he is a Man. For,
methinks they mightily misplace the Treatment due to their Children, who are
indulgent and familiar, when they are little, but severe to them, and keep them
at a distance when they are grown up: For, Liberty and Indulgence can do no
good to Children, their Want of Judgment makes them stand in need of Restraint
and Discipline: And, on the contrary, Imperiousness and Severity is but an ill
Way of Treating Men, who have Reason of their own to guide them, unless you
have a Mind to make your Children, when grown up, weary of you; and secretly to
say within themselves, When will you die, Father?

. 40. I imagine every one will judge it reasonable, that their Children, when
little, should look upon their Parents as their Lords, their Absolute
Governors, and as such, stand in awe of them: And that, when they come to riper
Years, they should look on them as their best, as their only sure Friends; and
as such, love and reverence them. The Way I have mentioned, if I mistake not,
is the only one to obtain this. We must look upon our Children, when grown up,
to be like our selves; with the same Passions, the same Desires. We would be
thought Rational Creatures, and have our Freedom; we love not to be uneasy,
under constant Rebukes and Brow-beatings; nor can we bear severe Humors, and
great Distance in those we converse with. Whoever has such Treatment when he is
a Man, will look out other Company, other Friends, other Conversation, with
whom he can be at Ease. If therefore a strict Hand be kept over Children from
the Beginning, they will in that Age be tractable, and quietly submit to it, as
never having known any other: And if, as they grow up to the Use of Reason, the
Rigor of Government be, as they deserve it, gently relaxed, the Father's Brow
be more smooth to them, and the Distance by Degrees abated, his former
Restraints will increase their Love, when they find it was only a Kindness to
them and a Care to make them capable to deserve the Pavour of their Parents,
and the Esteem of every Body else.

. 41. Thus much for the Settling your Authority over your Children in general.
Fear and Awe ought to give you the first Power over their Minds, and Love and
Friendship in riper Years to hold it: For the Time must come, when they will be
past the Rod, and Correction; and then, if the Love of you make them not
obedient and dutiful, if the Love of Virtue and Reputation keep them not in
Laudable Courses, I ask, What Hold will you have then upon them, to turn them
to it? Indeed, Fear of having a scanty Portion if they displease you, may make
them Slaves to your Estate, but they will be never the less ill and wicked in
private; and that Restraint will not last always. Every Man must some Time or
other be trusted to himself, and his own Conduct; and he that is a good, a
virtuous, and able Man, must be made so within; and therefore, what he is to
receive from Education, what is to sway and influence his Life, must be
something put into him betimes, Habits woven into the very Principles of his
Nature; and not a counterfeit Carriage, and dissembled Outside, put on by
Fear, only to avoid the present Anger of a Father, who perhaps may dis-inherit
him.

. 42. This being laid down in general, Punishments.
as the Course ought to be taken, it is fit we now come to consider the Parts of
the Discipline to be used, a little more particularly. I have spoken so much of
Carrying a strict Hand over Children, that perhaps I shall be suspected of not
Considering enough what is due to their tender Ages and Constitutions. But that
Opinion will vanish, when you have heard me a little farther. For I am very apt
to think, that great Severity of Punishment does but very little Good; nay,
great Harm in Education: And I believe it will be found, that, Caeteris
paribus, those Children who have been most chastised seldom make the best Men.
All, that I have hitherto contended for, is That whatsoever Rigor is
necessary, it is more to be used the younger Children are; and having, by a due
Application, wrought its Effect, it is to be relaxed, and changed into a milder
Sort of Government.

. 43. A Compliance, and Suppleness Awe.
of their Wills, being by a steady Hand introduced by Parents, before Children
have Memories to retain the Beginnings of it, will seem natural to them, and
work afterward in them as if it were so, preventing all Occasions of
Struggling, or repining. The only Care is, That it be begun early, and
inflexibly kept to, till Awe and Respect be grown familiar, and there appears
not the least Reluctance in the Submission and ready Obedience of their Minds.
When this Reverence is once thus established, (which it must be early, or else
it will cost pains and Blows to recover it; and the more, the longer it is
deferred,) it is by it, mixed still with as much Indulgence as they make not an
ill Use of; and not by Beating, Chiding, or other Servile Punishments, they are
for the future to be governed as they grow up to more Understanding.

. 44. That this is so, will be easily allowed, when it is but considered, what
is to be aimed at in an ingenuous Education; and upon what it turns.

1. He that has not a mastery over Self-denial.
his Inclinations, he that knows not how to resist the importunity of present
Pleasure or Pain, for the sake of what Reason tells him is fit to be done,
wants the true Principle of Virtue and Industry; and is in danger never to be
good for any thing. This Temper therefore, so contrary to unguided Nature, is
to be got betimes; and this Habit, as the true foundation of future Ability and
Happiness, is to be wrought into the Mind, as early as may be, even from the
first dawnings of any Knowledge, or Apprehension in Children; and so to be
confirmed in them, by all the Care and Ways imaginable, by those who have the
oversight of their Education.

. 45. 2. On the otherside, if the Dejected.
Mind be curbed, and humbled too much in Children; if their Spirits be abased
and broken much, by too strict an hand over them, they lose all their Vigor,
and Industry, and are in a Worse State than the former. For extravagant young
Fellows, that have Liveliness and Spirit, come sometimes to be set right, and
so make Able and Great Men: But dejected Minds, timorous, and tame, and low
Spirits, are hardly ever to be raised, and very seldom attain to any Thing. To
avoid the danger, that is on either hand, is the great Art; and he that has
found a way, how to keep up a Child's Spirit, easy, active and free; and yet at
the same time, to restrain him from many things, he has a Mind to, and to draw
him to things that are uneasy to him; he, I say, that knows how to reconcile
these seeming Contradictions, has, in my Opinion, got the true Secret of
Education.

. 46. The usual lazy and short Beating.
way by Chastisement, and the Rod, which is the only Instrument of Government,
that Tutors generally know, or ever think of, is the most unfit of any to be
used in Education, because it tends to both those Mischiefs, which, as we have
shown, are the Sylla and Charybdis, which on the one hand or other, ruin all
that miscarry.

. 47. 1. This kind of Punishment, contributes not at all to the mastery of our
Natural Propensity, to indulge Corporal and present Pleasure, and to avoid Pain
at any rate, but rather encourages it; and so strengthens that in us, which is
the root of all vicious and wrong Actions. For what Motives, I pray, does a
Child Act by, but of such Pleasure and Pain, that drudges at his Book against
his Inclination, or abstains from eating unwholesome Fruit, that he takes
pleasure in, only out of fear of whipping? He in this only preferrs the greater
Corporal Pleasure, or avoids the greater Corporal Pain, and what is it to
govern his Actions, and direct his Conduct by such Motives as these? What is
it, I say, but to cherish that Principle in him, which it is our Business to
root out and destroy? And therefore I cannot think any Correction useful to a
Child, where the Shame of Suffering for having done Amiss, does not more work
upon him than the Pain.

. 48. 2. This sort of Correction naturally breeds an Aversion to that which
it is the Tutor's Business to create a liking to. How obvious is it to observe,
that Children come to hate things liked at first, as soon as they come to be
whipped or chid, and teased about them; And it is not to be wondered at in
them, when grown Men, would not be able to be reconciled to any thing by such
ways. Who is there, that would not be disgusted with any innocent Recreation in
it self indifferent to him, if he should with blows or ill Language be haled to
it, when he had no Mind? Or be constantly so treated, for some Circumstance in
his application to it? This is natural to be so: Offensive Circumstances
ordinarily infect innocent things, which they are joined with; and the very
sight of a Cup, wherein any one uses to take nauseous Physic, turns his
Stomach, so that nothing will relish well out of it, though the Cup be never so
clean, and well shaped, and of the richest Materials.

. 49. 3. Such a sort of slavish Discipline, makes a slavish Temper. The Child
submits, and dissembles Obedience, whilst the fear of the Rod hangs over him;
but when that is removed, and by being out of sight, he can promise himself
impunity, he gives the greater scope to his natural Inclination, which by this
way is not at all altered, but on the contrary heightened and increased in him,
and after such restraint, breaks out usually with the more violence; or,

. 50. 4. If Severity carried to the highest pitch does prevail, and works a
Cure upon the present unruly Distemper, it is often by bringing in the room of
it, a worse and more dangerous Disease, by breaking the Mind, and then in the
place of a disorderly young Fellow, you have a low spirited, moap'd Creature,
who, however with his unnatural Sobriety, he may please silly People, who
commend tame, unactive Children, because they make no noise, nor give them any
trouble; yet, at last, will probably prove as uncomfortable a thing to his
Friends, as he will be, all his life, an useless thing to himself and others.

. 51. Beating then, and all other Rewards.
Sorts of slavish and corporal Punishments, are not the Discipline fit to be
used in the Education of those, we would have wise, good, and ingenuous Men;
and therefore very rarely to be applied, and that only in great Occasions, and
Cases of Extremity. On the other side, to flatter children by Rewards of
things, that are pleasant to them is as carefully to be avoided. He that will
give his Son Apples or Sugarplumbs, or what else of this kind he is most
delighted with, to make him learn his Book, does but authorize his love of
pleasure, and cocker up that dangerous propensitie, which he ought by all means
to subdue and stifle in him. You can never hope to teach him to master it,
whilst you compound for the Check you give his Inclination in one place, by the
Satisfaction you propose to it in another. To make a good, a wise, and a
virtuous Man, it is fit he should learn to cross his Appetite, and deny his
Inclination to riches, finery, or pleasing his Palate, etc. when ever his
Reason advises the contrary, and his Duty requires it. But when you draw him to
do any thing that is fit, by the offer of Money, or reward the pains of
learning his Book, by the pleasure of a luscious Morsel: When you promise him a
Lace-Crevat, or a fine new Suit upon the performance of some of his little
Tasks, what do you by proposing these as Rewards, but allow them to be the good
Things, he should aim at, and thereby encourage his longing for them, and
accustom him to place his happiness in them? Thus People to prevail with
Children to be industrious about their Grammar, Dancing, or some other such
matter, of no great moment to the happiness or ufefullness of their Lives, by
misapplied Rewards and Punishments, sacrifice their Virtue, invert the Order of
their Education, and teach them Luxury, Pride, or Covetousness, etc. For in
this way, flattering those wrong Inclinations, which they should restrain and
suppress, they lay the Foundations of those future Vices, which cannot be
avoided but by curbing our Desires, and accustoming them early to submit to
Reason.

. 52. I say not this, that I would have Children kept from the Conveniences or
pleasures of Life, that are not injurious to their Health or Virtue. On the
contrary, I would have their Lives made as pleasant and as agreeable to them,
as may be, in a plentiful enjoyment of whatsoever might innocently delight
them: Provided it be with this Caution, that they have those Enjoyments, only
as the Consequences of the State of Esteem and Acceptance, they are in with
their Parents and Governors, but they should never be offered or bestowed on
them as the Rewards of this or that particular Performance, that they show an
Aversion to, or to which they would not have applied themselves without that
Temptation.

. 53. But if you take away the Rod on one hand, and those little
Encouragements, which they are taken with on the other, How then (will you say)
shall Childern be governed? Remove Hope and Fear, and there is an end of all
Discipline. I grant, that Good and Evil, Reward and Punishment, are the only
Motives to a rational Creature; these are the Spur and Reins whereby all
Mankind are set on work and guided, and therefore they are to be made use of to
Children too. For I advise their Parents and Governors always to carry this in
their Minds, that they are to be treated as rational Creatures.

. 54. Rewards, I grant, and Punishments must be proposed to Children, if we
intend to work upon them; the Mistake, I imagine, is, that those, that are
generally made use of, are ill chosen. The Pains and Pleasures of the Body are,
I think, of ill consequence, when made the Rewards and Punishments, whereby Men
would prevail on their Children: For they serve but to increase and strengthen
those Appetites, which it is our business to subdue and master. What principle
of Virtue do you lay in a Child, if you will redeem his Desires of one Pleasure
by the Proposal of another? This is but to enlarge his Appetite, and instruct
it to wander. If a Child cries for an unwholesome and dangerous Fruit, you
purchase his quiet by giving him a less hurtful Sweet-meat; this perhaps may
preserve his Health, but spoils his Mind, and sets that farther out of order.
For here you only change the Object, but flatter still his Appetite, and allow
that must be satisfied: Wherein, as I have showed, lies the root of the
Mischief; and till you bring him to be able to bear a denial of that
Satisfaction, the Child may at present be quiet and orderly, but the Disease is
not cured. By this way of proceeding you foment and cherish in him, that which
is the Spring, from whence all the Evil flows, which will be sure on the next
occasion to break out again with more violence, give him stronger Longings, and
you more trouble.

. 55. The Rewards and Punishments Reputation.
then, whereby we should keep Children in order, are quite of another kind, and
of that force, that when we can get them once to work, the business, I think,
is done, and the difficulty is over. Esteem and Disgrace are, of all others,
the most powerful incentives to the Mind, when once it is brought to relish
them: If you can once get into Children a love of Credit, and an apprehension
of Shame and Disgrace, you have put into them the true Principle, which will
constantly work, and incline them to the right. But it will be asked, how shall
this be done?

I confess, it does not at first appearance want some difficulty; but yet I
think it worth our while, to seek the ways (and practice them when found,) to
attain this, which I look on as the great Secret of Education.

. 56. First, Children (earlier perhaps than we think) are very sensible of
Praise and Commendation. They find a Pleasure in being esteemed, and valued,
especially by their Parents, and those whom they depend on. If therefore the
Father caress and commend them, when they do well; show a cold and neglectful
Countenance to them upon doing ill: And this accompanied by a like Carriage of
the Mother, and all others that are about them, it will in a little Time make
them sensible of the Difference; and this, if constantly observed, I doubt not
but will of it self work more than Threats or Blows, which lose their Force
when once grown common, and are of no use when Shame does not attend them; and
therefore are to be forborne, and never to be used, but in the Case hereafter
mentioned, when it is brought to Extremity.

. 57. But Secondly, To make the Sense of Esteem or Disgrace, sink the deeper,
and be of the more weight, other agreeable or disagreeable Things should
constantly accompany these different States; not as particular Rewards and
Punishments of this or that particular Action, but as necessarily belonging to,
and constantly attending one, who by his Carriage has brought himself into a
State of Disgrace or Commendation. By which Way of Treating them, Children may,
as much as possible, be brought to conceive, that those that are commended, and
in Esteem, for doing well, will necessarily be beloved and cherished by every
Body, and have all other good Things as a Consequence of it. And on the other
Side, when any one by Miscarriage, falls into Dis-esteem, and cares not to
preserve his Credit, he will unavoidably fall under Neglect and Contempt; and
in that State, the Want of what ever might satisfy or delight him will follow.
In this way, the Objects of their Desires are made assisting to Virtue, when a
settled Experience from the beginning teaches Children, that the Things they
delight in, belong to, and are to be enjoyed, by those only, who are in a State
of Reputation. If by these Means you can come once to shame them out of their
Faults, (for besides that, I would willingly have no Punishment,) and make them
in love with the Pleasure of being well thought on, you may turn them as you
please, and they will be in love with all the Ways of Virtue.

. 58. The great Difficulty here is, I imagine, from the Folly and Perverseness
of Servants, who are hardly to be hindered from crossing herein the Design of
the Father and Mother. Children discountenanced by their Parents for any Fault,
find usually a Remedy and Retreat in the Caresses of those foolish Flatterers,
who thereby undo whatever the Parents endeavor to establish. When the Father
or Mother looks sour on the Child, every Body else should put on the same
Carriage to him, and no Body give him Countenance, till Forgiveness asked, and
a contrary Carriage restored him to his Esteem and former Credit again. If this
were constantly observed, I guess there would be little need of Blows, or
Chiding: Their own Ease and Satisfaction would quickly teach Children to court
Commendation, and avoid doing that which they found every Body condemned, and
they were sure to suffer for, without being chid or beaten. This would teach
them Modesty and Shame; and they would quickly come to have a natural
Abhorrence for that, which they found made them slighted and neglected by every
Body. But how this Inconvenience from Servants is to be remedied, I can only
leave to Parents Care and Consideration; only I think it of great Importance:
and they are very happy, who can get discreet People about their Children.

. 59. Frequent Beating or Chiding Shame.
is therefore carefully to be avoided, because it never produces any Good,
farther than it serves to raise Shame and Abhorrence of the Miscarriage that
brought it on them: And if the greatest part of the Trouble be not the Sense
that they have done amiss, and the Apprehension that they have drawn on
themselves the just Displeasure of their best Friends, the Pain of Whipping
will work but an imperfect Cure; it only patches up for the present, and skins
it over, but reaches not to the Bottom of the Sore. Shame then, and
Apprehension of Displeasure, being that which ought alone to give a Check, and
hold the Reins, it is impossible but Punishment should lose that Efficacy, when
it often returns. Shame has in Children the same Place as Modesty in Women,
which cannot be kept, and often transgressed against. And as to the
Apprehension of Displeasure in the Parents, that will come to be very
insignificant, if the Marks of that Displeasure quickly cease. And therefore I
think, Parents should well consider what Faults in their Children are weighty
enough to deserve the Declaration of their Anger: But when their Displeasure is
once declared to a Degree, that carries any Punishment with it, they ought not
presently to lay by the Severity of their Brows, but to restore their Children
to their former Grace with some Difficulty; and delay till their Conformity,
and more than ordinary Merit, make good their Amendment. If this be not so
ordered, Punishment will be, by Familiarity, but a Thing of Course; and
Offending, being punished, and then forgiven, be as natural and ordinary, as
Noon, Night, and morning following one another.

. 60. Concerning Reputation, I Reputation.
shall only remark this one Thing more of it; That though it be not the true
Principle and Measure of Virtue, (for that is the Knowledge of a Man's Duty,
and the Satisfaction it is, to obey his Maker, in following the Dictates of
that Light God has given him, with the Hopes of Acceptance and Reward,) yet it
is that, which comes nearest to it; and being the Testimony and Applause that
other People's Reason, as it were by common Consent, gives to virtuous, and
wellordered Actions, is the proper Guide and encouragement of Children, till
they grow able to judge for themselves, and to find what is right, by their own
Reason.

. 61. But if a right Course be taken with Children, there will not be so much
need of the Application of the common Rewards and Punishments as we imagine,
and as the general Practice has established: For, All their innocent Folly,
Playing, and Childish Childishness.
Actions are to be left perfectly free and unrestrained, as far as they can
consist with the Respect due to those that are present; and that with the
greatest Allowance. If these Faults of their Age, rather than of the Children
themselves, were as they should be, left only to Time and Imitation, and riper
Years to cure, Children would escape a great deal of mis-applied and useless
Correction; which either fails to overpower the natural Disposition of their
Childhood, and so, by an ineffectual Familiarity, makes Corection in other
necessary Cases of less use; or else, if it be of force to restrain the natural
gaiety of that Age, it serves only to spoil the Temper both of Body and Mind.
If the Noise and Bustle of their Play prove at any Time inconvenient, or
unsuitable to the Place or Company they are in, (which can only be where their
Parents are,) a Look or a Word from the Father or Mother, if they have
established the Authority they should, will be enough either to remove, or
quiet them for that Time. But this Gamesome Humor, which is wisely adapted by
Nature to their Age and Temper, should rather be encouraged to keep up their
Spirits, and improve their Strength and Health, than curbed, or restrained, and
the chief Art is, to make all that they have to do, Sport and Play too.

. 62. And here give me leave to Rules.
take notice of one thing I think a Fault in the ordinary Method of Education;
and that is, The Charging of Children's Memories, upon all Occasions, with
Rules and Precepts which they often do not understand, and constantly as soon
forget as given. If it be some Action you would have done, or done otherwise;
whenever they forget, or do it awkardly, make them do it over and over again,
till they are perfect: Whereby you will get these two Advantages; First, To see
whether it be an Action they can do, or is fit to be expected of them: For
sometimes Children are bid to do Things, which, upon Trial, they are found not
able to do; and had need be taught and exercised in, before they are required
to do them. But it is much easier for a Tutor to command, than to teach.
Secondly, Another Thing got by it will be this; That by repeating the same
Action till it be grown habitual in them, the Performance will not depend on
Memory, or Reflection the Concomitant of Prudence and Age, and not of
Childhood, but will be natural in them. Thus bowing to a Gentleman when he
salutes him, and looking in his Face when he speaks to him, is by constant use
as natural to a well-bred Man as breathing; it requires no Thought, no
Reflection. Having this way cured in your Child any Fault, it is cured for
ever: And thus one by one you may weed them out all, and plant what Habits you
please.

. 63. I have seen Parents so heap Rules on their Children, that it was
impossible for the poor little ones to remember a Tenth Part of them, much less
to observe them. However they were either by Words or Blows corrected for the
Breach of those multiplied and often very impertinent Precepts. Whence it
naturally followed, that the Children minded not, what was said to them; when
it was evident to them, that no Attention, they were capable of, was sufficient
to preserve them from Transgression and the Rebukes which followed it.

Let therefore your Rules, to your Son, be as few as is possible, and rather
fewer than more than seem absolutely necessary. For if you burden him with many
Rules, one of these two things must necessarily follow; that either he must be
very often punished, which will be of ill consequence, by making Punishment too
frequent and familiar; or else you must let the Transgressions of some of your
Rules go unpunished: Whereby they will of course grow contemptible, and your
Authority become cheap to him. Make but few Laws, but see they be well
observed, when once made. Few Years require but few Laws, and as his Age
increases, when one Rule is, by practice, well established, you may add another.

. 64. But pray remember, Children are not to be taught by Rules, which will be
always slipping out of their Memories. What you think necessary for them to do,
settle in them by an indispensible practice, as often as the occasion returns;
and if it be possible, make occasions. This will beget Habits in them, which
being once established, operate of themselves easily and naturally without the
assistance of the Memory. But here let me give two Cautions, 1. The one is,
that you keep them to the practice of what you would have grow into a Habit in
them, by kind Words, and gentle Admonitions, rather as minding them of what
they forget, than by harsh Rebukes and Chiding, as if they were wilfully
guilty. 2dly, Another thing you are to take care of, is, not to endeavor to
settle too many Habits at once, least by variety you confound them, and so
perfect none. When constant custom has made any one thing easy and natural to
them, and they practice it with Reflection, you may then go on to another.

. 65. Manners, as they call it, about Manners.
which Children are so often perplexed, and have so many goodly Exhortations
made them, by their wise Maids and Governesses, I think, are rather to be
learnt by Example than Rules; and then Children, if kept out of ill Company,
will take a pride, to behave themselves prettily, after the fashion of others,
perceiving themselves esteemed and commended for it. But if by a little
negligence in this part, the Boy should not put of his Hat, nor make Legs very
gracefully, a Dancing Master would cure that Defect, and wipe of all that
plainness of Nature, which the Alamode People call Clownishness. And since
nothing appears to me to give Children so much becoming Confidence and
Behavior, and so to raise them to the conversation of those above their Age,
as Dancing, I think, Dancing.
they should be taught to dance as soon as they are capable of Learning it. For
though this consist only in outward gracefulness of Motion, yet, I know not
how, it gives Children manly Thoughts, and Carriage more than any thing. But
otherwise, I would not Manners.
have Children much tormented about Punctilio's, or Niceties of Breeding. Never
trouble your self about those Faults in them, which you know Age will cure. And
therefore want of well-fashion'd Civility in the Carriage, whilst Civility is
not wanting in the Mind (for there you must take care to plant it early) should
be the Parent's and Tutor's least care, whilst they are young. If his tender
Mind be filled with a Veneration for his Parents and Teachers, which consists
in Love and Esteem, and a fear to offend them; and with Respect and good Will
to all People, that respect will of it self teach those ways of Expressing it,
which he observes most acceptable. Be sure to keep up in him the Principles of
good Nature and Kindness; make them as habitual as you can by Credit and
Commendation, and the good Things accompanying that State: And when they have
taken root in his Mind, and are settled there by a continued practice, fear
not, the Ornaments of Conversation, and the outside of fashionable Manners,
will come in their due time. Whilst they are young, any carelessness is to be
born with in Children, that carries not with it the Marks of Pride or ill
Nature: But those, when they appear in any Action, are to be Corrected
immediately by the ways abovementioned; and what else remains like
Clownishness, or want ofg ood Breeding, time and observation will of it self
reform in them as they ripen in Years, if they are bred in good Company; but if
in ill, all the Rules in the World, all the Correction imaginable, will not be
able to polish them. For you must take this for a certain truth, that let them
have what Instructions you will, what Teachers soever you please, that, which
will most influence their Actions, will be the Company they converse with;
Children (nay, and Men too) do most by Example: We are all a sort of Camelions,
that still take a Tincture from things about us; nor is it to be wondered at in
Children, who better understand what they see, than what they hear.

. 66. I mentioned above, one Company.
great Mischief that came by Servants to Children, when by their Flatteries
they take off the edge and force of the Parents rebukes, and so lessen their
Authority. And here is another great inconvenience which Children receive from
the ill Examples, which they meet with amongst the meaner Servants. They are
wholly, if possible, to be kept from such Conversation: For the contagion of
these ill precedents, both in Civility and Virtue, horribly infects Children,
as often as they come within reach of it. They frequently learn from unbred or
debauched Servants, such Language, untowardly Tricks and Vices, as otherwise
they possibly would be ignorant of all their Lives.

. 67. It Is a hard matter wholly to prevent this Mischief, you will have very
good luck, if you never have a clownish or vicious Servant, and if from them
your Children never get any infection. But yet as much must be done toward it,
as can be, and the Children kept as much as may be in the company of their
Parents, and those to whose care they are committed. To this purpose, their
being in their presence, should be made easy to them; they shall be allowed
the liberties and freedom suitable to their Ages, and not to be held under
unnecessary restraints, when in their Parent's or Governor's sight. If it be a
prison to them, it is no wonder they should not like it. They must not be
hindered from being Children, or from playing, or doing as Children, but from
doing ill; all other Liberty is to be allowed them. Next to make them in love
with the company of their Parents, they should receive all their good things
there, and from their hands. The Servants should be hindered from making court
to them, by giving them strong Drink, Wine, Fruit, Play-things, and other such
matters, which may make them in love with their conversation.

. 68. Having named Company, I am almost ready to throw away my Pen, and trouble
you no farther on this Subject. For since that does more than all Precepts,
Rules and Instructions, methinks it is almost wholly in vain, to make along
Discourse of other things, and to talk of that almost to no purpose; for you
will be ready to say, What shall I do with my Son? If I keep him always at
home, he will be in danger to be my young Master; and if I send him abroad, how
is it possible to keep him from the contagion of Rudeness and Vice, which is so
every where in fashion? In my house, he will perhaps be more innocent, but more
ignorant too of the World, and being used constantly to the same Faces, and
little Company, will, when he comes abroad, be a sheepish or conceited
Creature. I confess, both sides have their Inconveniences, but whilst he is at
home, use him as much to your company, and the company of Men. genteel and
well-bred People, that come to your House, as you can; and keep him from the
Taint of your Servants, and meaner People: And about his going abroad, or
staying at home, it must be left to the Parents Conveniences and Circumstances.
But this is certain, breeding at home in their own sight, under a good
Governor, is much the best, when it can be had, and is ordered, as it should
be.

. 69. Having under Consideration how great the Influence of Company is, and how
prone we are all, especially Children, to Imitation, I must here take the
liberty to mind parents of this one Thing, viz. That he that will have his Son
have a Respect for him and his Orders, must himself have a great Reverence for
his Son. Maxima Example.
debetur pueris reverentia. You must do nothing before him, which you would not
have him imitate. If any thing escape you, which you would have pass for a Fault
in him, he will be sure to shelter himself under your Example: And how then you
will be able to come at him to correct it in the right way I do not easily see:
And if you will punish him for it, he cannot look on it as a Thing which Reason
condemns, since you practice it; but he will be apt to interpret it, the
Peevishness, and arbitrary Imperiousness of a Father, which, without any Ground
for it, would deny his Son the Liberty and Pleasures he takes himself. Or if
you would have it thought, it is a Liberty belonging to riper Years, and not to
a Child, you add but a new Temptation, since you must always remember, that
Children affect to be Men earlier than is thought: And they love Breeches, not
for their Cut, or ease, but because the having them is a Mark of a Step toward
Manhood. What I say of the Father's Carriage before his Children, must extend
it self to all those who have any Authority over them, or for whom he would
have them have any Respect.

. 70. Thus all the Actions of Childishness, Punishment
and unfashionable Carriage, and whatever Time and Age will of it self be sure
to reform, being exempt from the Discipline of the Rod, there will not be so
much need of beating Children, as is generally made use of. To which if we add
learning to Read, Write, Dance, Foreign Languages, etc. as under the same
privilege, there will be but very rarely any Occasion for Blows or Force in an
ingenuous Education. The right way to teach them those things is, to give them
a Liking and Inclination to what you propose to them to be learned; and that
will engage their Industry and Application. This I think no hard Matter to do,
if Children be handled as they should be, and the Rewards and Punishments
abovementioned be carefully applied, and with them these few Rules observed in
the Method of Instructing them.

. 71. 1. None of the Things they Task.
are to learn should ever be made a Burden to them, or imposed on them as a
Task: Whatever is so proposed, presently becomes irksome; the Mind takes an
Aversion to it, though before it were a Thing of Delight or Indifferency. Let a
Child be but ordered to whip his Top at a certain Time every Day, whether he
has, or has not a Mind to it; let this be but required of him as a Duty,
wherein he must spend so many Hours Morning and Afternoon, and see whether he
will not soon be weary of any Play at this Rate. Is it not so with grown Men?
What they do cheerfully of themselves, do they not presently grow sick of, and
can no more endure, as soon as they find it is expected of them, as a Duty?
Children have as much a Mind to show that they are free, that their own good
Actions come from themselves, that they are absolute and independent, as any of
the proudest of your grown Men, think of them as you please.

. 72. 2. As a Consequence of this, Disposition.
they should seldom be put upon doing even those Things you have got an
Inclination in them to, but when they have a Mind and Disposition to it. He
that loves Reading, Writing, Music, etc. finds yet in himself certain Seasons
wherein those things have no Relish to him: And if at that Time he forces
himself to it, he only pothers and wearies himself to no purpose. So it is with
Children: This Change of Temper should be carefully observed in them, and the
favorable Seasons of Aptitude and Inclination be heedfully laid hold of, to
set them upon any Thing. By this Means a great Deal of Time and Tiring would be
saved; for a Child will learn three times as much when he is in tune, as he
will with double the Time and Pains, when he goes awkardly and unwillingly to
it. If this were minded as it should, Children might be permitted to weary
themselves with Play, and yet have Time enough to learn what is suited to the
Capacity of each Age. And if Things were ordered right, Learning any thing,
they should be taught, might be made as much a Recreation to their Play, as
their Play is to their Learning. The Pains are equal on both Sides: Nor is it
that which troubles them, for they love to be busy, and the Change and Variety
is that which naturally delights them; the only Odds is, in that which we call
Play, they act at liberty, and employ their Pains (whereof you may observe them
never sparing) freely; but what they are to learn, they are driven to it,
called on, or compelled. This is that that at first Entrance balks and cools
them; they want their Liberty: Get them but to ask their Tutor to teach them,
as they do often their Play-fellows, instead of this Calling upon them to
learn, and they being satisfied that they act as freely in this, as they do in
other Things, they will go on with as much Pleasure in it, and it will not
differ from their other Sports and Play. By these Ways, carefully pursued, I
guess, a Child may be brought to desire to be taught any Thing, you have a Mind
he should learn. The hardest Part, I confess, is with the first, or eldest; but
when once he is set right, it is easy by him to lead the rest whether one will.

. 73. Though it be past doubt, that the fittest Time for Children to learn any
Thing, is, when their Minds are in tune, and well disposed to it, when neither
Flagging of Spirit, nor Intentness of Thought upon something else makes them
awkard and averse; yet two Things are to be taken care of: 1. That these
Seasons either not being warily observed, and laid hold on, as often as they
return; or else, not returning as often as they should, (as always happens in
the ordinary Method and Discipline of Education, when Blows and Compulsion have
raised an Aversion in the Child to the Thing he is to learn,) the Improvement
of the Child be not thereby neglected, and so he be let grow into an habitual
Idleness, and confirmed in this Indisposition. 2. That though other Things are
ill learned when the Mind is either indisposed, or otherwise taken up, yet it
is a great Matter, and worth our Endeavors, to teach the Mind to get the
Mastery over it self; and to be able, upon Choice, to take it self off from the
hot Pursuit of one Thing, and set it self upon another with facility and
Delight; or at any Time to shake off its Sluggishness, and vigorously employ it
self about what Reason, or the Advice of another shall direct. This is to be
done in Children by trying them sometimes, when they are by Laziness unbent, or
by Avocation bent another Way, and endeavoring to make them buckle to the
Thing proposed. If by this Means the Mind can get an habitual Dominion over it
self, lay by Idea's, or Business, as Occasion requires, and betake it self to
new and less acceptable Employments, without Reluctance or Discomposure, it
will be an Advantage of more Consequence than Latin or Logic, or most of those
Things Children are usually required to learn.

. 74. Children being more active Compulsion.
and busy in that Age than any other Part of their Life, and being indifferent
to any Thing they can do, so they may be but doing, Dancing and Scotch-hoppers
would be the same thing to them, were the Encouragements and Discouragements
equal. But to Things we would have them learn, the great and only
Discouragement I can observe is, that they are called to it, it is made their
Business, they are teas'd and chid about it, and do it with Trembling and
Apprehension; or, when they come willingly to it, are kept too long at it, till
they are quite tired: All which intrenches too much on that natural Freedom
they extremely affect, and it is that Liberty alone which gives the true Relish
and Delight to their ordinary Play Games. Turn the Tables, and you will see
they will soon change their Application; especially if they see the Examples of
others, whom they esteem and think above themselves: And if the Things they see
others do be ordered so, that they are persuaded it is the Privilege of an Age
or Condition above theirs, then Ambition, and the Desire still to get forward,
and higher, and to be like those above them, will give them an Inclination
which will set them on work in a Way wherein they will go on with Vigor and
Pleasure, enjoying in it their dearly beloved Freedom; which, if it brings with
it also the Satisfaction of Credit and Reputation, I am apt to think, there
will need no other Spur to excite their Application and Assiduity as much as is
necessary. I confess, there needs Patience and Skill, Gentleness and Attention,
and a prudent Conduct to attain this at first. But, why have you a Tutor, if
there needed no pains? But when this is once established, all the rest will
follow more easily, than in any more severe and imperious Discipline; and I
think it no hard matter, to gain this Point; I am sure it will not be, where
Children have no ill Examples set before them. The great danger therefore I
apprehend, is only from Servants, and other ill-ordered Children, or such other
vicious or foolish People, who spoil Children, both by the ill pattern they set
before them in their own ill manners, and by giving them together, the two
things they should never have at once, I mean, vicious Pleasures and
Commendation.

. 75. As Children should very Chiding.
seldom be corrected by Blows; so, I think, frequent, and especially,
passionate Chiding, of almost as ill consequence. For it lessens the Authority
of the Parents, and the Respect of the Child, for I bid you still remember,
they distinguish early between Passion and Reason; and as they cannot but have
a Reverence for what comes from the latter, so they quickly grow into a
contempt of the former; or if it causes a present Terror, yet it soon wears
off, and natural Inclination will easily learn to slight such Scare-crows,
which make a noise, but are not animated by Reason. Children being to be
restrained by the Parents only in vicious (which, in their tender Years, are
only a few) things, a Look or Nod only ought to correct them, when they do
amiss: Or, if Words are sometimes to be used, they ought to be grave, kind and
sober, representing the ill, or unbecomingness of the Fault, rather than a
hasty rating of the Child for it, which makes him not sufficiently distinguish,
whether your Dislike be not more directed to him, than his Fault.

. 76. I foresee here it will be objected Obstinacy.
to me; what then, Will you have Children never Beaten nor Chid for any Fault?
This will be to let loose the Reins to all kind of Disorder. Not so much, as is
imagined, if a right Course has been taken in the first Seasoning of their
Minds, and implanting that Awe of their Parents abovementioned. For Beating, by
constant Observation, is found to do little good, where the Smart of it is all
the Punishment is feared, or felt in it; for the influence of that quickly
wears out, with the memory of it. But yet there is one, and but one Fault, for
which, I think, Children should be Beaten; and that is, Obstinacy or Rebellion,
and in this too, I would have it ordered so, if it can be, that the shame of
the Whipping, and not the Pain, should be the greatest part of the Punishment.
Shame of doing amiss, and deserving Chastisement, is the only true Restraint
belonging to Virtue. The Smart of the Rod, if Shame accompanies it not, soon
ceases, and is forgotten, and will quickly, by use, lose its Terror. I have
known the Children of a Person of Quality kept in awe, by the fear of having
their Shoes pulled off, as much, as others by apprehensions of a Rod hanging
over them. Some such Punishment, I think, better than Beating; for, it is Shame
of the Fault, and the Disgrace that attends it, that they should stand in fear
of, rather than Pain, if you would have them have a Temper truly ingenuous. But
Stubbornness, and an obstinate Disobedience, must be mastred with Force and
Blows, for this there is no other Remedy. Whatever particular Action you bid
him do, or forbear, you must be sure to see your self obeyed, no Quarter in
this case, no resistance; for when once it comes to be a Trial of Skill, a
Contest for Mastery betwixt you, as it is if you command, and he refuses, you
must be sure to carry it, whatever Blows it costs, if a Nod or Words will not
prevail, unless, for ever after, you intend to live in obedience to your Son. A
prudent and kind Mother, of my Acquaintance, was, on such an occasion, forced
to whip her little Daughter, at her first coming home from Nurse, eight times
successively the same Morning, before she could master her Stubbornness, and
obtain a compliance in a very easy and indifferent matter. If she had left off
sooner, and stopped at the seventh Whiping, she had spoiled the Child for ever,
and by her unprevailing Blows, only confirmed her refractariness, very hardly
afterward to be cured: But wisely persisting, till she had bent her Mind, and
suppled her Will, the only end of Correction and Chastisement, she established
her Authority thoroughly in the very first occasion, and had ever after, a very
ready Compliance and Obedience in all things from her Daughter. For as this was
the first time, so I think, it was the last too she ever struck her.

. 77. This, if well reflected on, would make People more wary in the use of the
Rod and the Cudgel; and keep them from being so apt to think Beating, the safe
and universal Remedy to be applied at Random, on all occasions. This is certain
however, if it does no good, it does great harm; if it reaches not the Mind,
and makes not the Will supple, it hardens the Offender, and whatever pain he
has suffered for it, it does but indear to him his beloved stubbornness, which
has got him this time the victory, and prepares him to contest and hope for it
for the future. This, I doubt not, but by ill ordered Correction many have been
taught to be obstinate and refractary, who otherwise would have been very
pliant and tractable. For if you punish a Child, so as if it were only to
revenge the past Fault, which has raised your Choler, What operation can this
have upon his Mind, which is the part to be amended? If there were no sturdy
wilfulness of Mind mixed with his Fault, there was nothing in it, that needed
the severity of Blows: A kind or grave Admonition would have been enough, to
remedy the Faults of frailty, Forgetfullness, or inadvertency, as much as they
needed. But if there were a perverseness in the Will, if it were a designed,
resolved Disobedience, the Punishment is not to be measured by the greatness or
smallness of the Matter, wherein it appeared, but by the opposition it carries,
and stands in, to that Respect and Submission is due to the Father's Orders,
and must always be rigorously exacted, and the Blows, by pauses, laid on till
they reach the Mind, and you perceive the Signs of a true Sorrow, Shame, and
resolution of Obedience. This, I confess, requires something more than setting
Children a Task, and whipping them without any more ado, if it be not done,
and done to our Phansy: This requires Care, Attention, Observation, and a nice
study of Children's Tempers, and weighing their Faults well before we come to
this sort of Punishment: but is not that better, than always to have the Rod in
hand, as the only Instrument of Government? And by frequent use of it on all
Occasions misapply and render inefficacious this last and useful Remedy, where
there is need of it. For what else can be expected, when it is promiscuously
used upon every little slip, when a Mistake in Concordance, or a wrong Position
in Verse, shall have the severity of the Lash, in a well-tempered and
industrious Lad, as surely, as a wilful Crime, in an obstinate and perverse
Offender? How can such a way of Correction be expected to do good on the Mind,
and set that right, which is the only thing to be looked after; and when set
right, brings all the rest, that you can desire, along with it?

. 78. Where a wrong bent of the Will, wants not amendment, there can be no need
of Blows. All other Faults, where the Mind is rightly disposed, and refuses not
the Government and Authority of the father or Tutor, are but Mistakes, and may
often be over-looked; or when they are taken notice of, need no other, but the
gentler Remedies of Advice, Direction and Reproof, till the repeated and
wilful neglect of those, shows the Fault to be in the Mind, and that a
manifest perverseness of the Will, lies at the root of their Disobedience: But
when ever obstinacy, which is an open defiance, appears, that cannot be winked
at, or neglected, but must in the first instance, be subdued and mastered; only
care must be had, that we mistake not, and we must be sure it is Obstinacy and
nothing else.

. 79. But since the Occasions of Punishment, especially Beating, are as much to
be avoided as may be, I think it should not be often brought to this Point: If
the Awe I spoke of be once got, a Look will be sufficient in most Cases. Nor
indeed, should the same Carriage, Seriousness, or Application be expected from
young Children, as from those of riper Growth: They must be permitted, as I
said, the foolish and childish Actions suitable to their Years, without taking
notice of them: Inadvertency, Carelessness and Gayety is the Character of that
Age. I think the Severity I spoke of is not to extend it self to such
unseasonable Restraints. Keep them from Vice, and vicious Dispositions, and
such a kind of Behavior in general will come with every Degree of their Age,
as is suitable to that Age, and the Company they ordinarily converse with; and
as they grow in Years, they will grow in Attention and Application. But that
your Words may always carry Weight and Authority with them, If it shall happen,
upon any Occasion, that you bid him leave off the Doing of any even Childish
thing, you must be sure to carry the Point, and not let him have the Mastery.
But yet, I say, I would have the Father seldom interpose his Authority and
Command in these Cases, or any other, but such as have a Tendency to vicious
Habits: I think there are better Ways of prevailing with them; and a gentle
Persuasion in Reasoning (when the first Point of Submission to your Will is
got) will most Times do much better.

. 80. It will perhaps be wondered that I mention Reasoning with Children, and
yet I cannot but think that Reasoning.
the true way of dealing with them. They understand it as early as they do
Language; and, if I mis-observe not, they love to be treated as Rational
Creatures sooner than is imagined. It Is a Pride should be cherished in them,
and, as much as can be, made the great Instrument to turn them by.

But when I talk of Reasoning, I do not intend any other, but such as is suited
to the Child's Capacity and Apprehension. No Body can think a Boy of Three or
Seven Years old should be argued with, as a grown Man: Long Discourses, and
Philosophical Reasonings, at best, amaze and confound, but do not instruct
Children. When I say therefore, that they must be treated as Rational
Creatures, I mean, that you should make them sensible by the Mildness of your
Carriage, and the Composure even in your Correction of them, that what you do
is reasonable in you, and useful and necessary for them: And that it is not out
of Caprichio, Passion, or Fancy, that you command or forbid them any Thing.
This they are capable of understanding; and there is no Virtue they should be
excited to, nor Fault they should be kept from, which I do not think they may
be convinced of; but it must be by such Reasons as their Age and Understanding
are capable of, and those proposed always in very few and plain Words. The
Foundations on which several Duties are built, and the Fountains of Right and
Wrong, from which they spring, are not perhaps easily to be let into the Minds
of grown Men, not used to abstract their Thoughts from common received
Opinions: Much less are children capable of Reasonings from remote Principles;
they cannot conceive the Force of long Deductions: The Reasons that move them
must be obvious, and level to their Thoughts, and such as may (if I may so say)
be felt, and touched. But yet if their Age, Temper and Inclinations be
considered, there will never want such Motives as may be sufficient to convince
them. If there be no other more particular, yet these will always be
intelligible, and of force to deterr them from any Fault fit to be taken notice
of in them, ( viz.) That it will be a Discredit and Disgrace to them, and
displease you.

. 81. But of all the ways whereby Examples.
Children are to be instructed, and their Manners formed, the plainest,
easiest, and most efficacious, is, to set before their Eyes the Examples of
those Things you would have them do, or avoid. Which, when they are pointed out
to them, in the Practice of Persons within their Knowledge, with some
Reflection on their Beauty, or Unbecomingness are of more force to draw or
deterr their Imitation, than any Discourses can be made to them. Virtues and
Vices can by no Words be so plainly set before their Understandings, as the
Actions of other Men will show them, when you direct their Observation, and bid
them view this or that good or bad Quality in their Practice. And the Beauty or
Uncomeliness of many Things in good and ill Breeding will be better learnt, and
make deeper Impressions on them, in the Examples of others, than from any Rules
or Instructions can be given about them.

This is a Method to be used, not only whilst they are young, but to be
continued even as long as they shall be under another's Tuition or Conduct.
Nay, I know not whether it be not the best Way to be used by a Father, as long
as he shall think fit, on any Occasion, to reform any Thing he wishes mended in
his Son: Nothing sinking so gently, and so deep, into Men's Minds, as Example.
And what Ill they either overlook, or indulge in them themselves, they cannot
but dis-like, and be ashamed of, when it is set before them in another.

. 82. It may be doubted concerning Whipping.
Whipping, when, as the last Remedy, it comes to be necessary; at what Time,
and by whom it should be done; whether presently upon the Committing the Fault,
whilst it is yet fresh and hot; and whether Parents themselves should beat
their Children. As to the First, I think it should not be done presently, lest
Passion mingle with it, and so, though it exceed the just Proportion, yet it
lose the Authority: For even Children discern when we do Things in Passion;
but, as I said before, that has most Weight with them, that appears sedately to
come from their Parents Reason; and they are not without this Distinction.
Next, If you have any discreet Servant capable of it, and has the Place of
governing your Child (for if you have a Tutor, there is no doubt) I think it is
best the Smart should come more immediately from another's Hand, though by the
Parents Order, who should see it done; whereby the Parent's Authority will be
preferred, and the Child's Aversion for the Pain it suffers rather be turned on
the Person that immediately inflicts it. For I would have a Father seldom
strike his Child, but upon very urgent Necessity, and as the last Remedy; and
then perhaps it will be fit to do it so, that the Child should not quickly
forget it.

. 83. But, as I said before, Beating is the worst, and therefore the last Means
to be used in the Correction of Children; and that only in Cases of Extremity,
after all gentler Ways have been tried, and proved unsuccessful; which, if well
observed, there will be very seldom any need of Blows. For it not being to be
imagined that a Child will often, if ever, dispute his Father's present Command
in any particular Instance; and the Father not rigorously interposing his
Authority in positive Rules concerning Childish or indifferent Actions, wherein
his Son is to have his Liberty; nor concerning his Learning or improvement,
wherein there is no Compulsion to be used; there remains only the Prohibition
of some vicious Actions, wherein a Child is capable of Obstinacy, and
consequently can deserve Beating: And so there will be but very few Occasions
of that Discipline to be used by any one, who considers well, and orders his
Child's Education as it should be. For the first Seven Years, What Vices can a
Child be guilty of, but Lying, or some ill-natured Tricks; the repeated
Commission whereof, after his Father's direct Command against it, shall bring
him into the Condemnation of Obstinacy, and the Chastisement of the Rod? If any
vicious Inclination in him be, in the first Appearance and Instances of it,
treated as it should, first with your Wonder, and then if returning again a
second Time, discountenanced with the severe Brow of the Father, Tutor, and all
about him, and a Treatment suitable to the State of Discredit beforementioned;
and this continued till he be made sensible, and ashamed of his Fault, I
imagine there will be no need of any other Correction, nor ever any Occasion to
come to Blows. The Necessity of such Chastisement is usually the Consequence
only of former Indulgencies, or Neglects. If vicious Inclinations were watched
from the Beginning, and the first Irregularities they caused corrected by those
gentler Ways, we should seldom have to do with more than one Disorder at once,
which would be easily set right without any Stir or Noise, and not require so
harsh a Discipline as Beating. Thus one by one as they appeared, they might all
be weeded out without any Signs or Memory that ever they had been there. But we
letting their Faults (by Indulging and Humouring our little Ones) grow up till
they are Sturdy and Numerous, and the Deformity of them makes us ashamed and
uneasy, we are fain to come to the Plough and the Harrow, the Spade and the
Pick-ax must go deep to come at the Roots; and all the Force, Skill, and
Diligence we can use, is scarce enough to cleanse the vitiated Seed-Plat
overgrown with Weeds, and restore us the hopes of Fruits to rewards our Pains
in its season.

. 84. This Course, if observed, will spare both Father and Child the trouble of
repeated Injunctions and multiplied Rules of Doing and Forbearing. For, I am of
Opinion, that of those Actions which tend to vicious Habits (which are those
alone that a Father should interpose his Authority and Commands in) none should
be forbidden Children till they are found Guilty of them. For such untimely
Prohibitions, if they do nothing worse, do at least so much toward teaching
and allowing them, that they suppose that Children may be guilty of them; who
would possibly be safer in the Ignorance of any such Faults. And the best
Remedy to stop them, is, as I have said, to show Wonder and Amazement at any
such Action, as has a vicious Tendency, when it is first taken Notice of in a
Child. For Example, When he is first found in a Lie or any ill natured Trick,
the first Remedy should be to talk to him of it as a strange, monstrous Matter,
that it could not be imagined he would have done, and so shame him out of it.

. 85. It will be ('it is like) objected, That whatever I fancy of the
Tractableness of Children, and the prevalency of those softer Ways of Shame and
Commendation, yet there are many who will never apply themselves to their
Books, and to what they ought to Learn, unless they are scourged to it. This I
fear is nothing but the Language of ordinary Schools and Fashion which has
never suffered the other to be tried as it should be, in Places where it could
be taken Notice of. Why, else, does the Learning of Latin and Greek need the
Rod, when French and Italian needs it not? Children learn to Dance and Fence
without whipping; nay, Arithmetic, Drawing, etc. they apply themselves well
enough to without beating, which would make one suspect, that there is
something strange, unnatural and disagreeable to that Age, in the Things
required in Grammar-Schools, or the methods used there, that Children cannot be
brought to, without the severity of the Lash, and hardly with that too, or else
that it is a mistake, that those Tongues could not be taught them without
Beating.

. 86. But let us suppose some so Negligent or Idle, that they will not be
brought to learn by the gentler Ways proposed; for we must grant that there
will be Children found of all Tempers, yet it does not thence follow, that the
rough Discipline of the Cudgel is to be used to all; nor can any one be
concluded unmanagable by the milder Methods of Government, till they have been
thoroughly tried upon him; and if they will not prevail with him to use his
Endeavors, and do what is in his Power to do, we make no Excuses, for the
obstinate Blows are the proper Remedies for those; but Blows laid on in a way
different from the ordinary. He that wilfully neglects his Book, and stubbornly
refuses any thing he can do, required of him by his Father, expressing himself
in a positive serious Command, should not be Corrected with two or three angry
Lashes, for not performing his Task, and the same Punishment repeated again and
again upon every the like Default. But when it is brought to that pass, that
wilfulness evidently shows it self, and makes Blows necessary, I think the
Chastisement should be a little more Sedate and a little more Severe, and the
Whipping (mingled with Admonitions between) so continued, till the Impressions
of it on the Mind were found legible in the Face, Voice and Submission of the
Child, not so sensible of the Smart as of the Fault he has been guilty of, and
melting in true Sorrow under it. If such a Correction as this tried some few
times at sit Distances, and carried to the utmost Severity, with the visible
Displeasure of the Father all the while, will not work the Effect, turn the
Mind, and produce a future Compliance, What can be hoped from Blows, and to
what purpose should they be any more used? Beating, when you can expect no good
from it, will look more like the Fury of an enraged enemy, than the good will
of a compassionate Friend; and such Chastisements carries with it only
Provocation without any prospect of amendment. If it be any Father's Misfortune
to have a Son thus perverse and untractable, I know not what more he can do but
pray for him. But, I imagine, if a right Course be taken with Children from the
beginning, very few will be found to be such, and when there are any such
Instances, they are not to be the Rule for the Education of those who are
better Natured, and may be managed with better Usage.

. 87. If a Tutor can be got, that Tutor
thinking himself in the Father's place, charged with his Care, and relishing
these Things, will at the beginning apply himself to put them in practice, he
will afterward find his Work very easy; and you will, I guess, have your Son
in a little time a greater Proficient in both Learning and Breeding, than
perhaps you imagine. But let him by no means Beat him, at least without your
Consent and Direction. He must be sure also to show him the Example of the
Things, he would have the Child practice, and carefully to preserve him from
the influence of ill Precedents, especially the most dangerous of all, that of
the Servants, from whose Company he is to be kept, not by prohibitions, for
that will but give him an Itch, but by other Ways I have mentioned.

. 88. In all the whole Business of Governor.
Education, there is nothing like to be less hearkened to, or harder to be well
observed, than what I am now going to say, and that is, that I would from their
first beginning to talk, have some Discreet, Sober; nay, Wise Person about
Children, whose Care it should be to Fashion them aright, and keep them from
all ill, especially the infection of bad Company. I think this Province
requires great Sobriety, Temperance, Tenderness, Diligence and Discretion,
Qualities hardly to be found united in Persons that are to be had for ordinary
Salaries, or easily to be found any where. As to the Charge of it, I think it
will be the Money best laid out, that can be, about our Children; and therefore
though it may be Expensive more than is ordinary, yet it cannot be thought
dear. He that at any Rate procures his Child a good Mind, well principled,
tempered to Virtue and Usefulness, and adorned with Civility and good Breeding,
makes a better purchase for him, than if he laid out the Money for an addition
of more Earth to his former Acres. Spare it in Toys and Play-Games, in Silk and
Ribbons, Laces and other useless Expenses, as much as you please; but be not
sparing in so necessary a Part as this. It Is not good Husbandry to make his
Fortune rich, and his Mind poor. I have often with great Admiration seen People
lavish it profusely in tricking up their Children in fine Clothes; Lodging and
Feeding them Sumptuously, allowing them more than enough of useless Servants,
and yet at the same time starve their Minds, and not take sufficient Care to
cover that, which is the most shameful Nakedness, viz. their natural wrong
Inclinations and Ignorance. This I can look on as no other than a Sacrificing
to their own Vanity; it showing more their Pride than true Care of the good of
their Children. Whatsoever you employ to the Advantage of your Son's Mind will
show your true Kindness, though it be to the lessening of his Estate. A Wise
and Good Man can hardly want either the Opinion or Reality of being Great and
Happy. But he, that is Foolish or Vicious, can be neither Great nor Happy, what
Estate soever you leave him: And I ask you, Whether there be not Men in the
world, whom you had rather have your Son be with 500 l. per Annum, than some
other you know with 5000 l.

. 89. The Consideration of Charge ought not therefore to deterr those who are
able; the great Difficulty will be where to find a proper Person. For those of
small Age, Parts and Virtue, are unfit for this Employment; and those that have
greater, will hardly be got to undertake such a Charge. You must therefore look
out early, and enquire every where; for the World has People of all sorts; and
I remember, Montaigne says in one of his Essays, That the Learned Castalio was
fain to make Trenchers at Basle to keep himself from starving, when his Father
would have given any Money for such a Tutor for his Son, and Castalio have
willingly embraced such an Employment upon very reasonable Terms, but this was
for want of Intelligence.

. 90. If you find it difficult to meet with such a Tutor as we desire, you are
not to wonder; I only can say, Spare no Care nor Cost to get such an one; all
things are to be had that way, and I dare assure you, that if you get a good
one, you will never repent the Charge, but will always have the Satisfaction to
think it the Money of all other the best laid out. But be sure take no Body
upon Friends or Charitable, no nor bare great Commendations: Nor will the
Reputation of a Sober Man with Learning enough (which is all usually that is
required in a Tutor) serve the turn. In this Choice be as Curious as you would
in that of a Wife for him: For you must not think of Trial or Changing
afterward, that will cause great Inconvenience to you, and greater to your
Son. When I consider the Scruples and Cautions I here lay in your way, methinks
it looks as if I advised you to something, which I would have offered at, but
in Effect not done. But he that shall consider how much the Business of a Tutor
rightly employed lies out of the Road, and how remote it is from the Thoughts
of many, even of those who propose to themselves this Employment, will perhaps
be of my Mind, that one sit to Educate and Form the Mind of a Young Gentleman
is not every where to be found; and that more than ordinary Care is to be taken
in the Choice of him, or else you may fail of your End.

. 91. But to return to our method again. Familiarity.
Though I have mentioned the Severity of the Father's Brow, and the Awe settled
thereby in the Mind of Children when young, as one main Foundation, whereby
their Education is to be managed: Yet I am far from being of an Opinion, that
it should be continued all a long to them, whilst they are under the Discipline
and Government of Pupilage. I think it should be relaxed as fast as their Age,
Discretion, and Good behavior could allow it, even to that degree, that a
Father will do well, as his Son grows up, and is capable of it, to talk
familiarly with him; nay, ask his Advice, and Consult with him about those
things, wherein he has any knowledge, or understanding. By this, the Father
will gain two things, both of great moment. The one is, That it will put
serious Considerations into his Son's Thoughts, better than any Rules or
Advices he can give him. The sooner you treat him as a Man, The sooner he will
begin to be one: And if you admit him into serious Discourses sometimes with
you, you will insensibly raise his Mind above the usual A musements of Youth,
and those trifling Occupations it is commonly wasted in: For it is easy to
observe, that many young Men continue longer in the Thoughts and Conversation
of Schoolboys, than otherwise they would, because their parents keep them at
that distance, and in that low Rank, by all their Carriage to them.

. 92. Another thing of greater consequence, which you will obtain by such a way
of treating him, will be his Friendship. Many Fathers, though they proportion
to their Sons liberal Allowances, according to their Age and Condition; yet
they keep them as much unacquainted with their Estates, and all other
Concernments, as if they were Strangers. This if it looks not like Jealousy,
yet it wants those Marks of Kindness and intimacy, which a Father should show
to his Son; and, no doubt, often hinders, or abates, that Cheerfullness and
Satisfaction, wherewith a Son should address himself to, and rely upon his
Father; and I cannot but often wonder to see Fathers, who love their Sons very
well, yet so order the matter by a constant Stiffness, and a mien of Authority
and distance to them all their Lives, as if they were never to enjoy or have
any comfort from those they love best in the World, till they had lost them, by
being removed into another. Nothing cements and establishes Friendship and
Good Will, so much as confident Communication of Concernments and Affairs.
Other Kindnesses without this, leave still some Doubts; but when your Son sees
you open your Mind to him, that you interest him in your Affairs, as Things you
are willing should in their turn come into his Hands, he will be concerned for
them, as for his own; wait his Season with Patience, and Love you in the mean
time, who keep him not at the distance of a Stranger. This will also make him
see, that the Enjoyment you have is not without Care, which the more he is
sensible of, the less will he envy you the Possession, and the more think
himself Happy under the Management of so favorable a Friend, and so careful a
Father. There is scarce any Young Man of so little Thought, or so void of
Sense, that would not be glad of a sure Friend, that he might have recourse to,
and freely Consult on occasion. The Reservedness and Distance, that Fathers
keep, often deprives their Sons of that refuge, which would be of more
Advantage to them, than an hundred Rebukes and Chidings. Would your Son engage
in some Frolic, or take a Vagary, were it not much better he should do it
with, than without your Knowledge? For since Allowances for such things must be
made to Young Men, the more you know of his Intrigues and Designs, the better
will you be able to prevent great Mischiefs; and by letting him see what is
like to follow, take the right way of prevailing with him to avoid less
Inconveniences. Would you have him open his Heart to you, and ask your Advice?
You must begin to do so with him first, and by your Carriage beget that
Considence.

. 93. But whatever he Consults you about, unless it lead to some fatal and
irremediable Mischief, be sure you advise only as a Friend of more Experience;
but with your Advice mingle nothing of Command or Authority, no more than you
wou^d to your Equal, or a Stranger. That would be to drive him for ever from
any farther demanding or receiving Advantage from your Counsel. You must
consider, that he is a Young Man, and has Pleasures and Fancies, which you are
passed. You must not expect his Inclinations should be just as yours, nor that
at Twenty he should have the same Thoughts you have at Fifty. All that you can
wish is, that since Youth must have some Liberty, some Outleaps, they might be
with the Ingenuity of a Son, and under the Eye of a Father, and then no very
great harm can come of it. The way to obtain this, as I said before, is
(according as you find him capable) to talk with him about your Affairs,
propose Matters to him familiarly, and ask his Advice; and when he ever lights
on the Right, follow it as his, and if it succeeds well, let him have the
Commendation. This will not at all lessen your Authority, but increase his Love
and Esteem of you. Whilst you keep your Estate, the Staff will still be in your
own Hands, and your Authority the surer, the more it is strengthened with
Confidence and Kindness. For you have not that Power, you ought to have over
him, till he comes to be more afraid of offending so good a Friend, than of
losing some part of his future Expectation.

. 94. When, by making your Son Reverence.
sensible that he depends on you, and is in your Power, you have established
your Authority; and by being inflexibly severe in your Carriage to him, when
obstinately persisting in any ill natured Trick, you have forbidden especially
Lying, you have imprinted on his Mind that awe, which is necessary: And on the
other side, when, by permitting him the full Liberty due to his Age, and laying
no restraint in your Presence to those childish Actions and gaiety of Carriage,
which, whilst he is very Young, is as necessary to him as Meat or Sleep, you
have reconciled him to your Company, and made him sensible of your Care and
Love of him by Indulgence and Tenderness, especially, Caressing him on all
Occasions wherein he does any thing well, and being kind to him after a
Thousand fashions suitable to his Age, which Nature teaches Parents Governor.
better than I can; when, I say, by these Ways of Tenderness and Affection,
which Parents never want for their Children, you have also planted in him a
particular Affection for you, he is then in the State you could desire, and you
have formed in his Mind that true Reverence, which is always afterward
carefully to be increased and maintained in both the Parts of it, Love and
Fear, as the great Principle, whereby you will always have hold upon him, to
turn his Mind to the ways of Virtue of Honor.

. 95. When this Foundation is once Temper.
well laid, and you find this Reverence begin to work in him, the next thing to
be done is carefully to consider his Temper, and the particular Constitution of
his Mind. Stubbornness, Lying and ill natured Actions are not (as has been
said) to be permitted in him from the beginning, whatever his Temper be: Those
Seeds of Vices are not to be suffered to take any root, but must be suppressed
in their appearance; and your Authority is to be established from the very
dawning of any Knowledge in him, that it may operate as a natural Principle,
whereof he never perceived the beginning, never knew that it was or could be
otherwise. By this, if the Reverence he owes you be established early, it will
always be Sacred to him, and it will be as hard for him to resist it as the
Principles of his Nature.

. 96. Having thus very early established your Authority, and by the gentler
Applications of it, shamed him out of what leads toward any immoral Habit, as
soon as you have observed it in him (for I would by no means have chiding used,
much less Blows, till Obstinacy and Incorrigibleness make it absolutely
necessary) it will be fit to consider which way the natural make of his Mind
inclines him. Some Men by the unalterable Frame of their Constitutions are
Stout, others Timorous some Confident, others Modest, Tractable or Obstinate,
Curious or Careless. There are not more Differences in Men's Faces, and the
outward Lineaments of their Bodies, than there are in the Makes and Tempers of
their Minds, only there is this Difference, that the distinguishing Characters
of the Face, and the Lineaments of the Body grow more plain and visible with
Time and Age, but the peculiar Physiognomy of the Mind is most discernable in
Children, before Art and Cunning has taught them to hide their Deformities and
conceal their ill Inclinations under a dissembled outside.

. 97, Begin therefore betimes nicely to observe your Son's Temper, and that
when he is under least restraint. See what are his predominant Passions and
prevailing Inclinations, whether he be Fierce or Mild, Bold or Bashful,
Compassionate or Cruel, open or Reserved, etc. For as these are different in
him, so are your Methods to be different, and your Authority must hence take
measures to apply it self different ways to him. These native Propensions,
these prevalencies of Constitution are not to be cured by Rules, or a direct
Contest, especially those of them that are the humbler and meaner sort, that
proceed from fear and lowness of Spirit; though with Art they may be much
mended, and turned to good purposes. But this, be sure, after all is done, the
Byas will always hang on that side, that nature first placed it: And if you
carefully observe the Characters of this Mind now in the first Scenes of his
Life, you will ever after be able to judge, which way his Thoughts lean, and
what he aims at, even hereafter, when, as he grows up, the Plot thickens, and
he puts on several Shapes to act it.

. 98. I told you before that Children Dominion.
love Liberty, and therefore they should be brought to do the things are fit
for them, without feeling any restraint laid upon them. I now tell you, they
love some thing more, and that is Dominion, and this is the first Original of
most vicious habits, that are ordinary and natural. This Love of Power and
dominion shows it self very early and that in these Two Things:

. 99. 1. We see Children (as soon almost as they are born (I am sure long
before they can speak) cry, grow peevish, sullen, and out of humor, for
nothing but to have their Wills. They would have their Desires submitted to by
others; they contend for a ready compliance from all about them, especially
from those that stand near or beneath them in Age or Degree, as soon as they
come to consider others with those distinctions.

. 100. Another thing wherein they show their love of Dominion, is, their desire
to have things to be theirs; they would have Propriety and Possession, pleasing
themselves with the Power that seems to give, and the Right they thereby have
to dispose of them as they please. He, that has not observed these two Humors
working very betimes in Children, has taken little notice of their Actions: And
he, that thinks that these two Roots of almost all the Injustice and
Contention, that so disturb humane Life, are not early to be weeded out, and
contrary Habits introduced, neglects the proper Season to lay the Foundations
of a good and worthy Man. To do this, I imagine, these following things may
somewhat conduce.

. 101. 1. That a Child should never Craving.
be suffered to have what he craves, or so much as speaks for, much less if he
cries for it. What then, would you not have them declare their Wants? Yes, that
is very fit; and it is as fit, that with all tenderness they should be hearkened
to, and supplied, at least whilst they are very little. But it is one thing to
say, I am hungry; another to say, I would have Roast-Meat. Having declared
their Wants, their natural Wants, the pain they feel from Hunger, Thirst, Cold,
or any other necessity of Nature, it is the Duty of their Parents, and those
about them, to relieve them: But Children must leave it to the choice and
ordering of their Parents, what they think properest for them, and how much;
and must not be permitted to choose for themselves, and say, I would save Wine,
or White-bread; the very naming of it should make them lose it.

. 102. This is for natural Wants, which must be relieved: But for all Wants of
Fancy and Affectation, they should never, if once declared, be hearkened to, or
complied with. By this means they will be brought to get a mastery over their
Inclinations, and learn the Art of stifling their Desires, as soon as they rise
up in them, and before they take vent, when they are easiest to be subdued,
which will be of great use to them in the future course of their Lives. By this
I do not mean, that they should not have the things, that one perceives would
delight them: 'Twould be Inhumanity, and not Prudence, to treat them so. But
they should not have the liberty to carve, or crave any thing to themselves;
they should be exercised in keeping; their Desires under, till they have got
the habit of it, and it be grown easy; they should accustom themselves to be
content in the want of what they wished for: And the more they practiced
Modesty and Temperance in this, the more should those about them study to
reward them with what is suited and acceptable to them: which should be
bestowed on them, as if it were a natural consequence of their Good-Behaviour,
and not a Bargain about it. But you will lose your Labor, and what is more,
their Love and Reverence too, if they can receive from others, what you deny
them. This is to be kept very stanch, and carefully to be watched. And here the
Servants come again in my way.

. 103. If this be begun betimes, and Curiosity.
they accustom themselves early to silence their Desires, this useful habit
will settle in them; and as they come to grow up in Age and Discretion, they
may be allowed greater liberty, when reason comes to speak in them, and not
Passion. For when ever Reason would speak, it should be hearkened to. But as
they should never be heard, when they speak for any thing they would have,
unless it be first, proposed to them; so they should always be heard, and
fairly and kindly answered, when they ask after any thing they would know, and
desire to be informed about. Curiosity should be as carefully cherished in
Children, as other Appetites suppressed.

. 104. 2. Children who live together Complaints.
often strive for mastery, whose Will shall carry it over the rest; whoever
begins the Contest, should be sure to be Crossed in it: But not only that, but
they should be taught to have all the Deference, Complaisance, and Civility one
for another imaginable. This when they see it procures them respect, and that
they lose no Superiority by it; but on the Contrary, they grow into love, and
esteem with every body, they will take more pleasure in, than in insolent
Domineering; for so plainly is the other.

The Complaints of Children one against another, which is usually but the
desiring the assistance of another to revenge them, should not be favorably
received, nor hearkened to: It weakens and effeminates their Minds to suffer
them to Complain: And if they endure sometimes crossing, or pain from others,
without being permitted to think it strange or intolerable, it will do them no
harm to learn Sufferance, and hearden them early. But though you give no
countenance to the Complaints of the Querulous, yet take care to suppress all
Insolence and Ill Nature. When you observe it your self, reprove it before the
injured Party: But if the Complaint be of something really worthy your notice,
and prevention another time, then reprove the Offender by himself alone, out of
sight of him that complained, and make him go and ask pardon, and make
reparation. Which coming thus, as it were, from himself, will be the more
cheerfully performed, and more kindly received, the Love strengthened between
them, and a custom of Civility grow familiar amongst your Children.

. 105. 3. As to the having and possessing Liberality.
of Things, teach them to part with what they have easily and freely to their
Friends; and let them find by experience, that the most liberal has always most
plenty, with Esteem and Commendation to boot, and they will quickly learn to
practice it. This I imagine will make Brothers and Sisters kinder and civiller
to one another, and consequently to others, than twenty Rules about good
Manners, with which Children are ordinarily perplexed and cumbred. Covetousness
and the desire of having in our possession, and under our Dominion, more than
we have need of, being the root of all Evil, should be early and carefully
weeded out, and the contrary Quality of a readiness to impart to others,
implanted. This should be encouraged by great Commendation and Credit, and
constantly taking care, that he loses nothing by his Liberality. Let all the
Instances he gives of such freeness be always repaid, and with interest; and
let him sensibly perceive, that the Kindness he shows to others, is no ill
husbandry for himself, but that it brings a return of Kindness both from those
that receive it, and those who look on. Make this a Contest among Children, who
shall outdo one another this way; and by this means, by a constant practice,
Children having made it easy to themselves to part with what they have, good
Nature may be settled in them into an Habit, and they may take pleasure and
pique themselves in being kind, liberal, and civil to others.

. 106. Crying is a fault that should Crying.
not be tolerated in Children, not only for the unpleasant and unbecoming Noise
it fills the House with, but for more considerable Reasons in reference to the
Children themselves, which is to be our aim in Education.

Their Crying is of two sorts; either stubborn and domineering, or querulous
and whining.

1. Their crying is very often a contention for Mastery, and an open
declaration of their Insolence, or Obstinacy, when they have not the power to
obtain their Desire, they will by their Clamor and Sobbing, maintain their
Title and Right to it. This is an open justifying themselves, and a sort of
Remonstrance of the unjustness of the Oppression, which denies them, what they
have a mind to.

. 107. 2. Sometimes their crying is the effect of Pain, or true Sorrow, and a
bemoaning themselves under it.

These Two if carefully observed may by the Mien, Looks and Actions, and
particularly by the Tone of their Crying be easily distinguished, but neither
of them must be suffered, much less encouraged.

1. The obstinate or stomachful crying should by no means be permitted, because
it is but another way of flattering their Desires, and encouraging those
Passions, which it is our main Business to subdue: And if it be, as often it is,
upon the receiving any Correction, it quite defeats all the good Effects of it:
For a Punishment, which leaves them in this declared Opposition, only serves to
make them worse. The Restraints and Punishments laid on Children are all
misapplied and lost, as far as they do not prevail over their Wills, teach them
to submit their Passions, and make their Minds supple and pliant, to what their
Parents Reason advises them now, and so prepare them to obey, what their own
Reasons shall advise hereafter. But if, in any thing wherein they are crossed,
they may be suffered to go away crying, they confirm themselves in their
Desires, and cherish the ill Humor with a Declaration of their Right, and a
Resolution to satisfy their Inclination the first Opportunity. This therefore
is another Reason why you should seldom Chastise your Children, for, whenever
you come to that extremity, it is not enough to whipp or Beat them, you must do
it till you find you have subdued their Minds; till with Submission and
Patience they yield to the Correction, which you shall best discover by their
crying and their ceasing from it upon your bidding. Without this, the beating
of Children is but a passionate Tyranny over them, and it is mere Cruelty and
not Correction to put their Bodies in Pain, without doing their Minds any good.
As this gives us a Reason why Children should seldom be corrected, so it also
prevents their being so. For if whenever they are chastised, it were done thus
without Passion, soberly and yet effectually too, laying on the Blows and smart
not all at once, but slowly, with Reasoning between, and with Observation how
it wrought, stopping when it had made them pliant, penitent and yielding; they
would seldom need the like Punishment again, being made Careful to avoid the
Fault, that deserved it. Besides, by this means, as the Punishment would not be
lost for being too little and not effectual, so it would be kept from being too
much, if we gave off, as soon as we perceived, that it reached the Mind, and
that was bettered. For since the Chiding or Beating of Children should be
always the least, that possible may be; that which is laid on in the heat of
Anger, seldom observes that measure, but is commonly more than it should be,
though it prove less than enough.

. 108. 2. Many Children are apt to Cry upon any little Pain they suffer, and
the least Harm that befalls them puts them into Complaints and Bawling. This few
Children avoid, for it being the first and natural Way to declare their
Sufferings or Wants, before they can speak, the Compassion that is thought due
to that tender Age, foolishly incourages and continues it in them long after
they can speak. It Is the Duty, I confess, of those about Children to
compassionate them, whenever they suffer any hurt; but not to show it in
pitying them. Help and ease them the best you can, but by no means bemoan them.
This softens their Minds, and makes the little harms, that happen to them, sink
deep into that part, which alone feels; and make larger Wounds there, than
otherwise they would. They should be hardened against all Sufferings,
especially of the Body, and have a tenderness only of Shame and for Reputation.
The many Inconveniences this Life is exposed to, require we should not be too
sensible of every little hurt. What our Minds yield not to, makes but a slight
impression, and does us but very little harm: It Is the suffering of our Spirits
that gives and continues the Pain. This brawniness and insensibility of Mind is
the best Armor, we can have, against the common Evils and Accidents of Life;
and being a Temper that is to be got by Exercise and Custom, more than any
other way, the practice of it should be begun betimes, and happy is he that is
taught it early. That effeminacy of Spirit, which is to be prevented or cured,
as nothing, that I know, so much increases in Children as Crying, so nothing,
on the other side, so much checks and restrains, as their being hindered from
that sort of Complaining. In the little harms they suffer from Knocks and
Falls, they should not be pitied for falling, but bid do so again, which is a
better way to cure their falling, than either chiding or bemoaning them. But
let the hurts they receive, be what they will, stop their Crying, and that will
give them more quiet and ease at present, and harden them for the future.

. 109. The former sort of Crying requires severity to silence it, and where a
Look or a positive Command will not do it, Blows must. For it proceeding from
Pride, Obstinacy, and Wilfullness, the Will, where the Fault lies, must be
bent, and made to comply by a Rigor sufficient to subdue it: But this latter
being ordinarily from softness of Mind, a quite contrary Cause, ought to be
treated with a gentler Hand. Persuasion, or diverting the Thoughts another way,
or laughing at their whining, may perhaps be at first the proper Method. But
for this the circumstances of the thing, and the particular Temper of the Child
must be considered; no certain unvariable Rules can be given about it, but it
must be left to the Prudence of the Parents or Tutor. But this I think I may
say in general, that there should be a constant discountenancing of this sort
of Crying also; and that the Father by his Looks, Words and Authority, should
always stop it, mixing a greater Degree of roughness in his Looks or Words,
proportionably as the Child is of a greater Age, or a sturdier Temper: But
always let it be enough to Master the Disorder.

. 110. One thing I have frequently Cruelty.
observed in Children, that when they have got possession of any poor Creature,
they are apt to use it ill: They often torment, and treat very roughly young
Birds, Butterflies, and such other poor Animals, which fall into their Hands,
and that with a seeming kind of Pleasure. This I think should be watched in
them, and if they incline to any such Cruelty; they should be taught the
contrary Usage. For the custom of tormenting and killing of Beasts will, by
degrees, harden their Minds even toward Men; and they who delight in the
suffering and destruction of inferior Creatures, will not be apt to be very
compassionate or benign to those of their own kind. Our Practice takes notice
of this in the exclusion of Butchers from Juries of Life and Death. Children
should from the beginning be bred up in an abhorrence of killing, or tormenting
any living Creature; and be taught not to spoil or destroy any thing, unless it
be for the preservation or advantage of some other that is: Nobler. And truly,
if the preservation of all mankind, as much as in him lies, were every one's
persuasion, as indeed it is every one's Duty, and the true Principle to
regulate our Religion, Politics and Morality by, the world would be much
quieter, and better natured than it is. But to return to our present Business,
I cannot but commend both the Kindness and prudence of a Mother I knew, who was
wont always to indulge her Daughters, when any of them desired Dogs, Squirils,
Birds or any such things, as young Girls use to be delighted with. But then,
when they had them, they must be sure to keep them well, and look diligently
after them, that they wanted nothing, or were not ill used: For if they were
negligent in their Care of them, it was counted a great Fault, which often
forfeited their Possession, or at least they failed not to be rebuked for it;
whereby they were early taught Diligence and good Nature. And indeed, I think
People should be accustomed, from their Cradles, to be tender to all sensible
Creatures, and to spoil or waste nothing at all. This delight they take in
doing of mischief, whereby I mean spoiling of any thing to no purpose; but more
especially the Pleasure they take to put any thing in Pain, that is capable of
it, I cannot persuade my self to be any other than a foreign and introduced
Disposition, an habit borrowed from custom and Conversation. People teach
Children to strike, and laugh, when they hurt, or see harm come to others: And
they have the Examples of most about them, to confirm them in it. All the
Entertainments and talk of History is of nothing almost but Fighting and
Killing: And the Honor and Renown, that is bestowed on Conquerours (who for
the most part are but the great Butchers of Mankind) farther misleads growing
youth, who by this means come to think Slaughter the laudable Business of
Mankind, and the most Heroic Virtue. This Custom plants unnatural Appetites,
and reconciles us to that, which it has laid in the way of Honor. Thus by
Fashion and Opinion that comes to be a Pleasure, which in it self neither is;
nor can be any. This ought carefully to be watched, and early remedied, so as
to settle and cherish the contrary and more natural Temper of Benignity and
Compassion in the room of it: But still by the same gentle Methods, which are
to be applied to the other two Faults before mentioned. But pray remember, that
the Mischiefs, or Harms, that come by Play, Inadvertency, or Ignorance, and
were not known to be Harms, or designed for Mischief's sake, though they may
perhaps be sometimes of considerable damage, yet are not at all, or but very
gently to be taken notice of. For this, I think, I cannot too often inculcate,
That whatever miscarriage a Child be guilty of, and whatever be the consequence
of it, the thing to be regarded in taking notice of it, is only, what root it
springs from, and what habit it is like to establish; and to that the
Correction ought to be directed, and the Child not to suffer any punishment for
any harm may have come by his play or inadvertency. The Faults to be amended
lie in the Mind; and if they are such as either Age will cure, or no ill habits
will follow from the present Action, whatever displeasing Circumstances it may
have, is to be passed by without any animadversion.

. 111. Curiosity in Children (which Curiosity.
I had occasion just to mention. 103) is but an appetite after Knowledge, and
therefore ought to be encouraged in them, not only as a good sign, but as the
great Instrument, Nature has provided, to remove that Ignorance they were born
with; and which, without this busy Inquisitiveness, will make them dull and
useless Creatures. The ways to encourage it, and keep it active and vigorous,
are, I suppose, these following:

1. Not to check or discountenance any Enquiries he shall make, nor suffer them
to be laughed at; but to answer all his Questions, and explain the Matters, he
desires to know, so, as to make them as much intelligible to him, as suits the
capacity of his Age and Knowledge. But confound not his Understanding with
Explications or Notions, that are above it, or with the variety or number of
Things, that are not to his present purpose. Mark what it is his Mind arms at in
the Question, and not what Words he expresses it in: And when you have informed
and satisfied him in that, you shall see how his Thoughts will proceed on to
other things, and how by fit Answers to his Enquiries, he may be led on farther
than perhaps you could imagine: For Knowledge to the Understanding is
acceptable, as Light to the Eyes; and Children are pleased and delighted with
it exceedingly, especially if they see, that their Enquiries are regarded, and
that their desire of Knowing is encouraged and commended. And I doubt not, but
one great reason, why many Children abandon themselves wholly to silly play,
and spend all their time in trifling, is, because they have found their
Curiosity bauk'd, and their Enquiries neglected. But had they been treated with
more Kindness and Respect, and their Questions answered, as they should, to
their satisfaction, I doubt not, but they would have taken more pleasure in
learning and improving their Knowledge, wherein there would be still newness
and variety, which is what they are delighted with, than in returning over and
over to the same Play and Play-things.

. 112. 2. To this serious answering their Questions, and informing their
Understandings, in what they desire, as if it were a matter that needed it,
should be added some peculiar ways of Commendation. Let others whom they
esteem, be told before their faces of the knowledge they have in such and such
things; and since we are all, even from our Cradles, vain and proud Creatures,
let their Vanity be flattered with Things, that will do them good; and let
their Pride set them on work on something which may turn to their advantage.
Upon this ground you shall find, that there cannot be a greater spur to the
attaining what you would have the eldest learn, and know himself, than to set
him upon teaching it his younger Brothers and Sisters.

. 113. 3. As Children's Enquiries are not to be slighted; so also great care is
to be taken that they never receive deceitful and eluding Answers. They easily
perceive when they are slighted, or deceived, and quickly learn the trick of
Neglect, Dissimulation, and Falsehood, which they observe others to make use of.
We are not to entrench upon Truth in any Conversation, but least of all with
Children; since if we play false with them, we not only deceive their
Expectation, and hinder their Knowledge, but corrupt their Innocence, and teach
them the worst of Vices. They are Travelers newly arrived in a strange
Country, of which they know nothing: We should therefore make conscience not to
mis-lead them. And though their Questions seem sometimes not very material, yet
they should be seriously answered: for however they may appear to us (to whom
they are long since known) Enquiries not worth the making, they are of moment
to those who are wholly ignorant. Children are strangers to all we are
acquainted with; and all the things they meet with, are at first unknown to
them, as they once were to us; and happy are they who meet with civil People,
that will comply with their Ignorance, and help them to get out of it. If you
or I now should be set down in Japan, with all our Prudence and Knowledge about
us, a Conceit whereof makes us perhaps so apt to slight the Thoughts and
Enquiries of Children; should we, I say, be set down in Japan, we should, no
doubt (if we would inform our selves of what is there to be known) ask a
thousand Questions, which, to a supercilious or inconsiderable Japaner, would
seem very idle and impertinent; and yet to us would be natural: And we should
be glad to find a Man so kind and humane, as to answer them, and instruct our
Ignorance. When any new thing comes in their way, Children usually ask, the
common Question of a Stranger, What is it? Whereby they ordinarily mean nothing
but the Name; and therefore to tell them how it is called, is usually the
proper Answer to that Demand. The next Question usually is, What is it for? And
to this it should be answered truly and directly; the use of the thing should
be told, and the way explained, how it serves to such a Purpose, as far as
their Capacities can comprehend it: And so of any other Circumstances they
shall ask about it, not turning them going, till you have given them all the
satisfaction they are capable of; and so leading them by your Answers into
farther Questions. And perhaps to a grown Man, such Conversation will not be
altogether so idle and insignificant, as we are apt to imagine. The native and
untaught Suggestions of inquisitive Children, do often offer things, that may
set a considering Man's Thoughts on work. And I think there is frequently more
to be learned from the unexpected Questions of a Child, than the Discourses of
Men, who talk in a road according to the Notions they have borrowed, and the
Prejudices of their Education.

. 114. 4. Perhaps it may not sometimes be amiss to excite their Curiosity, by
bringing strange and new things in their way on purpose to engage their
Enquiry, and give them occasion to inform themselves about them: And if by
chance their Curiosity leads them to ask, what they should not know, it is a
great deal better to tell them plainly, That it is a thing that belongs not to
them to know, than to pop them off with a Falsehood, or a frivolous Answer.

. 115. Pertness, that appears sometimes so early, proceeds from a Principle,
that seldom accompanies a strong Constitution of Body, or ripens into a strong
Judgment of Mind. If it were desirable to have a Child a more brisk Talker, I
believe there might be ways found to make him so: But, I suppose, a wise Father
had rather that his Son should be able and useful when a Man, than pretty
Company, and a Diversion to others, whilst a Child. Though if that too were to
be considered, I think I may say there is not so much pleasure to have a Child
prattle agreeably, as to reason well. Encourage therefore his Inquisitiveness
all you can, by satisfying his Demands, and informing his Judgment as far as it
is capable. When his Reasons are any way tolerable, let him find the Credit and
Commendation of it; and when they are quite out of the way, let him, without
being laughed at for his Mistake, be gently put into the right; and take care
as much as you can, that in this Inclination, he shows to reasoning about every
thing, no body bauk, or Inpose upon him. For when all is done, this, as the
highest and most important Faculty of our Minds, deserves the greatest Care and
Attention in cultivating it; the right improvement and exercise of our Reason,
being the highest Perfection that a Man can attain to in this Life. Sauntring.


. 116. Contrary to this busy inquisitive Temper there is sometimes observable
in Children, a listless carelessness, a want of regard to any thing, and a sort
of trifling even at their Business. This Sauntring Humor I look on as one of
the worst Qualities can appear in a Child, as well as one of the hardest to be
cured where it is natural. But it being liable to be mistaken in some Cases,
care must be taken to make a right Judgment concerning that trifling at their
Books or Business, which may sometimes be complained of in a Child. Upon the
first suspicion a Father has, that his Son is of a Sauntring Temper, he must
carefully observe him, whether he be listless and indifferent in all his
Actions, or whether in some things alone he be slow and sluggish, but in others
vigorous and eager. For though he find that he does loyter at his Book, and let
a good deal of the time he spends in his Chamber or Study run idly away, he
must not presently conclude, that this is from a sauntring Humor in his
Temper. It may be childishness, and a preferring something to his Study which
his Thoughts run on; and he dislikes his Book, as is natural, because it is
forced upon him as a Task. To know this perfectly, you must watch him at play,
when he is out of his Place and time of Study following his own inclinations,
and see there, whether he be vigorous and active; whether he designs any thing,
and with labor and eagerness pursues it, till he has accomplished what he
aimed at; or whether he lazily and listlesly dreams away his time. If this
sloth be only, when he is about his book, I think it may be easily cured. If it
be in his Temper it will require a Tittle more Pains and Attention to remedy it.

. 117. If you are satisfied by his earnestness at play or any thing else, he
sets his Mind on, in the intervals between his hours of Business, that he is
not of himself inclined to laziness, but only want of relish of his Book makes
him negligent and sluggish in his application to it. The first step is to try
by talking to him kindly of the folly and inconvenience of it, whereby he loses
a good part of his time which he might have for his diversion; But be sure to
talk calmly and kindly, and not much at first, but only these plain Reasons in
short. If this prevails you have gained the point by the most desirable Remedy,
which is Reason and Kindness. If it prevails not, try to shame him out of it,
by laughing at him for it, asking every day, if there be no Strangers there,
when he comes to Table, how long he was that Day about his Business, and if he
has not done it in the time he might be well supposed to have dispatched it,
expose and turn him into ridicule for it, but mix no chiding, only put on a
pretty cold Brow toward him, and keep it till he reform and let his Mother.
Tutor and all about him do so too. If this work not the effect you desire, then
tell him, he shall be no longer troubled with a Tutor, to take care of his
Education, you will not be at the Charge to have him spend his time idly with
him; But since he preferrs this or that [whatever Play he delights in] to his
Book, that only he shall do, and so in earnest set him on work on his beloved
play, and keep him steadily and in earnest to it Morning and Afternoon, till he
be fully surfeited, and would at any rate change it for some hours at his Book
again. But when you thus set him a Task of his Play, you must be sure to look
after him your self, or set somebody else to do it, that may constantly see
him employed in it, and that he be not permitted to be idle at that too. I say,
your self look after him, for it is worth the Father's while, whatever Business
he has, to bestow Two or Three Days upon his Son, to cure fo great a Mischief
as is Sauntring at his Business.

. 118. This is what I propose, if it be Idleness not from his general Temper,
but a peculiar or acquired aversion to Learning, which you must be careful to
examine and distinguish, which you shall certainly know by the way above
proposed. But though you have your Eyes upon him, to watch what he does, with
the time he has at his own disposal, yet you must not let him perceive, that
you, or any body else do so. For that may restrain him from following his own
Inclination, and that being the thing his Head or Heart is upon, and not daring
to prosecute it for fear of you, he may forbear doing other things, and so seem
to be idle and negligent; when in truth it is nothing, but being intent on
that, which the fear of your Eye or Knowledge keeps him from executing. You
must therefore, when you would try him, give full Liberty: But let some body,
whom you can trust, observe what he does, and it will be best he should have
his Play-day of Liberty, when you, and all, that he may suspect to have an Eye
upon him, are abroad, that so he may without any check follow his natural
Inclination. Thus by his employing of such times of Liberty, you will easily
discern, whether in be listlesness in his Temper, or aversion to his Book, that
makes him saunter away his time of Study.

. 119. If listlesness and drearning be his natural Disposition. This
unpromising Temper is one of the hardest to be dealt with, because it generally
carrying with it an indifferency for future things, may be attributed to want
of foresight and want of desire: and how to plant or increase either of these,
where Nature has given a cold or contrary Temper, is not I think very easy. As
soon as it is perceived, the first thing to be done, is to find out his most
predominate Passion, and carefully examine, what it is, to which the greatest
bent of his Mind has the most steady and earnest Tendency: And when you have
found that, you must set that on work to excite his Industry to any thing else.
If he loves Praise or Play or fine Cloths, etc. or, on the other side, dreads
Shame and Disgrace, your Displeasure, etc. whatever it be that he loves most,
except it be Sloth (for that will never set him on work) let that be made use
of to excite him to activity. For in this listless Temper, you are not to fear
an excess of Appetite (as in all other cases) by cherishing it: It Is that which
you want, and therefore must labor to stir up and increase. For where there is
no Desire, there will be no Industry.

. 120. If you have not hold enough upon him this way to stir up Vigor and
Activity in him, you must employ him in some constant bodily Labor, whereby he
may get an habit of doing something. The keeping him hard to some Study were
the better way to get him an habit of exercising and applying his Mind: But
because this is an invisible Attention, and no body can tell, when he is, or is
not idle at it, you must find bodily employments for him, which he must be
constantly busied in, and kept to: And if they have some little hardship and
shame in them, it may not be the worse, to make them the sooner weary him, and
desire to return to his Book. But be sure, when you exchange his Book for his
other Labor, set him such a Task, to be done in such a time, as may allow him
no opportunity to be idle: Only after you have by this way brought him to be
Attentive and Industrious at his Book, you may, upon his dispatching his Study
within the time set him, give him, as a Reward, some respit from his other
Labor, which you may diminish, as you find him grow more and more steady in
his Application, and at last wholly take off, when his sauntring at his Book is
cured.

. 121. We formerly observed, that Compulsion.
Variety and Freedom was that, that delighted Children, and recommended their
Plays to them: And that therefore their Book, or any thing, we would have them
learn, should not be enjoined them as Business. This their Parents, Tutors, and
Teachers are apt to forget; and their impatience to have them busied in what is
fit for them to do, suffers them not to deceive them into it; but by the
repeated Injunctions they meet with, Children quickly distinguish between what
is required of them, and what not. When this Mistake has once made his Book
uneasy to him, the Cure is to be applied at the other end: And since it will
be then too late to endeavor to make it a play to him, you must take the
contrary course; observe what Play he is most delighted with; enjoin that, and
make him play so many Hours every Day, not as a punishment for playing, but as
if it were the business required of him. This, if I mistake not, will, in a few
Days, make him so weary of his most beloved Sport, that he will prefer his
Book, or any thing to it, especially if it may redeem him from any part of the
task of play is set him, and he may be suffered to employ some part of the
time, destined to his Task of Play, in his Book, or such other Exercise as is
really useful to him. This I at least think a better Cure, than that Forbidding
(which usually increases the Desire) or any other Punishment should be made use
of to remedy it. For when you have once glutted his Appetite (which may safely
be done in all things but eating and drinking) and made him surfeit of what you
would have him avoid, you have put into him a Principle of Aversion, and you
need not so much fear afterward his longing for the same thing again.

. 122. This I think is sufficiently evident, That Children generally hate to be
idle. All the care then is, that their busy Humor should be constantly
employed in something of use to them; which if you will attain, you must make,
what you would have them do, a Recreation to them, and not a Business. The way
to do this, so that they may not perceive you have any hand in it, is this
proposed here; viz. To make them weary of that, which you would not have them
do, by enjoining, and making them under some pretense or other do it, till they
are surfeited. For example: Does your Son play at Top, and scourge too much?
Enjoin him to play so many Hours every Day, and look that he do it; and you
shall see he will quickly be sick of it, and willing to leave it. By this means
making the Recreations you dislike a Business to him, he will of himself with
delight betake himself to those things, you would have him do, especially if
they be proposed as Rewards for having performed his Task in that Play is
commanded him. For if he be ordered every Day to whip his top so long as to
make him sufficiently weary, do you not think he will apply himself with
eagerness to his Book, and wish for it, if you promise it him as a Reward of
having whipped his Top lustily, quite out all the time that is set him?
Children, in the things they do, if they comport with their Age, find little
difference so they may be doing; the esteem they have for one thing above
another, they borrow from others: So that what those about them make to be a
Reward to them, will really be so. By this Art it is in their Governor's
choice, whether Scotch-hoppers shall reward their Dancing, or Dancing their
Scotch-hoppers; whether Peg-top, or Reading; playing at Trap, or studying the
Globes, shall be more acceptable and pleasing to them. All that they desire
being to be busy, and busy, as they imagine, in things of their own choice,
and which they receive as Favors from their parents, or others, for whom they
have respect, and with whom they would be in credit. A Set of Children thus
ordered, and kept from the ill example of others, would all of them I suppose,
with as much earnestness and delight, learn to read, write, and what else one
would have them, as others do their ordinary Plays: And the eldest being thus
entered, and this made the fashion of the Place, it would be as impossible to
hinder them from learning the one, as it is ordinarily to keep them from the
other.

. 123. Play-things I think Children Play-Games.
should have, and of all sorts, but still to be in the keeping of their Tutors,
or some body else, whereof the Child should have in his power but one at once,
and should not be suffered to have another, but when he restored that. This
teaches them betimes to be careful of not losing, or spoiling the things they
have, whereas plenty and variety in their own Keeping, makes them wanton and
carless, and teaches them from the beginning to be Squanderers and Wasters.
These, I confess, are little things and such as will seem beneath the Care of a
Governor; but nothing, that may form Children's Minds, is to be overlooked
and neglected, and whatsoever introduces Habits, and settles Customs in them,
deserves the Care and attention of their Governors, and is not a small thing
in its consequences.

. 124. Lying is so ready and cheap a Lying.
Cover for any Miscarriage, and so much in fashion amongst all sorts of People,
that a Child can hardly avoid observing the use is made of it on all occasions;
and so can scare be kept, without great care, from getting into it: But it is
so ill a Quality, and the mother of so many ill ones that spawn from it, and
take shelter under it, that a Child should be brought up in the greatest
abhorrence of it imaginable. It should be always (when occasionally it comes to
be mentioned) spoke of before him with the utmost detestation, as a Quality so
wholly incompetent with a Gentleman, that no body of any Credit can bear the
imputation of a Lie, that it is proper only to beggar-Boys, and the abhorred
Rascality, and not tolerable in any one, who would converse with People of
Condition, or have any Esteem or Reputationin the World: and the first time he
is found in a Lie, it should rather be wondered at as a monstrous Thing in him,
than reproved as an ordinary Fault. If that keeps him not from relapsing, the
next time he must be sharply rebuked, and fall into the state of great
Displeasure of his Father and Mother, and all about him, who take notice of it.
And if this way work not the Cure, you must come to blows. For after he has
been thus warned, a premeditated Lie must always be looked upon as obstinacy,
and never be permitted to 'scape unpunished.

. 125. Children, afraid to have Excuses.
their Faults seen in their naked Colors, will, like the rest of the Sons of
Adam, be apt to make Excuses. This is a Fault usually bordering upon, and
leading to untruth, and is not to be indulged in them. But yet it ought to be
cured rather with shame than roughness. If therefore when a Child is questioned
for any thing, his first Answer be an Excuse, warn him soberly to tell the
truth; and then if he persists to shuffle it off with a Falsehood, he must be
chastised. But if he directly confess, you must commend his Ingenuity, and
pardon the Fault, be it what it will; and pardon it so, that you never so much
as reproach him with it, or mention it to him again. For if you would have him
in love with Ingenuity, and by a constant practice make it habitual to him, you
must take care, that it never procure him the least inconvenience; but on the
contrary, his own Confession bringing always with it perfect Impunity, should
be besides encouraged by some Marks of Approbation. If his Excuse be such at
any time, that you cannot prove it to have any Falsehood in it, let it pass for
True, and be sure not to show any Suspicion of it. Let him keep up his
Reputation with you as high as is possible; for when once he finds he has lost
that, you have lost a great and your best hold upon him. Therefore let him not
think he has the Character of a Liar with you, as long as you can avoid it
without flattering him in it. Thus some slips in Truth may be over-looked. But
after he has once been corrected for a Lie, you must be sure never after to
pardon it in him, when ever you find, and take notice to him, that he is guilty
of it. For it being a Fault, which he has been forbid, and may, unless he be
wilful, avoid, the repeating of it is perfect perverseness, and must have the
chastisement due to that Offense.

. 126. This is what I have thought concerning the general Method of Educating a
young Gentleman, which though I am apt to suppose may have some influence on
the whole course of his Education, yet I am far from magining it contains all
those particulars, which his growing Years, or peculiar Temper may require. But
this being premised in general, we shall in the next place descend to a more
particular Consideration of the several parts of his Education.

. 127. That which every Gentleman (that takes any care of his Education)
desires for his Son, besides the Estate he leaves him, is contained, I suppose,
in these four Things, Virtue, Wisdom, Breeding and Learning. I will not trouble
my self whether these words do not some of them sometimes stand for the same
thing, or really include one another. It serves my turn here to follow the
popular use of these Words, which I presume, is clear enough to make me be
understood, and I hope there will be no difficulty to comprehend my Meaning.

. 128. I place Virtue as the first Virtue.
and most necessary of those Endowments, that belong to a Man or a Gentleman,
as absolutely requisite to make him valued and beloved by others, acceptable or
tolerable to himself; without that, I think, he will neither be happy in this,
nor the other World.

. 129. As the Foundation of this, God.
there ought very early to be imprinted on his Mind a true Notion of God, as of
the independent Supreme Being, Author and Maker of all Things, from whom we
receive all our Good, that loves us, and gives us all Things; and consequent to
it a Love and Reverence of him. This is enough to begin with, without going to
explain this matter any farther, for fear, least, by talking too early to him
of Spirits, and being unseasonably forward to make him understand the
incomprehensible Nature of that infinite Being, his Head be either filled with
false, or perplexed with unintelligible Notions of him. Let him only be told
upon occasion of God, that made and governs all Things, hears and sees every
Thing, and does all manner of Good to those, that love and obey him. You will
find that being told of such a God, other Thoughts will be apt to rise up fast
enough in his Mind about him, which, as you observe them to have any mistakes,
you must set right; and I think it would be better if Men generally rested in
such an Idea of God, without being too Curious in their Notions about a Being,
which all must acknowledge incomprehensible, whereby many, who have not
strength and clearness of Thought, to distinguish between what they can, and
what they cannot know, run themselves into Superstition or Atheism, making God
like themselves, or (because they cannot comprehend any thing else) none at all.

. 130. Having by gentle degrees, Spirits.
as you find him capable of it, settled such an Idea of God in his Mind, and
taught him to pray to him, forbear any Discourse of other Spirits, till the
mention of them coming in his way upon occasion hereafter to be set down, and
his reading the Scripture-History, put him upon that enquiry.

. 131. But even then, and always Goblins.
whilst he is Young, be sure to preserve his tender Mind from all Impressions
and Notions of Sprites and Goblins, or any fearful Apprehensions in the dark.
It being the usual Method of Servants to awe Children, and keep them in
subjection, by telling them of Raw-Head and Bloody-Bones, and such other Names,
as carry with them the Idea's of some hurtful terrible Things, inhabiting
darkness. This must be carefully prevented. For though by this foolish way,
they may keep them from little Faults, yet the Remedy is much worse than the
Disease, and there is stamped upon their Minds Idea's, that follow them with
Terror and Affrightment. For such Bugbear Thoughts once got into the tender
Minds of Children, sink deep there, and fasten themselves so, as not easily, if
ever, to be got out again, and whilst they are there, frequently haunt them
with strange Visions, making Children dastards when alone, and afraid of their
Shadows and Darkness all their Lives after. For it is to be taken notice, that
the first Impressions sink deepest into the Minds of Children, and the Notions,
they are possessed with when young, are scarce by any Industry or Art ever
after quite wiped out. I have had those complain to me, when Men, who had been
thus used when young, that though their Reason corrected the wrong Idea's, they
had then taken in; and though they were satisfied, that there was no cause to
fear invisible Beings more in the Dark, than in the Light; yet that these
Notions were apt still upon any occasion to start up first in their preposses'd
Fancies, and not to be removed without some Pains. And to let you see, how
lasting frightful Images are, that take place in the Mind early, I shall here
tell you a pretty remarkable but true Story. There was in a Town in the West, a
Man of a disturbed Brain, whom the Boys used to teaze, when he came in their
way: This Fellow one Day seeing in the Street one of those Lads, that used to
vex him, stepped into a Cutlers Shop he was near, and there seizing on a naked
Sword, made after the Boy, who seeing him coming so armed, betook himself to
his Feet, and ran for his Life; and by good luck, had Strength and Heels enough
to reach his Father's House, before the Madman could get up to him: The Door
was only latch'd, and when he had the Latch in his Hand, he turned about his
Head to see how near his pursuer was, who was at the entrance of the Porch with
his Sword up ready to strike, and he had just time to get in and clap to the
Door to avoid the Blow, which though his Body escaped, his Mind did not. This
frightning Idea made so deep an Impression there, that it lasted many Years, if
not all his Life after. For, telling this Story when he was a Man, he said,
That after that time till then, he never went in at that Door (that he could
remember) at any time, without looking back, whatever Business he had in his
Head, or how little soever, before he came thither, he thought of this Madman.

If Children were let alone, they would be no more afraid in the Dark, than of
the broad Sunshine: They would in their turns as much welcome the one for
Sleep, as the other to Play in: and there should be no distinction made to them
by any Discourse of more danger or terrible Things in the one than the other;
but if the folly of any one about them should do them this Harm, to make them
think there is any difference between being in the dark and winking, you must,
get it out of their Minds as soon as you can, and let them know, That God, who
made all Things good for them, made the Night that they might sleep the better
and the quieter; and that they being under his Protection, there is nothing in
the dark to hurt them. What is to be known more of God and Good Spirits, is to
be deferred till the time we shall hereafter mention, and of Evil Spirits,
'twill be well if you can keep him from wrong Francies about them, till he is
ripe for that sort of Knowledge.

. 123. Having laid the Foundations Truth.
of Virtue in a true Notion of a God, such as the Creed wisely teaches, as far
as his Age is capable, and by accustoming him to pray to him. The next thing to
be taken Care of, is to keep him exactly to speaking of Truth, and by all the
ways imaginable, inclining him to be good natured. Let him know that Twenty
Paul^s are sooner to be forgiven than the straining of Truth to cover any one
by an Excuse. And to teach him betimes to love, and be good natured to others,
is to lay early the true Foundation of an honest Man: All Injustice generally
springing from too great Love of our selves, and too little of others.

This is all I shall say of this Matter in general, and is enough for laying
the first Foundations of Virtue in a Child. As he grows up, the Tendency of his
natural Inclination must be observed, which, as it inclines him, more than is
convenient, on one or the other side from the right Path of Virtue, ought to have
proper Remedies applied. For few of Adam's Children are so happy, as not to be
born with some Bias in their natural Temper which it is the Business of
Education either to take off, or counter-balance; but to enter into the
Particulars of this, would be beyond the Design of this short Treatise of
Education. I intend not a Discourse of all the Virtues and Vices, and how each
Virtue is to be attained, and every particular vice by its peculiar Remedies
cured. Though I have mentioned some of the most ordinary Faults, and the ways
to be used in correcting them.

. 133. Wisdom, I take in the popular Wisdom.
acceptance, for a Man's managing his Business ablely, and with foresight in
this World. This is the product of a good natural Temper, application of Mind,
and Experience together, and not to be taught Children. The greatest Thing that
in them can be done toward it, is to hinder them, as much as may be, from
being Cunning, which being the ape of Wisdom, is the most distant from it that
can be, and as an Ape, for the likeness it has to a Man, wanting what really
should make him so, is by so much the uglier. Cunning is only the want of
Understanding, which, because it cannot compass its ends by direct ways, would
do it by a Trick and Circumvention; and the Mischief of it is, a cunning Trick
helps but once, but hinders, ever after. No cover was ever made either so big
or so fine as to hide its self. No Body was ever so cunning as to conceal their
being so; and when they are once discovered, every body is shie, every Body
distrustful of crafty Men, and all the World forwardly join to oppose and
defeat them. Whilst the open, fair, wise Man has every Body to make way for
him, and goes directly to his business. To accustom a Child to have true
Notions of things, and not to be satisfied till he has them. To raise his Mind
to great and worthy Thoughts, and to keep him at a distance from falsehood and
Cunning which has always a broad mixture of Falsehood in it, is the fittest
preparation of a Child for Wisdom, which being to be learned from Time,
Experience, and Observation, and an Acquaintance with Men, their Tempers, and
designs, are not to be expected in the ignorance and inadvertency of Childhood,
or the inconsiderate heats and unwariness of Youth: All that can be done
toward it, during this unripe Age, is, as I have said, to accufrom them to
Truth, and submission to Reason; and, as much as may be, to reflection on their
own Actions.

. 134. The next good Quality belonging Breeding.
to a Gentleman, is good Breeding. There are Two Sorts of ill Breeding, The one
a sheepish Bashfulness, and the other a mis-becoming Negligence and Disrespect
in our Carriage, both which are avoided by duly observing this one Rule, Not to
think meanly of our selves, and not to think meanly of others.

. 135. The first Part of this Rule must not be understood in opposition to
Humility, but to assurance: We ought not to think so well of our selves, as to
stand upon our own Value, or assume a Preference to others, because of any
Advantage, we may imagine, we have over them; but Modestly to take what is
offered, when it is our due. But yet we ought to think so well of our selves,
as to perform those Actions, which are incumbent on, and expected of us,
without discomposure, or disorder, in whose presence soever we are, keeping
that respect and distance, which is due to every one's Rank and Quality. There
is often in People, especially Children, a clownish shamefacedness before
Strangers, or those above them: They are confounded in their Thoughts, Words,
and Looks; and so lose themselves in that confusion, as not to be able to do
any thing, or at least not to do it with that freedom and gracefulness, which
pleases, and makes them acceptable. The only cure for this, as for any other
Miscarriage, is by use to introduce the contrary Habit. But since we cannot
accustom our selves to converse with Strangers, and Persons of Quality, without
being in their company, nothing can cure this part of Ill-breeding, but change
and variety of Company, and that of Persons above us.

. 136. As the beforementioned consists in too great a concern, how to behave
our selves toward others; so the other part of Ill-breeding, lies in the
appearance of too little care of pleasing, or showing respect to those we have
to do with. To avoid these, two things are requisite: First, a disposition of
the Mind not to offend others; and, secondly, the most acceptable, and
agreeable way of expressing that Disposition. From the one, Men are called
Civil; from the other Well fashioned. The latter of these is, that decency and
gracefullness of Looks, Voice, Words, Motions, Gestures, and of all the whole
outward Demeanor, which pleases in Company, and makes those easy and
delighted, whom we Converse with. This is, as it were, the Language, whereby
that internal Civility of the Mind is expressed; and being very much governed
by the Fashion and Custom of every Country, as other Languages are, must, in
the Rules and Practice of it, be learned chiefly from observation, and the
Carriage of those, who are allowed to be exactly well-bred. The other part,
which lies in the Mind, is that general Goodwill and Regard for all people,
which makes any one have a care not to show, in his carriage, any contempt,
disrespect, of neglect o them; but to express according to the Fashion and way
of that Country, a respect and value far them, according to their Rank and
Condition.

. 137. There is another, fault in good Manners, and that is excess of Ceremony,
and an obstinate persisting to force upon another, what is not his due, and
what he cannot take without folly or shame. This seems rather a design to
expose than oblige: Or at least looks like a contest for mastery, and at best
is but troublesome, and so can be no part of Good Breeding, which has no other
use nor end, but to make people easy and satisfied in their conversation with
us. This is a fault few young People are apt to fall into; but yet if they are
ever guilty of it, or are suspected to incline that way, they should be told of
it, or warned of this mistaken Civility. The thing they should endeavor and
aim at in Conversation, should be to show Respect, Esteem, and Good Will, by
paying to every one that common Ceremony and regard which is in civility due to
them. To do this, without a suspicion of Flattery, Dissimulation, or Meanness,
is a great Skill, which good Sense, Reason, and good Company can only teach;
but is of so much use in civil Life, that it is well worth the studying.

. 138. Though the managing our selves well, in this part of our Behavior, has
the name of Good-Breeding, as if peculiarly the effect of Education; yet, as I
have said, young Children should not be much perplexed about it; I mean about
putting off their Hats, and making Legs modishly. Teach them Humility, and to
be good-natured, if you can, and this sort of Manners will not be wanting:
Civility being, in truth, nothing but a care not to show any slighting, or
contempt, of any one in Conversation. What are the most allowed and esteemed
ways of expressing this, we have above observed. It is as peculiar and
different, in several Countries of the World, as their Languages; and therefore
if it be rightly confidered, Rules and Discourses, made to Children about it,
are as useless and impertinent, as it would be now and then to give a Rule or
two of the Spanish Tongue, to one that converses only with Englishmen. Be as
busy as you please with Discourses of Civility to your Son, such as is his
Company, such will be his Manners. A Plough-man of your Neighborhood, that has
never been out of his Parish, read what Lectures you please to him, will be as
soon in his Language as his Carriage a Courtier; that is, neither will be more
polite than of those he uses to converse with: And therefore of this, no other
care can be taken. And, in good earnest, if I were to speak my Mind freely, so
Children do nothing out of Obstinacy, Pride, and Ill Nature, it is no great
matter how they put off their Hats, or make Legs. If you can teach them to love
and respect other People, they will, as their Age requires it, find ways to
express it acceptably to every one, according to the Fashions they have been
used to: And as to their Motions and Carriage of their Bodies, a
Dancing Master, as has been said, when it is fit, will teach them what is most
becoming. In the mean time, when they are young, People expect not that
Children should be over-mindful of these Ceremonies; Carelessness is allowed to
that Age, and becomes them as well as Complements do grown People: Or at least,
if some very nice People will think it a fault, I am sure it is a fault, that
should be overlooked and left to Time and Conversation only to cure. And
therefore I think it not worth your while to have your Son (as I often see
Children are) molested or child about it: But where there is Pride or
Ill Nature appearing in his Carriage, there he must be persuaded or shamed out
of it.

. 139. This that I have said here, Company.
if it were well reflected on, would, perhaps, lead us a little farther, and
let us see of what influence Company is. It Is not the Modes of Civility alone,
that are imprinted by Conversation: The tincture of Company sinks deeper than
the outside; and possibly if a true estimate were made of the morality and
Religions of the World, we should find, that the far greater part of Mankind
received even those Opinions and Ceremonies they would die for, rather from the
Fashions of their Country, and the constant practice of those about them, than
from any conviction of their Reasons. I mention this only to let you see of
what moment, I think, Company is to your Son, in all the parts of his Life, and
therefore how much that one part is to be weighed, and provided for; it being
of greater force to work upon him, than all you can do besides.

. 140. You will wonder, perhaps, Learning.
that I put Learning last, especially if I tell you I think it the least part.
This will seem strange in the mouth of a bookish Man; and this making usually
the chief, if not only bustle and stir about Children, this being almost that
alone, which is thought on, when People talk of Education, makes it the greater
Paradox. When I consider what a-do is made about a little Latin and Greek, how
many Years are spent in it, and what a noise and business it makes to no
purpose, I can hardly forbear thinking, that the Parents of Children still live
in fear of the Schoolmasters Rod, which they look on as the only Instrument of
Education, as a Language or two to be its whole Business. How else is it
possible that a Child should be chained to the Oar, Seven, Eight, or Ten of the
best Years of his Life to get a Language or Two, which I think, might be had at
a great deal cheaper rate of Pains and Time, and be learned almost in playing.

Forgive me therefore, if I say, I can not with Patience think, that a young
Gentleman should be put into the Herd, and be driven with Whip and Scourge, as
if he were to run the Gantlet through the several Classes, ad capiendum ingenii
cultum. What then, say you, would you not have him Write and Read? Shall he be
more ignorant than the Clerk of our Parish, who takes Hopkins and Sternhold for
the best Poets in the World, whom yet he makes worse, than they are, by his ill
Reading? Not so, not so fast, I beseech you. Reading, and Writing, and
Learning, I allow to be necessary, but yet not the chiefest Business. I imagine
you would think him a very foolish Fellow, that should not value a Virtuous or
a Wise Man, infinitely before a great Scholar: Not but that I think Learning a
great help to both in well disposed Minds; but yet it must be confessed also,
that in others not so disposed, it helps them only to be the more foolish or
worse Men. I say this, that when you consider of the Breeding of your Son, and
are looking out for a Schoolmaster, or a Tutor, you would not have (as is
usual) Latin and Logic only in your Thoughts. Learning must be had, but in the
second place, as subservient only to greater Qualities: Seek out somebody,
that may know how discreetly to frame his Manners: Place him in Hands, where
you may, as much as possible, secure his Innocence cherish and nurse up the
Good, and gently correct and weed out any Bad Inclinations, and settle in him
good Habits. This is the main Point, and this being provided for, Learning, may
be had into the Bargain, and that, as I think, at a very easy rate, by Methods
that may be thought on.

. 141. When he can talk; it is time Reading.
he should begin to learn to read. But as to this, give me leave here to
inculcate again, what is very apt to be forgotten, viz. That a great Ca^e is to
be taken, that it be never made as a Business to him, nor he look on it as a
Task. We naturally, as I said, even from our Cradles, love Liberty, and have
therefore an aversion to many Things, for no other Reason, but because they are
enjoined us. I have always had a Fancy, that Learning might be made a Play and
Recreation to Children; and that they might be brought to desire to be taught,
if it were proposed to them as a thing of Honor, Credit, Delight and
Recreation, or as a Reward for doing something else; and if they were never
chid or corrected for the neglect of it. That which confirms me in this
Opinion, is, that amongst the Portugueses, it is so much a Fafhion, and
Emulation, amongst their Children, to learn to Read, and Write, that they
cannot hinder them from it: They will learn it one from another, and are as
intent on it, as if it were forbidden them. I remember that being at a Friend's
House, whose younger Son, a Child in Coats, was not easily brought to his Book
(being taught to Read at home by his Mother) I advised to try another way, then
requiring it of him as his Duty; we therefore, in a Discourse on purpose
amongst our selves, in his hearing, but without taking any notice of him,
declared, That it was the Privilege and Advantage of Heirs and Elder Brothers,
to be Scholars; that this made them fine Gentlemen, and beloved by every body:
And that for Younger Brothers, 'twas a Favor to admit them to Breeding; to be
taught to Read and Write, was more than came to their share; they might be
ignorant Bumpkins and Clowns, if they pleased. This so wrought upon the Child,
that afterward he desired to be taught; would come himself to his Mother to
learn, and would not let his Maid be quiet till she heard him his Lesson. I
doubt not but some way like this might be taken with other Children; and when
their Tempers are found, some Thoughts be instilled into them, that might set
them upon desiring of Learning themselves, and make them seek it, as another
sort of Play or Recreation. But then, as I said before, it must never be
imposed as a Task, nor made a trouble to them. There may be Dice and
Playthings, with the Letters on them, to teach Children the Alphabet by
playing; and twenty other ways may be found, suitable to their particular
Tempers, to make this kind of Learning a Sport to them.

. 142. Thus Children may be cozened into a Knowledge of the Letters; be taught
to read, without perceiving it to be any thing but a Sport, and play themselves
into that others are whipped for, Children should not have any thing like Work,
or serious, laid on them; neither their Minds nor Bodies will bear it. It
injures their Healths; and their being forced and tied down to their Books in
an Age at enmity with all such restraint, has, I doubt not, been the reason,
why a great many have hated Books and Learning, all their Lives after: It Is
like a Surfeit, that leaves an Aversion behind not to be removed.

. 143. I have therefore thought, that if Play-things were fitted to this
purpose, as they are usually to none, Contrivances might be made to teach
Children to Read, whilst they thought they were only Playing. For example, What
if an Ivory-Ball were made like that of the Royal-Oak Lottery, with Thirty two
sides, or one rather of Twenty four, or Twenty five sides; and upon several of
those sides pasted on an A, upon several others B, on others C, and on others
D. I would have you begin with but these four Letters, or perhaps only two at
first; and when he is perfect in them, then add another; and so on till each
side having one letter, there be on it the whole Alphabet. This I would have
others play with before him, it being as good a sort of Play to lay a Stake,
who shall first throw an A or B, as who upon Dice shall throw Six or Seven.
This being a play amongst you, tempt him not to it, least you make it Business;
for I would not have him understand it is any thing but a play of older People,
and I doubt not but he will take to it of himself. And that he may have the
more reason to think it is a play, that he is sometimes in favor admitted to,
when the Play is done, the Ball shall be laid up safe out of his reach, that so
it may not, by his having it in his keeping at any time, grow stale to him. To
keep up his eagerness to it, let him think it a Game belonging to those above
him: And when by this means he knows the Letters, by changing them into
Syllables, he may learn to Read, without knowing how he did so, and never have
any chiding or trouble about it; nor fall out with Books, because of the hard
usage and vexation they have caused him. Children, if you observe them, take
abundance of pains to learn several Games, which if they should be enjoined
them, they would abhor as a Task and Business. I know a Person of great
Quality (more yet to be honored for his Learning and Virtue, than for his Rank
and high Place) who by pasting on the six Vowels (for in our language Y is one)
on the six sides of a Die, and the remaining eighteen Consonants on the sides
of three other Dice, has made this a play for his Children, that he shall win,
who at one cast throws most Words on these four Dice; whereby his eldest Son,
yet in Coats, has played himself into Spelling with great eagerness, and
without once having been child for it, or forced to it.

. 144. I have seen little Girls exercise whole Hours together, and take
abundance of pains to be expert at Dibstones, as they call it: Whilst I have
been looking on, I have thought, it wanted only some good Contrivance, to make
them employ all that Industry about something that might be more useful to
them; and methinks it is only the fault and negligence of elder People, that it
is not so. Children are much less apt to be idle, than Men; and Men are to be
blamed, if some part of that busy Humor be not turned to useful Things; which
might be made usually as delightful to them, as those they are employed in, if
Men would be but half so forward to lead the way, as these little Apes would be
to follow. I imagine some wise Portuguese heretofore began this Fashion amongst
the Children of his Country, where, I have been told, as I said, it is
impossible to hinder the Children from learning to Read and Write: And in some
parts of France they teach one another to Sing and Dance from the Cradle.

. 145. The Letters pasted upon the sides of the Dice, or Polygon, were best to
be of the size of those of the Folio Bible to begin with, and none of them
Capital Letters; when once he can read what is printed in such Letters, he will
not long be ignorant of the great ones: And in the beginning, he should not be
perplexed with variety; with this Die, also, you might have a Play just like
the Royal-Oak, which would be another variety, and play for Cherries or Apples,
etc.

. 146. Besides these, Twenty other Plays might be invented, depending on
Letters, which those, who like this way, may easily contrive and get made to
this use if they will. But the Four Dice abovementioned, I think so easy, and
useful, that it will be hard to find any better, and there will be scarce need
of any other.

. 147. Thus much for learning to read, which let him never be driven to, nor
chid for; cheat him into it if you can, but make it not a Business for him;
it is better it be a Year later before he can read, than that he should this way
get an aversion to Learning. If you have any Contests with him, let it be in
Matters of Moment, of Truth, and good Nature; but lay no Task on him about ABC.
Use your Skill to make his Will supple and pliant to Reason: teach him to love
Credit and Commendation; to abhor being thought ill or meanly of, especially by
You and his Mother, and then the rest will come all easily. But I think, if you
will do that, you must not shackle and tie him up with Rules about indifferent
Matters, nor rebuke him for every little Fault, or perhaps some, that to others
would seem great ones: But of this I have said enough already.

. 148. When by these gentle ways he begins to be able to read, some easy
pleasant Book suited to his Capacity, should be put into his Hands, wherein the
entertainment, that he finds, might draw him on, and reward his Pains in
Reading, and yet not such as should fill his Head with perfectly useless
trumpery, or lay the principles of Vice and Folly. To this purpose, I think,
Aesop's Fables the best, which being Stories apt to delight and entertain a
Child, may yet afford useful Reflections to a grown Man. And if his Memory
retain them all his life after, he will not repent to find them there amongst
his manly Thoughts, and serious Business. If his Aesop has Pictures in it, it
will entertain him much the better, and encourage him to read, when it carries
the increase of Knowledge with it. For such visible Objects Children hear
talked of in vain and without any satisfaction, whilst they have no Idea's of
them; those Idea's being not to be had from Sounds, but either the things
themselves, or their Pictures. And therefore I think, as soon as he begins to
spell, as many Pictures of Animals should be got him, as can be found, with the
printed names to them, which at the same time will invite him to read, and
afford him Matter of Enquiry and Knowledge. Raynard the Fox, is another Book, I
think, may be made use of to the same purpose. And if those about him will talk
to him often about the Stories he has read, and hear him tell them, it will,
besides other Advantages, add Encouragement, and delight to his Reading, when
he finds there is some use and pleasure in it, which in the ordinary Method, I
think Learners do not till late; and so take Books only for fashionable
amuzements or impertinent troubles good for nothing.

. 149. The Lord's Prayer, the Creeds, and Ten Commandments, it is necessary he
should learn perfectly by heart, but I think, not by reading them himself in
his Primer, but by some-body's repeating them to him, even before he can read.
But learning by heart, and learning to read, should not I think be mixed, and
so one made to clog the other. But his learning to read should be made as
little trouble or business to him as might be.

What other Books there are in English of the kind of those abovementioned,
fit to engage the liking of Children, and tempt them to read, I do not know:
But am apt to think that Children, being generally delivered over to the Method
of Schools, where the fear of the Rod is to enforce, and not any pleasure of
the Employment to invite them to learn, this sort of useful Books amongst the
number of silly ones, that are of all sorts, have yet had the fate to be
neglected; and nothing that I know has been considered of this kind out of the
ordinary Road of the Horn-Book, Primer, Psalter, Testament, and Bible.

. 150. As for the Bible, which Children are usually employed in, to exercise
and improve their Talent in Reading, I think, the promiscuous reading of it
through, by Chapters, as they lie in order, is so far from being of any
Advantage to Children, either for the perfecting their Reading, or principling
their Religion, that perhaps a worse could not be found. For what Pleasure or
Encouragement can it be to a Child to exercise himself in reading those Parts
of a Book, where he understands nothing? And how little are the Law of Moses,
the Song of Solomon, the Prophecies in the Old, and the Epistles and Apocalypse
in the New Testament, suited to a Child's Capacity? And though the History of
the Evangelists, and the Acts, have something easier; yet taken altogether, it
is very disproportionate to the understanding of Childhood. I grant, that the
Principles of Religion are to be drawn from thence, and in the Words of the
Scripture: yet none should be proposed to a Child, but such, as are suired to a
Child's Capacity and Notions. But it is far from this to read through the whole
Bible, and that for reading's sake. And what an odd jumble of Thoughts must a
Child have in his Head, if he have any at all such as he should have concerning
Religion, who in his tender Age, reads all the Parts of the Bible
indifferently, as the Word of God without any other distinction. I am apt to
think, that this in some Men has been the very Reason, why they never had clear
and distinct Thoughts of it all their Lifetime.

. 151. And now I am by chance fallen on this Subject, give me leave to say,
that there are some Parts of the Scripture, which may be proper to be put into
the Hands of a Child, to engage him to read; such as are the Story of Joseph,
and his Brethren, of David and Goliath, of David and Jonathan, etc. And others,
that he should be made to read for his Instruction, as That, What you would
have others do unto you, do you the same unto them; and such other easy and
plain-moral Rules, which being fitly chosen, might often be made use of, both
for Reading and Instruction together: But the Reading of the whole Scripture
indifferently, is what I think very inconvenient for Children, till after
having been made acquainted with the plainest Fundamental Parts of it, they
have got some kind of general view of what they ought principally to believe
and practice, which yet, I think, they ought to receive in the very Words of
the Scripture, and not in such, as Men prepossessed by Systems and Analogies,
are apt in this case to make use of, and force upon them. Dr. Worthington, to
avoid this, has made a Catechism, which has all its Answers in the precise
Words of the Scripture. A thing of good Example, and such a sound Form of
Words, as no Christian can except against, as not fit for his Child to learn,
of this, as soon as he can say the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments
by heart, it may be fit for him to learn a Question every Day, or every Week,
as his understanding is able to receive, and his Memory to retain them. And
when he has this Catechism perfectly by heart, so as readily and roundly to
answer to any Question in the whole Book, it may be convenient to lodge in his
Mind the Moral Rules scattered up and down in the Bible, as the Best Exercise
of his Memory, and that which may be always a Rule to him ready at hand, in the
whole Conduct of his Life.

. 152. When he can read English Writing.
well, it will be seasonable to enter him in Writing: And here the first thing
should be taught him is, to hold his Pen right; and this he should be perfect
in, before he should be suffered to put it to paper: For not only Children, but
any body else, that would do any thing well, should never be put upon too much
of it at once, or be set to perfect themselves in two parts of an Action at the
same time, if they can possibly be separated. When he has learned to hold his
Pen right (to hold it betwixt the Thumo and Forefinger alone, I think best;
but in this, you should Consult some good Writing-master, or any other person
who writes well and quick) then next he should learn how to lay his paper, and
place his Arm and Body to it. These Practices being got over, the way to teach
him to Write, without much trouble, is to get a Plate graved, with the
Characters of such an Hand as you like best: But you must remember to have them
a pretty deal bigger than he should ordinarily write; for every one naturally
comes by digrees to write a less Hand, than he at first was taught, but never a
bigger. Such a Plate being graved, let several Sheets of good Writing-paper be
printed off with Red Ink, which he has nothing to do but to go over with a good
Pen filled with Black Ink, which will quickly bring his Hand to the formation
of those Characters, being at first showed where to begin, and how to form
every Letter. And when he can do that well, he must then exercise on fair
Paper; and so may easily be brought to Write the Hand you desire.

. 153. When he can Write well, Drawing.
and quick, I think it may be convenient, not only to continue the exercise of
his Hand in Writing, but also to improve the use of it farther in Drawing, a
thing very useful to a Gentleman in several occasions; but especially if he
travel, as that which helps a Man often to express, in a few Lines well put
together, what a whole Sheet of Paper in Writing, would not be able to
represent, and make intelligible. How many Buildings may a Man see, how many
Machines and Habits meet with, the Idea's whereof would be easily retained and
communicated, by a little Skill in Drawing; which being committed to Words, are
in danger to be lost, or at best but ill retained in the most exact
Descriptions? I do not mean, that I would have your Son a perfect Painter; to
be that to any tolerable degree, will require more time than a young Gentleman
can spare from his other Improvements of greater importance: But so much
insight into Perspective, and skill in Drawing, as will enable him to represent
tolerably on Paper any thing he sees, except Faces, may, I think, be got in a
little time, especially if he have a Genius to it: But where that is wanting,
unless it be in things absosutely necessary, it is better to let him pass them
quietly, than to vex him about them to no purpose: And therefore in this, as in
all other things not absolutely necessary, the Rule holds, Nihil invita Minerva.

. 154. As soon as he can speak English, French.
it is time for him to learn some other Language: This no body doubts of, when
French is proposed. And the Reason is, because People are accustomed to the
right way of teaching that Language: which is by talking it into Children in
constant Conversation, and not by Grammatical Rules. The Latin Tongue would
easily be taught the same way if his Tutor, being constantly with him, would
talk nothing else to him, and make him answer still in the same Language. But
because French is a Living Language, and to be used more in speaking, that
should be first learned, that the yet pliant Organs of Speech might be
accustomed to a due formation of those Sounds, and he get the habit of
pronouncing French well, which is the harder to be done the longer it is
delayed.

. 155. When he can speak and Latin.
read French well, which in this Method is usually in a Year or two, he should
proceed to Latin, which it is a wonder Parents, when they have had the
experiment in French, should not think ought to be learned the same way, by
talking and reading. Only Care is to be taken whilst he is learning these
Foreign Languages, by speaking and reading nothing else with his Tutor, that he
do not forget to read English, which may be preserved by his Mother, or
somebody else, hearing him read some chosen Parts of the Scripture, or other
English Book every Day.

. 156. Latin, I look upon as absolutely necessary to a Gentleman, and indeed,
Custom, which prevails over every thing, has made it so much a Part of
Education, that even those Children are whipped to it, and made spend many
Hours of their precious time uneasily in Latin, who, after they are once gone
from School, are never to have more to do with it as long as they live. Can
there be any thing more ridiculous, than that a Father should waste his own
Money, and his Son's time, in setting him to learn the Roman Language, when at
the same time he designs him for a Trade, wherein he having no use of Latin,
fails not to forget that little, which he brought from School, and which it is
Ten to One he abhorrs, for the ill usage it procured him? Could it be believed,
unless we had every where amongst us Examples of it, that a Child should be
forced to learn the Rudiments of a Language, which he is never to use in the
course of Life, he is designed to, and neglect all the while the writing a good
Hand, and casting Account, which are of great Advantage in all Conditions of
Life, and to most Trades indispensibly necessary? But though these
Qualifications, requisite to Trade and Commerce, and the Business of the World,
are seldom or never to be had at Grammar Schools, yet thither, not only
Gentlemen send their younger Sons, intended for Trades; but even Tradesmen and
Farmers fail not to send their Children, though they have neither Intention nor
Ability to make them Scholars. If you ask them why they do this, they think it
as strange a Question, as if you should ask them, why they go to Church. Custom
serves for Reason, and has to those who take it for Reason, so consecrated this
Method, that it is almost Religiously observed by them, and they stick to it as
if their Children had scarce an Orthodox Education unless they learned Lily's
Grammar.

. 157. But how necessary soever Latin be to some, and is Thought to be to
others, to whom it is of no manner of Use or Service; yet the ordinary way of
learning it in a Grammar School is that, which having had thoughts about I
cannot be forward to encourage. The Reasons against it are so evident, and
cogent, that they have prevailed with some intelligent Persons, to quit the
ordinary Road, not without success, though the Method made use of, was not
exactly that which I Imagine the easiest, and in Short is this: To trouble the
Child with no Grammar at all but to have Latin, as English has been, without
the perplexity of Rules talked into him; for if you will consider it, Latin is
no more unknown to a Child, when he comes into the World, than English: And yet
he learns English without Master, Rule, or Grammar; and so might he Latin too,
as Tully did, if he had somebody always to talk to him in this Language. And
when we so often see a French-Woman teach a young Girl to speak and read French
perfectly in a Year or Two, without any Rule of Grammar, or any thing else but
prattling to her, I cannot but wonder, how Gentlemen have over-seen this way for
their Sons, and thought them more dull or incapable than their Daughters. If
therefore a Man could be got, who himself speaks good Latin, who would always
be about your Son, and talk constantly to him, and make him read Latin, that
would be the true Genuine, and easy way of teaching him Latin, and that that I
could wish, since besides teaching him a Language, without Pains or Chiding
(which Children are wont to be whipped for at School Six or Seven Years
together) he might at the same time, not only form his Mind and Manners, but
instruct him also in several Sciences, such as are a good Part of Geography,
Astronomy, Chronology, Anatomy, besides some Parts of History, and all other
Parts of Knowledge of Things, that fall under the Senses, and require little
more than Memory: For there, if we would take the true way, our Knowledge
should begin, and in those Things be laid the Foundation; and not in the
abstract Notions of Logic and Metaphysics, which are fitter to amuze, than
inform the Understanding, in its first setting out toward Knowledge: In which
abstract Speculations when young Men have had their Heads employed a while
without finding the Success and Employment or Use of it which they expected,
they are apt to have mean Thoughts, either of Learning or themselves, to quit
their Studies, and throw away their Books, as containing nothing but hard
Words, and empty Sounds; or else concluding, that if there be any real
Knowledge in them, they themselves have not Understandings capable of it; and
that this is so, perhaps I could assure you upon my own Experience. Amongst
other Things to be learned by a young Man in this Method, whilst others of his
Age are wholly taken up with Latin and Languages, I may also set down Geometry
for one, having known a Young Gentleman, bred something after this way, able to
demonstrate several Propositions in Eucbid before he was Thirteen.

. 158. But if such a Man can not be got, who speaks good Latin, and being able
to instruct your Son in all these Parts of Knowledge, will undertake it by this
Method; the next best is to have him taught as near this way as may be, which
is by taking some easy and pleasant Book, such as AEsop's Fables, and writing
the English Translation (made as literal as it can be) in one Line, and the
Latin Words which answer each of them, just over it in another. These let him
read every Day over and over again, till he perfectly understands the Latin.
(But have a Care still, whatever you are teaching him, of cloging him with too
much at once; Or making any thing his Business but downright Virtue; or
reproving him for any Thing but Vice) and then go on to another Fable till he
be also perfect in that, not omitting what he is already perfect in, but
sometimes reviewing that, to keep it in his Memory. And when he comes to write,
let these be set him for Copies, which with the exercise of his Hand, will also
advance him in Latin. This being a more imperfect way than by talking Latin
unto him; the formation of the Verbs first, and afterward the declensions of
the Nouns, and Pronouns perfectly learned by heart, may facilitate his
acquaintance with the genius and manner of the Latin Tongue, which varies the
signification of Verbs, and Nouns, not as the Modern Languages do by Particles
prefixed, but by changing the last Syllables. More than this of Grammar, I think
he need not have till he can read himself Sanctii Minerva with Scioppius's
Notes.

. 159. When by this way of interlining Latin and English one with another, he
has got a moderate Knowledge of the Latin Tongue, he may then be advanced a
little farther to the reading of some other easy Latin Book, such as Justin or
Eutropius, and to make the reading and understanding of it the less tedious and
difficult to him, let him help himself if he please with the English
Translation. Nor let the Objection, that he will then know it only by roat
(which is not when well considered of any moment against, but plainly for this
way of learning a Language) fright any one. For Languages are only to be
learned by reat; and a Man who does not speak English or Latin perfectly by
roat, so that having thought of the thing he would speak of, his Tongue of
course without thought of Rule or Grammar, salls into the proper Expressions
and Idiom of that Language, does not speak it well, nor is Master of it. And I
would fain have any one name to me that Tongue, that any one can learn, or
speak as he should do by the Rules of Grammar. Languages were made not by
Rules, or Art, but by Accident, and the common Use of the People. And he that
will speak them well, has no other Rule but that; nor any thing to trust to,
but his Memory, and the habit of speaking after the Fashion learned from those,
that are allowed to speak properly, which in other Words is only to speak by
roat.

. 160. For the exercise of his Writing, let him sometimes translate Latin into
English: But the learning of Latin, being nothing but the learning of Words, a
very unpleasant Business both to young and old, join as much other real
Knowledge with it as you can, beginning still with that which lies most obvious
to the Senses, such as is the Knowledge of Minerals, Plants, and Animals; and
particularly Timber and Fruit Trees, their parts and ways of propagation:
Wherein a great deal may be taught a Child, which will not be useless to the
Man. But more especially Geography, Astronomy, and Anatomy.

. 161. But if, after all, his Fate be to go to School to get the Latin Tongue,
it is in vain to talk to you concerning the method I think best to be observed
in Schools; you must submit to that you find there; nor expect to have it
changed for your Son: But yet by all means obtain, if you can, that he be not
employed in making Latin Themes and Declamations, and least of all Verses of
any kind. You may insist on it if it will do any good, that you have no design
to make him either a Latin Orator, or a Poet; but barely would have him
understand perfectly a Latin Author; and that you observe, that those, who
teach any of the modern Languages, and that with success, never amuse their
Scholars, to make Speeches, or Verses, either in French or Italian, their
Business being Language barely, and not Invention.

. 162. But to tell you a little more Themes.
fully, why I would not have him exercised in making of Themes and Verses 1. As
to Themes, they have, I confess, the pretense of something useful, which is to
teach People to speak handsomely and well, on any subject; which if it could be
attained this way, I own, would be a great advantage; there being nothing more
becoming a Gentleman, nor more useful in all the Occurrences of Life, than to
be able, on any occasion, to speak well, and to the purpose. But this I say,
That the making of Themes, as is usual in Schools, helps not one jot toward it.
For do but consider what it is in making a Theme, that a young Lad is employed
about: It Is to make a speech on some Latin Saying; as, Omnia vincit Amor; or,
Non licet in Bello bis peccare, etc. And here the poor Lad, who wants knowledge
of these things he is to speak of, which is to be had only from Time and
Observation, must set his Invention on the Rack to say something, where he
knows nothing; which is a sort of Egyptian Tyranny, to bid them make Bricks,
who have not yet any of the Materials: And therefore it is usual, in such
cases, for the poor Children, to go to those of Higher Forms with this
Petition, Pray give me a little Sense; which whether it be more reasonable, or
more ridiculous, is not easy to determine. Before a Man can be in any capacity
to speak on any subject, it is necessary to be acquainted with it: Or else it is
as foolish to set him to discourse on it, as to set a blind Man to talk of
Colors, or a deaf man of Music. And would you not think him a little cracked
who would require another to make an Argument on a Moot Point, who understands
nothing of our Laws? And what, I pray, do Schoolboys understand concerning
those matters, which are used to be proposed to them in their Themes, as
Subjects to discourse on, to whet and exercise their Fancies?

. 163. In the next place consider the Language that their Themes are made in:
It Is Latin, a Language foreign in their Country, and long since dead
everywhere: A Language, which your Son, it is a thousand to one, shall never
have an occasion once to make a Speech in, as long as he lives, after he comes
to be a Man; and a Language, wherein the manner of expressing ones self is so
far different from ours, that to be perfect in that, would very little improve
the Purity and Facility of his English Style. Besides that, there is now so
little room, or use, for set Speeches in our own Language, in any part of our
English Business, that I can see no pretense for this sort of Exercise in our
Schools, unless it can be supposed, that the making of set Latin Speeches,
should be the way, to teach Men to speak well in English extempore. The way to
that, I should think rather to be this: That there should be proposed some
rational and material Question to young Gentlemen, when they are of a fit age
for such Exercise, which they should extempore, or after a little meditation in
the place, speak to, without penning of any thing. For, I ask, if we will
examine the effects of this way of learning to speak well, who speak best in
any Business, when occasion calls them to it, upon any debate, either those who
have accustomed themselves to compose and write down beforehand, what they
would say; Or those, who thinking only of the matter, to understand that as
well as they can, use themselves only to speak extempore? And he, that shall
judge by this, will be little apt to think, that the accustoming him to studied
Speeches, and set Compositions, is the way to fit a young Gentleman for
Business.

. 164. But, perhaps, we shall be told, It Is to improve and perfect them in the
Latin Tongue. It Is true, that is their proper Business at School; but the
making of Themes is not the way to it: That perplexes their Brains about
invention of things to be said, not about the signification of Words to be
learned: And when they are making a Theme, it is Thoughts they search and sweat
for, and not Language. But the Learning and Mastery of a Tongue, being uneasy
and unpleasant enough in it self, should not be cumbred with any other
Difficulties, as is done in this way of proceeding. In fine, if boys invention
be to be quickn'd by such Exercise, let them make Themes in English; where they
have facility, and a command of Words, and will better see what kind of
Thoughts they have, when put into their own Language: And if the Latin Tongue
be to be learned, let it be done the easiest way, without toiling and
disguisting the mind, by so uneasy an employment, as that of making Speeches
joined to it.

. 165. If these may be any Reasons Verses.
against Children's making Latin Themes at School, I have much more to say, and
of more weight, against their making Verses; Verses of any sort: For if he has
no Genius to Poetry, it is the most unreasonable thing in the World, to torment
a Child, and waste his time about that which can never succeed: And if he have
a Poetic Vein, it is to me the strangest thing in the World, that the Father
should desire, or suffer it to be cherished, or improved. Methinks the Parents
should labor to have it stifled, and suppressed, as much as may be; and I know
not what reason a Father can have, to wish his son a Poet, who does not desire
to have him bid defiance to all other Callings, and Business, which is not yet
the worst of the case; for if he proves a successful Rhymer, and get once the
reputation of a Wit, I desire it may be considered what Company and Places he
is Like to spend his Time in, nay, and Estate too. For it is very seldom seen,
that any one discovers Mines of Gold or Silver in Parnassus. It Is a pleasant
Air, but a barren Soil; and there are very few instances of those, who have
added to their Patrimony by any thing they have reaped from thence. Poetry and
Gaming, which usually go together, are alike in this too, That they seldom
bring any advantage, but to those who have nothing else to live on. Men of
Estates almost constantly go away losers; and it is well if they escape at a
cheaper rate than their whole Estates, or the greatest part of them. If
therefore you would not have your Son the Fiddle to every jovial Company,
without whom the Sparks could not relish their Wine, nor know how to pass an
Afternoon idly; if you would not have him waste his Time and Estate, to divert
others, and contemn the dirty Acres left him by his Ancestors, I do not think
you will much care he should be a Poet, or that his Schoolmaster should enter
him in Versifying. But yet, if any one will think Poetry a desirable Quality in
his Son, and that the study of it would raise his Fancy and Parts, he must
needs yet confess, that to that end reading the excellent Greek and Roman Poets
is of more use, than making bad Verses of his own, in a Language that is not
his own. And he, whose design it is to excel in English Poetry, would not, I
guess, think the way to it were to make his first Essays in Latin Verses.

. 166. Another thing very ordinary Memoriter.
in the Vulgar Method of Grammar-Schools there is, of which I see no use at
all, unless it be to balk young Lads in the way to learning Languages, which,
in my Opinion, should be made as easy and pleasant as may be; and that which
was painful in it, as much as possible quite removed. That which I mean, and
here complain of, is, their being forced to learn by Heart, great parcels of
the Authors which are taught them; wherein I can discover no advantage at all,
especially to the Business they are upon. Languages are to be learned only by
reading, and talking, and not by scraps of Authors got by Heart; which when a
Man's Head is stuffed with, he has got the just Furniture of a Pedant, and it is
the ready way to make him one; than which, there is nothing less becoming a
Gentleman: For what can be more ridiculous, than to mix the rich and handsome
Thoughts and Sayings of others, with a deal of poor Stuff of his own; which is
thereby the more exposed, and has no other grace in it, nor will otherwise
recommend the Speaker, than a threadbare, russet Coat would, that was set off
with large Patches of Scarlet, and glittering Brocard. Indeed, where a Passage
comes in the way, whose matter is worth remembrance, and the expression of it
very close and excellent (as there are many such in the ancient Authors) it may
not be amiss to lodge it in the Mind of young Scholars, and with such admirable
Strokes of those great Masters, sometimes exercise the Memory of Schoolboys.
But their learning of their Lessons by heart, as they happen to fall out in
their Books, without choice or distinction, I know not what it serves for, but
to misspend their Time and Pains, and give them a disgust and aversion to their
Books, wherein they find nothing but useless trouble.

. 167. But under whose Care soever Latin.
a Child is put, to be taught, during the tender and flexible Years of his
Life, this is certain, it should be one, who thinks Latin and Language the
least part of Education; one who knowing how much Virtue, and a well-tempered
Soul is to be preferred to any sort of Learning or Language, makes it his chief
Business to form the Mind of his Scholars, and give that a right disposition,
which if once got, though all the rest should be neglected, would, in due time,
produce all the rest; and which if it be not got, and settled, so as to keep out
ill and vicious Habits, Languages and Sciences, and all the other
Accomplishments of Education will be to no purpose, but to make the worse, or
more dangerous Man. And, indeed, whatever stir there is made about getting of
Latin, as the great and difficult business, his Mother may teach it him her
self, if she will but spend two or three hours in a day with him, and make him
read the Evangelists in Latin to her: For she need but buy a Latin Testament,
and having got somebody to mark the last Syllable but one, where it is long, in
Words above two Syllables (which is enough to regulate her Pronunciation and
Accenting the Words) read daily in the Gospels, and then let her avoid
Understanding them in Latin if she can. And when she understands the
Evangelists in Latin, let her, in the same manner, read Aesop's Fables, and so
proceed on to Eutropius, Justin, and other such Books. I do not mention this,
as an Imagination of what I fancy may do, but as of a thing I have known done,
and the Latin Tongue with ease got this way.

But to return to what I was saying: He that takes on him the charge of
bringing up young Men, especially young Gentlemen, should have something more
in him than Latin, more than even a Knowledge in the Liberal Sciences: He
should be a Person of eminent Virtue and Prudence, and with good Sense, have
good Humor, and the skill to carry himself with gravity, ease, and kindness,
in a constant Conversation with his Pupils.

. 168. At the same time that he is learning French and Latin, a Child, as has
been said, may also be entered in Arithmetic, Geography, Chronology, History,
and Geometry too. For if these be taught him in French or Latin, when he begins
once to understand either of these Tongues, he will get a knowledge in these
Sciences, and the Language to boot.

Geography, I think, should be begun Geography.
with: For the learning of the Figure of the Globe, the Situation and
Boundaries of the Four Parts of the World, and that of particular Kingdoms and
Countries, being only an exercise of the Eyes and Memory, a child with pleasure
will learn and retain them: And this is so certain, that I now live in the
House with a Child, whom his Mother has so well instructed this way in
Geography, that he knew the Limits of the Four Parts of the World, could
readily point being asked, to any County upon the Globe, or any Country in the
Map of England, knew all the great Rivers, Promontories, Straits, and Bays in
the World, and could find the Longitude and Latitude of any Place, before he
was six Years old. These things, that he will thus learn by sight, and have by
roat in his Memory, is not all, I confess, that he is to learn upon the Globes.
But yet it is a good step and preparation to it, and will make the remainder
much easier, when his Judgment is grown ripe enough for it: Besides, that it
gets so much time now; and by the pleasure of knowing things, leads him on
insensibly to the gaining of Languages.

. 169. When he has the natural Arithmetic.
Parts of the Globe well fixed in his Memory, it may then be time to begin
Arithmetic. By the natural Parts of the Globe, I mean the several Positions of
the Parts of the Earth, and Sea, under different Names and Distinctions of
Countries, not coming yet to those Artificial and imaginary Lines, which have
been invented, and are only supposed for the better improvement of that Science.

. 170. Arithmetic, is the easiest, and consequently the first sort of abstract
Reasoning, which the Mind commonly bears, or accustoms it self to; and is of so
general use in all parts of Life and Business, that scarce any thing is to be
done without it: This is certain, a Man cannot have too much of it, nor too
perfectly; he should therefore begin to be exercised in counting, as soon, and
as far, as he is capable of it; and do something in it every Day, till he is
Master of the Art of Numbers. When he understands Addition and Substraction, he
may then be advanced farther in Geography, and after he is acquainted with the
Poles, Zones, parallel Circles and Meridians, be taught Longitude and Latitude,
and the use of Maps, and by that time he is perfected in these Circles of the
Globe, with the Horizon and the Eclyptick, he may be taught the same thing also
on the Celestial Astronomy.
Globe, with the Figure and Position of the several Constellations, which may
be showed him first upon the Globe, and then in the Heavens. But in this as in
all other parts of Instruction, great Care must be taken with Children, to
begin with that, which is plain and simple, and to teach them as little as can
be at once, and settle that well in their Heads, before you proceed to the
next, or any thing new in that Science, whereby Children 'scape being amazed
and confounded; by which way of giving them first one simple Idea, and taking
Care that they took it right and perfectly comprehended it before you went any
farther, and then adding some other simple Idea (which lay next in your way to
what you aimed at) and no more to it, and so proceeding by gentle and
insensible steps, Children have had early righter Apprehensions, and their
Thoughts extended farther, than could have been expected. And when he has
learned any thing himself, there is no such way to fix it in his Memory, and to
encourage him to go on, as to set him to teach it others.

. 171. When he has once got such an Geometry.
acquaintance with the Globes, he may be fit to be tried a little in Geometry;
wherein I think the six first Books of Euelid enough for him to be taught. For
I am in some doubt, whether more to a Man of Business be necessary or useful.
At least if he have a Genius and Inclination to it, being entered so far by his
Tutor, he will be able to go on of himself without a Teacher.

The Globes therefore must be studied, and that diligently, and I think, may be
begun betimes, if the Tutor will but be careful to distinguish, what the Child
is capable of knowing, and what not; for which this may be a Rule that perhaps
will go a pretty way ( viz.) that Children may be taught any thing, that falls
under their Senses, especially their sight, as far as their Memories only are
exercised: And thus a Child very young may learn, which is the Equator, which
the Meridian, etc. which Europe and which England upon the Globes, as soon
almost as he knows the Rooms of the House he lives in, if Care be taken not to
teach him too much at once, nor to set him upon a new Part, till that, which he
is upon, be perfectly learned and fixed in his Memory.

. 172. With Geography, Chronology Chronology.
ought to go hand in hand, I mean the general part of it, so that he may have
in his Mind a view of the whole current of time, and the several considerable
Epochs that are made use of in History. Without these two History, which is the
great Mistress of Prudence and Civil Knowledge; and ought to be the proper
Study of a Gentleman, or Man of Business in the World, without Geography and
Chronology, I say, History will be very ill retained, and very little useful;
but be only a jumble of Matters of Fact, confusedly heaped together without
Order or Instruction. It Is by these two, that the Actions of Mankind are ranked
into their proper Places of Times and Countries, under which Circumstances,
they are not only much easier kept in the Memory, but in that natural Order,
are only capable to afford those Observations, which make a Man the better and
the abler for reading them.

. 172. When I speak of Chronology as a Science he should be perfect in, I do
not mean the little Controversies, that are in it. These are endless, and most
of them of so little importance to a Gentleman, as not to deserve to be
inquired into, were they capable of an easy Decision. And therefore all that
learned Noise and Dust of the Chronologist is wholly to be avoided. The most
useful Book I have seen in that part of Learning, is a small Treatise of
Strauchius, which is printed in Twelves, under the Title of Breviarum
Chronologium, out of which may be selected all that is necessary to be taught a
young Gentleman concerning Chronology; for all that is in that Treatise a
learner need not be cumbred with. He has in him the most remarkable or usual
Epochs reduced all to that of the Julian Period, which is the easiest and
plainest, and surest Method, that can be made use of in Chronology. To this
Treatise of Strauchius, Helvicus's Tables may be added as a Book to be turned
to on all occasions.

. 173. As nothing teaches, so nothing History.
delights more than History. The first of these recommends it to the Study of
Grown-Men, the latter makes me think it the fittest for a young Lad, who as
soon as he is instructed in Chronology, and acquainted with the several Epochs
in use in this part of the World, and can reduce them to the Julian Period,
should then have some Latin History put into his Hand. The choice should be
directed by the easiness of the Style; for wherever he begins, Chronology
will keep it from Confusion; and the pleasantness of the Subject inviting him
to read the Language will insensibly be got, without that terrible vexation and
uneasiness, which Children suffer, where they are put into Books beyond their
Capacity, such as are the Roman Orators and Poets, only to learn the Roman
Language. When he has by reading Mastered the easier, such perhaps as Justin,
Eutropius, Quintus Curtius, etc. the next degree to these, will give him no
great Trouble: And thus by a gradual Progress from the plainest and easiest
Historians, he may at last come to read the most difficult and sublime of the
Latin Authors, such as are Tully, Virgil, and Horace.

. 174. The Knowledge of Virtue, Ethics.
all along from the beginning, in all the Instances he is capable of, being
taught him, more by Practice than Rules; and the love of Reputation instead of
satisfying his Appetite, being made habitual in him, I know not whether he
should read any other Discourses of Morality, but what he finds in the Bible;
or have any System of Ethics put into his Hand, till he can read Tully's
Offices, not as a Schoolboy to learn Latin, but as one that would be informed
in the Principles and Precepts of Virtue, for the Conduct of his Life.

. 175. When he has pretty well Civil-Law.
digested Tully's Offices, it may be seasonable to set him upon Grotius de Jure
Belli and Pacis, or which I think, is the better of the two, Puffendorf de Jure
naturali and Gentium; wherein he will be instructed in the natural Rights of
Men, and the Original and Foundations of Society, and the Duties resulting from
thence. This general Part of Civil-Law and History, are Studies which a
Gentleman should not barely touch at, but constantly dwell upon, and never have
done with. A Virtuous and well behaved young Man, that is well versed in the
general Part of the Civil-Law (which concerns not the chicane of private Cases,
but the Affairs and Intercourse of civilized Nations in general, grounded upon
Principles of Reason) understands Latin well, and can write a good hand, one
may turn loose into the World, with great assurance, that he will find
Employment and Esteem every where.

. 176. It would be strange to suppose Law.
an English Gentleman should be ignorant of the Law of his Country. This,
whatever station he is in, is so requisite, that from a Justice of the Peace,
to a Minister of State, I know no Place he can well fill without it. I do not
mean the chicane or wrangling and captious part of the Law; a Gentleman, whose
Business it is to seek the true measures of Right and Wrong, and not the Arts
how to avoid doing the one, and secure himself in doing the other, ought to be
as far from such a study of the Law, as he is concerned diligently to apply
himself to that, wherein he may be serviceable to his Country. And to that
purpose, I think the right way for a Gentleman to study Our Law, which he does
not design for his Calling, is to take a view of our English Constitution and
Government, in the ancient Books of the Common Law; and some more modern
Writers, who out of them have given an account of this Government. And having
got a true Idea of that, then to read our History, and with it join in every
King's Reign the Laws then made. This will give an insight in to the reason of
our Statutes, and show the true ground upon which they came to be made, and
what weight they ought to have.

. 177. Rhetoric and Logic being Rhetoric. Logic.
the Arts that in the ordinary method usually follow immediately after Grammar,
it may perhaps be wondered that I have said so little of them: The reason is,
because of the little advantage young People receive by them: For I have seldom
or never observed any one to get the Skill of reasoning well, or speaking
handsomely by studying those Rules, which pretend to teach it: And therefore I
would have a young Gentleman take a view of them in the shortest Systems could
be found, without dwelling long on the contemplation and study of those
Formalities. Right Reasoning is founded on something else than the Predicaments
and Predicables, and does not consist in talking in Mode and Figure it self.
But it is besides my present Business to enlarge upon this Speculation: To come
therefore to what we have in hand; if you would have your Son Reason well, let
him read Chillingworth; and if you would have him speak well, let him be
conversant in Tully, to give him the true Idea of Eloquence; and let him read
those things that are well writ in English, to perfect his Style in the purity
of our Language. If the use and end of right Reasoning, be to have right
Notions and a right Judgment of things; to distinguish betwixt Truth and
Falsehood, Right and Wrong, and to act accordingly; be sure not to let your Son
be bred up in the Art and Formality of Disputing, either practicing it himself,
or admiring it in others; unless instead of an able Man, you desire to have him
an insignificant Wrangler, Opiniater in Discourse, and priding himself in
contradicting others; or, which is worse, questioning every thing, and thinking
there is no such thing as truth to be sought, but only Victory in Disputing.
Truth is to be found and maintained by a mature and due Consideration of Things
themselves, and not by artificial Terms and Ways of Arguing, which lead not Men
so much into the discovery of Truth, as into a captious and fallacious use of
doubtful Words, which is the most useless and disingenous Way of talking, and
most unbecoming a Gentleman or a lover of Truth of any thing in the World.

Natural Philosophy, as a speculative Natural Philosophy.
Science, I think we have none, and perhaps, I may think I have reason to say
we never shall. The Works of Nature are contrived by a Wisdom, and operate by
ways too far surpassing our Faculties to discover, or Capacities to conceive,
for us ever to be able to reduce them into a Science. Natural Philosophy being
the Knowledge of the Principles, Properties and Operations of Things, as they
are in themselves, I imagine there are Two Parts of it, one comprehending
Spirits with their Nature and Qualities; and the other Bodies. The first of
these is usually referred to Metaphysics, but under what Title soever the
consideration of Spirits comes, I think it ought to go before the study of
Matter, and Body, not as a Science that can be methodized into a System, and
treated of upon Principles of Knowledge; but as an enlargement of our Minds
toward a truer and fuller comprehension of the intellectual World to which we
are led both by Reason and Revelation And since the clearest and largest
Discoveries we have of other Spirits besides God and our own Souls is imparted
to us from Heaven by Revelation, I think the information, that at least young
People should have of them, should be taken from that Revelation. To this
purpose, I think, it would be well if there were made a good History of the
Bible for young People to read, wherein every thing, that is fit to be put into
it, being laid down in its due Order of Time, and several things omitted, which
were suited only to riper Age, that Confusion, which is usually produced by
promiscuous reading of the Scripture, as it lies now bound up in our Bibles,
would be avoided. And also this other good obtained, that by reading of it
constantly, there would be instilled into the Minds of Children, a Notion and
Belief of Spirits, they having so much to do in all the Transactions of that
History, which will be a good Preparation to the study of Bodies, for without
the Notion and allowance of Spirits, our Philosophy will be lame and defective
in one main Part of it, when it leaves out the Contemplation of the most
Excellent and Powerful Part of the Creation.

. 179. Of this History of the Bible, I think too it would be well if there were
a short and plain Epitome made, containing the chief and most material Heads,
for Children to be conversant in as soon as they can read. This, though it will
lead them early into some Notion of Spirits, yet is not contrary to what I said
above, That I would not have Children troubled whilst young with Notions of
Spirits, whereby my meaning was, that I think it inconvenient, that their yet
tender Minds should receive early Impressions of Goblins, Specter, and
Apparitions, wherewith their Maids and those about them are apt to fright them
into a compliance with their Orders, which often proves a great inconvenience
to them all their Lives after, by subjecting their Minds to Frights, fearful
Apprehensions, Weakness, and Superstition, which, when coming abroad into the
World, and Conversation, they grow weary and ashamed of, it not seldom happens,
that to make as they think, a through Cure, and ease themselves of a load has
sat so heavy on them, they throw away the thoughts of all Spirits together,
and so run into the other but worse extreme.

. 180. The Reason why I would have this premised to the study of Bodies; and
the Doctrine of the Scriptures well imbibed, before young Men be entered in
Natural Philosophy, is, because Matter being a thing, that all our Senses are
constantly conversant with, it is so apt to possess the Mind, and exclude all
other Beings, but Matter, that prejudice grounded on such Principles often
leaves no room for the admittance of Spirits, or the allowing any such things
as immaterial Beings, in rerum natura, when yet it is evivent that by mere
Matter and Motion, none of the great Phoenomena of Nature can be resolved, to
instance but in that common one of Gravity, which I think impossible to be
explained by any natural Operation of Matter or any other Law of Motion, but
the positive Will of a Superior Being, so ordering it. And therefore since the
Deluge cannot be well explained without admitting something out of the ordinary
course of Nature, I propose it to be considered whether God's altering the
Center of gravity in the Earth for a time (a thing as intelligible as gravity
it self, which, perhaps a little variation of Causes unknown to us would
produce) will not more easily account for Noah's Flood, than any Hypothesis yet
made use of to solve it. But this I mention by the by, to show the necessity of
having recourse to something beyond bare Matter and its Motion in the
explication of Nature, to which the Notions of Spirits and their Power, to
whose Operation so much is attributed in the Bible, may be a fit preparative
reserving to a fitter opportunity, a fuller explication of this Hypothesis, and
the application of it to all the Parts of the Deluge, and any Difficulties can
be supposed in the History of the Flood as recorded in the Bible.

. 181. But to return to the study of Natural Philosophy, though the World be
full of Systems of it, yet I cannot say, I know any one which can be taught a
young Man as a Science, wherein he may be sure to find truth and certainty,
which is what all Sciences give an expectation of. I do not hence conclude that
none of them are to be read: It is necessary for a Gentleman in this loarned
Age to look into some of them, to fit himself for Conversation. But whether
that of Des Carts be put into his Hands, as that which is most in Fashion; or
it be thought fit to give him a short view of that and several other also. I
think the Systems of Natural Philosophy that have obtained in this part of the
World, are to be read, more to know the Hypotheses, and to understand the Terms
and Ways of Talking of the several Sects, than with hopes to gain thereby a
comprehensive scientifical and satisfactory Knowledge of the Works of Nature:
Only this may be said, that the Modern Corpusoularians talk in most Things more
intelligibly than the Peripateticks, who possessed the Schools immediately
before them. He that would look farther back, and acquaint himself with the
several Opinions of the Ancients, may consult Dr. Cudworth's Intellectual
System; wherein that very learned Author has with such Accurateness and
Judgment collected and explained the Opinions of the Greek Philosophers, that
what Principles they built on, and what were the chief Hypotheses, that divided
them, is better to be seen in him, than any where else that I know. But I would
not deterr any one from the study of Nature, because all the Knowledge we have,
or possibly can have of it, cannot be brought into a Science. There are very
many things in it, that are convenient and necessary to be known to a
Gentleman: And a great many other, that will abundantly reward the Pains of the
Curious with Delight and Advantage. But these, I think, are rather to be found
amongst such, as have employed themselves in making rational Experiments and
Observations, than in writting barely speculative Systems. Such Writings
therefore, as many of Mr. Boyles are, with others, that have writ of Husbandry,
Planting, Gardening, and the like, may be fit for a Gentleman, when he has a
little acquainted himself with some of the Systems of the Natural Philosophy in
Fashion.

. 182. Though the Systems of Physic, that I have met with, afford little
encouragement to look for Certainty or Science in any Treatise, which shall
pretend to give us a body of Natural Philosophy from the first Principles of
Bodies in general, yet the incomparable Mr. Newton, has shown how far
Mathematics, applied to some Parts of Nature, may, upon Principles that matter
of fact justify, carry us in the knowledge of some, as I may so call them,
particular Provinces of the incomprehensible Universe. And if others could give
us so good and clear an account of other parts of Nature, as he has of this our
Planetary World, and the most considerable Phoenomena observable in it, in his
admirable Book, Philosophiae naturalis principia Mathematica, we might in time
hope to be furnished with more true and certain Knowledge in several Parts of
this stupendous Machin, than hitherto we could have expected. And though there
are very few, that have Mathematics enough to understand his Demonstrations,
yet the most accurate Mathematicians, who have examined them, allowing them to
be such, his Book will deserve to be read, and give no small light and pleasure
to those, who willing to understand the Motions, Properties, and Operations of
the great Masses of Matter, in this our Solar System, will but carefully mind
his Conclusions, which may be depended on as Propositions well proved.

. 183. This is, in short, what I Greek.
have thought concerning a young Gentleman's Studies; wherein it will possibly
be wondered, that I should omit Greek, since amongst the Grecians is to be found
the Original, as it were, and Foundation of all that Learning which we have in
this part of the World. I grant it so; and will add, That no Man can pass for a
Scholar, that is ignorant of the Greek Tongue. But I am not here considering of
the Education of a professed Scholar, but of a Gentleman, to whom Latin and
French, as the World now goes, is by every one acknowledged to be necessary.
When he comes to be a Man, if he has a mind to carry his Studies farther, and
look into the Greek Learning, he will then easily get that Tongue himself: And
if he has not that Inclination, his learning of it under a Tutor will be but
lost Labor, and much of his Time and Pains spent in that, which will be
neglected and thrown away, as soon as he is at liberty. For how many are there
of an hundred, even amongst Scholars themselves, who retain the Greek they
carried from School; or ever improve it to a familiar reading, and perfect
understanding of Greek Authors?

. 184. Besides what is to be had from Study and Books, there are other
Accomplishments necessary to a Gentleman, to be got by exercise, and to which
time is to be allowed, and for which Masters must be had.

Dancing being that which gives graceful Dancing.
Motions all the life, and above all things Manliness, and a becoming
Confidence to young Children, I think it cannot be learned too early, after
they are once of an Age and Strength capable of it. But you must be sure to
have a good Master, that knows, and can teach, what is graceful and becoming,
and what gives a freedom and easiness to all the Motions of the Body. One that
teaches not this, is worse than none at all, Natural Unfashionableness being
much better, than apish, affected Postures; and I think it much more passable
to put off the Hat, and make a Leg, like an honest Country-Gentleman, than like
an ill-fashion'd Dancing Master. For as for the jigging part and the Figures of
Dances, I count that little or nothing farther, than as it tends to perfect
graceful Carriage.

. 185. Music is thought to have Music.
some affinity with Dancing, and a good Hand, upon some Instruments, is by many
People mightily valued; but it wastes so much of a young Man's time, to gain
but a moderate Skill in it, and engages often in such odd Company, that many
think it much better spared: And I have, amongst Men of Parts and Business, so
seldom heard any one commended, or esteemed for having an Excellency in Music,
that amongst all those things that ever came into the List of Accomplishments,
I think I may give it the last place. Our short Lives will not serve us for the
attainment of all things; nor can our Minds be always intent on something to be
learned: The weakness of our Constitutions, both of Mind and Body, requires
that we should be often unbent, and he, that will make a good use of any part
of his Life, must allow a large Portion of it to Recreation. At least this must
not be denied to young People, unless whilst you, with too much haste, make
them old, you have the displeasure to see them in their Graves, or a second
Childhood, sooner than you could wish. And therefore, I think, that the Time
and Pains allotted to serious Improvements, should be employed about Things of
most use and consequence, and that too in the Methods the most easy and short,
that could be at any rate obtained: And perhaps it would be none of the least
Secrets in Education, to make the Exercises of the Body and the Mind, the
Recreation one to another. I doubt not but that something might be done in it,
by a prudent Man, that would well consider the Temper and Inclination of his
Pupil. For he that is wearied either with Study, or Dancing, does not desire
presently to go to sleep; but to do something else, which may divert and
delight him. But this must be always remembered, that nothing can come into the
account of Recreation, that is not done with delight.

. 186. Fencing and Riding the Great Horse, are looked upon as so necessary
parts of Breeding, that it would be thought a great omission to neglect them:
The latter of the two being for the most part to be learned only in Great
Towns, is one of the best Exercises for Health which is to be had in those
Places of Ease and Luxury; and upon that account makes a fit part of a young
Gentleman's Employment during his abode there. And as far as it conduces to
give a Man a firm and graceful Seat on Horseback, and to make him able to teach
his Horse to stop and turn quick, and to rest on his Haunches, is of use to a
Gentleman both in Peace and War. But whether it be of moment enough to be made
a Business of, and deserve to take up more of his time than should barely for
his Health be employed at due intervals in some such vigorous Exercise, I shall
leave to the Discretion of Parents and Tutors, who will do well to remember, in
all the Parts of Education, that most time and application is to be bestowed on
that which is like to be of greatest consequence, and frequentest use, in the
ordinary course and occurrences of that Life the young Man is designed for.

. 187. As for Fencing, it seems to Fencing.
me a good Exercise for Health, but dangerous to the Life. The confidence of it
being apt to engage in Quarrels, those that think they have some Skill, and to
make them more touchy than needs, on Points of Honor, and slight Occasions.
Young Men in their warm Blood are forward to think, they have in vain learned
to Fence, if they never show their Skill and Courage in a Duel, and they seem
to have Reason. But how many sad Tragedies that Reason has been the Occasion
of, the Tears of many a Mother can witness. A Man that cannot Fence will be the
more careful to keep out of Bullies and Gamesters Company, and will not be half
so apt to stand upon Punctilio's, nor to give Affronts, or fiercely justify
them when given, which is that, which usually makes the Quarrel. And when a Man
is in the Field, a moderate Skill in Fencing rather exposes him to the Sword of
his Enemy, than secures him from it. And certainly a Man of Courage who cannot
Fence at all, and therefore will put all upon one thrust, and not stand
parrying, has the odds against a moderate Fencer, especially if he has Skill in
Wrestling, and therefore if any Provision be to be made against such Accidents,
and a Man be to prepare his Son for Duels, I had much rather mine should be a
good Wrestler than an ordinary Fencer, which is the most a Gentleman can attain
to in it, unless he will be constantly in the Fencing-School, and every Day
exercising. But since Fencing and Riding the great Horse, are so generally
looked upon as necessary Qualifications in the breeding of a Gentleman, it will
be hard wholly to deny any one of that rank these Marks of Distinction. I shall
leave it therefore to the Father, to consider, how far the Temper of his Son,
and the Station he is like to be in, will allow or encourage him to comply with
Fashions, which having very little to do with civil Life, were yet formerly
unknown to the most Warlike Nations, and seem to have added little of Force or
Courage to those who have received them, unless we will think Martial Skill or
Prowess, have been improved by Duelling, with which Fencing came into, and with
which I presume it will go out of, the World.

. 188. These are my present Thoughts concerning Learning and Accomplishments.
The great Business of all is Virtue and Wisdom.

Nullum numen abest si sit prudentia.

Teach him to get a Mastery over his Inclinations, and submit his Appetite to
Reason. This being obtained, and by constant practice settled into Habit, the
hardest part of the Task is over. To bring a young Man to this, I know nothing
which so much contributes, as the love of Praise and Commendation, which should
therefore be instilled into him by all Arts imaginable. Make his Mind as
sensible of Credit and Shame as may be: And when you have done that, you have
put a Principle into him, which will influence his Actions, when you are not
by, to which the fear of a little smart of a Rod is not comparable, and which
will be the proper Stock, whereon afterward to graft the true Principles of
Morality and Religion.

. 189. I have one Thing more to Trade.
add, which as soon as I mention, I shall run the danger to be suspected to
have forgot what I am about, and what I have above written concerning
Education, which has all tended toward a Gentleman's Calling, with which a
Trade seems wholly to be inconsistent. And yet, I cannot forbear to say, I
would have him learn a Trade, a Manual Trade; nay, two or three, but one more
particularly.

. 190. The busy Inclination of Children being always to be directed to some
thing, that may be useful to them. The Advantage may be considered of two
Kinds; 1. Where the Skill it self, that is got by exercise, is worth the
having. Thus Skill not only in Languages, and learned Sciences, but in
Painting, Turning, Gardening, Tempering, and Working in Iron, and all other
useful Arts is worth the having. 2. Where the Exercise it self, without any
other Consideration, is necessary, or useful for Health. Knowledge in some
Things is so necessary to be got by Children whilst they are young, that some
part of their time is to be allotted to their improvement in them, though those
Employments contribute nothing at all to their Health: Such are Reading and
Writing and all other sedentary Studies, for the improvement of the Mind, and
are the unavoidable Business of Gentlemen quite from their Cradles. Other
Manual Arts, which are both got and exercised by Labor, do many of them by
their Exercise contribute to our Health too, especially, such as employ us in
the open Air. In these, then, Health and Improvement may be joined together,
and of these should some fit ones be chosen, to be made the Recreations of one,
whose chief Business is with Books and Study. In this Choice, the Age and
Inclination of the Person is to be considered, and Constraint always to be
avoided in bringing him to it. For Command and Force may often create, but can
never cure an Aversion: And whatever any one is brought to by compulsion, he
will leave as soon as he can, and be little profited, and less recreated by,
whilst he is at it.

. 191. That which of all others Painting.
would please me best, would be a Painter, were there not an Argument or two
against it not easy to be answered. First, ill Painting is one of the worst
things in the World; and to attain a tolerable degree of Skill in it, requires
too much of a Man's Time. If he has a natural Inclination to it, it will
endanger the neglect of all other more useful Studies, to give way to that, and
if he have no inclination to it, all the Time, Pains, and Money shall be
employed in it, will be thrown away to no purpose. Another Reason why I am not
for Painting in a Gentleman, is, Because it is a sedentary Recreation, which
more employs the Mind than the Body. A Gentleman's more serious Employment I
look on to be Study; and when that demands relaxation and refreshment, it
should be in some Exercise of the Body, which unbends the Thought, and confirms
the Health and Strength. For these two Reasons I am not for Painting.

. 192. In the next place, for a Gardning.
Country-Gentleman, I should propose one, or rather both these; viz. Gardening,
and working in Wood, as a Carpenter, Joyner, or Turner, as being fit and
healthy Recreations for a Joyner.
Man of Study, or Business. For since the Mind endures not to be constantly
employed in the same Thing, or Way; and sedentary or studious Men, should have
some Exercise, that at the same time might divert their Minds, and employ their
Bodies; I know none that could do it better for a Country-Gentleman, than these
two, the one of them affording him Exercise, when the Weather or Season keeps
him from the other. Besides, that by being skilled in the one of them, he will
be able to govern and teach his Gardener; by the other, contrive and make a
great many Things both of delight and use: though these I propose not as the
chief end of his Labor, but as Temptations to it; Diversion from his other
more serious Thoughts and Employments, by useful and healthy manual Exercise,
being what I chiefly aim at in it.

. 193. Nor let it be thought that I Recreation.
mistake, when I call these or the like Trades, Diversions or Recreations: For
Recreation is not being idle (as every one may observe) but easing the wearied
part by change of Business: And he that thinks Diversion may not lie in hard
and painful Labor, forgets the early rising, hard riding, heat, cold and
Hunger of Huntsmen, which is yet known to be the constant Recreation of Men of
the greatest Condition. Delving, Planting, Inoculating, or any the like
profitable Employments, would be no less a Diversion, than any of the idle
Sports in fashion, if Men could but be brought to delight in them, which Custom
and Skill in any Trade will quickly make any one do. And I doubt not, but there
are to be found those, who being frequently called to Cards, or any other Play,
by those they could not refuse, have been more tired with these Recreations,
than with any the most serious Employment of Life, though the Play has been
such, as they have naturally had no aversion to, and with which they could
willingly sometimes divert themselves.

. 194. Though when one reflects on these and other the like Pastimes, (as they
are called,) one finds they leave little satisfaction behind them, when they
are over; and most commonly give more vexation than delight to People, whilst
they are actually engaged in them, and neither profit the Mind, nor the Body.
They are plain instances to me, that Men cannot be perfectly idle; they must be
doing something. The Skill should be so to employ their time of Recreation,
that it may relax and refresh the part, that has been exercised, and is tired,
and yet do something, which besides the present Delight and Ease, may produce
what will afterward be profitable. It has been nothing but the Vanity and
Pride of Greatness and Riches, that has brought unprofitable and dangerous
Pastimes into fashion, and persuaded People into a belief, that the learning or
putting their hands to any thing, that was useful, could not be a Diversion fit
for a Gentleman. This has been that which has given Cards, Dice, and Drinking
so much Credit in the World: And a great many throw away their spare Hours in
them, through the prevalency of Custom, and want of some better Employment to
pass their time, more than from any real delight is to be found in them, only
because it being very irksome and uneasy to do nothing at all, they had never
learned any laudable manual Art where with to divert themselves.; and so they
betake themselves to those foolish, or ill ways in use, to help off their Time,
which a rational Man, till corrupted by Custom, could find very little pleasure
in.

. 195. I say not this, that I would never have a young Gentleman accommodate
himself to the innocent Diversions in fashion, amongst those of his Age and
Condition. I am so far from having him austere and morose to that degree, that
I would persuade him to Trade.
more than ordinary complaisance sor all the Gaieties and Diversions of those
he converses with, and be averse or resty in nothing, they should desire of
him, that might become a Gentleman and an honest Man. But allowance being made
for idle and jovial Conversation, and all fashionable becoming Recreations; I
say, a young Man will have time enough, from his serious and main Business, to
learn almost any Trade. It Is want of application, and not of time, that Men are
not skilful in more Arts than one; and an Hour in a Day, constantly employed in
such a way of Diversion, will carry a Man, in a short time, a great deal
farther than he can imagine: which if it were of no other use, but to drive the
common, vicious, useless, and dangerous Pastimes out of fashion; and to show
there was no need of them, would deserve to be encouraged. If Men from their
youth were weaned from that sauntring Humor, wherein some, out of Custom, let
a good part of their Lives run uselesly away, without either Business or
Recreation, they would find time enough to acquire dexterity and skill in
hundreds of Things; which though remote from their proper Callings, would not
at all interfere with them. And therefore, I think, for this, as well as other
Reasons beforementioned, a lazy, listless Humor, that idly dreams away the
time, is of all others the least to be indulged, or permitted in young People.
It is the proper state of one sick, and out of order in his Health, and is
tolerable in no body else, of what Age or Condition soever.

. 196. To the Arts abovementioned, may be added Perfuming, Varnishing,
Graving, and several sorts of working in Iron, Brass, and Silver: And if, as it
happens to most young Gentlemen, that a considerable part of his Time be spent
in a great Town, he may learn to cut, pollish, and set precious Stones, or
employ himself in grinding and pollishing Optical Glasses. Amongst the great
variety there is of ingenuous Manual Arts, 'twill be impossible that no one
should be found to please and delight him, unless he be either idle or
debauched, which is not to be supposed in a right way of Education. And since
he cannot be always employed in Study, Reading, and Conversation, there will be
many an Hour, besides what his Exercises will take up, which, if not spent this
way, will be spent worse: For, I conclude, a young Man will seldom desire to
sit perfectly still and idle; or if he does, it is a fault that ought to be
mended.

197. But if his mistaken Parents, frighted with the disgraceful Names of
Mechanic and Trade, shall have an aversion to any thing of this kind in their
Children; yet there is one thing relating to Trade, which when they consider,
they will think absolutely necessary for their Sons to learn.

Merchants Accounts, though a Science Merchants Accounts.
not likely to help a Gentleman to get an Estate, yet possibly there is not any
thing of more use and efficacy, to make him preserve the Estate he has. It Is
seldom observed, that he who keeps an Account of his Income and Expenses, and
thereby has constantly under view the course of his domestic Affairs, lets
them run to ruin: And I doubt not but many a Man gets behind-hand, before he
is aware, or runs further on, when he is once in, for want of this Care, or the
Skill to do it. I would therefore advice all Gentlemen to learn perfectly
Merchants Accounts, and not think it is a Skill, that belongs not to them,
because it has received its Name, and has been chiefly practiced by Men of
Traffic.

. 198. When my young Master has once got the Skill of keeping Accounts (which
is a Business of Reason more than Arithmetic) perhaps it will not be amiss,
that his Father, from thenceforth, require him to do it in all his
Concernments: Not that I would have him set down every Pint of Wine, or Play,
that costs him Money, the general Name of Expenses will serve for such things
well enough, nor would I have his Father look so narrowly into these Accounts,
as to take occasion from thence to criticize on his Expenses. He must remember
that he himself was once a young Man, and not forget the Thoughts he had then,
nor the Right his Son has to have the same: and to have allowance made for
them. Merchants Accounts.
If therefore, I would have the young, Gentleman obliged to keep an Account, it
is not at all to have that way a check upon his Expenses (for what the Father
allows him, he ought to let him be fully Master of) but only, that he might be
brought early into the Custom of doing it, and that that might be made familiar
and habitual to him betimes, which will be so useful and necessary to be
constantly practiced the whole Course of his Life. A Noble Venetian, whose Son
wallowed in the Plenty of his Father's Riches, finding his Son's Expenses grow
very high and extravagant, ordered his Casheer to let him have for the future,
no more Money, than what he should count, when he received it. This one would
think no great restraint to a young Gentleman's Expenses, who could freely have
as much money, as he would tell. But, yet this, to one who was used to nothing
but the pursuit of his Pleasure, proved a very great trouble, which at last
ended in this sober and advantageous Reflection. If it be so much Pains to me
barely to count the Money, I would spend, What Labor and Pains did it cost my
Ancestors, not only to count, but get it? This rational Thought, suggested by
this little pains imposed upon him, wrought so effectually upon his Mind, that
it made him take up, and from that time forwards, prove a good Husband. This at
least every body must allow, that nothing is likelier to keep a Man within
compass, than the having constantly before his Eyes, the state of his Affairs
in a regular course of Accounts.

. 199. The last Part usually in Education Travel.
is Travel, which is commonly thought to finish the Work, and complete the
Gentleman. I confess Travel into Foreign Countries has great Advantages, but
the time usually chosen to send young Men abroad, is, I think, of all other,
that which renders them least capable of reaping those Advantages. Those which
are proposed, as to the main of them, may be reduced to these Two, first
Language, secondly an Improvement in Wisdom and Prudence, by seeing Men, and
conversing with People of Tempers, Customs, and Ways of living, different from
one another, and especially from those of his Parish and Neighborhood. But
from Sixteen to One and Twenty, which is the ordinary time of Travel, Men are
of all their Lives, the least suited to these Improvements. The first Season to
get Foreign Languages, and from their Tongue to their true Accents, I should
think, should be from Seven to Fourteen or Sixteen; and then too a Tutor with
them is useful and necessary, who may with those Languages teach them other
things. But to put them out of their Parents view at a great distance, under a
Governor, when they think themselves too much Men to be governed by others,
and yet have not Prudence and Experience enough to govern themselves, what is
it, but to expose them to all the greatest Dangers of their whole Life, when
they have the least Fence and Guard against them? Till that boiling boisterous
part of Life comes in, it may be hoped, the Tutor may have some Authority.
Neither the stubbornness of Age, nor the Temptation or Examples of others can
take him from his Tutor's conduct, till Fifteen or Sixteen: But then, when he
begins to consort himself with Men, and think himself one; when he comes to
relish, and pride himself in manly Vices, and thinks it a shame to be any
longer under the Control and Conduct of another, what can be hoped from even
the most careful and discreet Governor, when neither he has Power to compel,
nor his Pupil a disposition to be persuaded; but on the contrary, has the
advice of warm Blood, and prevailing Fashion, to hearken to the Temptations of
his Companions, just as wise as himself, rather than to the persuasions of his
Tutor, who is now looked on as the Enemy to his Freedom? And when is a Man so
like to miscarry, as when at the same time he is both raw and unruly? This is
the Season of all his Life, that most requires the Eye and Authority of his
Parents, and Friends to govern it. The flexibleness of the former part of a
Man's Age, not yet grown up to be headstrong, makes it more governable and
safe; and in the after part, Reason and Foresight begin a little to take
place, and mind a Man of his Safety and Improvement. The time therefore I
should think the fittest for a young Gentleman to be sent abroad, would be,
either when he is younger, under a Tutor, whom he might be the better for: Or
when he was some Years older, without a Governor, when he was of Age to govern
himself, and make Observations of what he found in other Countries worthy his
Notice, and that might be of use to him after his return: And when too, being
thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and Fashions, the natural and moral
Advantages and Defects of his own Country, he has something to exchange, with
those abroad, from whose Conversation he hoped to reap any Knowledge.

. 200. The ordering of Travel otherwise is that, I imagine, which makes so many
young Gentlemen come back so little improved by it. And if they do bring home
with them any Knowledge of the Places and People, they have seen, it is often
an admiration of the worst and vainest Fashions they met with abroad, retaining
a relish and memory of those Things wherein their Liberty took its first swing,
rather than of what should make them better and wiser after their return. And
indeed how can it be otherwise, going abroad at the Age they do, under a
Governor, who is to provide their Necessaries, and make their Observations for
them? Thus under the Shelter and Pretense of a Governor, thinking themselves
excused from standing upon their own Legs, or being accountable for their own
Conduct, they very seldom trouble themselves with Enquiries, or making useful
Observations of their own. Their Thoughts run after Play and Pleasure; wherein,
they take it as a lessening, to be controlled; but seldom trouble themselves to
examine the Designs, observe the Address, and consider the Arts, Tempers and
Inclinations of Men, they meet with; that so they may know how to Comport
themselves toward them. Here he that Travels with them, is to skreen them; get
them out when they have run themselves into the Briars, and in all their
Miscarriages be answerable for them. I confess, the Knowledge of Men is so
great a Skill, that it is not to be expected, that a young Man should presently
be perfect in it: But yet his going abroad is to little purpose, if travel does
not somewhat open his Eyes, make him cautious and wary, and accustom him to
look beyond the outside, and, under the inoffensive Guard of a civil and
obliging Carriage, keep himself free and safe in his Conversation with
Strangers, and all sorts of People, without forfeiting their good Opinion. He
that is sent out to travel at the Age, and with the Thoughts of a Man designing
to improve himself, may get into the Conversation and Acquaintance of Persons
of Condition where he comes; which though a thing of most advantage to a
Gentleman that travels, yet I ask amongst our young Men, that go abroad under
Tutors, what one is there of an hundred, that ever visits any Person of
Quality? much less makes an Acquaintance with such, from whose Conversation he
may learn, what is good Breeding in that Country, and what is worth observation
in it: Though from such Persons it is, one may learn more in one Day, than in a
Years rambling from one June to another. Nor indeed is it to be wondered; for
Men of Worth and Parts, will not easily admit the Familiarity of Boys, who yet
need the care of a Tutor; though a young Gentleman and a Stranger, appearing
like a Man, and showing a desire to inform himself in the Customs, Manners,
Laws, and Government of the Country he is in, will find welcome assistance and
entertainment, amongst the best and most knowing Persons everywhere, who will
be ready to receive, encourage, and countenance an ingenuous and inquisitive
Foreigner.

. 201. This, how true soever it be, will not, I fear alter the Custom, which
has cast the time of Travel upon the worst part of a Man's Life; but for
Reasons not taken from their Improvement. The young Lad must not be ventured
abroad at Eight or Ten, for fear what may happen to the tender Child, though he
then runs ten times less risque than at Sixteen or Eighteen. Nor must he stay
at home till that dangerous heady Age be over, because he must be back again by
One and twenty to marry and propagate. The Father cannot stay any longer for
the Portion, nor the Mother for a new Set of Babies to play with; and so my
young Master, whatever comes on it must have a Wife looked out for him, by that
time he is of Age; though it would be no prejudice to his Strength, his Parts,
nor his Issue, if it were respited for some time, and he had leave to get, in
Years and Knowledge, the start a little of his Children, who are often found to
tread too near upon the heels of their Fathers, to the no great Satisfaction
either of Son or Father. But the young Gentleman being got within view of
Matrimony, it is time to leave him to his Mistress.

. 202. Though I am now come to a Conclusion of what obvious Remarks have
suggested to me concerning Education, I would not have it thought that I look
on it as a just Treatise on this Subject: There are a thousand other things
that may need consideration, especially if one should take in the various
Tempers, different Inclinations, and particular Defaults, that are to be found
in Children, and prescribe proper Remedies: The variety is so great, that it
would require a Volume; nor would that reach it. Each Man's Mind has some
peculiarity, as well as his Face, that distinguishes him from all others; and
there are possibly scarce two Children, who can be conducted by exactly the
same method. Besides, that I think a Prince, a Nobleman, and an ordinary
Gentleman's Son, should have different ways of Breeding. But having had here
only some general Views, in reference to the main End and Aims in Education,
and those designed for a Gentleman's Son, who being then very little, I
considered only as white Paper, or Wax, to be molded and fashioned as one
pleases; I have touched little more than those Heads, which I judged necessary
for the Breeding of a young Gentleman of his Condition in general; and have now
published these my occasional Thoughts with this Hope, That though this be far
from being a complete Treatise on this Subject, or such, as that every one may
find what will just fit his Child in it, yet it may give some small light to
those, whose Concern for their dear Little Ones, makes them so irregularly
bold, that they dare venture to consult their own Reason, in the Education of
their Children, rather than wholly to rely upon Old Custom.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECTIONS.
A.
ALteration Sect. 7. Air 9. Awe 43. Arithmetic 169. Astronomy 170.
B.
Bed 22. Beating 46. Breeding 134
C.
Cloths 11. Costiveness 23. Craving 36, 101. Childishness 61. Company 66, 139.
Compulsion 74, 121. Chiding 75. Curiosity 103, 111. Complaints 104. Crying 106.
Cruelty 110 Chronology 172. Civil-Law 175.
D.
Diet 13. Drink 16. Drink Strong 19. Dejected 44. Dancing 65, 184. Disposition
72. Dominion 98. Drawing 153.
E
Early 34, 39. Example 69, 81. Excuses 125. Ethics 174.
F
Feet 7. Fruie 20. Familiarity 91. French 154. Fencing 185.
G
Government 88. Governor 64. God 129. Goblins 131. Geography 168. Geometry
171. Greek 183. Gardening 192.
H
Health 2. History 173.
I.
Joyner 192.
L.
Liberality 104. Lying 124. Learning 140. Latin 155, 167. Law 176. Logic 177.
M.
Meals 15. Mind 31. Maimers 65. Memoriter 166. Music 185. Merchants Accounts
197.
O.
Obstinacy 76.
P.
Physic 29. Punishment 42, 70. Play-Games 123. Philosophy Natural 177. 188.
Painting 191.
R.
Rewards 51. Reputation 55, 60. Rules 62. Reasoning 80. Reverence 91. Reading
141. Rhetoric 177. Recreation 193.
S.
Swiming 8. Sleep 21. Self-denial 44. Shame 59. Sauntring 116. Spirits 130.
T.
Tenderness 4. Task 71. Tutor 87. Temper 95. Truth 122. Themes 162. Trade 189,
195. Travel 199.
V.
Virtue 128. Verses 165.
W.
Warmth 5. Whipping 82. Wisdom 133. Writing. 152.
FINIS.

