The GLORY of Free Grace DISPLAYED: Or, The Transcendent Excellency of the Love
of God in Christ, unto Believing, Repenting Sinners, in some measure described.
WHEREIN, 1. The Doctrine about Election, and the Covenant of Reconciliation is
Explained. 2. The Error of the Antinomians, who assert, That the Filth of Sin
was laid on Christ, and that the Holiness as well as the Righteousness of
Christ is made the Elects while in the Womb, etc. With their Abuse of
FREE GRACE particularly detected and confuted. 3. In what sense our Sins were
laid on Christ, and Christ's Righteousness made the Believers, according to the
Sacred Scriptures, evinced. 4. The Glory of Irresistible-Grace, as exerted in
the Conversion of a Sinner in opposition to the Arminian, cleared. 5. A modest
Defense of the sober Dominican, about Physical Predetermination.


London, Printed by T.S. for B. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible against the
Stocks-market. 1680.

An Epistle to the well-meaning but weak READER, who is most liable to the
being tainted with the Errors which are opposed in the following Discourse.
THE design of the ensuing Discourse, is to enlighten Thee concerning the true
Notion of Free Grace, which contains in it discoveries of Divine Love to the
greatest of Sinners; and, which is then illustrated in its fullest glory, when
extended toward such, as are affected with the dreadfulness of their lost
estate, as out of Christ: For, whatever some may suggest, none but Convinced
Sinners, are capable of entertaining right conceptions of Gospel Grace. An
Unconvinced Sinner, cannot in any saving measure understand, much less
comprehend the glory of this mystery; for whoever would be savingly acquainted
with it, must know, and believe, that so many, and so great are his
transgressions, that, unless he be made the object thereof, he is eternally
undone. Whence it is impossible, that any should discover unto Thee the true
Notion of this Grace, and not at the same time show, who are the proper objects
of it: Nor can any show who are the proper objects of it, unless they acquaint
Thee with the state of those persons, that shall be made the actual partakers
thereof, which cannot be without an insisting on the greatness of both the sin
and misery of all such: for Grace is to the miserable, to those, who in the
sense of sin, labor, and are heavy laden; and therefore the first work of a
Gospel Minister, is to preach up Repentance toward God, and then Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, we must first, (if we will be faithful) acquaint you
with your sin, and your danger, assuring you, that although you were from
eternity elected, your sins were not actually in God's sight pardoned from
eternity, nor from the day of Christ's death, nor from the time you were first
conceived in the womb; for every Elect Soul, while under the reigning power of
Unbelief, and other Lusts, is unpardoned, and in a state of condemnation;
whence notwithstanding your election, if you would receive an actual pardon,
you must go to God through Christ for it; yea, you must receive Christ in your
hearts by Faith; and that you may, we must beseech you, as in Christ's stead,
that you come unto Christ; but come unto Christ without Faith and Repentance,
you cannot; for our coming unto Christ, is our believing in the Lord Christ,
which believing includes Gospel Repentance, which cannot be without conviction
of Sin.

The Doctrine of Free Grace thus rightly stated, is a Point of the highest
Concern to all the Children of Fallen Man, leading us unto a due closing with
such other Truths, as are also of very great importance, viz. The necessity of
conviction of sin, in order to a right believing; and of that Faith, which
includes in it the entire Principle of Gospel Repentance, as antecedent unto
our actual justification in God's sight. All which Gospel Truths, how necessary
soever to salvation, are sadly neglected by such, as understand not the
Scripture Notion of Free Grace; which being so, I have thought my self the more
obliged to do my utmost for thy relief, who art in danger of being drawn aside,
not only to the contemning the but now mentioned Truths, but moreover to an
entertaining many a Dangerous Error, concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, as if he
bore not only the Guilt and Punishment, but also the Filth of our Sin; and as
if what the Lord Jesus has done for the Church, would exempt the Elect from
the necessity there is of their Repenting, Believing and Rendering a sincere
Obedience to the end of their Lives.

These, and many other Errors, that are but too firmly linkt unto 'em, are of
different mischievous influences; some tending to the discountenancing
Holiness, as others do to the advancing Profaneness, and a gratifying the
Papists; all which, besides what I have already done, I will, for thy greater
Caution, particularly evince.

1. The Errors I oppose greatly discountenance Holiness; for Justification, and
a right to Glory, depending merely upon an eternal, but secret Decree,
according unto them, the Elect are justified actually in God's sight, at least,
as soon as they receive their Beings in the womb; whence the conviction of Sin,
or that Faith, which includes in it the Principle of Gospel Repentance, is no
way a necessary antecedent unto this Justification; and consequently, if the
Elect be unconcerned about the knowledge of their Election, they are safe
enough, although they mind not Religion in its purity.

2. The Profane are as much encouraged, who, confidently persuading themselves
that their sins are pardoned, or, who concluding that their Sentence in the
Court of Heaven is already past, their Piety cannot better their state, nor
their wickedness any way conduce to the making it the worse, and theref^re
contemn God and true Religion. I knew as great a Debauchee, as these times
afford, who, reading Mr. Saltmarshe's Book, had arrived to a strange assurance
that his sins were pardoned; and that although he lived under the prevalency of
his lusts, and was confessedly a vile wretch, yet, he being so fully persuaded
both of his Election, and Justification, knew, as he said, that he should be
eternally happy, although he should dye in that state. But,

3. These Errors gratify the Papists as much, and that on a twofold account.

1. In that some, (to wit, two or three) Protestants assert, That the Filth of
Sin was laid on Christ, the Papists judge themselves sufficiently enabled to
reproach all Protestants, as a People, whose Heretical Opinions, are most
odious, casting the Lord of Life under the vilest of Calumnies. Thus
Bellarmine, de Justif. l. 2. c. 7. lit. H. etc. would prove, That we make
Christ a real Sinner. -- Ergo poterit Christus dici vere peccator, and, quod
horret animus cogitare, Filius Diaboli. -- Illyricus in confess. Antuerpien. c.
6. and in Apol. ejusd. admits (says Bellarmine,) that Christ may be said to be
most truly a Sinner, by the imputation of the Father, and his own voluntary
reception of their sins on himself, to which he adds, But this their
Blasphemous and Sacrilegious Impudence contradicts the whole Scripture. Whether
this Illyricus were of the Antinomian Opinion, or not, I Will not now enquire;
for nothing more sure, than that he embraced Errors of a dangerous tendency.
But by this we may see, How the Papists are gratified by such Doctrines as
these.

2. The Antinomians, not clearly distinguishing between the Guilt and Filth of
Sin, (as I have shown both in the Body of the Treatise, and in the Appendix)
give great advantages unto some Popish Errors.

For these Reasons I have been the more careful in my endeavors, that thou, by
coming to the knowledge of the Truth, may be freed from the mischiefs thou
art liable unto, by a too fixed adhering unto Error. Yea, the saving thy soul
from Errer, and the ruinous consequences thereof, is my aim in this Essay; It
being Grievous to consider, that any Well-meaning Professors, in this day, and
land of light, should be tempted to abandon so necessary an Article of the
Protestant Doctrine, and instead thereof, embrace an Opinion that so much
discountenanceth Holiness, that so much en^ Profaness, yea, and so much
gratifies the ^sts, who are the great Enemies to our blessed J^; and who are,
at this time, attempting our ^ine, by their bringing us into a strange
confusi^, reviving old Errors, setting Protestant against ^rotestant, and by
their scurrilous Pamphlets preparing the People to believe, that the greatest
Enemies to Popery, viz. the Nonconformists, are vile enough to perpetrate such
Villainies as are abhorred by none as much as by them.

Reader, That thou may not, contrary to the honest inclinations of thy Soul,
be drawn unto these destructive Errors, I have written the ensuing Treatise,
desiring, that thou would seriously peruse it; and that thou may do so,
to thine own profit, shall be my Prayer unto the Lord, who is able, and I
trust, who will bring thee to the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

Farewell. From my Study. July 24. 1680.
The Glory of FREE GRACE Displayed: OR The Transcendent Excellency of the Love
of God in Christ unto Believing, Repenting Sinners, in some measure described.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. The Method proposed. What the Grace of God is, in short
explicated.

THis is a Subject that abounds with its delights, affording matter of the
greatest comforts, unto such, as are of truly broken, and contrite spirits. A
Soul, who has been savingly convinced of sin, and consequently, of its lost
condition, while in a State of Nature, cannot but be greatly refreshed at the
believing meditation of the Fullness and Freeness of the Grace of God in Christ.
What is it, that can raise the distressed conscience of him, who does firmly
believe, that he sinned in Adam, and by that, and many another heinous actual
iniquity, has incurred Divine displeasure, what, I say, can so much relieve
the distressed conscience of such an one, as the knowledge of, and Faith in the
freeness of Grace in Christ unto all such?

It Is glorious Grace, that alone can prove truly advantageous, and reviving to
the humble sinner. About which, some lying under great Ignorance, as others do
under dangerous mistakes, I will attempt to speak somewhat, (as the Lord shall
help me,) for the inlightening the minds of men concerning it; that so, such,
to whom comforts belong, may rejoice, and glory in God their Savior, even,
when unhumbled, bold and presumptuous sinners, may see the greatest reasons,
why, they ought to mourn, and be in bitterness, for that, while so, they are
not actually partakers of this Grace.

But, before I engage in a discourse of this nature, 'twill be absolutely
necessary, that I caution the the Reader, against any expectations of a full
display of this grace, it being far beyond the heart of man to conceive, or the
tongue of Angels to express, the full glory thereof. The contrivance is so
profound, that though the Angels of God may pry into it, they cannot Fathom
its depths, how much less then can Man, to whom it may be said, Can thou by
searching find out this Grace, can thou find out what is infinite unto
perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? the measure thereof is
longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea, what can thou know? thou
may cry out; Oh what is the length, and breadth and depth and height of the
love of God, which passes knowledge! O how unsearchable are the riches of this
Grace! but to comprehend, or comprehensively to describe it is impossible. For
who ever would obtain adequate conceptions of it, must ravel into the eternal
counsels of God, and search into that wise invention, which was the product of
an eternal consultation, between the Father and the Son, or otherwise he can
but stand gazing, admiring and wondering at such discoveries, it has pleased
the Lord in infinite mercy to vouchsafe us. Expect not then a full display of
this glory, but in this treatise be satisfied with such hints, as the least of
the Lords Servants can give thee, looking into the writings of the more
learned, and judicious on this Subject, but especially into the Scriptures,
where an enlightened understanding may see more, than he is capable of
revealing.

Reader, having given thee this caution, I Will not detain thee any longer, from
what I principally design, but will immediately attempt the giving thee in
short, the plainest, clearest and most full account I can of this grace, in
this following method. I Will show,

1. What the Grace of God is.

2. How or in what respect it is magnified and exalted, and in doing so,
discover how and in what regards, the Grace of God is turned into wantonness by
many, to the great reproach of God and his glory with the due improvement we
ought to make of every Instance of Free Grace.

1. What is the Grace of God?

I answer, The Grace of God may be considered after a twofold manner.

1. As it is in God, and so it is God himself inclining to favor, and do good
unto the creature, FREELY, without a respect to any merit or desert in him. Or,

2. It may be taken for the good thing it sel^ freely given unto the creature,
which is but the effect of the former, to wit, of that grace tha^ is in God.
Here it must be duly minded,

1. That the Grace, which is now to be displayed, is the Grace which is in God:
The Divine Will it self inclining to favor man mo^ freely, which grace, as
it is in God, is a prope^sion, inclination or disposition of his Will to do
good, or God himself thus disposed, and inclined to show mercy, or it is God
himself willing, purposing or determining to make known the greatness of his
goodness.

2. The Object of this Grace is man. (For I design not to mention the Grace
shown the Angels, but to Man,) as he is incapable of meriting the least
instance of Divine Love, yea Man, as he has by his sin incurred the just
displeasure of Almighty God. Grace then is God himself inclining, or rather
purposing and determining to show favor freely; freely, (i e) because he will,
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, yea, and because he will have
mercy. For an act of grace is most Sovereign and free, and God, who is the
absolute Lord of all things, does dispose of all things freely, that is, as he
will. But,

3. This Grace, that is in God, is discovered unto us in its effects, even in
that the gracious designs, purposes and determinations of God, are
accomplished, and the good intended, is actually given out unto the undeserving
creature, whence the great things graciously done, the good things mercifully
vouchsafed unto the children of men, at sundry times, in diverse ways and
manners, do most excellently represent unto us that Grace, that is in God.
Which being so, who ever will, in any measure, display the Grace of God, must
not only acquaint you, with the eternal designs of grace, but, also with the
effects of such designs, the great things done and actually given out unto
those, for whom they are prepared [The Schoolmen do distinguish between the
grace, Quae in Deo residet, et quae a Deo data est. Gratia quae in Deo residet
est ipsa voluntas Divina seu Dei beneplacitum. The Gratia a Deo data is the
beneficium datum seu donum habituale. About which the Protestants and Papists
greatly differ, although the Popish Schoolmen have said enough to justify the
Protestant Doctors: The difference lies in this Our Divines do call the Grace,
quae in Deo residet, Gratia gratum faciens, but the Papists call the Grace,
quae data est a Deo by that name, So Durand l. 3. dis. 13. q. 1. -- alio modo
accipitur gratia pro aliquo dono creatoet 6. te hoc dividitur in Gratiam gratum
facientem et Gratiam gratis datam. Gratia gratum faciens perficit hominem in
se, et ad meritum personale. Gratia vero gratis data Ordinatur ad utilitatem
ecclesiae, ut donum linguarum, etc. -- In like manner Bellarmine de great. et
lib. arb. l. 1. C. 2. Partitio gratiae temporariae est in gratiam gratis datam
et gratiam gratum facientem. But that which is still considerable is, that they
must acknowledge the truth, for which we plead. For says Durand. Vbi supra.
Gratia dupliciter sumitur, uno modo pro acceptatione divina, et sio gratia non
dicit aliquid subjective in homine grato; sed est denominatio extrinseca ab
actu divino. Alio modo accipitur Gratia pro aliquo dono. And Bellarmine like in
manner. Prima partitio est in Gratiam eternam, et temporariam; Gratia eterna
ille est amor, quo nos dilexit Deus ante mundi constitutionem, Ab ipsa
aeternitate dilexit, etc. Gratia temporaria dicuntur beneficia vocationis et
justificationis quae ex aeterna gratia ut effectus ex causa derivantur. So
plain they are in their concessions.]
.

CHAP. II.
In what respects the Grace of God is displayed. Grace to Man in innocence only
hinted. Electing Grace the first instance, this Grace explained, confirmed and
IMPROVED.

IN showing how, it has pleased the Lord to make a Glorious display of his
Grace, I shall not speak all, that may be said, nor insist on every particular,
which those would, that design large treatises, but resolving to be short, I
will confine my self to such things as do in a more especial manner, set forth,
and illustrate the Glory of this Grace.

I might insist on that great instance of Grace, which, according to the
eternal counsel of God, was given us all in Adam, in that we were created after
Gods own Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, at which time
Righteousness was not only concreated with us, but created as that which was
connatural unto us, whereby, Man was capable without the help of any superadded
grace, supernatural to that state of integrity and perfection, to render the
required obedience, that was necessary to the obtaining a further happiness,
when man was also made the Lord and Sovereign of this lower creation, having
received a right to all the Glory of this world, in that there was but the
propriety unto and use of one only tree denied him. This is an admirable
instance of Free Grace, in that man was in his first-make, so noble a creature,
much above the brutes and all other inferior animals, and but little lower than
the Holy Angels themselves. But I must pass this by and begin with Gods
Electing-Grace. (viz.) That the Great God our Absolute Sovereign, who might
have exalted the Glory of his Dominion in destroying us, as soon as he had made
us, or, who as a most Just and Righteous Judge, might have satified himself in
determining to inflict everlasting wrath, on all the Children of Men for their
sin in Adam. That this Lord, should from all Eternity purpose, and unalterably
determine to glorify the riches of his Grace, Mercy and Bounty in the actual
redemption, complete Justification, Sanctification, and Glory of some, is of
Grace My design being to explicate the Glory of Free Grace. I have added to the
description of God's Electing Love somewhat concerning his Overflowing Goodness
even unto all.
. But that he should also resolve to exalt his patience, forbearance, and
long-suffering in all, is moreover marvelously astonishing.

About which consider,

1. God from all eternity determined to send the Lord Jesus Christ into the
World, purposing within himself, that whosoever did believe should not perish
but have everlasting life. This is proved easily in that nothing is done in
time, but what was from eternity determined to be done, Christ Jesus then, in
time coming into the world, in a way agreeable to the Will of the Father, being
the Gift of the Father, John 3.16. Delivered by the determinate counsel, and
foreknowledge of God, Acts 2.28. yea, and this Lord Jesus sending the
Ministers into the World to preach to every creature, that whosoever believes
should be saved, Mark 16.15,16. It Is most certain that God from everlasting did
determine to send the Lord Jesus Christ into the World, that whoever believed
might not perish but obtain eternal life. Yea,

2. God did determine, and fore-ordain, that much patience and long-suffering
should be exercised toward all, yea, even toward such, who, by going on
obstinately in their sins, discover themselves to be the vessels of wrath, and
a People prepared for destruction, for this, we see confirmed in the execution
of the decree, Romans 9.23. Oh the wonderful instances of Free Grace vouchsafed
the worst of men, and how do the thoughts of abused grace add to the horror of
the damned! that they rejected so many a gracious invitation, and that their
destruction is only of themselves.

3. As God from everlasting determined the salvation of all the Children of
fallen man, on their sincere faith and sound repentance, yea, and to bear long
with the worst of sinners, even so, such was the superabundance of his
infinitely free love, as to purpose the actual giving unto some sincere faith
and sound repentance, that so, they might be saved.

God would not, that All should perish, and therefore although the wickedness
of all was great, yet, the Lord determined to extend his infinite grace to
some, that they might, by receiving faith from God, and all those other graces,
which are the merits and purchase of Christ's blood, etc. and the work of
Christ's Spirit, be eternally saved.

The eternal purpose of giving this superabundant grace is called Election;
about which observe these following particulars.

1. God has Elected some to life everlasting. This is acknowledged by the
Remonstrants, who have corrupted this doctrine in part, and shall be proved in
the confirmation of the following particulars

2. The Election, or foreknowledge of God is of a certain select number of
particular persons, known unto the Lord from all eternity: whom he foreknew,
those he predestined, Romans 8.29. The Lord knows, who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.
and calls them by name, John 10.3. Jacob have I loved: Romans 9.13. Before I
formed thee in the belly, I knew thee, and ordained thee a prophet to the
nations, Jer. 1.5. Jeremiah in particular was from eternity known unto the
Lord, viz. The great God from everlasting foreknew, and predestined this,
(and consequently every other) particular elect person to their work here, and
glory hereafter.

3. Election being an act of the Divine will, an immanent, and an eternal act
it is most free, we cannot suppose any thing to precede what is eternal, God's
election therefore is according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5.
The elect being predestined, or foreordained, according to the purpose of
him, who works all things, after the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11. For,
the mystery of Gods will, which is made known unto us, is according to his,
good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself ver. 9. 'Twas not the
foresight of Faith, and good works, that moved God to elect any, the principal
cause of election being the will of God, the eternal purpose of God.

4. The select Number of particular persons, who were from eternity most freely
foreordained to be saved, are ordained to Salvation, in and through the Lord
Jesus Christ. According as he has chosen us in Christ, before the Foundation
of the world, having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1.4,5. Yea, God has appointed us to Obtain Salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5.9.

5. The unalterable determination, and purpose of God, is, that such as are
ordained to be saved through Christ, be regenerated and renewed in their minds
by the powerful working of the holy Spirit. According as he has chosen us in
him, that we should be Holy and without blame before him in love. Ephesians. 1.4.
For, whom he did foreknow he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son, Romans 8.29. whence it is said, that we are created in Jesus Christ unto
good works, in which, God has foreordained, that we should walk, Ephesians. 2.10.
For God has chosen you unto Salvation through the Sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 Thessal. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.

The Improvement follows.

1. That the Lord left not the whole lump of mankind to perish in eternal
misery but resolved the Salvation of some, is fully of grace.

2. That the Most High condescendeth so infinitely, as to regard the Low estate
of fallen man, affording suitable helps for the effectual engageing some to lay
hold on eternal life is of grace; The Lord gives Grace and Glory, and every
good thing to a Select Number, which is the ture reason why any are saved. But
that which is surprising is this.

3. That the Worst of men, who appear to be vessels of wrath, have been endured
with much long-suffering: Surely it is not the Decree, that has any such
causality in it, as does effect man's sin, Detestanda and abominanda opinio est,
quae Deum cujusquam malae voluntatis, aut malae actionis credit Authorem; cujus
praedestinatio nunquam extra bonitatem, nunquam extra justitiam. Adulteria --
non instruere novit sancta Divinitas; sed damnare: nec disponere; sed punire.
Aug. resp. ad art. sibi impos. art. l. 10. Posset enim peccatum aliquod ex
praedestinatione Dei esse: Si posset aliquis hominum just peccare: Nullus
autem hominum just peccat, quamvis eum Deus just peccare permittat. Fulgent.
ad Mon. de praed. lib. 1.
Decreta nil ponunt in esse; Man's sin is from himself, and his destruction is
but the product of his own obstinacy, and rebellion. Oh the many exhortations,
sincere calls, pressing and Pathetical invitations, that are given all to
return unto God, that they may live; and how does the Lord wait to be gracious,
exercising the greatest patience in bearing the affronts of vile sinners so
long!

4. It must be duly remembered, Ego hoc dico quod dixi quia quicquid Deusagit,
miserecorditer, just, sancteque facit. -- non potest tantum justus dici Deus
aut solum misericors: sed Justus et misericors. Sic legimus, sic credimus.
August. Resp. ad calumn. Pelagianor.
That the Lord in exalting Free Grace, regards the glory of his other most
excellent attributes, viz. his Holiness and Righteousness, and in both, his
Infinite Wisdom. I Will only hint, in this place, somewhat concerning the
glorification of Free Grace, in a way consistent with his Holiness. Although
the Lord has wonderfully discovered himself to be the Lord God, Gracious, and
Merciful, Long-suffering, slow to anger and abundant in goodness, yet, still
the Lord is holy, yea, he is the Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, showing
himself to be so, by his love to holiness in the creature; and by his
abhorrence unto sin, that is most contrary thereunto; and accordingly as the
determination is to save some, it is further (as has been proved,) through the
sanctification of the Spirit: Oh then, let none presume to say, If they are
elected, they shall be saved, though they remain wallowing in their sin! No,
No, Reader, this is not so, for without holiness no seeing the face of God, 1
Heb. 12.14. Out of Christ no Salvation, and to remain Unsanctified, Unholy, and
in sin, is to be out of Christ: give therefore all diligence to make thy
election sure, by being savingly Called, to the Leading a new (which is an
holy) life. But of this more Hereafter.

CHAP. III.
A second Instance of grace, Adding light unto the former, showing how the
gracious decree is accomplished notwithstanding the difficulty. The Covenant
between God the Father and the Son which is the Covenant of reconciliation, or
the Mediatorial Covenant discovered in some of its particulars. The use showing
how grace is hereby glorified.

THat God might effectually accomplish the Salvation of any, in a way
consistent with the glory of his Holiness, Righteousness, Truth and
Faithfulness, and accordingly see the Execution of the decree of Grace, 'twas
absolutely necessary, that Infinite Wisdom be in exercise; for, the work was
stupendous, too great for finite capacities to engage in, a work no way
beneath God himself. A Holy Good and just Law, unto which was annexed a severe
threatening, is transgressed, mankind is become unholy and unclean, altogether
filthy and polluted, liable to to the greatest miseries: the Lord still Just
and Righteous, True, and faithful, a God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity,
or delight in sin, or in the unreconciled sinner; Sin must be punished, justice
must be satisfied, Holiness and Truth Glorified, but, Man in the circumstances
he then was, unable to do either; He cannot appease Gods Wrath, nor satisfy
Justice, nor purify, or cleanse his own heart to perfection, how then can he
become the object of everlasting love: or how is it possible that the Gracious
decree be executed? I answer,

Whoever considers these things seriously, cannot but cry out, and say, if this
work be accomplished, it must be the Lords own doing; and marvelous in our
eyes. The contrivance must be the effort of infinite wisdom; and the Glory of
that Grace, for which such a work must be carried on, is Unspeakable: and
verily the Lord has shown himself to be God, even in that he has found out a
way for the doing this. Wisdom dwelt with Prudence, and found out the knowledge
of this witty invention. Prove. 8.12,30. 3. God the Father, consulted with God
the Son, and it rejoiced their soul, that Grace might be magnified, that
Justice and Mercy might greet each other. That the Love of God might be made
known unto man, without the impeachment of the honor of his other Attributes.

But what was the contrivance? 'twas this; God the Father entered into a
Covenant with God the Son, in which Covenant there is observable,

1. What the Father required from the Son. 2. What the Father Promised the Son.
1. What the Father required the Son to do, which more generally, was the
exalting Free Grace in the actual Salvation of some, even in a way agreeable
with the other glorious perfections of God.

But more particularly several things in order to the obtaining this end must
be done.

1. A body must be prepared for the Son, he must assume humane nature: it being
necessary, that he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, should be of
one, of one common Parent, Adam; and therefore God the Son took on him the
flesh and blood, viz. The nature of the Brethren, the humane (but not corrupt)
nature, Heb. 2.11,14,16. And therefore a body was prepared for the Son, Heb.
10.5. etc.

2. In this nature, God the Son must come into the World, Prove. 8.30,31. And
suffer f^ man's sin, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, Gal. 3.13. John 10.18.

3. He must render a sinless, a full, complete and perfect obedience to Gods
Law, being made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. It became him to fulfill all
Righteousness, Math. 3.15. He came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it,
Math. 5.17. In doing which, the end of the Law was answered, the honor of Gods
Justice, and governing wisdom conserved, and the door of grace opened to
believing, repenting, returning sinners, who were givens to the Lord Jesus.

4. The Lord Christ was obliged to keep and preserve these given him, This is
the Fathers Will, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
shall raise it up at the last day, John 6.39.

2. God the Father moreover does make rich promises unto the Son, on the Sons
performing the required conditions; The Son shall be greatly rewarded, he shall
be exalted, and made very high, Isa. 52.13. Yea, God highly exalted him, giving
him a name above every name, Philip. 2.9. etc. Again God gives him a select
number, who shall in process of time be actually with him in the eternal glory:
He shall see his seed, and the travel of his soul, and be satisfied, Isa.
53.10.11. yea, a select number among the Heathen, Psalm. 2.8. Nations shall run
unto him, Isa. 5.5. Who are called Children, given unto Christ, Heb. 2.13. So
John 10.29. The Lord Jesus Christ speaking of his sheep, that is, of those that
were ordained to eternal life, does say my Father which gave them me. Thus you
see, the terms of the Covenant, all ordered for the exaltation of infinitely
free Grace.

The USES

It Is wonderful that the thoughts of God should from all eternity be concerned
for fallen man's salvation.

3. That the Lord Christ, God-man, must engage in this great work, that he, who
was eternally in the bosom of the Father, should empty himself of the Glory of
God and take upon him the form of a servant, is mightily surprising. That God
should humble himself so infinitely, as to undergo the wrath of the Father! Oh
what manner of love, what manner of Grace is this! Read believingly, and
considerately the account given in the Scriptures of our Lord Jesus his
fulfilling his part of the Covenant in the particulars thereof, and you cannot
but see free grace, highly exalted.

1. God assumes humane nature.

What a wonder is this, and how many miracles, were wrought for the effecting
it, considering humane nature was by sin Corrupted, and yet, it must be
assumed, and united unto the divine, without Corruption!

2. God in this nature suffers; not, that the divine nature, as such, is
capable of the least sufferings; and therefore, it is the humane nature, that is
the immediate subject of sufferings; but passions, as well as actions being of
persons, we may safely say, That he, who is God, suffered: for, our iniquities
were laid on Christ, Isay, 53. Christ was made sin, as it is 2 Cor. 5.21. yea,
and a curse, that such as do believe might be delivered from an eternal curse.
Gal. 3.13.

But, how was Christ made sin, or in what sense, were the iniquities of any
laid on him? was the filth of sin laid on Christ?

CHAP. IV.
The difficulty proposed in the last Chapter spoken unto. Sin with reference
unto its FILTH, GUILT and PUNISHMENT distinctly considered, and Explained. The
punishment and Guilt of Sin laid on Christ asserted. Concerning the Filth of
Sin. The sense of some Antonomians, reduced to three particulars, proposed.
Their first Error in saying the Filth of Sin was laid on Christ, detected, and
confuted. That the Filth of Sin be laid on Christ impossible. The consequences
of this Error dreadful and unscriptural. The Purity and Holiness of Christ
asserted and vindicated. The Antinomians abuse of the Grace of God hinted.

IN giving a truly Scriptural, a full, and satisfying answer unto this
difficulty, we shall have a fair occasion of showing, How, and after what
manner, Free Grace is, in its Excellencies, displayed. But, that we may
entertain right conceptions concerning this thing, we must carefully
distinguish between the Filth, the Guilt and Punishment of sin.

1. There is the Sin it self formally considered which is a transgression of a
holy, good, and just Law; and accordingly, regarding sin as it is either
contrary to, or different from this Law, it is somewhat impure, unclean, and
polluting. In Sin there is a dissonancy, or disconformity to the preceptive
part of the Law, an irregularity, or a want of conformity unto it, an
obliquity, which is, filth, pollution, a blot or stain, the fault it self. In
whomsoever there is this fault, or this irregularity, or obliquity, there is a
deformity, there is filth and defilement, and that person is truly faulty for
he has transgressed the Law; there is so much in him, either contrary unto, or
dissonant from the Law, which is sin, whence he may be said to be formally, or
in a proper, and strict sense a sinner [More expressly to declare what is this
Filth, is somewhat difficult; although Maeratius the Jesuit ( disp. in sum.
Th. tract. de pec. dis. 13. Sect. 5. etc.) asserts that the Macula peccati
formaliter est ipsa malitia peccati actualis; to which he adds, quatenus
moraliter durat, and perseverat, etium transacto Physice actu peccati, etc.
This he gives, as the general sentiment of the Modern Schoolmen, concluding,
that the actual sin, though as Physically considered, immediately passes away;
yet as morally, it remains; called actual, as you respect the moment, in which
it is committed; called the Macula, as it remains until by Repentance or the
infusion of grace it be blotted out: But I cannot comprehend How the Filth of
sin, which remains, should be the same Numerically with the Act, which so
suddenly cease to be, it seeming to be little less than an Implication to
assert, that the same Numerical act, is, and is not, in one and the same
instant. I should therefore rather humbly conclude it to be thus. Actual sins
being contrary to the Pure Law of God are Filthy and Impure, which Filthy and
Impure Acts, leave behind them much Filth, which consists in vicious habits,
which habits are strengthened, by a frequency of sinful, filthy Acts, and
consequently the soul thereby the more filthy and polluted; whence the
remaining Filth is the continued blindness and habitual aversion of the heart
from God.]


2. There is Guilt, which does immediately attend this sin where ever it is, so
that whoever sins, contracts Guilt, which Guilt is a liableness to
punishment, an Obnoxiousness thereunto for some fault. Guilt, as it is
distinguished from the fault it self, is the immediate effect of the Fault, or
of the sin, and is not properly or in a strict sense sin; but only
Metonymically, and Improperly so. In which sense, as I shall hereafter show,
it is frequently in Scripture called sin. It being sins respect unto the
threatening part of the Law. For as the inclinations, thoughts, words, and
actions, as dissonant from, or disconform unto the Precept of the Law, are
formally sins; even so, as sin regards the threatening part of the same Law,
it is guilt; Guilt then is sin's extrinsecal respect unto the threatening, the
sanction of the Law. To be liable to the threatening is to be Guilty. To be
judged liable unto it, is to be judged Guilty, or to be judged a sinner: I
think not my self obliged to insist on the distinction, inter Reatum culpae and
poenae. For wherever there is the dignitas poenae, there is the obligatio ad
poenam; (Whatever Maeratius and others say to the contrary) and there can be no
obligatio ad poenam, where there is not Dignitas poenae propter culpam.

3. The punishment is the evil threatened for sin; it is an evil or somewhat
painful, and grievous, inflicted for sin. It Is malum passionis propter malum
actionis, or malum natural propter malum morale, which is also an effect of
sin, and frequently bears the name of sin, it is cause. And so the word that
signifies Sin is used in the sacred writing to denote punishment, as in Genesis
4.13 Note Genesis 47.
Where Cain said, my punishment is greater than I can bear, that is, in the
Hebrew, (...) mine Iniquity or my sin, the like also in Genesis 19.15. Lest thou
be consumed in the Iniquity of the City (is) says Ainsworth in loc. "The
Punishment for Iniquity, Hereupon is that usual Phrase of bearing Iniquity, for
suffering Punishment," Lev. 28.17,19,20. Numb. 14.34. To Punish is to inflict
evil on the Guilty, as such; for evils inflicted on the Innocent as Innocent,
are not punishments. Whence observe, that when it is said, our Iniquities were
laid on the Lord Christ, we may safely understand it of the punishment and
guilt of sin.

1. That the punishment of our sin was laid on Christ, is most evident, in that
the Lord Christ, was made a Sacrifice for sin. All his fufferings being Penal,
he being wounded, and bruised for our sins, our griefs laid on him, and he made
a curse for us.

2. That the Guilt of Sin, was also laid on Christ, is a truth most agreeable
unto the Scriptures.

In order to the confirming which I shall attempt to show (1) That this is
Possible; the Guilt may be laid on Christ without the laying any stain on his
most pure nature (2) that this was really so.

1. That this may be, viz. That the Guilt of sin may be laid on Christ, and the
Lord Christ remain pure and free from the least blemish, appears from this,
that the Guilt of sin does not contain in it, the formal nature of sin that is
so Polluting, it being somewhat extrinsecal thereunto, and consequently
separable from sin, yea, and from the actual sinner: I know that Bellarmine,
who, denies the Guilt of sin to have been laid on Christ, does assert, Guilt to
be inseparable from the sin it self, for, says he, speaking of the Reatus
culpae. " Reatus, ut recte docet Philippus, est Relatio, cujus proximum
fundamentum est actus malus, sive iniquitas. Non potest autem Relatio a
fundamento proximo separari, quia ex ipso fundamento naturaliter and necessario
sequitur." Bell. de amiss. Great. and Stat. peccat. l. 5. c. 7. But what more
evident, than that, although, sin ever contracts Guilt, and Guilt ever attends
sin; Which is the whole Bellarmine proves in saying that Relatio ex ipso
fundamento, etc. yet Guilt is not an Inseparable Consequent of sin, even
according to the sense of the Schoolmen, yea, and of Bellarmine himself. Do not
the Schoolmen generally distinguish between the Guilt and Filth of sin?
Malderus in 12 ae. Thomae, q. 85. art. 1.2. mentions eight different sentiments
that the Learned entertain concerning the Macula, the Filth of sin, and it is
the opinion of but a few, that the Macula and the Reatus is the same; These
Schoolmen commonly discoursing of the Fault it self, the Macula, and the Reatus
culpae, and Reatus poenae as distinct; so Maeratius the Jesuit disp. in sum.
tract. de pec. disp. 13. sect. 5. and Bellarmine: They mostly agreeing in this,
That the Reatus culpae, or the Dignitas poenae is not the same with the filth
of sin, neither does this Guilt contain within it the formal nature of sin. For
says Maeratius, ubi supra. " Quare cum ex omni peccato sequatur poenae
Dignitas, and dignitatem obligatio; si Dignitas haec, and obligatio, sit
formaliter peccatum, ex iis altera dignitas, and obligatio sequetur, quae vel
erit peccatum, vel non; si secundum, habemus intentum; si primum, dabitur
processus in infinitum;" yea, and they farther conclude, That the guilt is
separable from the fault it self. Dignitas and obligatio luendae poenae possunt
in eo esse, qui caret peccato; yea, and Bellarmine ubi supra c. 19. asserts
that "Reatus culpae non est proprie peccatum, sed effectus necessario
consequens, and aliquid manens post actum peccati, non enim homo est dignus
odio praecise, quia peccavit, alioqui nunquam talis dignitas auferri posset,
and peccatum esset Irremissibile; sicut fieri non potest, ut qui peccavit, non
peccaverit; praeterea talis dignitas etc. -- non est aliquid recedens a lege --
non deformat, vel occidit spiritualiter animam, non est privatio boni, neque
habet aliquid aliud eorum, quae proprie peccato convenient." So plain it is,
that Guilt, the Guilt of the Fault, is not properly, or formally sin, it is
somewhat distinct from the Fault, for it does not pollute, or deform the soul;
yea, Guilt is separable from the fault it self, otherwise, the Guilt of Adam's
actual sin, could not be made ours, for if his actual sin, and the guilt
thereof, had been inseparable, there could have been no passing of the guilt of
his sin to us, unless his actual sin had been removed also from him unto us.
Again the pardon of sin, which consists in the removing the guilt of sin, would
also become an Impossibility to the unspeakable horror of all the Children of
fallen Adam. But that the Guilt is separable from the filth of sin, is easily
illustrated, by the Metaphor of a Debtor, Creditor, and Surety, according to
the Rules of Law. A Debtor is liable to pay one thousand pounds unto his
Creditor. This liableness is Guilt. Inde Reus constitutus dicitur, qui se
obligavit. Which Guilt may be the product of his own extravagancy or Fault: But
this debtor becoming Insolvent, another who voluntarily undertaking the
payment, thereby becomes liable to pay the debt, i.e. He becomes Guilty: [For,
Interdum Reus Expromissorem significat, i.e. eum, qui alienam in se
obligationem, vel novatione, vel delegatione suscepit. Schard. in verb.] but
Guilty of another Fault, [ Venia namque digni sunt, qui aliena tenentur Culpa,
cujusmodi sunt Fide-jussores pro alieno debito obligati. Schard. in verb.
Fidejuss.] So plain it is, That the Fault, and Guilt are so separable, that the
Fault may remain on the one, when the Guilt passes to the other.

2. But secondly, That the Guilt of our sins passed from us unto Christ, is now
to be considered. But before I proceed to do so, it must be duly remembered,
That, what has been already said, does with the greatest clearness show, That
the laying the Guilt of sin on Christ, may be without the casting any Filth on
the face of this our blessed Lord.

But to the Proof.

1. This may be evinced from the consideration, that Jesus Christ suffered for
our sins as a surety. The Lord Jesus voluntarily offered up himself, and most
freely undertook to pay what sinful man, the Debtor, could not: On which
account He was immediately liable to pay the Debt, or undergo the punishment
(i.e.) He was Guilty, as has been already intimated: Man was faulty in
contracting so great a debt, but Christ was innocently merciful in taking it on
himself to satisfy the Father whereby Christ became Guilty of another Fault.
But,

2. God the Father's inflicting evil on Christ as Penal most righteously, does
necessarily infer this truth; It being unjust to punish any, but the Guilty: to
which add those Scriptures, that make mention of the Lords bearing our
iniquities, his being wounded for our transgressions, his being made sin, and a
curse, Isa. 53.4,5,6. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.

That which will give light unto these texts, and strength unto my arguments is
a truth of great importance concerning the guilt, and punishment of sin, viz.
That although the Faul, and the Guilt are separable yet the Guilt and
Punishment are not; Whence whosoever is found Guilty at the Bar, must be
sentenced, yea, and punished as such. If Guilt and Punishment had not been by
the unalterable determination of God, as he is a Righteous Lawgiver, so fixedly
united unto each other, as never to admit of the least separation, the Justice
and Righteousness of God might have been sufficiently glorified in the
pardoning sin without any regard unto a sacrifice, yea, it might have been
possible, for that bitter cup, to have passed, according unto the Lord Jesus
his desire; and man, notwithstanding might have been most happy. But since Laws
would appear to be but ludicrous and feeble things, without a due execution of
the threatened evil, casting the worst of reflections upon the Lawgiver, God,
who is Infinitely Wise, Holy, Just, and Righteous gives most illustrious
instances of the Excellency of his Laws, in that there is a day, in which
search shall be made after the transgressour, and when all such, as are found
guilty shall be condemned to the threatened punishment; for God will by no means
clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. They that shall presume to Justify the wicked,
or, condemn the Righteous, even they both are an abomination unto the Lord,
Prove. 17.15. Whence it is a thing most unjust to punish the Innocent, and permit
the Guilty to go free: which being so, it follows, that whoever is justly
punished, must be really guilty of his own or of another fault; to punish any
as not guilty, or as innocent, is as great an act of injustice, as it is, not to
punish those who at the Judgment Seat are found Guilty. These truths carry
their own evidence with them, proclaiming this other, namely, That if the Lord
Jesus Christ did bear the Punishment of our iniquities; it was, because
antecedently thereunto, the Guilt of our iniquities was laid on him; And that
the Lord did undergo the punishment of our sins can never be denied by any,
that believe the forementioned texts, it being so express, That he has born
our griefs, and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, yea, the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all, he was made sin, and a Curse. But in what sense, if not in this, That
at least the punishment of our iniquity was laid on Christ? Is not this so
plain that neither Arminian, nor Papist do presume to deny it? Bellarmine, I am
sure, asserts it, and if the Punishment of sin be laid on Christ, since it is
done by the Lord who is Just, it must be because antecedently to the infliction
of punishment; Guilt was laid on him, for otherwise not only the Innocent would
be punished, but moreover as Innocent, which is injustice; for, although an
Innocent Person may justly undergo severe punishments; yet not as Innocent, but
as guilty of another's Faults.

For the fuller clearing this Truth I Will only attempt to prove, that the
bearing sin, or Iniquity, or the being made sin, and a Curse does signify both
the being Guilty and as such the being punished.

That Punishment by a Metonymy, bears the name of sin, I have proved out of
Genesis 4.13. chapter 19.15. and which may be further confirmed, from that in 1 Samuel
28.10. Where Saul swear to the Witch, that there shall no Punishment happen
unto her: In the Hebrew it is (...) there shall no Sin, or Iniquity happen. So
also in Zechar. 14.19. This shall be the Punishment of Egypt and the
Punishment of all nations. In the Hebrew it is (...) the sin of Egypt, etc. In
like manner to bear sin, is to bear the Guilt or Punishment of sin, Ezekiel.
18.20. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, (i.e.) the Son shall
not bear the Guilt, nor the Punishment of the Fathers sin; but the wickedness
of the wicked shall be upon him (i.e.) the Guilt and Punishment of the wicked
shall be upon him; whence that word which in the Hebrew does signify Guilt does
also signify Sin; it is (...) Genesis 42.21. we are Guilty (...) the same word is
elsewhere translated sins and trespasses; as in Psalm. 68.21. God will wound the
hairy scalp of such an one, as goes on still in his trespasses (...) Again to
have iniquity laid on us, is the same with the bearing iniquity, that is, the
bearing the guilt of sin. In fine, The being made sin, and the being made a
curse, are terms much of the same import, denoting the Guilt and Punishment,
and (as I humbly conceive,) more properly, the guilt of sin, because the
wicked, even on their sinning are immediately accursed; are abnoxious, though
not immediately Punished, q. d. Since to be obnoxious is to be guilty, to be
cursed is to be guilty; but, that the being made a curse does not, as formerly
considered, signify the being made formally sin, is evident, in that, it is an
evil threatened for what is strictly sin; and therefore, as such, denotes
somewhat distinct from sin, taking sin, in a strict sense, for the very fault,
or transgression it self.

Thus I have in some weak measure performed, what I engaged to do, and have
proved, That Guilt is separable from Sin, the formal Nature and Filth thereof;
and consequently, may pass from us to Christ, even when it must not be
concluded as if Christ had been for such a reason formally a sinner. I have
further shown, That the Guilt, as well as Punishment of sin, is laid on Christ,
These being so inseparable, that a Righteous Judge in doing Right, cannot omit
the Punishing the Guilty; nor presume to inflict any evil penally on such, as
are not in any wise Guilty: But,

3. To consider the Filth of Sin. The Filth of Sin, being of a Polluting and
Defiling Nature, was not laid on Christ, as some very boldly have asserted, who
not distinctly minding what the Filth of Sin is; how distinguished from Guilt,
etc. have under the notion of exalting Free Grace, fallen into Dangerous Errors;
which I will essay to demonstrate by showing the falseness, Absurdity and
Impossibility thereof. But before I do so, 'twill be necessary, that I acquaint
you with the sense of those men that assert it, which is this.

"God does not only lay the Punishment and Guilt of Sin on Christ, but simply
the very Fault it self, that men commit, that is, The Transgression it self is
become the transgression of Christ, so that, in respect of the Reality of being
a Transgressor, Christ is as really a Transgressor, as the person that did
commit the sin. -- Yea Christ Jesus by virtue of Gods laying sin on him, is as
really a Transgressor, as if he himself, had actually committed Transgression.
The very Erring, Straying, and Transgressing of the Elect is passed from them
and laid on Christ. -- Have thou been an Idolater, Blasphemer, etc. If thou
have part in the Lord Christ, all these Transgressions of thine become actually
the Transgressions of Christ, and so cease to be thine, and thou ceasest to be
a Transgressor from that time they were laid on Christ to the last hour of thy
life. -- Thy Sins being laid on Christ are taken from thee. -- If God himself
say, thy sins lie upon thee, and withal say, he did before lay them on Christ,
how much is this better than a Contradiction? -- The Sin it self or the Filth
is removed from the Elect by being laid on Christ, and the soul made Perfect.
-- God does not wash them by halves, nor does he leave some spots and blemishes
and stains behind. -- Christ's holiness is imputed unto the Elect, as well as
his Righteousness, otherwise they could not be perfect in this life, since the
Spirit's work in their Sanctification is but imperfect in this life; it is
Christ therefore who by bearing our sins carries away all the Abhorrency and
loathsomness of sin, otherwise God could take no pleasure in us. -- God is a
God of so much Purity, that he cannot endure that Person where the least SPOT
of Sin is found."

This, and much more, is asserted by Dr. Crisp in his Sermons on Isaiah. 53.6.
as also by some others, which for the greater clearness, I Will sum up in these
following particulars.

1. That these men conclude that the Filth of sin is laid on Christ, and made
really his Filth. 2. That Christ is our Justification by the Imputation of his
Righteousness, even so, he is our Sanctification by the Imputation of his
Holiness. 3. That the Filth of sin being laid on Christ, the Elect are thereby
totally, and perfectly delivered from every loathsome Spot and blemish of sin.
To all which I reply distinctly.

1. To the first. That the Filth of sin is laid on Christ, and made really his
Filth (as they say) this is Impossible, Absurd and False.

1. Impossible, for by the Filth of sin we must understand, either Irregular,
Oblique, and disorderly defections, or inclinations, or words, or actions. For
sin is a moral relation, which cannot be, but in a subject; and as the Person
sinning, is the Remote Subject, even so, the Disposition, Thought, Word or
Action, or some defection must be the nearest Subject; whence then, since sin
cannot be, and not be in some Subject, the sin in its filth cannot pass from us
to Christ, but in transity, i.e. in its passage from one Subject to another, it
must be considered, as in no Subject (i.e.) as what is destroyed. For the
Relation must pass without its Subject, which is impossible; or with the
nearest Subject it self, that is, All our sinful Defections, Propensions, Words
and Actions must pass from us into Christ, but if this be not also impossible,
what is? But 2ly. It Is Absurd and false. For,

2. If the Filth of our sin be laid on Christ, then surely, the Lord Christ is
thereby made really filthy; for as Guilt is laid on Christ, and thereby Christ
is made really guilty that is, really guilty of another man's sin, even so, if
the Filth of sin be laid on Christ, then Christ must be really filthy, for in
quocunque inest abstractum, de eo dicitur concretum, the denomination is a
forma denominante: Filth, on whomsoever it is, does give the denomination of
filthy; but was our Lord Christ really filthy? Was there any sin in any respect
in him, who knew no sin, and in whom there was no guile? Guilt is an
extrinsecal respect of sin to the threatening of the Law, and a man may be
guilty of sin, that is of another sin, who has no sin in him of his own; but
Filth the fault it self, is so intrinsecal to sin, that in whomsoever the Filth
of sin is, in him sin must be; and were it a thing possible, that the sin of
the elect should pass from the elect to Christ, it would make the Lord Christ a
real sinner, really Unclean, Impure, Filthy, and Corrupt, but who can entertain
such a thought without abhorrence? For,

1. The Scriptures never assert that the Filth of sin was laid on Christ. It Is
true our iniquities were laid on Christ, that is, the Punishment and Guilt of
our iniquities, as has been proved, but not the Filth of our iniquities;
neither was it necessary, that any more should be laid on Christ, than the
Punishment and Guilt. For the Lord Christ came only to exempt us from wrath, to
bring us into a state of Grace, and to purchase a right to glory for us, by his
sufferings, and perfect righteousness. But,

2. The Scriptures do most vehemently conclude, that there was no spot in
Christ.

1. As Christ is God, we cannot say, that any Filth was on him without
blasphemy surely, that God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, could
never be so in love with the filth, the worst of iniquity, as to take it on
himself. Neither (2) Durst we aver that the Lord Christ, with respect to his
Humane Nature, had the least Filth of sin, either in, or upon him. For he was
born an Holy thing, Luke 1.35. therefore also that Holy thing, which shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. He was born with holy
inclinations, and propensions, yea and all his Thoughts, Words and Actions were
holy all his lifetime, for he fulfilled all Righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. chapter
5.17. and at his death, his blood was the precious blood of him, who was
without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. He did not sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth, Chapter 2.22. For such an High Priest became us, who is
Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.26. Which could not
be, had he the least spot or blemish on him. Note well Isa. 53.9.

3. In what part of Christ was the filth of sin laid, or what was there in
Christ, that was either faulty, or filthy? was there any flaw in his
understanding, or, were the inclinations of his soul after evil? were his
thoughts irregular, or his words, or actions dissonant from Gods Law? The Filth
of sin is a spiritual filth, polluting the Soul, but which part of his
righteous soul was polluted? was our Ignorance laid on Christ, making Christ
Ignorant? or our Pride, Stubbornness, Uncleanness, Sinful anger, and Undue
Passions in Christ? was the Lord Christ, Ignorant, Proud, Passionate, or
Unclean? what sound believer does not tremble at such thoughts as these. But,
for the Filth of sin to be laid on Christ, and yet the Filth of no one
particular sin to be found on him, is strange. Oh that men, who presume to
contradict the Generation of the Just, would show, what they mean by the filth
of sin, as it is distinguished, both from Guilt and Punishment, and what they
understand by the Fathers laying the Filth of sin on Christ, or what by the
words, transacting the filth of sin on Christ! For methinks, it is impossible,
that any truly gracious soul should conclude that the filth of sin, the fault
it self, as distinguished from Guilt and Punishment, can in any respect be laid
on Christ.

Wherefore then consider, it is a great dishonor to Free Grace, to say, that the
Father laid the filth of sin on Christ, for this is inconsistent with the
Holiness and Wisdom of God, and to set up Free Grace to the reproach of Divine
Holiness or Wisdom is to abuse it.

CHAP. V.
A second Error of the Antinomians, viz. The Elect made holy by Christ's
Holiness. Somewhat concerning Justification premised. Several reasons against
the Error. Wherein its tendency to the subversion of a great part of the
Christian Religion is evinced. The third error considered, its destructiveness
to all Religion proved particularly.
To the Second.

"THat, as Christ is our Justification by the imputation of his Righteousness,
even so, he is our Sanctification through the imputation of his holiness." For
it is suggested, that they must be perfectly Holy before their entrance into
Heaven, and that they are not made so in this life by the sanctification of the
Spirit, therefore it must be by the imputed Holiness of Christ.

That I may be the more clear in considering this, I humbly apprehend it very
necessary, that I do acquaint the vulgar, with the true notion of
Justification, and Sanctification; In order unto which, it is requisite, that we
remember the distinction, that is between the guilt, and the filth of sin,
Justification respecting the guilt, Sanctification the Filth of sin; Guilt of
sin, is an external respect of it with regard unto the sanction of the Law
only, and is separable from sin, as the Reverend Dr. Owen also has shown of
Justification page 285. But the Fault it self, or the filth, the transgression
of the preceptive part of the Law is the formal nature of sin, and is so
intrinsecal thereunto, as to be inseparable from it. Justification then makes
only an external relative-change, by removing guilt, and giving us a right to
life, and as it regards guilt, it respects the past State; Sanctification
imports an internal, and a physical change by introducing new light into the
the heart, and new principles, inclinations, and propensions toward God, and
regards the future state, weakening the habits of sin, strengthening the habits
of infused Grace, and thereby preventing much sin, that otherwise would pollute
the soul, whereby the man is in part sanctified; Justification is through the
blood, and righteousness of Jesus Christ; Sanctification is through the working
of the Spirit of the same Lord Jesus: Christ is our Justification by his blood,
and Righteousness; and the same Christ is our sanctification by his Spirit. For
God has chosen you to salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit, 2
These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Thus the filth and guilt of sin are distinguished, and accordingly
Justification and Sanctification: But such as confound the guilt and filth of
sin with some It Is said by one, I do not think, as some do, that Guilt dissers
from sin, as that which is an obligation, or a binding over, to the Punishment
of sin, rather than sin it self being past and gone, to be guilty, and to
commit a sin is all one, they are but two words expressing the same thing. Dr.
Crisp. on Isaiah.
cannot but confound Justification and Sanctification, and consequently, fall
into the Popish error about this point; for the great error of the Papists in
this, lies much in their considering Justification and Sanctification
promiscuously, as though, the being Justified did import the same with the
being sanctified. Whence it is, that it must be seriously considered, that
Justification does no way regard the filth of sin, as its object. Neither is
the soul cleansed from filth, even in that, it is Justified; for Justification,
as such, does not consist in the renewing of our minds, or the making any
internal-physical-change on our hearts, for that is the Spirits work in our
Sanctification; and therefore it must be acknowledged, That we are not made
holy by Christ's Holiness, by the imputation of it, (i.e.) God does not judge
the elect to be really and perfectly holy, because Christ is really and
perfectly so; for Holiness, in whomsoever it is, imports an inward work on the
soul. No one can be really, and perfectly holy, but he, in whom are the habits
of holiness. He whose Propensions, Dispositions, and Habits are not holy,
cannot be reputed perfectly holy; Christ's Holiness therefore cannot be made
ours, but by a transfusion of Christ's Habits into our souls; it is true, Christ's
Righteousness may be given us, and after the Donation or gift thereof, be truly
reputed, and reckoned, as ours, and we may be dealt with accordingly; but there
can be no giving the Holiness of Christ unto us, in a way distinct from the
imputation of Righteousness, but by transfusing it into us, which is as
impossible, as the transfusing of sin from one into another So that,
understanding the course of Scripture, and the common use of the phrase of
Reckoning and Accounting, you shall find that Imputing is nothing but Gods
determination, and conclusion that he does pass upon things, as really and
truly things are, without any Imagining and fancying things to be so and so,
when indeed and Truth they are not so. Dr. Crisp. on Isaiah, whence if the
Elect are Reputed perfectly holy by Christ's holiness, the holiness of Christ
must be indeed, and in Truth in them; for De quocunque dicitur concretum, ei
inest abstractum. Dici de, sequitur esse in.
.

For the clearing this, remember that as sin, guilt, and Punishment are to be
distinctly considered, even so Holiness, Righteousness and the Reward. But,
before I proceed to show, how Holiness, Righteousness, and the Reward are to be
distinctly considered, it will be meet I prove, That (although Holiness and
inherent Righteousness are the same, yet) there is a Righteousness, somewhat
distinct from Holiness, which is done by a due observation of the import of the
words Righteous and Holy; for if to be Righteous is somewhat distinct from the
being Holy, then surely Righteousness is somewhat distinct from Holiness, in
that the Denominatives Righteous and Holy, are from Righteousness and Holiness,
their Denominating Forms; for which reason, if Righteousness, and Holiness be
the same, since Denominativum and Denominans convenient in re significata, quia
significant eandem formam essentialiter, to be Righteous and to be Holy must be
the same; The same denominating Form, ever giving the same denomination: And if
to be Righteous, be not the same with the being Holy, Righteousness and
Holiness cannot be the same; But to be Righteous, is somewhat distinct from the
being Holy. To be made Righteous, is to be declared, pronounced, judged,
esteemed and reputed in the eye of the Law to be just, i.e. to be not guilty,
not liable unto the curse due to sin, but to have a right unto the Reward. He
is Righteous (that is,) not guilty; He is Righteous (i.e.) He has a right unto
the Reward. But to be made Holy is another thing, it is to be Sanctified, which
is by the infusion of Habits into the Soul. To be sanctified, is to be
Physically and internally changed, to be inherently Holy. So that it is most
apparent, that there is a great difference between the being Righteous, and the
being Holy; or between the being made Righteous, and the being made Holy; the
one being our Justification, the other our Sanctification, which do greatly
differ: And therefore Righteousness, as Formally and strictly considered,
differs from Holiness, for, otherwise the imputation of Righteousness, would be
the same with the imputation of Holiness, or our being made Righteous would be
our being Holy, (i.e.) by a Righteousness imputed, we should be sanctified,
which is most untrue; it being a confounding, Justification and Sanctification.
A thing not to be admitted by sound Protestants; which confusion cannot well be
declined but by our distinguishing between Holiness and Righteousness as well
as between sin and guilt. That there is a difference between these and the
Reward is no way doubted by any.

This premised, I proceed to the showing how Holiness, Righteousness and the
Reward are distinguished.

1. Holiness, which is opposed unto the formal nature of sin, consists in the
souls conformity to the preceptive part of the Law. When the inclinations,
propensions, thoughts, words and actions are exactly agreeable to Gods most
holy Law, then it is, that the man is Holy: Formally Holy. Christ's Holiness
then consists in the consonancy, agreeableness and conformity of Christ's
propensions, dispositions and habits unto that Law given him by the Father, and
is subjectively in Christ; The Lord Jesus Christ, exactly answering the whole
Law, in his life was perfectly holy.

2. Righteousness, as it is condistinguished from Holiness, regards rather the
promissory part of the Law, than the preceptive, it being in an especial manner
opposed unto Guilt, as Holiness is unto sin; whence as to be Guilty and
Unrighteous imports one and the same thing, even so to be Guiltless or
Innocent, and to be Righteous. For says the Apostle, as by one man's
disobedience, many are made Sinners (i.e.) guilty, even so by the obedience of
one shall many be made Righteous, i.e. Guiltless or Innocent, free from wrath,
having a Right unto the Reward: Righteousness being holiness's respect unto the
promissory part of the Law, and is somewhat extrinsecal unto holiness and
therefore can as easily pass from one, unto another, as Guilt can; and as the
sin of one cannot be imputed unto another, but in its Guilt, even so the
holiness of one, cannot be imputed unto another, but in its Righteousness.

3. The Reward is the good thing promised unto Holiness, as the Punishment is
the evil threatened against sin: And the Reward necessarily presupposes a
Righteousness, as the Punishment does Guilt. And as no punishment but for
guilt, so no Reward but for Righteousness; for as Reatus is dignitas poenae
propter culpam, so Righteousness is dignitas praemii propter obedientiam
perfectam, and the Reward is for righteousness. From the whole it must be
noted, That as Guilt, which is sins extrinsecal respect unto the threatening of
the Law, may pass from the actual sinner, and be made the guilt of him who knew
no sin, without a passing of the actual sin; even so Righteousness, which is
the extrinsecal respect of Holiness unto the promissory part of the Law, may
pass from Christ, who is perfectly Holy, to another that is not so.

This being so it is easy to conclude,

1. That the Reward of Christ's obedience may be actually given out unto all
such, as are united unto Christ. As the punishment of man's sin, was laid on
Christ, even so the Reward of Christ's Holiness shall be given unto the
believer. The Reward, considered strictly, and in an eminent manner, is the
product of Christ's Righteousness and Holiness, it being given out, as the great
effect of Christ's fulfilling the Law of Innocence, and not as the merit of our
obedience.

2. The Righteousness of the Lord Christ, is given unto all such, as are born
of God, as do savingly believe; Even as their guilt is made Christ's, so Christ's
Righteousness is made their Righteousness. In which there is a non-imputation
of sin, and an actual imputation of Righteousness, God does not proceed in
Judgment with them, as with guilty sinners; but treats them as Righteous,
giving them a Right to Impunity and Glory, so that the freedom from Punishment,
and the eternal life is the effect of this Righteousness of Christ, which
Righteousness is given unto, and reckoned, judged and esteemed to be the
Righteousness of the believer, which can easily be made theirs, as has been
already shown. But,

3. The Holiness of Christ, was never designed by God the Father, or the Son,
for the formal Sanctification of any, For as the being justified or made
Righteous by Christ's Righteousness, denotes an extrinsecal, an outward and a
relative change only, even so the being sanctified by Christ's Holiness must
import an internal and physical change, which cannot be, but by the transfusion
of the acts or habits of Holiness from one unto another; For Sanctification,
which most certainly is somewhat distinct from justification, consists in a
real internal physical change, done by the infusion of new habits,
dispositions, etc. Whence then it will follow, that if we are Sanctified by
Christ's Holiness, the Holiness of Christ must be transfused into us, for
Holiness is seated in the soul, as in its most proper Subject. Yea, the
Holiness of Christ, is seated in the soul of Christ, and if any are truly and
perfectly holy by Christ's holiness, this holiness must be removed from Christ's
soul, into the souls of such as are esteemed by the Lord to be Holy by such an
Holiness, which is. 1. Impossible, in that the ^s, that are in Christ cannot
migrate, or pass from Christ to us, without their destruction. 2. Absurd and
false, for. 1. If the habits of Christ's Holiness, be removed from Christ,
Christ cease to be holy, and consequently cannot remain a Meet Intercessor or
Advocate on the behalf of the sincerely humbled soul. 2. The Elect are hereby
set up above the Lord Jesus, in that they are perfectly holy, even when the
Lord Jesus is void of holiness. That a thing should be taken away, and yet be
lest behind is a flat Contradiction says Dr. Crisp.
. But if it be said, that the habits of Christ's Holiness pass from Christ unto
the Elect, and yet remain in Christ, then an Accident may in one and the same
instant, contrary to the fullest evidence desirable pass from one Subject to
another without destruction, and remain in two distinct Subjects at one and the
same time, yea, in a thousand, and can continue in being without any Subject,
that is, without what is essential to its Being; but if this be once granted
'twill follow that Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, and the grossest of
Errors and plainest of Popish contradictions may be easily admitted, as he
greatest truths. Moreover what is more dangerous? If the Elect be made
perfectly Holy by Christ's Holiness then 'twill follow, that the Sanctification
of the Spirit, is an useless things; that conversion, Faith in Christ and
repentance toward God are no way necessary to our actual Salvation, for a man
may be both holy and happy without them. For consider,

3. The third thing. The Elect are totally delivered from the filth of sin, no
one spot remaining on them. If they were made holy by Christ's holiness, and
every spot removed by Christ, without the Spirit, what remains to be further
done by the Spirit? Your Sanctification being already perfected without the
Spirit, the Spirit must run over the same work, and actum agere, or set idle,
which is gross: what greater despite can be done against the Spirit of God?
wherein can you offend him more? Oh consider it and tremble! 2. If this be
true, Our Preaching is in vain, Praying of no use, Ordinances unprofitable
things, though designed by our Lord Jesus Christ for conversion, and
edification, yea for the helping on, and promoting the work of Holiness on the
Heart. But what use can preaching be of, if this be true? must it be for the
inlightening you in the knowledge of Christ and for the turning you from the
power of Satan unto the most High? how can this be, since, when you were in the
Womb, Christ's holiness was made yours, and can you be perfectly holy or can you
be without the spot and filth of sin, even when the spot of Ignorance is on
your understandings, and the Filth of obstinacy, rebellion and pride on your
wills? It must be here remembered, That the Filth of sin remains on us until the
habitual blindness and stubbornness of our hearts be removed; for since this
Ignorance on the Understanding and the Depraved habits of the Will, etc. is the
Filth of the soul; the Filth, the Spot remains, as long as these abide. About
this consult Bellar. de justif. lib. 2. c. 16. Who says Quemad nodum ex
aversione a lege Dei orta est Macula, ita ex conversione tollitur.
Again, why will you pray, and draw near to the Lords Supper, for strengthening
grace, and fuller measures of holiness, even when you are perfect and want
nothing? Remember that it has been sufficiently proved that we are Sanctified
by the Spirit.

CHAP. VI.
A digression concerning the actual imputation of Christ's Merits, etc. to all
the Elect in the Womb. The unsoundness of this notion. The absurd consequences
that naturally slow from it. The plain Scripture notion about our actual
Justification declared. Faith in Christ antecedent thereunto. The convinced
sinner, the only Subject capable of Justification. A return from the
digression, showing wherein Grace is highly glorified by some, and wherein
abused by others.
THus, you see where these errors lead men, and how, such as do entertain one
error, do but prepare they way unto many. For that which is remarkable is this,
Those persons, who embrace the error, I have now confuted, do assert, that the
Elect are actually justified, even in the womb, though they know it not; for
says one "God lays the sins of the Elect on the Lord Jesus Christ by
Obligation, Execution and Application; which Application, as done by the
Father, is secret and manifest: Secretly unto particular Elect Persons, before
they come into the world, even while in the womb, as soon as conceived, for
which Reason the Lord has no more to lay to the charge of an Elect person, yet
in the height of iniquity, and in the Excess of Riot, and committing all the
Abominations that can be committed, even then, the Lord has no more to lay to
that Persons charge, than he has to lay to the charge of a Person Triumphant
in Glory, though the Elect person knows it not," So Dr. Crisp. on Isaiah.

The Reading which, is enough to engage a tender conscience to abhor it. But to
go on, and show the unsoundness hereof.

If the Elect, as soon as they receive Being, are in the sight of God actually
justified by this secret Application of their sins unto Christ, it is
impossible, that any one Elect soul, can be truly considered as born, or as
conceived, in sin; for their conception and this secret application is in one
and the same instant. Neither do they need any Sanctification by the Spirit, as
I shall show immediately, neither can they be capable of a Pardon; for they are
not actually guilty, nor by nature the Children of Wrath: This is plain. For
Christ's Holiness being made their Holiness, as soon as they received their Being
in the Womb, there was no one instant in which they were sinners, without
perfect Holiness; whence 'twill follow, that there is no Original sin, no being
by nature the Children of wrath, no need of pardon; for a pardon presupposes
Guilt, as Guilt infers Sin; where no Sin, their no Guilt, no Pardon, yea,
and hereby Repentance, and Faith in the blood of Christ for pardon, is made of
none effect. But if it be said that although the Righteousness and Holiness of
Christ is imputed unto the Elect, as soon as they receive their Being; yet the
Elect may remain under the power of sin, filthy, unclean and polluted, full of
sinful spots and blemishes. If so, it must be acknowledged. That one and the
same person, may be at one and the same time, a Child of God and a Child of the
Devil. 1. As Christ's Righteousness, and Holiness is imputed unto him, so He is
the Child of God, in a state of grace, actually in Gods account justified,
having a right unto the Kingdom, the Object of Gods special love and favor;
but yet, 2. As he is under the power of sin, and Unclean, so he is the Child of
the Devil, and in a state of wrath, actually unjustified in Gods account,
liable to eternal burnings, the Object of Gods hatred, being a worker of
iniquity. But how impossible is this? Oh how dangerous to assert! what! can a
man be at one and the same time the Child of God, and also of the Devil? He may
as well, be in Heaven and Hell at the same time, bathing himself in the Rivers
of pleasure, that run at the right hand of God for ever, even when tormented in
that lake that burns with Fire and brimstone. What strange confusion is this?
but they say that the sin passing from the Elect, cease to be the sin of the
Elect. q. d. The Elect are never in a state of sin, or wrath though under the
Power of sin.

The truth then is this.

The Righteousness of Christ is not actually imputed unto any under the
reigning power of unbelief, for, he that believes not, is condemned already,
Joh. 3.18. The wrath of God abides on on him, ver. 36. There is no
Communication of any justifying, pardoning grace to any, that are not united
unto Christ, and whatever soul is united unto Christ, he is so by Faith, "for,
as the Reverend Dr. O. it must be remembered that, we require Evangelical Faith
in order of nature antecedently unto our justification by the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto us, which justifying Faith, includes in its
nature the entire principle of Evangelical repentance, so as that it is utterly
impossible, that a man should be a true believer, and not at the same instant
of time, be truly penitent." A man that continues under the power of sin, no
way convinced of his lost estate out of Christ, (as is the case of many Elect
persons, a long time, after they are out of the Womb,) is so far from being
actually justified in the sight of God, that he is not, while so, a meet
Subject of justification; Conviction of sin, being a necessary antecedent unto
that Faith, that in order of nature goes before justification, and therefore it
must be considered, that a Convinced sinner, (as the same Reverend Dr. has
largely proved,) is the only Subjectum capax justificationis.

But to return.

From what has been said, we may clearly see, wherein the Grace of God is
highly glorified, and wherein by some it is greatly abused.

1. It Is highly glorified, in that the Son of God, according to the eternal
compact between the Father and the Son, assumed Humane Nature, made under the
Law, voluntarily taking on him the Guilt and Punishment of our sins, whereby
poor fallen man, may be freed from both, in being pardoned, and in being
delivered from the weight of that wrath, which omnipotency was to inflict: Now
the Guilty may escape that guilt, which tormenteth the consciences of many
here, and which is amongst the damned, as a Gnawing Worm, that continually adds
to their insupportable horrors hereafter.

2. Free Grace is greatly abused by such, as do assert,

1. That the spots, and blemishes of our sins, are laid on Christ; as if he,
who is infinitely pure, had been defiled and stained with the Filth of our
abominations; as if infinite Wisdom, could not find out a way to make a display
of Free Grace, in the accomplishing fallen man's salvation, but by the making
Jesus Christ, God-Man, subject unto the Pollution of sin. Oh! How is God
dishonored by the bold confidence of Finite mortals! who can presume to deny
the Lord to be gracious, unless his grace be made known in a way agreeable to
their corrupt imaginations!

2. To assert, that the Grace of God is such, as makes the Elect holy by
Christ's Holiness, even when they are not only subject to much sin, but are
under the reigning power of the worst of sins, is to abuse the Grace of God,
for these talk as if such as are in themselves impure, unclean, and unholy
could, while so, be esteemed by the Father of our blessed Jesus, as clean, pure
and holy; or, as if God could not set forth the Excellency of his Grace any
other way, than by lying under many a mistake. These notwithstanding their
pretense of exulting Free Grace, denying the Omniscience, or Infinite knowledge
of him, who is All-wise; and representing the Infallible God, as liable to
error do sadly abuse Free Grace.

3. To suggest, that Free Grace is glorified in the actual imputing Christ's
righteousness unto any, while in unbelief, as if the swearer or Sabbath
breaker, the drunkard, or unclean person, that delights in fornication and
adultery, might, while so, be an actual partaker of the special blessings of
God; or as if the Sanctification of the Spirit, had been no way necessary to
our Salvation; is a sad abuse of Grace, tending to the great dishonor of the
infinite Holiness, and purity of God. But since God is not only Gracious, but
also is most holy, Grace is not, it cannot be revealed, but in a way consistent
with the glory of Divine Purity and Holiness. But,

4. Some there are, who magnify the Free Grace of God, by concealing that
glorious discovery God has made thereof in our Lord Jesus; these are they, who
contend for the actual justification of all the Elect from Eternity, as if
Jesus Christ died to procure that for the Elect, which they had before the
Worlds were made; or as if the decree of God, his electing Will, an Immanent
act, had been transient in the actual creating, justifying and saving all the
Elect from eternity, (that is) as if they had been created millions of years
before there was any creature.

Thus men on pretense of lifting up the Free Grace of God, do not only trouble
the Churches with their confusion and variety of contradictions, but morcover
do lightly esteem the greatest Instance of Free Grace, the Elect ^re capable of
receiving, viz. the Love of God in Christ. For hereby God commends his Love
to us, that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. Again God
SO loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. and without
blood no Remission.

5. There are others, who in their abuse of Free Grace, do greatly reproach the
Spirit of Christ, and of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by asserting
that the Elect are actually Justified in the womb, even before they do believe,
yea, while they are in a state of darkness, and strang^ to the powerful working
of Gods holy Spirit. These are they who insist on Faith, as necessary only for
the procuring the knowledge of that justification, which they actually had
before (...). But how do these men sin against the Spirit of God, by
reproaching its works, as if the gr^s of the Spirit, had been of no esteem; as
if our Faith and Repentance, our Love to God and (...) ^lking according to the
Gospel of our (...) Redeemer, had been our sin! It Is true, the (...) does
consider the Righteousness of the (...), and the Apostle concluded, that his
righteousness, which was not done in Faith, to be as dung, in comparison of the
righteousness of Christ: And surely because of the many imperfections that
attend our best performances, we have cause to be humbled daily before the Lord
and to apply our selves to the blood, and righteousness of Christ, for
pardoning mercy. But yet it must be still asserted, that there is a difference
between those graces, that are the work of God's spirit in us, and the
imperfections which proceed from the remains of our old corruption, for that
which is the work of God's Spirit, as such, is not dung, nor dross, nor filth,
nor stinking rags, much less filthy sins. The Spirit of God is the Author of
Faith, and Love, and other graces; but the Spirit of God is not the Author of
sin and filth. The giving grace to the soul, is the renewing the Image of God
on the soul; but the image of God does not consist in sin, and filth, and
stinking rags. The believer, in being a partaker of the graces of God's spirit,
is a partaker of the divine nature, but the divine nature is not composed of
sin, or any filthy thing: It Is our duty to believe in Christ, to love God, etc.
but, it is not our duty to sin, or wallow in any spiritual uncleanness. Whence
then, such as do deny the necessity of says in order to our being actually
justified; or such as do reproach the working of Gods holy spirit, calling what
is holy, unholy, what is pure, impure; reviling, the divine nature, reproaching
Gods image, on pretense of exalting free grace, do greatly sin, in abusing a
great instance of free grace viz. The holy Spirit's work, unto which we are
infinitely obliged. For it is the Spirit that does begin, carry on, and finish
the work of Sanctification on the soul; whence, although, while we are in this
life, our Sanctification is but imperfect, yet there is not one soul in Heaven
one instant without perfect holiness.

But, it may be, you will quaery how it can be, that the soul, which, while on
earth, is but imperfectly sanc^fied, should (...) perfectly purged from the
filth of sin when in Heaven? I Answer. There are several sorts of men, who
talk, as if they had been fully acquainted with the whole counsel of God, and
as if they could give a particular account of the methods of divine operations;
hence some are confident enough to assert that the perfect purgati-on of the
filth of sin, must be either by the Spirit in this life, or by a purgatory fire
in the other. The one asserts perfection, not only of parts, but of degrees
attainable here, and consequently denies the necessity of Ordinances, etc. The
other viz. the Papists conclude, that as some arrive to perfection here, others
do not, e're they arrive unto the purgatery sire, but the Antinomian presumes
to say, that our perfect Sanctification must. be by Christ's Holiness, even as
our complete Justification is by Christ's Righteousness. But I have already
shown, That our perfect Sanctification, which consists in the removal of the
filth of every sin is not done by the Holiness of Christ: Neither is it
possible, that any material flames should be adjusted, for the cleansing the
soul, which is a Being spiritual and Immaterial: Materiale non agit in
immateriale. It is done then by the Spirit; when? not in this life, for until
the body of Sin be put off, there will be the remainders of old lusts, Note, 1
King. 8.46. Prove. 20.9. Eccl. 7.20. 1 John 1.8. No mere man since the Fall ever
arrived unto a state of sinless perfection in this life.
. which are inconsistent with a Sanctification, that is perfect with a
perfection of degrees. Does it, (you, it may be, will say) enter into Heaven
with its imperfections (i.e.) Spots and Filth? Ans. No surely, for no Spot can
have an admittance into that holy place. Does the departed soul make its stay
after it passes from the body, e're it enter Heaven? Ans. The stay cannot be
long, for said Jesus Christ to the Thief on the Cross, This day thou shall be
with me in Paradise, Who stood in need of as long a stay for a further
Sanctification, as any, his conversion being just then; How then is it? I
answer, That since it is certain, That it is the Spirits work to sanctify, which
work is not perfected while the soul is in the body, and yet enters into Heaven
perfect, we should satisfy our selves with these plain truths, without any
further search into the secrets of the Almighty, especially since the Spirit of
God, on the souls parting from the body of sin, can in a moment perfectly
Sanctify it.

But for your fuller Satisfaction

Consider, That the Tyrant Sin, has its usurped Throne, in our members, in our
body, the flesh (which is the true reason, why the Elect in the body, are not
perfectly sanctified) and you will suddenly be engaged to conclude, That our
sanctification may be immediately perfected, on the souls freedom from the
body. If the body of sin, be the hinderer of our perfect Sanctification, how
easily may our perfect Sanctification be accomplished, when once we are freed
from the body of this death? Remember the guilt of sin being removed by the
Blood of Christ, a Right to Glory purchased by his Righteousness, and through
the Sanctification of the Spirit all the faculties and powers of the soul being
exactly conformable to the Rule given 'em, by the Lord, which is done on the
souls leaving the body, casting off its Chains and Fetters, nothing remains but
that the soul immediately at death may go to God. Read seriously the 7th. of
the Romans.

CHAP. VII.
The Glory of Gods Free Grace further discovered; in several propositions.
Grace how shown unto mankind in General. The greatness and extensiveness
thereof. Common Grace offered unto more than the Elect. Special Grace to some
only. This Irresistible, without the laying any violence on our faculties: Man,
though passive in conversion, yet not so passive, as pure matter. Several other
Gospel truths evinced. The Uses, etc.

FRom what has been said, it evidently appears, that although our blessed
Redeemer, was never polluted, or any way defiled by the sins of the Elect, yet
in order to the glorifying Free Grace, consistently with the magnifying the
Justice, Truth, Faithfulness, and infinite Wisdom of God, it was necessary,
that the Lord Jesus should take on him the guilt of our iniquities, which being
done 'twas but Righteousness in God the Father, to lay on him all those sorrows
he underwent: A particular consideration whereof, cannot but deeply affect the
souls of truly, sincere, and sound believers. But I must hasten to what I
design further on this subject, and insist on some of those special Blessings
that are the purchase of Christ's blood. All which, for the greater clearness, I
shall lay down in several propositions, passing by those which are most
evident, and making my stay only in explicating and confirming such as may seem
to some obscure.

Propos. 1.

1. That on the account of Christ's sufferings in humane nature all mankind is,
in some sense, so far redeemed from that misery, in which, antecedently unto
the Promise of Christ's death, they did lie, that they are now in a much more
happy condition than the fallen Angels, not only upon the account of their
receiving at least a temporary reprieve from everlasting flames, but also
because their Salvation is become possible.

EXPLICATION.

Fallen man, antecedently unto the promise of the Messiah, being in as helpless,
and as desperately miserable condition, as the Devils themselves, and as unable
to satisfy divine justice, any other way, than by remaining in chains of
darkness for ever, Christ's sufferings afford that relief unto all mankind, as
to deliver them from this misery that is so desperate; for their salvation is
not now as impossible, as it was before the promise of the Lord Jesus: For the
Lord Christ satisfying infinite justice, no one man can truly say, that the
reason why he perished is because there was not enough in the blood of Christ
to ransom him: for whosoever does sincerely believe, shall be actually redeemed
from the wrath to come. Our remaining in our sin is the great reason, why the
wrath of God abides on us; so St. Austin, that great enemy to Pelagianism, so
much envied by the Arminians. "Quod ergo ad magnitudinem et potentiam pretii;
and quod ad unam pertinet causam generis humani: Sanguis Christi Redemptio est
totius mundi, sed qui hoc seculum, sine side Christi, and sine regenerationis
sacramento, pertranseunt, redemptionis alieni sunt." Aug. lib. ad Artic. sibi
imposit. ad Artic. 1.

Again, "Sed hoc inter malos homines, et Daemones distat: quod hominibus etiam
valde malis superest, si Deus misereatur, Reconciliatio: Daemonibus nulla
servata est conversio." Aust. ubi sup. ad Art. 6.

2. That what Person soever does savingly believe, sincerely repent, and is
really a sound convert, shall actually be saved in the day of the Lord, Isa.
55.1. Mark 16.16. Joh. 3.16. Joh. 7.37. 1 Timothy 2.3,4. Rev. 3.20. Rev. 22.17.

3. That the helps vouchsafed unto all for the enabling us savingly to believe,
and sincerely to repent, are such as will leave all those who, believe not,
inexcusable. For,

1. They who receive least, receiving one talent, have given them sufficient
for the enabling them to do more toward the saving their souls, than they
actually do.

2. If those men do actually improve the common helps vouchsafed them, they
may, for ought any man can prove to the contrary, receive such further
assistances, as may have a special influence in enabling them to turn sincerely
unto God, through Jesus Christ.

For, there is in Scripture, as a motive to sincere repentance, a who can tell,
a may be, or who knows but, or a perhaps the Lord may be gracious, Joel
2.13.14. Amos 5.15. Jonah 3.8,9. Zeph. 2.3. Acts 8.22. Call these Scriptures
half-Promises, or not, the encouragement they afford all to improve the
received talents, is as great as is given any, to engage in worldly affairs.
What greater motive has the Seeds-man to sow his seed, than a May be he shall
meet with a good harvest? what moves the Merchant to send a considerable part
of his estate beyond Seas, but a perhaps there may be a good return? what
animated Jacob in his great distresses to go on, when he feared that his
Brother Esau designed the destroying him, but a peradventure he will accept of
me? Genesis 32.26. What was the motive Jeremiah gave Baruch to read in the roll
the words of the Lord in the ears of the People, but It may be they will
present their supplications before the Lord, and return? or what other
encouragement did the Lord himself give Jeremiah to Preach unto Judah, but It
may be the house of Judah will hear all the evil that I purpose to do unto
them, that they may return every man from the evil of his way? Jer. 36.2,3,6
and 7. And is a may be, a peradventure, powerful enough to raise the hearts of
men to great undertakings, as to the things of this life, and yet not
sufficient to oblige us to act for God, and glory? or does this may be prove a
motive sufficient to engage the Ministers of Christ to endeavor the salvation
of precious and immortal souls, and yet insufficient for the moving you to the
doing any thing for your selves? surely this may be does not argue only a
Possibility, but moreover a great Probability: Thou art therefore, O man!
inexcusable, if thou neglectest thy duty, and wilt not strive to enter in at
the strait gate, since by striving, thou may have an entrance into the
heavenly glory given thee; it is possible, it is probable; but if thou will not
strive for Heaven, nothing more sure, than that Hell will be thy portion. Oh
consider these things and remember, Si ergo a Justitia and pietate quis
desicit, suo in praeceps fertur arbitrio; sua concupiscentia trahitur; sua
persuasione decipitur. Aug. Resp. ad Art. sibi impos. ad Art. 13.
That if you die in your sins, your destruction will be of your selves, you will
be found self-condemned sinners, to whom the Lord may say, How often would I
have gathered you together, but you would not! Man's sin, and consequently his
ruin is from himself, and not from the Lord, so. -- "Quae mala cum homines
admittunt, suis concupiscentiis and cupiditatibus serviunt, quas ab illa prima
voluntariae praevaricationis labe traxerunt."

4. Such is the corruption of humane nature, since the fall, as engages all
mankind to slight, neglect, scorn, contemn, and obstinately to despise all the
common helps offered us.

It must be acknowledged, that man after the fall remains a man, whence
whatever is essential unto the humane nature, as such, is to be found in him,
(i.e.) man is still a living, rational creature, his soul is still ennobled
with the powers or faculties of understanding, and will, he is capable of
knowing and willing. These faculties are not totally eradicated, or rooted out
of the soul, for that would be to destroy it. Man is still man, but a corrupt
man, that is, though the natural powers and faculties remain, yet they are
sadly vitiated, in that they are become the seat of vicious propensions,
dispositions, and habits: For the Understanding has not only lost its
primogeneal, directive light, and become darkness, but the will is also
strangely corrupted, not in the Arminian sense alone as the Remonstrants
express it, Act. Scrip. Synod. min. Remonst. in Explic. 3. et. 4. art. de Great.
etc.
who say, "Quare libertatem volendi indifferenter tam bonum salutare, quam
malum in statu lapsus voluntati adesse negamus, quin potius liberum Arbitrium
ad bona istiusmodi non modo vulneratum, sauciatum, infirmatum, inclinatum and
attenuatum est, sed and Captivatum, perditum, and amissum, viresque ejus non
modo debilitatae and cassae nisi restaurentur a gratia, sed and null." Free Will
to what is savingly good (say they) is not only wounded, and weakened, but
without a gracious restoration altogether lost, (i.e.) the Understanding
having lost its directive light, and the will being a blind power, cannot
embrace what is savingly good, not because of any weakness in the faculty of
the will, but for want of a a Guide to direct it. "In lapsu boni salutaris et
salvifici cognitione destituta men's, nequaquam illud ut volendum voluntati
monstrare potuit, nec voluntas illud velle." But this is unsound, for the
weakness of the will, is not merely because of the blindness of the
understanding, but, because it is so subjected unto vicious, propensions,
dispositions, and habits. The heart of man naturally runs out after sin,
it is bent to commit evil, it is obstinately resolved against what is savingly
good, and therefore morally impotent; men sin because they will sin, as appears
both from Scripture and experience. You will not come unto me that ye may have
life, you will have none of my counsel, you will not return, you are a
stiff-neck'd people, obstinate and rebellious, whence the common assistances of
Gods Spirit proves ineffectual and if God did not Glorify Free Grace any
further, none, not the Elect would return unto God, for although Common Grace
given unto all, is sufficient to leave all men without excuse, their
non-improvement being their sin; yet none are thereby effectually engaged to
turn unto God in Faith, no not the Elect, who, while unregenerate, are as
sinfully obstinate, as any; their souls being as much polluted with Ignorance,
sinful defections, inclinations and habits, as others, who are by nature
Children of Wrath, as others, and for the same reason, who are by nature, as
sinful and rebellious as others. Who more vile than Manasseh in unregeneracy?
and who made more havoc of the Church of Christ, than Paul did in the days of
his Ignorance? Should the Lord leave all the Sons of men to themselves, they
would (notwithstanding the Common Grace afforded them) run on in sin to their
eternal ruin. Wherefore,

5. As God did from Eternity in himself determine, and by Covenant engage to
give unto our Lord Jesus, a Select number, even so, in time God glorifieth the
freeness of his grace, and shows himself faithful, in giving some unto Christ.

Whoever duly observes what has been already said concerning Election, and the
Covenant of Reconciliation made between the Father and the Son, cannot believe
the Lord to be a God of truth, the faithful one, and not consent unto this.

6. That those who are given to the Lord Jesus Christ, are by SPECIAL grace
most powerfully, yet sweetly drawn unto him by the Father. For none comes unto
Christ, but whom the Father draws.

7. God the Father, giving this Select Number unto Christ, they are by Faith
through the Spirit united unto Christ. For God in drawing and giving them unto
Christ, gives Christ, the Spirit, and Faith unto them. They by being given unto
Christ, are taken into Covenant with Christ, they are Christ's, and Christ is
theirs; the Union between them and Christ, being a Covenant Union, that is real
but mystical. That Lord Christ, that is offered unto all upon their believving,
is actually given unto these; and as all may have Christ if they believe, these
believe that they may have Christ; God, of his infinitely Free Grace, makes
these a willing People in the day of his power. Whence all that do turn from
the evil of their ways, they must ascribe the whole glory to God, even to the
praise of his Grace P^inde, quoniam, Demino in te misericorditer open, jam
cidicisti, in abundantia divitiarum tuarum, non Gloriari: hoc superest, ut non
confidas in virtute tua: (i.e.) ne dep^tes v^ripus tuis, quod seculi facultates
divitiasque contemans; and -- quod viam mandatorum Dei currere (...). Haec enim
omnia nullatenus haberes; nisi a Deo, manner Gratuitae Donationis, acciperes.
Non hoc homini dat natura; sed Gratia: Non hoc ex qual^ te condition is humanae
habetur, sed ex benignitate divinae illuminationis acquiritur,

Again Quicquid habes bonae voluntatis, vel bonae operationis, Deo assigna, qui
dedit Fulgent. de convers. ad Theod. Epist. 6. toward the end.


.

8. To assert, That any, while in unregeneracy, may be united unto Christ, or
that any, who savingly believe, may not be united unto Christ, is most false,
unsound, and dangerously absurd.

1. To be unregenerate, is to abide in a state of sin, altogether Unclean,
Filthy and Polluted, at a distance from God and Jesus Christ; how then can
these be One? what, is Christ joined to an Harlot? or can light have any Union
or Communion with darkness?

2. A believer does close with Christ, which cannot be without Union.

9. It Is both unnecessary, and unprofitable to dispute about a moment or instant
of nature; as to the precedence of Faith unto Union, or of Union unto Faith. e.
g. whether Faith, or the Union, is in order of nature first; it being evident,
that there is no instant supposable, in which, a soul, who has saving Faith,
is not united unto Christ, or in which One united unto Christ has not sound
saving Faith. But

10. This Faith, and this union is in order of nature antecedent to an actual
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and consequently, before our actual
Justification in the sight of God.

Communion presupposes Union; and therefore, Union must precede an actual
imputation, which is but the Communication of Christ's Righteousness unto us.
Faith and Union being Simultanecus, and at one and the same instant, as Union,
even so Faith, must precede the Communication of Christ's Righteousness, and our
actual justification in the sight of God thereby.

11. This Faith, which does so necessarily precede, and go before the actual
justification of a sinner, is the Fidem autem hominum, Donum Dei esse fateamur;
sine enj^s Gratia (...) currit ad gratiam. Prosper. Aq. Resp. ad Gal. Object.
ad Obj. 8.
gift of God, infused into the soul by the holy Spirit, that does irresistibly
carry on its work.

1. Grace being the gift of God, the first thing which the soul is capable of
in the work of Regeneration, or conversion is the receiving the gift, or
infused habit; the soul does recipere effectum agentis, which is as much as,
Pati, whence the soul, the first instant or moment of conversion, must be
considered as passive.

2. This Converting Grace is irresistible; which may be evinced to any
unprejudiced mind, that will but consider, that antecedently unto conversion,
the soul is obstinately bent toward sin. The inclinations of the will, are
continually evil, averse to what is good, and both actually and habitually
determined to vanity, for which reason, the Spirit, in carrying on the work of
conversion, meets with great opposition from the sinner; yea, with such
opposition, as would altogether impede and hinder the Spirits work, had not the
power of the Spirit been great enough to conquer and overcome this habitual
obstinacy of the will; but the power of God's Spirit being greater than that of
the Sinner, the Sinner is overcome, and converted. How? but by that Grace that
is Irresistible; it being most evident, that it is naturally impossible for
finite power to prevail against what is infinite; So clear it is, that
converting grace is irresistible: And surely, had it not been so, never one
obstinate sinner, no, not one child of Adam (since all are by nature
obstinately rebellious sinners) would be converted, for such is the nature of
our corrupt wills, that they will never yield, until overcome by an overstrong
and irresistible power.

12. This infused Irresistible grace is given unto the Adult, ordinarily in the
use of means, as the preaching of the word, etc. Whence man though passive in
the first moment of his conversion, yet, not so passive as some suggest.

1. It must be noted, that Man in conversion is not so passive as a Stone when
thrown up into the Air: For the infusion of Grace, being into a Soul, that is,
active life, to the end the Soul may be the better prepared for action, the
Soul must be also active in the great work of conversion. The infusion of Grace
into the soul, that is, active life, is not like the infusion of the soul into
the body, that is, antecedently to its receiving the soul wholly unactive,
purely passive; No, the Lord does consider the nature, he has given beings,
and his actions toward such beings are suitable to their natures. As a mere
passive thing is purely passive in its receptions, even so what is essentially
active, cannot but be active in its receptions. To insist on niceties
concerning the opposition that is between action and passion, and consequently
on the seeming inconsistency, some may judge to be, in this expression active
reception, q. d. active passion, is but to quibble; since it is impossible to
suppose an Essentially-active-being to be in every regard, as passive as pure
matter is. God carries on the work of conversion on man, in a way agreeable
unto that nature God has given him; which is by inlightening the
understanding, and by suscitating, and stiring up the powers of the soul to
their being duly conversant about their proper objects, influencing, and
enabling the will to close with what is proposed in the word, as good, and
accordingly understood and believed to be so. Although we cannot comprehend
how, yet nothing more evident, than that God does irresistibly, and yet most
sweetly, without laying any violence on our faculties, draw us from sin unto
Jesus Christ This notion is agreeable to the Sentiments of the Schoolmen, as
Marius Scrib. de lib. Arb. disp. 19. qu. 8. does assert. Dionys. Carthusianus
in 2. d. 39. q. 2. Capreolus d. 45. q. 1. Concl, 5. Ferrariensis primo contr.
Gent. c. 88. Dreido opusc. lib. de concordia Lib. arb. et praed estinationis 2.
p. c. 3. ad primum. All these reconciling humane Liberty with the Irresistible
Divine Will thus. Dicunt enim Dei voluntatem et providentiam Dei tantae esse
virtutis and efficaciae, ut licet et nulla potentia and libertas refistere
valeat, omnes tamen causas, quibus cooperatur, suaviter moveat, infinitae
siquidem est virtutis and sapientiae, and cum fit infinitae Sapientiae, scit
omnia suaviter disponere, licet nobis videantur factu impossibilia: cum vero
infinitae sit virtutis attingit a fine usque ad finem fortiter, ita ut per
infinitam suam virtutem sciat etiam, quae videntur dissonantia, concordare: et
propter Sapientiam sine praejudicio humanae libertatis effectum suae voluntatis
semper sortiri. Et Cajetanus iisdem pene id videtur profiteri. 1. p. q. 4. a
23. and 9.19. ar. 8. docens quod talis est cooperatio primae causae, quod
disponit omnia suaviter, juxta scil. modum cujusque, cooperans unicuique. So
Austin. Et hoc est opus ejus, quo continet omnia, and quo ejus sapientia
pertendit a fine usque ad finem fortiter, et disponit omnia suaviter. lib. 4.
de Genesis ad lit. c. 12.
.

2. This Irresistible grace is given ordinarily in the use of means, viz. the
preaching of the word whence Paul must go to be instructed by Ananias, Acts 9.
Philip is sent to preach to the Eunuch, Peter is sent to Cornelius, Acts 10. to
the end, that by the foolishness of Preaching many might be converted, 1 Cor,
1.21.

13. It is therefore the great duty of all men seriously apply themselves to
the use of means, that so they may be converted, and turned unto God. For,

1. Our souls are Essentially-active-beings, and therefore should be engaged
for God, and Holiness; and not for sin, and the pleasures thereof.

2. We are commanded to prepare our hearts in order to our turning unto the
Lord, 1 Samuel 7.3. Ezekiel. 14.6. chapter 18.31. which Scriptures, as they expressly
show it to be our duty to be active in turning unto God, even so, moreover,
they imply, that, if we are active in our work, God will be graciously pleased
by his blessing, abundantly to encourage us therein. All men, even the wicked,
must pray, they must attend on the word, and mind the Salvation of their souls,
which if they do, who can tell, but that the Lord may be gracious. Thus Peter
said unto Simon the Sorcerer, pray God, if perhaps he will forgive the thoughts
of thy heart; For when the wicked do pray, and hear the word, although their
prayers, etc. -- are an abomination unto the Lord, in that they do not pray
with that Faith and Love, etc. they ought; yet, even in that they do both pray
and hear the word, they are not so ^minable, as they would be, should they
totally neglect these duties. For, he, who pray's with an unsound heart, fails
as to the manner of prayer, but he, who prays not at all, fails as to the
matter as well as manner, and consequently is the greater transgressor: Again,
he who prays and hears the word, is in a fairer way of receiving a blessing
from the Lord, than he, who will neither pray, nor hear the word. In the
discharge of these duties, we may meet with God, it is probable, because
frequently it has been so; but he who lives in the constant neglect of them,
is in danger of losing his immortal soul eternally. But remember, that it is
both duty to pray, and hear, yea, and to do so in Faith with hearts sincerely
devoted unto God. We must engage in duty, and yet conclude that all the good we
receive is of Grace so Fulgentius -- Cum timore and tremore tuam salutem
operare: Nec Lectio desit operibus bonis: Nec bona opera desint studio
lectionis -- In Scripturis S. studium tui cordis impende. Et, ibi si fueris;
qui sis, quique debeas esse, cognosce: Ad has si humilis and mitis accesseris,
ibi profecto invenies and Pr^evenientem gratiam, qua potest elisus surgere; and
comitantem, qua viam recti queat itineris currere; and subsequentem, qua valeat
ad regni caelestis beatitudinem pervenire. Full. de conv. ad Theodor. Epist. 6.
Yea the same Fulgentius in the same Epistle does encourage us both unto our
duty, and to give the Glory of all to Free Grace. Hujus Gratiae adjutorium,
semper est nobis a Deo poscendum, sed nec ipsum, quod poscimus, nostris viribus
assignemus: neque enim haberi potest ipse saltem Orationis affectus, nisi
divinitus fuerit attributus. Ut ergo desideremus adiutorium Gratiae, hoc ipsum
quoque opus est Gratiae. Ipsa namque incipit infundi; ut incipiat posci: Ipsa
quoque amplius infunditur, cum poscentibus datu^* Quis vero potest Gratiam
poscere nisi velit? sed nisi in eo Deus ipsum voluntatem operetur; velle
n^tenus poterit.
.

From the whole that has been said, it is most certain, that the manifold grace
of God, has been diversely extended to mankind in general, and to some in
particular. 1. To mankind in general, and that in these following respects.

1. To all mankind, in that, God the Son assumed Humane Nature, in which, he
suffered, and fulfilled all righteousness, to the end man's Salvation might
become possible. The Lord might have left us all in that helpless, and
desperately miserable state, in which we with the fallen Angels were once
fixed: But, God extended the riches of his grace toward fallen man, even, when
the least favor was not shown the fallen Angels.

2. To all mankind, in that as the Salvation of all is become possible, the
Lord moreover affords unto all, such a sufficiency of help, in order to the
doing what is necessary unto an actual entrance into the glories of God as
leaves all such as remain in sin most Inexcusable. The worst of men, who
received least, receiving more than they improve, must acknowledge, that Grace
was afforded them, but they most wretchedly rejected it. But then

2. The Grace of God is infinitely exalted, in that it is extended after an
eminent manner to SOME in special; some receive Faith, and all such other
graces, as are necessary to their actual Salvation, who must ascribe the glory
of their Faith, Repentance and Conversion, their sincere Obedience, and final
perseverance to the glory of Free Grace.

Here I might enlarge, and show how and in what respect the Grace of God is
exalted, in the Supporting, Refreshing and comforting the believer, while in
this life diversely exercised; But I, designing to be short, will insist only
on what may clear God from the Reproaches are cast on him by the wicked, who
assert that, according to the Opinion of many learned Divines both among the
Protestants and Papists, it may be soundly argued, That God does lay men under
a Natural necessity, (i.e.) [a necessity of the consequent, or rather of the
Effect] of sinning; which Notion, if true, would subvert not only the greatest
part of the preceding Discourse, but even the whole of Religion. The Falsness,
and Unsoundness of which wretched reflection, as cast on God by the
Irrationally-Athestical Debauchees of our times, I will attempt to evince in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
The Grace of God further cleared. Divine Providence owned and acknowledged by
most. God no way the Author of man's sin. The Dominican notion about Physical
Predetermination vindicated from the Absurdities are said to flow from it. The
necessity of our being Modest in enquiries of this Nature. Several reasons for
this, drawn from the Depths of the Mystery, as well as from the shallowness of
Humane Capacities, and the General Confusion the Jews, Philosophers and
Schoolmen run into, when too nice in their Disquisitions. Some Truths of
greatest importance concerning the exalting Free Grace, the reasonableness of
our discharge of Duty notwithstand Predetermination; and of man's
inexcusableness if he neglect it. These Truths known to the Heathen; whence
Grace appears in its fuller Glory. A Recapitulation of some of the most
material things insisted on, as Instances of Free Grace. The Conclusion with a
Caution, that none Presume to sin because the Lord is Gracious.

THus, I have shown, in many a respect, how the Grace of God, is displayed in
it^ glory; It therefore, now remains only that I evince, That this grace, is so
infinitely extended toward all men, that what man soever perishes eternally,
He does so, because He will.

I have already proved, that the Decree does lay no causal influence on man's
will, in order to the determining it to a commission of this, or the other
individuated actual sin, in that, as it is acknowledged by all, the Decree,
being an Immanent, and not Transient act as such, nil ponit in esse.

I Will now essay to demonstrate, that such is the Transcendency of Free Grace,
that, what influence soever proceeds from the first cause, in an execution of
the eternal decree, it is not such as does lay a man under a Physical necessity
of Sinning.

But before I make an entrance, on a Province, so intricate, it will be
necessary, that by way of Prologue, I intimate what in this controversy is
plain, and what seems obscure and difficult.

1. What is plain and undoubtedly True.

1. That God is the first Being, yea, and the first Efficient, the Holy, Just
and Wise disposer of all things, the Author and Conserver of all Beings. 2.
That such is the purity of the Divine Nature, that it is Impossible God should
be the Author of Sin, and consequently, have any causal influence on the
sinfulness of humane actions.
The Truth of the first Proposition, although denied by Epicurus, and by
Ennius, [as Cicero de Divinat. lib. 2. Ego Deum genus esse semper dixi, and
dicam coelitum: Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus.] by
Averrois and some other Peripateticks, contrary to the sense of the great
Aristotle [as Franc. Patric. discus. perip. tom. 4. l. 9. expresses it, 'Quid
ergo Averrois quid Peripatetici caeteri aiunt, Deum in sui contemplatione, in
motione primi Coeli contentum, haec nostratia non curare? Id praeterquam quod
nefarium and scelestum dogma est, contra praeceptoris mentem ac dicta est.]'
etc. -- I say, the Truth of this first proposition, notwithstanding it has
been denied by a few, is so plain, and obvious, as to command the assent of
most, so Franc. Patric. ubi supra. tom. 12. l. 3. sane de providentia
vetustissimum est omnium, nedum Sapientum, sed Gentium etiam dogma, and the
Learned Mornay de verit. Christ. Relig. c. 11. Antiqui, (...) seu (...) (i.e.)
Deum, seu Providentiam promiscue vocabant, quia neutrum sine altero concipi
potest. But Lactantius does sufficiently evince this, lib. 2. de orig. erroris.
where he says 'Nam Divina Providentia effectum esse mundum, ut taceam de
Trismegisto, qui hoc praedicat, taceam de Carminibus Sibyllarum, quae idem
nunciant, taceam de Prophetis, qui opus mundi ac opificium Dei uno spiritu ac
pari voce testantur; etiam inter Philosophos pene Universos convenit. Idem
etiam Phythagorici, Stoici, Peripatetici, qui sunt principes omnis Disciplinae.
Denique a primis illis sapientibus, a Socrate usque ad Platonem, pro confesso
and indubitato habitum est; donec unus multis post seculis extitit delirus
Epicurus.' etc.

And not only the old Philosophers, but among the Jews, the Assarian sect, as
well as that of the Muatzali, and the followers of Rambam; and of the Schoolmen
not only the Dominican and Jansenist, but the Molinist, yea, and Durandus
himself own a Providence.

The Second, is a Truth no less evident, owned even by the worst of Hercticks
(excepting the Seleuciani, and the followers of Florinus, who, in opposing the
Coluthians, fell into this contrary extreme. vide Aug. de Haeresibus c.
59.65.66.) This Mar. Scribonius in Pantal. in cos. de pec. act. dis. 18. qu. 5.
asserts, 'Nefarii quidem, ac Scelesti fuerunt haeretici antiqui, nullus tamen
ita vecors, ut Deum totaliter Authorem peccati fecerit. Non tamen Deum
astruebant esse primarium peccati authorem, ut malum morale est, sed solum,
quia est Creator omnium, vel quia nonnulli illorum duo principia ponebant, unum
boni, aliud mali, and sic unum Deum dicebant bonum, alium malum; nullus autem
ausus est Deum asserere vere ac proprie peccati Authorem.' The same is
confessed by Bellarmine de amiss. Great. et stat. pecc. l. 2. c. 1. Moreover,
the Protestants do with the greatest Zeal conclude, that God is of purer eyes,
than to behold iniquity. And as Durandus, the Molinists, yea and the
Jansenists, who have espoused the sentiments of St. Austine, even so the
Dominicans, if not Peter de Aliaco and Abailardus deny God to be the Author of
sin; for surely, as the learned Dr. Stillingfleet has proved in his Orig. Sacr.
lib. 3. c. 3. Whoever believes the Sacred Scriptures, cannot entertain the
thoughts of Gods being the Author of sin. ' Shall not the Judge of all the
World do right? will a God of Infinite Justice, Purity and Holiness, punish the
sinner for that which himself was the cause of? Far be such unworthy thoughts
from our apprehensions of a Deity, much more of that God whom we believe to
have declared his mind so much to the contary, that we cannot believe that, and
the Scriptures to be true together.'

From these two uncontrollable Truths there proceeds another, with as much
conviction as either of these, viz.

3. That what man soever sins, he does so freely, man being the sole Author
of the sinfulness of those evil actions he commits.

This is agreeable to the sentiments, both of the Schoolmen, and Philosophers,
as hereafter shall be evinced. But

2. To what is Obscure.

Although these things are so, there arise great difficulties in all humane
attempts, how to reconcile the two latter with the first proposition;
concerning which, diverse men, do diversely descant, every particular Sect
amongst the learned, insisting on different Hypotheses for the solving these
Phenomenon; In doing which, some in order to a more secure establishing the two
last propositions, express themselves so unwarily, as to tempt many to fear,
they are not right in the former; again, such as make it their principal design
to confirm, and illustrate the first about Divine Providence, etc. have been
censured, as if their Dogmata, had been attended with the most black and dismal
consequences; whence instead of a cordial agreement about these three confessed
Truths, there are variety of disputes; contentions, animosities, and quarrels
concerning the How can these things be.

But I humbly apprehend, that since, these three propositions are so
undoubtedly true, that few, or none presume openly, or directly to oppose them;
it is the great interest, as well as duty of all, rather to satisfy themselves in
the producing plain, cogent, Scriptural arguments for their confirmation, than
to make a too nice inquiry into the (...), the way and manner how these things
are so. For,

1. Is it not concerning the Modes, or Media of Divine Knowledge, and
operations, that the great contest is? which, as they are of what more
immediately concerns the Divine Nature, must be acknowledged to be infinitely
above humane (which are but finite) capacities. Who can by searching find out
God? who can know him, or his ways, unto perfection? Methinks, the arguing of
Le blank, is admirable. de concord. libert. hum. cum decret. Div. these. 43.
'Itaque cum r^m tantam scrutanti, undique se tenebrae offundant and occurrant
tricae ac pedicae, ex quibus nos non satis extricare valemus, nihil magis tutum
and ingenuum puto, quam ignorantiam nostram hic aperte profiteri, and serio
illud Davidis usurpare, Mirabilis facta est scientia tua prae me, and
sublimior, quam ut assequi possim. Ac quanquam aliorum ingenia nolim ex mea
tenuitate metiri, and super hac re modestam disquisitionem damnare, facile
tamen adducor, ut credam mysterium hoc ad ea pertinere, de quibus dicit
Sapiens, Altiora te ne quaesieris, and fortiora te ne scrutatus fueris. Nec
mirum videri debet, si men's nostra tam angustis limitibus definita, percipere
non possit qua ratione intellectus Divinus, cui plane nulli sunt fines, ea
cognoscat, and attingat, quae sunt a cognitione nostra remotissima.'

2. Is there any thing more certain, than that, all our discourses about these
things can be but about what is Obscure? But because we cannot comprehend what
is Obscure, must we reject what is most plain and obvious? Cajetane, as I find
it in Bellarmine, de great. et lib. arbit. l. 4. c. 14. expresses himself as to
this, most excellently, ' Cajetanus in 1. part. q. 22. art. 4 docet concordiam
istam liberi Arbitrii cum Divina providentia videri inexplicabilem, and non
intelligibilem in hac vita; Et quidem si ita se res haberet, non tamen neganda
esset, vel Providentia Dei, vel Libertas hominum. Potest enim facile
contingere, ut aliquid ab una part manifest constet, ab altera sit maxim
dubium, and obscurum: and tunc non est negandum unum propter alterum: Nunquid
(inquit S. Aug. lib. de bono perseverantiae, c. 14.) ideo negandum est quod
Apertum est, quia comprehendi non potest quod occultum est?' But

3. It Is humbly apprehended, That, whatever is extorted, and with the greatest
violence forced from the Dominican Hypothesis, when laid on the rack by the
Molinist and some others; it may be easily evinced, that these Dominicans in
giving God the glory of being the only wise orderer, and disposer of all things
do no way cast him under the blasphemous reproach, of being the Author of the
sinfulness of any of our evil actions; neither, according unto them, is Humane
Liberty and Physical predetermination Irreconcilable.

Before I begin to attempt the clearing this, I must crave leave, to do my self
the right of assuring the Reader, that although I do engage my self so far in
favor of these Dominicans, it is not to discover any Zeal for that faction, who
in the Roman Church, are as bloody, as any; nor for the Hypothesis, which is as
Metaphysically and obscurely, as boldly worded by some of them, but it is to
show, that such is the Grandeur of Free Grace, that notwithstanding the seeming
severity of this Doctrine, none shall be able to say, that they following the
Dominicans, verily believed that they were so Physically predetermined to the
sinfulness of those actions, they committed, that the true reason of their
damnation, is their doing what they were by an Omnipotent, Overstrong, and
Invincible Force violently compelled to do; for according to the Dominican
notion, what sinner soever dies in his sin, is a self condemned sinner; which
being so, in the sense of these Stoical Schoolmen, there can be no scruple, but
that in the sense of most others, such as perish in their iniquity will be
found to be (...), condemned of themselves. For what more evident, than that
the Arminian, and the Molinist pretend to oppose the Dominican, principally to
clear God from the reproach of being a destroyer of Humane Liberty, and
consequently, from the being the Author of man's sin? and it is as certain, that
for the same reason, Durandus rejects not only the notion of the Dominican, but
also that of the Molinist, insisting only on a Remote, or mediate concourse of
the first cause with the second, espousing that old Dogma of Origin, and the
Pelagians, as Bellarmine asserts de Great. and Lib. Arb. l. 4. c. 4. 'Quidam
enim docuerunt, posse homines, ut etiam res caeteras, opera sua efficere sine
ullo Dei auxilio, sive generali sive speciali. Ita videtur sensisse Origines in
lib. 3. de principiis, ut annotavit S. Thomas lib. 3. contra Gentiles c. 89.
ita etiam senserunt Pelagiani, test S. Hieronymo in Epist. ad Ctesiphontem,
and lib. 1. adv^ Pelag. ita sensit ex Scholasticis Theologis Durandus in 2.
Sent. did. 1. q. 5. and did. 37.1.' Whence it appears, that Durandus was not
the Author of this Pelagian Hypothesis; Mention being made of it long before
him, even by the Master of the Sentences, Albertus, Henricus, and others, yea,
and by S. Austin de Genesis ad lit. t. 5. c. 20. as I find in Malderus in 12.
Thorn. q. 79. dub. 2. 'Meminit hujus sententiae Magister, Albertus Henricus and
alii, sunt enim (inquit Aug.) qui arbitrantur tantummodo mundum ipsum factum a
Deo, caetera jam fieri ab ipso mundo, sicut ille ordinavit and jussit, Deum
autem ipsum nihil operari:' These things being so, I shall no sooner be able to
evince the Physical Predeterminant to be one who is so far from casting man
under a Physical necessity of sinning, as to conclude, his destruction to be of
himself, but this following truth will appear in its splendour, viz. That such
is the Infiniteness of Free Grace toward all, that whoever is for sin
condemned to eternal flames, is so most Righteously, after the abuse of much
patience, and forbearing Love.

In order then, to a more clear, and convincing procedure, it must be observed,

1. That the Dominican acknowledge the second cause to be in a proper sense a
cause, and consequently, Man the proper, though not the Solitary Efficient of
his own actions: Herein do the Dominicans differ from Peter de Aliaco and
Gabriel his follower, as Molina himself asserts in 1 m. Thom. q. 14. Art. 13.
Disp. 5. ' Gabriel (inquit Molina) in 4. did. q. 1. Art. 1. and Art. 3. dub 2.
and 3. secutus Petrum de Aliaco, in ea est sententia, ut dicat Causas secundas
nihil omnino operari, sed Deum in illis, atque ad earum praesentiam se solo,
producere omnes effectus, unde Dub. 3. Citato, ait, Causas secundas non proprie
esse causas, quasi influunt in effectum -- Causas vero secundas, dicit
appellari Causas sine quibus non, quatenus constitutum habet Deus ad earum
praesentiam producere effectus;' which opinion of Peter de Aliaco differs not
from that of the Sectators of Mahomet; as Bellarmine out of Thom. in q. 3. de
potentia, art. 7. does declare. The clearness then of this Truth is such, that,
should I enter on an enumerating, the many Authorities, which may be easily
produced for the evincing it to be the sense of the Dominicans, viz. that the
second cause is suo genere a proper cause, and that, man, notwithstanding that
Physical Efficient predetermination, that does premove him to those actions he
performs, is suarum actionum Dominus, doing what he does most Freely, time
would fail me; and since, the great contest is, rather about the
Reconcilableness of these points, than about the Dominicans avouching them,
it is become unnecessary: I will therefore proceed to a 2d. thing.

2. The Dominicans do also distinguish between the materiale, and formale
peccati, and assert, that Physical predetermination has a causal influence
only on the materiale, q. d. The Materiale seu Substratum peccati est a Deo
tanquam a Causa prima, which is but according to the general sentiment of the
Schoolmen, as Mar. Scrib. does particularly evince, by which they clear God
from being the Author of sin. The Materiale, seu actio quatenus actio, being
quid physicum as such, is ens reale, and consequently, since ens and bonum
convertuntur, it is somewhat good, and a Deo; for, omne ens est, aut primum, aut
a primo ortum. Thus Gabriel and Richard in 2 did. 37. q. 1. (as Scribonius at
large in Pantal. in Cos. de pec. actuali, dis. 18. q. 4.) 'asserunt Deum non
esse causam malitiae peccati, quae consequitur actum positivum; quia quilibet
actus peccati, potest esse sine malitia; and exemplum potest esse in odio Dei,
quod, quamvis maxim omnium videatur conjunctum cum malitia, potest tamen esse
sine illa -- and ideo, licet Deus concurrat in omnem actum, non tamen concurrit
in actus malitiam.' Yea, Sotus li. 1. de not. and Great. c. 18. and Canus lib.
2. de locis c. 4. and in lect. de Sacram. p. 4. etc. -- 'dicunt, quod licet
Deus concurrat ad actum peccati secundum rationem, and substantiam operis, non
tamen dicit causam peccati secundum formalem rationem culpae. Sunt enim,
inquiunt, Duo causarum genera, alterum causae naturalis, quales sunt omnes
causae Physicae, alterum causae moralis, qualis est ille, qui monet, imperat
and consulit. Cum igitur Deus concurrat cum nostra voluntate ad actum Peccati,
per modum Causae naturalis, non moralis, nulla ratione potest dici Causa
Peccati, non enim monet, suadet, consulit ad peccatum, sed solum ad Actum, qui,
si naturaliter sumatur, vitiosus non est, sed solum prout moraliter, quia Culpa
secundum rationem Culpae, non a Causa naturali, sed a morali procedit.'

The like Anselm l. de concord praesc. praedest. Great. and Lib. Arb. c. 1.
'Facit, inquit, Deus omnia, quae justa, vel injusta voluntate fiunt, (i.e.)
opera bona, and mala. In bonis enim facit quod sunt, and quod bona sunt; in
malis facit quod sunt, non quod mala sunt.' So he is quoted by Bellarmine de
Great. and Lib. Arb. l. 4. c. 4.

Thus, they distinguish between the Materiale and the Formale of sin: which
distinction once granted, and added to the foregoing assertion about man's being
a proper cause of his own action, the Dominicans will be sufficiently defended
from all the Reproaches cast on their Doctrine, about the making God the Author
of sin; and really, this distinction (although in other words,) is acknowledged
by their adversaries, who say, that the Actus Peccati may be considered as in
genere, in which sense it is quid distinctum a forma specificante, of which God,
the Fons naturae, is the Universal Cause, and what is this actus peccati,
condsidered in genere, but the same with the Materiale: It Is true, if we
consider the action, as a sinful action, and in the action include the
obliquity, that action, as such, is not a Deo; yet in that action, there is the
Act it self distinguishable from the obliquity, which Act is ens Physicum, and
a Deo, thus Bellarmine de amiss. great. and stat. pecc. l. 2. c. 18. 'Actiones
intrinsece nullas malas esse nisi ut sint determinatae in specie; nam entitas
ipsa Odii Dei, si per se consideretur, non est mala sed solum ut est talis
entitas.' Yea and Durandus himself adknowledgeth as much lib. 2. did. 37. Q.
1. which is, Utrum actio peccati secundum quod actio, sit a Deo? which he
affirms, with this reason, 'Quia illud quod non est causa actus, non est causa
effectus producti per actum; sed per actionem peccati aliquid effectus in esse
producuntur: generantur enim homines ex adulteriis. Si ergo talium actionum
Deus non esset causa, per consequens nec hominum, qui his actionibus
generantur, quod est inconveniens.' And thence he concludes, 'Quod Deus est
causa actionis peccati Universalis and prima; for which reason he must
distinguish inter actionem peccati and ipsum peccatum, seu obliquitatem (i.e.)
inter materiale, and formale,' unless the very sin, as to its formality, or
obliquity sit a Deo.

Whence then, according unto the Dominican, the obliquity of a sinful action,
is not from God, but from man; who is a Proper cause of all his own actions;
and who is the sole cause of the obliquity of them, as has been proved.

I confess that great attempts are made for the reproaching this doctrine, and
that the Advantages which some (if not too many) Obscure writers have given, by
insisting on a Physical-Efficient-Praemotion, as the cause of the Individuated
action, as evil, have been great; but if, notwithstanding the unhappiness such
have been guilty of, in expressing themselves so unwarily, they mean no more,
than what I have said concerning the Materiale peccati, etc. I humbly
apprehend, their sense to be defensible; for what more evident than that their
several opposers (as has been proved) acknowledging that God is the cause of
all Being, and of every Action, as such, do seem to grant the whole, these
Moderate Predeterminants, would be thought to assert? However it must be
acknowledged, that the severe and Rigid do assert what is attended with
Insuperable difficulties, the consequences that are said to flow from their
Hypothesis, seeming most grossly absurd. And be it so, Yet

1. Since these, do detest the Dogma of Hobbes, and Spinosa, and with the
greatest indignation, show their abhorrence to all such gross, and blasphemous
absurdities, why may we not charitably conclude, that the confusion, they have
plunged themselves into, is but equal to that of their bold adversaries,
occasioned by a peremptory determining what is too sublime and high, yea, and
what is by finite comprehensions really indeterminable? Consider what the
learned Mr. Baxter in his Cathol. Theolog. part. 1. Sect. 7. has most
excellently evinced in showing, That it is impossible Finite Mortals should
comprehend the modes or media of Divine Knowledge, or of Divine Operations;
whence who-ever enters into a dispute about the controversies between the
Dominicans, Jesuits, etc. cannot but run themselves into such intricate, and
perplexing Niceties, as will, after the utmost attempts, prove dismally
confounding; and therefore what the same Reverend Mr. B. says in the following
Sect. about Foreknowledge is true as to Physical-Predetermination, viz. 'If
any particular manner therefore offer it self to your minds, as that which
probably seems to be the Right, it may afford you reason therefore to
suspect, that it is not the right: Because it is certain, that the manner is
past our reach. And what man can comprehend is infinitely below God.'

This being the Truth; no wonder, if the bold entangle themselves, and by an
unwariness of expression insist on such Notions, as are accompanied with
difficulties most invincible; In order to an escaping which, I humbly apprehend
a consulting that most excellently Treatise of the learned and Judicious Dr.
Burthogge. viz. his Organon novum, may be of great use. For in that little
Tract, there are such Harmonical (which are the most convincing) Arguments, as
cannot but oblige the Discreet Reader to satisfy himself in being modest in his
inquiries about most things, especially about what is so abstruse, since
otherwise looking too near things, instead of obtaining more distinct and full
conceptions, he may be abundantly confounded: There must be a due distance
between the faculty, (as well as the Organ) and its object; for by our looking
too near the Object, we run into the dark, contradicting one another even when
agreed; or if there be a difference, such, as embrace not the one extreme, must
be censured, as Asserters and Abettors of the other; yea, and in the heats of
disputation, many fall into the Error they would oppose: Many instances of each
particular might easily have been produced, but I Will only mention some. As, 1.
Alvarez, who represents Calvin as an opposer of the Dominican opinion, even
when by others the same Calvin is blamed for espousing it. 2. Victorinus by the
learned (but proud) Illyricus is reviled, as if the denial of that strange
error contended for by Simon Musaeus, and himself, had been Pelagianism.
Moreover, 3. In the present dispute, How do the confident, on every side,
discover their weaknesses by falling into the errors they pretend to reject?
Thus the Anti-Dominicans, who despise the Predeterminants distinctions, for
reasons that are as much against their own, and who in forcing strange
consequences from the Dogmata of the Dominican, do themselves entertain Notions
as liable to the same absurdities. How much is said against all those who are
only for an Immediate concourse, not by the Dominican only, but also by the
Durandists, and what is considerable is this, That the Reverend Mr. B. in his
Cathol. Theol. li. 1. part. 3. 4. does argue most unanswerably against them, in
the following words. 'It surpasses my understanding to conceive, what it is
for God Physice influere in actum immediate, and non in potentiam seu virtutem
agentem: Nor how he can be said to move the faculties to act, that does cause
the act, and not meddle with (and therefore not move) the Faculty. Nor know I
how an Act immediately (and not the Agent) can be the terminus of a Physical
Motion.' But since Durandus is the man who seems to have an advantage above all
others, I will instance only in him: whom Bellarmine has proved to assert what
necessarily infer's Deum operari omnia peccata. For says Bellarmine de Great.
and Lib. Arb. l. 4. c. 4. 'Post Pelagium Durandus dicit, Deum omnia operari,
quia virtutes operatrices rebus attribuit. -- But if this should be so,
sequeretur Deum omnia peccata operari, quia dedit homini and Angelo Liberum
Arbitrium, quo peccata omnia fiunt. Et apud Durandu^ id maxim locum haberet,
cum ipse contendat in 2. sentent. did. 44. Potentiam peccati formaliter esse a
Deo.'

Thus the learned may impose on each others infirmities ad infinitum, to the
great dishonor of God and of his truths. Oh! what reason then have we to be
cautelous in our expressions concerning these matters! for, what we speak,
since it so nearly concerns the Glory of that God, who is clothed with terrible
Majesty, and whose name is a Great and a Dreadful Name, we should do it with
Fear and Trembling; with an humble modesty, dreading the thoughts of being bold
in any determinations, about what is so incomprehensible in it self, and so
infinitely above the largest create capacity. But what is further of weight
with me is this, viz.

2. That these very things, have been bandied amongst the learned of all ages,
not only by the Antichristian (I had almost said the Irreligious and Trifling)
Schoolmen; but also by the Jewish Rabbines and Heathen Philosophers, who spent
much time in these unsearchably deep mysteries, to no accountable advantage;
can we then hope to explicate what by woeful experience has been found
inexplicable from the beginning. But,

1. As touching the Jews, whoever consults Rabbi Moses Ben Majemon in his more
Nevoch. part. 3. c. 17. as translated by Buxtorf. Fill. may see, that as there
are the Dominicans, Molinists, and others amongst the Schoolmen; even so,
amongst them, there were, not only some who followed Epicurus, but also some of
the Judgment of Aristotle, qui credunt, quarundam rerum esse providentiam, ita
ut ab aliquo regantur and dirigantur; quaedam vero derelicta, and fortunae esse
exposita. But others contrary unto these, assert, 'omnia esse ex certa
voluntate, intention, and gubernatione. Haec sententia est Sectae Assariae
inter Ismaelitas, and sequuntur eam inconvenientia and absurda multa: Tollitur
secundum eam natura possibilium, quod omnia sunt vel necessaria, vel
impossibilia. Insuper sequitur, nihil quicquam prodesse leges. etc. Quarta
sententia est eorum qui statuunt, Hominem potestatem vel facultatem aliquam
habere, etc. Et in hac sententia est Secta Muatzali, licet potestatem homini
absolutam non tribuant. Ex hac quoque sententia, absurda and contradictoria
multa sequuntur.' And then he comes unto the last, which, he says, is
according to their Law, which is, Quod homo per naturam, Arbitrium, and
voluntatem suam faciat, quicquid homo facere potest. Thus they presuming too
much on sacred mysteries, as some, came near unto the Truth, others, as far
from it, but all in an heat, insisting on the absurdities of each others
opinions.

2. The heathen Philosophers, were entangled with the same perplexities,
contradicting each other. So Cicero de Fato, who says that some of ^he Old
Philosophers. 'censerent omnia ita fato fieri, ut id fatum vim necessitatis
afferret. In qua sententia Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Aristoteles
fuit: altera sententia eorum, quibus viderentur sine ullo fato esse animorum
motus voluntarii;' but Chrysippus, the chief of the Stoics, would walk in
medio, 'tanquam arbiter honorarius, medium se far voluisse: Sed applicat se
ad eos potius, qui necessitate motus animos liberatos volunt. Dum autem verbis
utitur suis, delabitur in eas difficultates, ut necessitatem Fati confirmet
invitus.' But I humbly conceive that this Chrysippus, and all the Stoics his
sectators, had a glimpse of this doctrine about Physical Predetermination,
which, they concluded to be necessarily inferred, from that other about
Prescience, as may be easily evinced out of Cicero de divinatione, where their
notion de Fato is explained thus, ' Fatum autem id appello, quod Graeci (...)
(i.e.) ordinem, seriemque causarum, cum causa causae nexa rem ex se gignat, Ea
est ex omni aeternitate fluens veritas sempiterna. Quod cum ita sit, nihil est
factum, quod non futurum fuerit^ codemque modo nihil est futurum cujus no^
causas id ipsum efficientes, natura contineat. Ex quo intelligitur, ut fatum
sit non id quod superstitiose, sed id quod Physice dicitur, Caus^ aeterna
rerum, Cur and ea, quae praeterierunt, fact^ sint, and quae instant, fiant, and
quae sequuntur, futura sint.' etc. -- Whence they consider the Doctrine de
Divinatione, and de Fato, to be a^ 'twere inseparable, the former necessarily
i^ferring the latter; for in their judgment, nothin^ can be Foreknown, but what
has a Natural Anteceding cause. This concluded by the Stoics, they are
plunged into as many an intricate perplexity, as are our Physical
Predeterminants; some asserting this to be a dogma attended with the same
absurd consequences, that of Democritus, etc. is viz. that it introduces a
necessity on humane actions; 'At qui introducunt causarum seriem sempiternam,
ij mentem hominis voluntate libera spoliatam necessitate fati devinciunt.' But
Chrysippus, has his distinctions to clear himself from such smart censures, as
is to be seen in Cicero de Fato, Where you will find him to conclude thus: 'Non
enim si alii ad alia sint propensiores propter causas naturales, and
antecedentes, idcirco etiam nostrarum voluntatum, atque appetitionum, sunt
causae naturales and antecedentes, nam nihil esset in nostra potestate, ^si res
ita se haberet,' q. d. Physical predetermination does not infer a Physical
necessity on humane actions, whence Chrysippus, cum and necessitatem
improbaret, and nihil vellet sine praepositis causis evenire, causarum genera
distinguit, ut and necessitatem effugiat, and retineat fatum. His distinction
is this. Causarum aliae sumt perfectae and principales, aliae adjuvantes, and
proximae: And concedes, that if the causae antecedentes had been perfectae and
principales, Humane Liberty had been destroyed, but since they are but
adjuvantes and proximae, it is not so: But they are mightily confounded.
Diodorus contradicting Chrysippus, asserting nothing to be possible, but what
is necessary and future: Carneades insisting on a distinction inter causas
fortuito antegressas, and inter causas cohibentes in se efficientiam naturalem,
and others arguing against both prescience and predetermination, as what is
impossible. In the apprehension of some the one introduces the other; and
again, it is urged, as if one destroyed the other. In Cicero de divin. l. 2.
it is thus disputed;

1. Praesensio seu praedictio [or if you will praescientia] non est earum rerum
quae sunt fortuitae: For, 'Nihil est tam contrarium rationi, and constantiae,
quam fortuna; ut mihi ne in Deum quidem cadere videatur,' ut sciat quid casu,
and fortuito futurum sit; si enim scit, certo illud eveniet; sin certe eveniet
-- rerum igitur fortuitarum nulla est praesensio, [q.d.nulla praescientia.]
'Aut si negas esse fortunam and omnia quae fiunt,' quaeque futura sint, ex omni
aeternitate definita dicis esse fataliter; muta definitionem Divinationis, quam
dicebas esse praesensionem rerum fortuitarum, to which I may agreeably enough
add [rerum contingentium.] But on the contrary;

2. Praesensio [seu praescientia] non est rerum futurarum: 'Nam si fato omnia
fiant, nihil nos d monere potest, ut cautiores simus; quoquo enim modo nos
gesserimus, fiet tamen illud quod futurum est; sin autem id potest flecti,
nullum est fatum, ita nec Divinatio [seu Praescientia] quidem, quoniam ea rerum
futurarum est. Nihil autem est pro certo futurum, quod potest aliqua
procuratione accidere ne fiat. Si enim nihil sit extra Fatum, nihil levari re
Divina potest.'

Thus many an hundred years have been spent in these inquiries, by such as have
been both too curious and confident; and what was the fruit of all their
labors, but in some, confusion and much torment; in others, viz. the more
judicious and sober, just light enough to see their Ignorance, and the truth of
this, viz. that there was a Providence, a Fate; which in Laertius his Zeno is
Ratio per quam mundus administratur; and that notwithstanding this Fate or
Providence, man was not so divested of his rational liberty, as to be by force
compelled to a violation of the Laws. From all which, I thus argue. That either
we must be modest in our inquiry after these things; or give our weak
understandings the liberty of raveling into the whole of this Labyrinth; If the
Second, then there remains nothing but obscurity, confusion and torment, if
not, through rashness, much error, and our time spent in contradicting,
reviling, and severely censuring each other ad infinitum: But if the First, if
we must be modest, then surely, enough may be said even in favor of the
Dominicans, to show, that Physical Predetermination, as Prescience, does but
infer, a Logical necessity, which necessity is consistent enough, in the
judgment of all, with Humane Liberty. The product of all which will be this,
viz. That such are the transactions of God with men, so infinitely wise, so
Just, so Equal, so Holy, and yet so merciful and Gracious, that none, no not
those who are to be condemned unto Eternal Misery, will have one word to offer
against God.

Oh! How Infinite is the Freeness of his Grace!

Thus, I have further shown, the Grace of God to be so infinitely glorious,
that there is nothing in those profound points about Predetermination, etc. --
when modestly asserted, that can in the least blemish it; I say, when modestly
asserted, because such as are too confident, and peremptory in their
determinations about this point, which is as dark and as mysterious as any in
the whole body of Divinity, may suddenly break the bounds, and come too near
the Mount to their own hurt.

For although a Predetermination is most clearly Revealed in Scripture, yet
whether by a Physical efficient-praemotion to this sinful action, rather than
to that, is not so obvious. A praedetermination there is; but whether St.
Austin, Prosper and Fulgentius had not righter apprehensions of it, than the
Dominicans, who differ from St. Austin in several respects as Jansenius in his
Augustinus de Great. Christ. Salvat. lib. 8. c. 1. etc. -- has unanswerably
proved, is no impertinent Quaery.

But without any further determination of these incomprehensible difficulties,
as I have begun, so I Will end both this Chapter and Treatise with most necessary
and concerning truths, which as they are so self-evident as to be known to the
Heathen, in like manner they are such as add to the illustrating Free Grace.

1. That, Although God is the great Orderer and Disposer of all things, the
Author, and conserver of all beings, and has eternally predetermined, and
foreordained all things that come to pass in time; yet man is not hereby
Physically necessitated to any sin, but does what he does most freely, and
therefore, must not complain on God, nor neglect the performance of Holy duties
unto him.

1. Man's Liberty is not destroyed by Predetermination; so Seneca Nature. Quaest.
l. 2. c. 38. ' Ista nobis opponi solent, ut probetur nihil voluntati nostrae
relictum, and omne jus fato traditum. Cum de ista re agitur, dicam,
quemadmodum, manente fato, aliquid sit in hominis arbitrio' etc. --

2. Men must not complain on God, as if they had been compelled to sin: So
Chrysippus in A. Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 6. c. 2. 'Propterea Negat oportere
ferri, audirique homines aut nequam aut ignavos and nocentes and audaces; qui
cum in culpa, and in maleficio revicti sunt, perfugiunt ad Fati necessitatem,
tanquam in aliquod Fati asylum; and quae pessime fecerunt, ea non suae
temeritati, sed fato esse attribuenda dicunt.'

3. We ought not to neglect duty, notwithstanding this Predetermination, but
must Pray, and use such means, as are suited to the obtaining the desired end.
So Seneca ubi supra c. 37. 'nos quoque existimamus vota proficere, salva vi ac
potestate fatorum; quaedam enim a Diis immortalibus ita suspensa relicta sunt
ut in bonum vertant, si admotae Diis preces fuerint; si vota suscepta. Ita non
est hoc contra fatum, sed ipsum quoque in Fato est.'

'Aut futurum, inquit, est, aut non. Si futurum est, etiam si non susceperis
vota, fiet: Si non est futurum, etiam si susceperis vota, non fiet: Falsa est
illa interrogatio; quia mediam illam inter ista exceptionem praeteris. Futurum,
inquam, hoc est, sed si vota suscepta fuerint.' So Cicero, de fato. 'Sic enim
interrogant: Si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo convalescere; sive medicum
adhibueris, sive non, convalesces. Item si fatum tibi est, ex hoc morbo non
convalescere: sive tu medicum adhibueris, sive non, non convalesces: and
Alterutrum fatum est; medicum ergo adhibere nihil attinet. Rect^ genus hoc
interrogationis ignavum atque (...), nominatum est, quod eadem ratione, omn^ e
vita tolletur actio. But to the Second self-evident proposition."

2. That although we cannot fully comprehend HOW these things are reconcilable;
yet we have the greatest reason imaginable, to conclude, that they are most
true; yea, and capable of a Reconciliation: What is not possible with men, is
possible with God; Gods works do bear the characters of Divinity on them, and
consequently it is become impossible, that any Finite wight, should have any
adaequate conceptions of them; We must be satisfied, that we know, what is,
though we cannot comprehend How it is.

For the confirming this, consider what is said by Lactantius de Orig. er. l.
2. c. 9. "Adeo nefas existimandum est, ea scrutari quae Deus voluit esse
celata. -- Quasi vero ex hoc putandum sit, non esse haec divinitus facta, quia
quo modo facta sunt, non potest pervideri -- Opera ipsius videntur oculis:
Quomodo autem illa fecerit, ne mente quidem videtur: quia (ut Hermes ait)
mortale immortali, temporale perpetuo, and corruptibile incorrupto propinquare
non potest, id est propius accedere, and intelligentia subsequi. -- Denique,
cum aperiret homini veritatem Deus, ca sola scire nos voluit, quae interfuit
hominem scire ad vitam consequendam; quae vero ad curiosam and profanam
cupiditatem pertinebant, reticuit, ut arcana essent. Quid ergo quaeris, quae
nec potes scire, nec si scias, beatior fias? perfecta est in homine sapientia,
si and Deum esse unum, and ab ipso esse facta universa cognoscat. So Cicero de
divinat. l. 1. Hoc sum contentus, quod etiamsi Quomodo quidque fiat ignorem,
Quid fiat, intelligo -- sic ventorum and Imbrium signa, quae dixi, rationem
quam habeant, non satis perspicio: vim and eventum agnosco, scio, approbo.
Again, Quid quaeris, Carneades, cur haec ita fiant, aut qua art perspici
possent? nescire me fateor: evenire autem, teipsum dico videre. -- Quae est
igitur ista calliditas, res vetustate robustas calumniando velle pervertere?
Non reperio causam, Latet fortasse obscuritate involuta naturae. Non enim me
Deus ista scire, sed his tantummodo uti voluit. Utar igitur," etc.

From these two acknowledged Truths there ^oth naturally flow this other. viz.

3. That none more Judicious and wise, none more sober and modest, none more
regardful of the Dread Majesty of God, than those who, on the strict est
inquiry after these things, profess, that what concerns God, so immediately, as
these profound Doctrines about the modes, and media of Divine operations, being
infinitely beyond us, are more meet for our humble admiration, than proud
determination. Placeus is to be applauded, who says tract. de lib. arb. (as I
find in Le blank de council. Arb. Hum. cum div. concurs. ad These. 52.) Nos
quidem Qua Reverentia erga Infinitam Dei Majestatem ducimur, non Audemus
definire quanta sit dependentia causae secundae a prima. Nobis sufficit, modo
ne Deo ullam peccatorum nostrorum, vel minimam labem aspergat, non posse Nimiam
statui. So Le Blank himself, ubi supra. these. 55,58,59. "Quantum ad me attinet,
horumce Doctissimorum virorum modestiam maxim laudandam censeo: and modum
Divini concursus, quo cum causis secundis prima cooperatur, pro certo definire
temerarium mihi and nimium audax videtur, quum ingenii nostri tenuitas divinae
potentiae and sapientiae abyssum penetrare and scrutari non valeat, nec ea res
sit satis ratione percepta, aut sat distinct in sacra Scriptura Revelata,"
etc. -- Yea, and before them the same was the sense of the Judicious, as I find
in Pet. Tartaret. Reportata, in senten. etc. "Tota materia praedestinationis
tangit mysterium imperscrutabile intellectui humano. Nam ad Roman. 11. Exclamat
Paulus, O altitudo etc. Ne igitur scrutando, de profundo in profundum eatur, ut
dicit Magister," etc.

Thus I have gone thorough the Province, I engaged in, and have in some
measure, made a Display of this Glorious Grace. I have shown, That the Election
of some unto Grace, and Glory, even when others are passed by, but left as self
condemned wretches, is of Grace. That the Covenant transaction, between the
Father and the Son from all Eternity, considered in its particulars, adds light
unto this profound mystery: That God the Son should assume humane nature, and
in that nature, lie under both the Guilt and punishment of sin is admirable;
and that the Righteousness of Christ should be given the elect believer in
order to his actual entrance into to Glories of God is no less surprising. That
Grace is offered all, and although rejected by all, yet actually given some, in
such circumstances that the honor of all Gods other attributes is set forth
with the greater Luster, is also of Grace. In the doing all which, to the end,
I might, according to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, Vindicate God, from
those blasphemous, and unworthy abuses are cast on his pure Majesty by the
Antinomian; I have proved, that no spot of sin was ever on the Lord Christ, He
never was stained with the filth of any evil, neither are the Elect sanctified
by an imparting or an imputing the subjective Intrinsecal Holiness of Christ
unto them; nor, are they actually justified in God's sight, while under the
pravalcncy of unbelief: Moreover, in opposition to the Arminian, I have
evinced, That God, in giving Grace unto the Elect, converts them by the
Irresistible power of his Holy Spirit, which, although so necessary to our
conversion, that none are savingly engaged to believe in Christ without it, yet
does it not lay man under any unnatural violence, but sweetly draws him unto
our blessed Jesus. Whence it follows that although man's destruction is of
himself, his conversion and Salvation is wholly of Free Grace. And in fine,
that no Debauchee or Atheist may have the least pretense for the abuses he may
cast on God, as if there had been any want of Grace in him, I have proved that
the Dominican Hypothesis, which seems most liable to exception, if modestly (
i.e. Judiciously) looked into, will appear to be Defensible against those
reproaches are cast on it: It being most evident, that although God is both our
Creator, and Preserver, He, in whom we live, move, and have our being, yet does
he not lay man under a Physical necessity of sinning, for man's sin is from
himself; as is asserted by the Stoics themselves; which being so, I will only
add this Caution, viz. That, although, the Grace of God is so infinitely
extended, (as has been fully proved) yet it is a sin to expect the being made a
partaker of the special instances thereof, unless we sincerely repent; It Is the
Believing, Repenting, Humbled sinner, that is the proper object of this
Glorious Grace. Despise not then this Grace, by continuing in thy sin; for, as
there are mercies with the Lord, it is, that he should be feared: Despisest thou
the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not knowing
that the Goodness of God leads to Repentance? Remember then that if
Free Grace leads thee not to Repentance, thou do but treasure up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous judgment
of God.

Think on these things seriously, and by an Holy, Humble life give God the
Glory of all this Grace.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
SInce the preceding Discourse has been finished, I have had the advantages of
such Remarks on some Particulars therein contained, as do call for a fuller
Explanation of my thoughts concerning them; for which Reason, I must presume on
the Candor of the Reader, in adding this following Appendix.

1. I have insisted much on the distinction there is between the Sin itself,
and the Guilt of the Fault, which some think to be but one, and the same thing;
for Reatus, being a Re, it does intimate, that the being guilty of Sin, imports
no more than that he is a Real Sinner, (i.e.) has really sinned, or broken the
Law; whereas I humbly conceive, it does moreover import a liableness to
Punishment for Sin: But that I may be the more full in the discovering my
thoughts, it will be proper to consider,

1. The Impo^t of the word Guilt, which in Latin is Reatus, a word not very
ancient; for, say the Learned, "Dictio Reatus Ciceroni and aliis antiquis
inusitata, primum a M. Messala conficta, ut Fabius author est lib. 8." So
Schard. But how novel soever this word is, yet, among the Romans it signified
the quality, and state of the Accused; which was represented to be sad and
disimal, by the poor, filthy, squalid garments the accused did wear, yea, and
by Hair and Beards undressed, " Reatus, status, and conditio Reorum, (h.e.) ut
Budaeus ait, Habitus demissus, pannosus, squalidus, and misericordiae
aucupator," whence Martial. lib. 2. Epigram. Si det iniqua tibi tristem fortuna
reatum
Squalidus haerebo pallidiorque Reo.
The like may be concluded from what is mentioned by Pliny, lib. 7. ad Suram.
And also by Aul. Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 3. c. 4.] All which was done, thereby
to engage the Judges to a more compassionate procedure, they being anciently
considered as Guilty, as soon as Accused, and consequently, before it appeared,
that the Fault, of which they were Accused, was Really committed by them,
whence although Reus sit a Re, it is not as if the person had been denominated
Guilty merely because he had really done the Fact; but he is said to Reus a Re,
quae ab eo petitur, whence the guilty person is one, qui defendit, and
propulsat actionem, vel accusationem; yea, and consequently he may be guilty,
although he did never really commit the Fault; for to be Accused is to be
guilty. For this consult Dr. Owen of Justification.

Again, to be guilty, according to the Ancients, is taken yet more largely, as
appears out of Cicero de Orator. lib. 2. who was well acquainted with the word
Reus, although not so with Reatus; and who says, " Reos autem appello, non eos
modo qui arguuntur, sed omnes quorum de re disceptatur: sic enim olim
loquebantur:" And agreeably hereunto Aelius Gallus lib. de signif. verb. ad jus
pertinentium, Reum definit, qui cum altero litem contestatam habet, sive is
agat, sive cum eo agatur, so Schard. Whence although it be sometimes used for
the Crime itself, and again for the punishment inflicted for such a Crime, yet,
it is certainly somewhat distinct, both from the Crime, and the Punishment; yea,
so distinct from the Crime, that, as one, who never committed a Crime, may in
the sense of the Ancients be guilty; even so, 'twas a wonder to some, that any
should conclude the Crime and the Guilt to be the same; for Speigelius, yea,
Schardius and Kakl. on the word Reatus do agree in this, take the words of the
last, Quapropter omnino falluntur scriptores post Accursium existimantes, Juris
consultos Reatus verbum pro Crimine usurpari, eorumque sententia refutatur per
l. 3.. quod patet F. de mun. and honor. Non enim Crimen sed habitum illud
pannosum, statumque demissum significat. l. fin. F. ad leg. etc. Moreover,

2. If we consider the use of the word, as it does presuppose a crime, for
which reason, to say such an one is guilty, is as if it had been said, he has
done the Fact; yet guilt, as such, is somewhat distinct from the Crime, whence
although the learned in the exercise of their freedom, may use the word Reatus
diversely, yet it is absolutely necessary, that we consider the word Guilt, as
expressive of somewhat distinct from the Fault itself, or that some other word
that is as meet, or more so, be insisted on for such an End: For what more
evident, than that as the doing this or the other thing contrary to the
preceptive part of the Law is sin, even so, from this sin, as it regards the
retributive part of the same Law, there results a liableness to punishment, an
obnoxiousness thereunto, which liableness being but the result of the sin, is
not the sin itself, it is only somewhat resulting from sin, as it regards the
penal part of the Law, which is the thing the learned generally mean by Guilt;
and if not fitly enough expressed by Guilt, or by Reatus, by what English or
Latin term can it be better made known? It Is a liableness, or an obnoxiousness
unto punishment: To be Guilty, is (...), q. d (...), qui reus est poenae a
Judice definitae, or proprie obnoxious e re judicata, obnoxious to the
punishment for some fault, which as it is a liableness unto punishment, may be
called Reatus poenae, but as it is such a liableness propter culpam, it may be
called Reatus culpae; But if any of the learned will say, that there is 1.
Reatus Facti. 2. Reatus Culpae. And 3. Reatus Poenae, distinct from each other,
and mean 1. That the Fact is done. 2. That this Fact is a breach of the Law. 3.
That he that did this Fact is by the Law to be punished; since by Reatus
culpae, as much seems to be intended as the sin itself, the breach of the Law,
although such learned persons may use their own freedom, yet it must be duly
remembered that in their sense, I do not assert, That Reatus Culpae, (i.e.) the
sin itself formally considered, is laid on Christ; but the Reatus Culpae,
(i.e.) the Guilt, which is somewhat distinct, and separable from the Fault
itself, is laid on Christ; for, I understand by Guilt (call it Guilt of Fault,
or Punishment) an obnoxiousness unto wrath for some fault, which is somewhat
distinct from the fault itself. But moreover,

3. That Guilt, I mean the Guilt of the Fault, is distinct from the Fault
itself, is evident, in that it may be on such as never really committed the
actual sin, or did the fault, for thus it was with reference unto the guilt of
Adam's sin, which is really the Guilt of his Posterity, who are such as have
not actually, and in a proper sense really sinned. We did not actually sin in
Adam, and yet the guilt of his actual sin is so much ours, that we are justly
punished for it: What more evident than that the corruption of nature, which we
receive with our Beings, is penal, a just punishment, which necessarily
presupposes Guilt, which Guilt must be the result of some anteceding sin, but
since it is impossible it should be the result of any sin that has been really,
and in a proper sense actually committed by us, it must be for the sin of our
first Parent; which being so, it follows,

1. That there may be real Guilt on him, who has not really, in a proper sense
sinned, and therefore to say He is guilty, is not as much as to say, He has
really committed the fault.

2. That the Guilt of the Fault, or a liableness to punishment for sin may be
on him, in whom the actual sin, the foundation of that Guilt is not: For it
must be acknowledged, that it is naturally impossible, that Adam's actual sin
should pass from him to us, and yet nothing more true than that the guilt of
the same actual sin is made our guilt, and we are as liable to punishment in
the eye of God, the righteous Judge, as if we had actually, and in a proper
sense committed the sin.

3. That the guilt of our sin, the guilt of our fault, which I humbly conceive
is best expressed by the Latin Reatus Culpae, may pass from us to Christ, even
when the sin, or fault itself does not, or rather cannot.

4. The reason, why I so much insist on this distinction between the formal
nature of sin, and guilt, is, because of that light, we may thereby receive in
order to our clearer comprehending the fundamental mistakes of the Papists
about Justifcation, who sometime insisting on guilt, as the formal nature of
sin, understand by remission of sin, the Mortification thereof, and by
Justification, Sanctification. Whence we may perceive, on what ground that
Reverend Bishop Dr. Usher told a person of great worth and learning, from whom
I had it, That the Papists did not hold any such thing as the pardon of sin,
distinct from the mortification of sin, (if I mistake not.) For if the guilt be
the same with the sin itself, remittere peccatum, or the removing guilt can be
but the destroying the formal nature of sin, the sin itself, and consequently
pardon of sin the same with mortification. Again, the Papists, considering
guilt as the Formale Peccati, do with the greatest confidence conclude, that
Concupiscence being pardoned in the Regenerate, the guilt thereof removed, the
formal nature thereof is gone, and it is no more formally sin in them. But
since, the sin formally considered is somewhat distinct from the guilt thereof,
(as I have proved in the preceding discourse) the ground of these Popish
mistakes is detected; and that which follows is a great Truth insisted on, viz.
The difference there is between Holiness and Righteousness; for as sin regards
the preceptive part of the Law, even so does Holiness; the former being a
disconformity, the latter a conformity thereunto: And as the immediate result
of sin with reference to the retributive part of the Law is Unrighteousness,
even so contrarily the immediate result of Holiness is Righteousness: the one
Dignitas poenae propter inobedientiam, the other Dignitas praemii propter
obedientiam; for contrariorum eadem est ratio: Which being so, we easily may
see how our sin is imputed unto Christ in its guilt, even when sin formally
considered is not laid on him. Yea, and how Christ's obedience is made ours in
its Righteousness, when the formal, subjective Holiness of Christ is not.

2. I have introduced Maeratius as one, who distinguishes inter Reatum culpae
and poenae, though I have not, as yet, found him to be express in his doing so;
but, the reason, which prompted me to single out this Schoolman, is his
distinguishing inter dignitatem poenae, and obligationem ad poenam, which is
the same that Bellarmine intends by the Guilt of the Fault, and that of the
Punishment.

3. In order to a fuller vindicating the Dominicans, I humbly conceive it
necessary to suggest, that they, in their opposing Peter de Aliaco, who judged
the second cause to be no proper cause, [it not being the fire that burns, but
God in the fire, etc.] do assert the second cause to be a proper, though not a
solitary cause. This I prove out of Molina himself, who, although he is no way
a lover of the Dominican Dogmata; yet does assert, that Aquinas the great
Physical Predeterminant, does regard the notion of Pet. de Aliaco as foolish,
and as what contradicts a general experience, and our common sense, it being
more absurd than the Notion of Antonius Cordubensis and Abailardus, that is
followed by some of the Nominals, to which Scotus (as Molina says) gave too
great countenance, even when it cannot be said that the Physical
Predeterminants did so. Molina in primum Th. q. 14. Art. 13. dis. 1,2,3, etc.

4. In this last Chapter I have also insisted on the report the Schoolmen make
of things, showing into what Passions an espoused interest did anciently drive
men. For Bellarmine asserts Durandus to have been a Follower of Pelagius, but
how truly, let the learned judge; for, although I have mentioned it, I think my
self no way obliged to believe it. Again, the same Bellarmine does prove, that
Durandus himself makes God to be the Author of Sin; but if so, how is it
possible that what Le Blanc says should be true, when he asserts it to be the
sense of all, that if Durandus be in the right, as to this point, there will be
no difficulty in clearing God from the but-now-mentioned reproach: But what is
the more surprising is this, That Bellarmine hereby does but revile his own
Notion, if the learned Mr. Baxter (who is well acquainted with the Schoolmen)
does not mistake; "For, says he, I do verily believe that Durandus and his
Followers, under the name of supporting the Natural, and Free Faculties did
mean inclusively, that which Bellarmine pleads for, A general concourse to
the Act as an Act. And that they differ in words, not in sense." Thus the
Learned spend their time in contradicting themselves as well as one another.

5. I have moreover insisted on the different apprehensions the old
Philosophers entertain concerning those insuperable difficulties that are about
Predetermination, etc. thereby to intimate, that the confident Schoolmen, and
their several Sectators, do but actum agere, and consume their strength on
needless Controversies, to the great disadvantage of true Religion. These
acting in Divinity, as our Virtuosi do in Philosophy, who, by a zealous attempt
to establish their new dogmata (as they call them) do not walk in any untrodden
paths; The Copernican Hypothesis about the motion of the Earth, as also the
learned Fancies about the Earth, and Inhabitants that are said to be in the
Moon, as well as that solid Truth about the Antipodes, so much reproached by
Lactantius, were all known in Cicero's, if not in Plato's, or Pythagoras's
days. For this, consult Cicero. Quaest. Acad. l. 2. "Habitari ait Xenophanes
in Luna, eamque esse terram multarum urbium, and montium. Portenta videntur:
sed tamen neque ille qui dixit jurare posset ita se rem habere, neque ego.
Nonne etiam dicitis, esse e regione nobis, e contraria part terrae, qui
adversis vestigiis stent contra vestigia nostra, quos Antipodas vocatis? Cur
mihi magis succensetis, qui ista non aspernor, quam eis, qui quum audiunt,
desipere vos arbitrantur? Nicetas Syracusius, ut ait Theophrastus, Coelum,
Solemn, Lunam, Stellas, supera denique omnia stare censet, neque praeter terram
rem ullam in mundo moveri: quae cum circum axem se summa celeritate convertat,
and torqueat, eadem effici omnia, quae si stante terra, Coelum moveretur. Atque
hoc etiam Platonem in Timaeo dicere quidam arbitrantur, sed paulo obscurius."

Thus both our New Philosophers, and the Old Schoolmen, do but trace the
Ancient Heathen in their particular Fancies, concerning things not only
unreveal'd, but moreover, too high for vain Mortals to reach unto. The New
Philosophers confidently solve, as they say, the insolvable Phenomenon in the
Natural world; and the Schoolmen with no less boldness overcome (at least in
their own conceit) the invincible difficulties in the Moral. The New
Philosophers can (if you will believe 'em) acquaint you with the particular
methods of God in creating and conserving all Beings, showing How, or after
what particular manner every natural effect is produced; and the Schoolmen are
as express in demonstrating the particular modes of Divine concourse, not only
unto every good, but also unto every sinful Action; though still it must be
asserted, that the difficulties which occur unto both in these attempts, are
most certainly incapable of a clear, distinct, and satisfying Solution; for
which reason the vanity of each in their Essays, is equally to be neglected;
for the Schoolmen are as vain, and consequently as liable unto just rebukes, as
are the New Philosophers; Do the New Philosophers revive the old Dogmata of the
Heathen? so do the Schoolmen: Do the New Philosophers disturb the world with
their learned Folly? so do the Schoolmen. And must the New Philosopher be
severely checked for his Presumption in Philosophy? then surely, much more so
must the Schoolman for his greater confidence in Divinity. For, might Divinity
be freed from the perplexing abuses of these Schoolmen, as every other
Doctrine, even so this of Free Grace in all the great instances thereof, would
suddenly appear to the view of the Vulgar, affording them the most satisfying
comforts and spiritual advantages desirable.

6. In the Close of all, 'twill be necessary, that in order to the undeceiving
the weak, I do evince, that the Doctrines I assert are according to the Holy
Scriptures, as most rightly understood by the generality of our Protestant
Divines; not only the Calvinist beyond the Seas, but also the Reformed Divines
at home, viz. The Church of England, and the Nonconformist, whether
Presbyterian, or Congregational: which, concerning the great Doctrine about our
actual justification in the sight of God by Faith in Christ's blood, I Will
particularly evince, and the rather, because it is the practice of Deceivers to
draw Proselytes to their Errors, by representing the Truth they oppose, as what
is either Arminianism, Socinianism, or Popery; and the Error, they espouse, as
what is the true Protestant Doctrine, whereby such as are justly haters of the
abovementioned Errors, and lovers of the Protestant Truths, are tempted, for
this single reason, to abandon the Truth, and entertain an Error in its stead.

I. That the Church of England (who certainly are truly Scriptural, and
Protestant, in this great Doctrine about Justification by Faith) do in their
Articles, and Book of Homilies concur with me, is evident to any that shall,
without prejudice, peruse them. Yea, this Church is so zealously concerned for
the establishing this Truth, [ viz. Our Justification by Faith in Christ's
blood, and consequently that none of the Elect are actually in God's sight
justified, while under the reigning power of unbelief, etc.] that, whoever will
receive any advantages from her, must so cheerfully assent and consent
thereunto, that it is become impossible, that any of her Sons honestly recede
from it; yea, they must be so express in their profession, that nothing but a
Popish distinction can be subtle enough to extricate their Consciences from
the bonds into which by Conformity, they have brought themselves: Whence many
sober Conforming Divines, whose Principles are really Protestant, [or which is
the same, truly Scriptural] cannot but be filled with a kind of horror and
astonishment, to observe, how far some of the zealous Sons of the Church have
receded from this Doctrine. The truth of this is to be found in that learned,
and once dignified Conforming Divine Doctor Tully, in his Book de Justif.
Paulin. c. 3. p. 23. where he says -- "Quippe vehementer non mihi solum, sed
aliis quamplurimis mirari subit, qua vel obscurissima rationis umbra, qua se
defendant verecundia, qui se Ecclesiae Anglicanae Filios, etiam
obsequentissimos dici volunt, quique ut tales, manu, and fide data toties in
illius doctrinam consensum formaverint, cum ea nihilominus bellum aperte
gerant." But the Doctors wonder is heightened, when he reflects on the 35th
Article about Homilies, amongst which, that of Justification is one, assented
and consented unto by some, who in their Writings and Discourses fully show,
that they consent to no such thing. But if the Doctor had but called to mind
the Paraphrase of Francisc. a Sancta Clara on this mentioned 35th Article de
Homiliis, the surprise might, at least in some measure, be removed: for that
this Popish Casuist assures them, that they may give in both their Assent and
Consent unto every Homily, as to what contains both godly and wholesome
Doctrines, even when they do not consent unto the whole thereof as such: and
his reasons are prodigiously strong, [ i.e. to such as design an espousing
Popery, when it is their interest to do so,] it being agreeable to the
sentiments of several Popish Doctors, which is sufficient to make the greatest
impossibilities become Probable. Consider how particular, and express such are,
as do Conform, in the giving in their Assent and Consent, and what Francisc. a
Sancta Clara's Paraphrase is, and you cannot but be convinced, that as to this
I am in the right. The sentiments of Francisc. a Sancta Clara, are as follows
-- "Nec tenentur Protestants ob haec verba in Articulo statim in singula
verba, vel sententias Homiliarum jurare; nam ut olim Turrecremata, cum ipsa
Ecclesia Doctorum aliquorum opuscula probat, non ob id intelligendum est, omnia
in eis contenta probari. Sicut in constitutionibus 6 Synodi, aliquorum Doctorum
opera probata sunt, quod etiam in decretis legitur, did. 15. non tamen omnia
verba and particulas approbat, ut convenient Doctores. Hoc etiam exactissime
tradunt Doctores Parisienses, exponentes Bullam Urbani quinti approbantem
doctrinam S. Thomae, in qua scripsit Tholosanis, ejus doctrinam, ut been
dictam, and catholicam teneri debere. Dicunt tamen Parisienses, praedictam
approbationem non esse universalem, sed tanquam doctrinae utilis, and in multis
probabilis; prudenter igitur quae sanam doctrinam sapiunt, populo legenda,
alia, neglectui habenda." So far Franc. a Sancta Clara. But to return. It must
be acknowledged that the Church of England is so Orthodox in this great
doctrine about Justification, that the greatest Sophistry of either her open
Enemies, or pretended Friends, who profess themselves to be Her most obedient
Sons, can never with the least color of reason evince the contrary.

II. The Nonconformists also, are as right in this, whence whatever any
particular person among them may assert, it is the judgment of the generality,
whether Presbyterian or Congregational, That our Justification is by Faith in
Christ's blood: and consequently our actual justification in God's sight, does
not precede, but follow Faith. That the Presbyterians are right in this is
acknowledged by some, who assert the Congregational (notwithstanding their
professed owning the Presbyterians Confession of Faith) to be Antinomian, of
which I do the rather take some notice, because in an especial manner such, as
are of that Error, attempt the countenancing it, by saying, that it is embraced
by the Congregational; than which nothing more untrue, as may be evinced by a
due perusal of the Declaration of their Faith, agreed and consented unto by
their Elders and Messengers in their meeting at the Savoy, October. 12. 1658. And
might the world be so happy, as to see a very Elaborate Confutation of the
Antinomians, written by a very acute and solid Person, a great Disputant, viz.
Mr. Stone of New England, a Congregational Divine, it would easily appear, that
the Congregational are not Antinomian. However, although this Excellent MS.
has not seen the light, yet another Treatise, whose worth is much above my
Applauses, has, namely; That of the Reverend Doctor Owen, about Justification;
which discourse, (although in it the same Truths, on which I have insisted are
particularly asserted, yet) has given such satisfaction to the generality of
the Congregational, that they cannot but judge themselves greatly indebted unto
the learned Author for that special service he has therein done the Churches;
whence it is become impossible, that any unprejudiced person should consult the
but now mentioned discourse, and believe that in it he finds the sentiments of
the Congregational, and yet honestly assert, the Congregational to be
Antinomian, and Abettors of the Errors I oppose: For who, without a running
into the contrary Extreme, can be more express in rejecting the Antinomian
Error, than the Doctor is in the mentioned Treatise; for therein he asserts,

1. The necessity of Faith, as antecedent to our actual Justification in God's
sight. 2. That this Faith includes in its nature the entire principle of
Evangelical Repentance, so as that it is utterly impossible, that a man should
be a true Believer, and not at the same instant of time be truly penitent. 3.
That conviction of sin is a necessary antecedent unto this justifying Faith. 4.
That nothing but the Guilt and Punishment of Sin was laid on Christ, it being
impossible that the Sin itself, formally considered, or the Fault itself, as
distinct from the Guilt and Punishment of Sin, should be laid on him.
These things being so, nothing more undoubtedly true, than that, as the Errors
I oppose are discountenanced by the generality of the learned and judicious
Protestant, even so, it highly concerns all such, as would adhere unto the
Protestant Doctrines, to beware, how they close with the contrary Errors,
concerning which, I would the rather Caution the well-meaning, but weak
Christian, for these following Reasons.

1. The asserting the Filth of Sin, as it is somewhat distinct both from the
Guilt and Punishment of Sin, to have been laid on Christ, does not only expose
our blessed Lord and Redeemer to the worst of Reproaches, but wholly
incapacitate him for the accomplishing fallen man's salvation. For if our
Faults or Sins be made Christ's, then Christ must have suffered for his own
Sins, whereby he would have been made incapable of suffering for ours; yea, and
whereby he would have needed daily to have offered for his own Sins first,
contrary to that in Hebrews 7.27. But,

2. The concluding the Fault and Guilt to be the same thing, or which is much
the same, the Guilt to be the formal nature of Sin, as it is a Notion attended
with the Absurdities but now hinted, if it be said to be laid on Christ, even
so, it is moreover but in order to the introducing several dangerously Popish
Errors, viz. the making Justification and Sanctification the same, Remission
and Mortification of Sin one thing; from all which 'twill follow, that if
Original Sin, or Concupiscence and Lust be pardoned in the Regenerate, the
formal nature of Sin is removed; and although there remain the matter, and the
name of Sin, yet it is not formally Sin. After this manner does Bellarmine
himself argue de Amiss. great. and stat. pec. l. 5. c. 7. lit. C. Primum enim si
vere crederent adversarii Reatum dimitti in Baptismo, fateri deberent
consequenter, nihil esse in renatis quod habeat veram peccati rationem. -- And
why, but because this Bellarmme does with Phil. Melancthon consider Guilt as
the Formale Peccati, (i.e.) the Guilt and the Fault itself, or the formal
nature of Sin to be the same, whence, says He, "Sublata rei forma, non manet
ejus rei ratio, sive natura, cum forma sit praecipua pars naturae, imo sit ipsa
ratio and quidditas rei." And really Melancthon's Reply is very feeble. Beware
then of such, as pretend high for the Protestant Religion, who yet revile
Conforming, and Nonconforming Protestants; and, who seem to consider the Guilt
of Sin, and the formal nature thereof, to be the same, for that, by such an
unjust procedure, none but the Papists can be any way advantaged.

3. The asserting the Elect, quatenus, or as Elect, to be pardoned in the womb,
and to be freed from the Filth of Sin, by Christ's taking it on himself, is a
Doctrine that countenances the worst of Villainies. For if I actually am
pardoned, in that I am Elect, although I remain under the power of the worst of
Sins, what need I be any otherwise concerned about the salvation of my Soul?
What need I examine my heart, search for sin, mourn over it, pray, and hear the
Word, or abstain from any Debaucheries, for that, if I received not a Pardon
with my Being, I shall never gain it? But if I then received it, there is
nothing more requisite, than that I confidently persuade my self that it is so.

For these Reasons, we may easily perceive the necessity there is, that such as
design the glory of God in the salvation of their own souls, Take heed, how
they forsake the Protestant, which is the Gospel Doctrine, and follow two, or
three, [an inconsiderable number] in entertaining Notions, which, if
practically observed in their Principles and Consequences, cannot but prove
their eternal Ruin. I say, if practically observed both in their Principles
and Consequences, because I hope, that through a special instance of infinitely
FREE GRACE, the Hearts of some, whose heads have been filled with these
Principles I oppose, have been so averse from a practical closure with the
dismal consequences that attend them, as to be freed from the mischiefs that
otherwise they would have fallen into. But, although some, by an astonishing
instance of Divine Bounty, may be preserved, and consequently, although a few
good men have embraced this Error in the Notion, when they have hated it in the
Practice; yet, it is unsafe, and really dangerous venturing on such hazards;
for, although One may escape the Contagion, yet thou may be infected to thy
greater damage. For the Lord's sake therefore consider what thou do, and
endeavor, that thou may be both sound in thy Notions, and also in thy
Practices, for thereby thou will be in a better capacity of giving God the
greater glory, to the praise of infinitely FREE GRACE.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 18. line 19. for shall, read should. P. 19. in the uses set before l.
13.1. and l. 16. for 3. r. 2. P. 22. l. 19. for 13. r. 16. for 5. r. 2. P. 27.
l. 2. for sit, r. sint. l. 3. after obligatio, r. poenae. P. 28. l. 12. dele
who. P. 33. l. 10. for formerly, r. formally. P. 35. l. 26. after that, r. as.
P. 72. l. 15. for proves, r. prove. P. 79. l. 18. after pene, r. verbis. l. 19.
for q. 4. r. q. 14. and for 9. r. q* P. 87. l. 19. for 12. r. 2. P. 88. l. 22.
for qu. 5. r. qu. 4. P. 97. l. 5. r. art. 3. for lect. r. relect. P. 101. l.
20. for excellently, r. excellent. Page 2. line 26. (in the Appendix) after to,
r. be.

