THE Growth of Error: BEING AN EXERCITATION CONCERNING The Rise and Progress of
ARMINIANISM, and more especially SOCINIANISM, both abroad, and now of late in
England.

By a Lover of Truth, and Peace.

Psalm. 7.14. Behold he travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived Mischief,
and brought forth Falsehood.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun, in Cornhill, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I first observed, how suddenly the Socinian Heresy spread it self
throughout the Nation, I could not satisfy my self, without making some
Enquiry, how it came to pass, which I no sooner did, but perceived, that
Pretenses, either to Reason, or Revelation, were not indeed the true Cause
thereof so much as the Industry, Artifice, and Deceitful Methods of the
Heresiarchists, who, being themselves struck Blind by the Divine Glory, which
shines in the Mysteries of our Holy Religion, and hardened also through the
Innate Aversion, that is in us by Nature, unto the Self-abusing Truths in the
Gospel, have made it their Province to pervert such, whom they found pliable to
how down to the Idol of a Religion of their making.

Some of their Methods I have detected, in the Ensuing Discourse; and, if God
give leave, may do more hereafter. I have traced out some Footsteps, in the
Arminian Party, conducing toward the Socinian Cause, and am sorry to see how
many, among the Orthodox, by their Heats, and Indiscretions, have contributed
too much toward the Propagation of Error, as well as they, that have run to
the contrary Extreme in their opposing Socinian, and Arminian Notions.

Whether, in Imitation of the Italian Combinators, there are any amongst us
have joined themselves to the Orthodox, with a Design to subvert the Truths,
they profess to own, and introduce the Contrary they pretend a Zeal against, I
will not say: But this will I say; that, though my Charity to Men, whose
Principles are very different from what I hold (who I believe sincere, and open
in their Enunciations) is by many, that know me, observed to be of a Latitude,
as they think, to a Fault; yet, not being able to abide any of these
Hypocritical, and Deceitful Trickings, in Matters Religious, which, to my great
Sorrow I see now, though formerly I could not believe, I shall, for the
unburthening my Conscience, and for the sake of the Unwary, show, that there
are sundry Principles advanced by Men of Reputation, among the sound in the
Faith, that do, in there Tendency, lead to what these drive, who are of the
worst Sort, that is, the English Socinians. And that my Impartiality may
appear, as I have not, so will I not forbear to express my just Indignation
against those Antinonian Dotages, with their Mischievous Effects, which have
been, not only an Inlet to a loose Life, but the Occasion of hurrying so many
into that wicked Heresy.

And when I do, as I intend, this, I desire to be found one neither so to
affect to be Orthodox, as to become censorious toward my Brethren, who out of
Judgment, or Conscience differ from me, in any tolerable Opinion; nor so
afraid to be Heterodox, as to decline the Examination, or Reception of any
Momentous Point, that shall be offered me by another, whereof I am convinced,
that it is first True, and then also profitable either for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, or Instruction in Righteousness to the Church of God.

March the 4th. 1697. S. L.

ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 2. after Doctrine, read, in another Instance. P. 17. l. 8. for
Personality, r. Deity. P. 63. l. 11. r. into. P. 81. l. 8. for confirming, r.
confining. P. 83. l. 13. r. subrogatum, l. 14. r. subrogatur. P. 86. l. 1, 2.
dele, or improve, l. 13. r. 1691. P. 124. l. 4. dele, till. P. 166. l. 28, 29.
r. For, to the End they might. P. 184. l. 23. r. which. P. 195. l. 5. for one,
r. on. P. 207. l. 2. after to, add be.

OF THE GROWTH OF ERROR.
The Introduction.
GREAT and Pernicious Errors having been insensibly spread through this Nation,
an Account of their Rise, and Progress, and of the various and sundry Methods
which have been taken for their Propagation, will not, I presume, be
unnecessary; but rather a Caution to young Students, a prevention of their
Fall, if not a means to recover others, that have been already tainted.

And, that I may be the more clear and distinct in the Account I give, I must,
in the first place, mention the Errors my Discourse is of. For, though there is
a great Cognation and Alliance between one Error and another, and the most
opposite Heresies at last, center in the same Point: Yet on an easy search, we
shall find vast Differences between them, some greater, others less; some in
one, others in a contrary extreme: But, in all, a Tendency to Atheism; or, to
use the new and finer word to express the same thing, Deism.

As there are gradual Recesses from Truth, the first, and least observable Turn
from it, prepares the way for a greater; but whilst near unto Truth, the Error
is so like it, that it cannot be easily discerned, or detected: And he, who
makes the first step toward it, does, er'e he is aware, slide into a greater;
and no sooner perceives where he is, but thinks himself too far gone to make an
honorable Retreat; whereby the Error which had it is first rise from
Inadvertency, is upheld, and supported by the Lust, or sensual Interest of its
Embracers.

Thus the Amyraldians, amongst whom, they who are sincere in what they Profess,
as I doubt not, but there are many such, cannot see wherein they differ from
their Brethren, except in the way and method of Explaining, and Defending the
same Doctrine; and therefore assume to themselves the Title of New Methodists,
firmly adhering to old Truths.

Now, of these, how many slide into Arminianism? and from thence pass over unto
the Tents of ^ocinus: Though they set up for Men of a middle way, between the
extremes of Calvin, and the Excesses of Van Harmine; yet, on the turn from the
former, they fall in so far with the latter in their Concessions, that it is
become impossible for them to make a just Defense of what they hold in
opposition to the other Parts of the Arminian System; and therefore at last,
fall in entirely with them, and run their length.

In like manner the Arminians, who pretend a middle way between the Orthodox
and Socinian, are in the twinkling of an Eye, fallen under Socinus his Banner;
confounding Holy Scripture with their odd Glosses, and unintelligible
Interpretations; framing Idea's of the Divine Being, so unworthy of it, as to
provoke some to deny all revealed Religion, and others to turn Atheists.

Now it is the rise and progress of these mischievous Errors, embracd and
propugnd by the followers of Arminius, and Socinus, that my Discourse is
designed to be of. Errors which, above Fifty years ago, on their first
appearances amongst us, so alarmed the Nation, as to put it into a very
terrible Convulsion.

But since that day, through the force of an Arminian Dose, or some such like
methods, we have fallen into an Amazing slumber, and no sooner does any one
awake out of it, but he is filled with wonder to behold the Nation to be so
much Socinian and Deist; Nor can he easily imagine how it came to be so?

And, that we may obtain some Light about what it is, that has influenced so
great a part of Mankind to embrace these Errors; I have spent some thoughts
about it, the Result of which, I offer to Consideration.

CHAP. I.
The first Particular, instanced in as an Occasion of Error, is a Prejudice
against Gospel Doctrines, because of their Mysteriousness. The unreasonableness
of this Prejudice discovered.

THE first thing I shall observe, which for the most part runs through all the
rest, their (...), the chief Ground and Reason of their many Mistakes and
Errors, is the Prejudices they have conceived against the Mysteriousness of our
Holy Religion, which is founded on a grand Maxim, they have fixed as the Rule
and Standard by which they^ll try what is Truth, and what is Error: It Is this,
Nothing is to be received into our Religion, as true, but what we have an
Adequate and Comprehensive Idea of.

When therefore, in our Systems, they meet with what transcends their
understandings, they reject it as False, Absurd and Ridiculous.

This was the way of the Remonstrants, touching the Doctrine of particular
Election, Reprobation, Irresistible Grace, etc. And of the Socinians, about
Christ's satisfaction; the Incarnation of the Son of God; the Blessed Trinity,
etc. And of the Deist against all revealed Religion; who by a Late Ingenious
Author, in the Account he gives of the growth of Deism, is brought in, (saying)
Many Doctrines are made necessary to Salvation, page 20
which it is impossible to believe, because they are in their Nature
Absurdities. I replied (says the Author) That these things were Mysteries, and
so above our Understandings. But he asked me, to what end could an
Unintelligible Doctrine be revealed? Not to instruct, but to puzzle, and amuse.
What can be the effect of an Vnintelligble Mystery upon our minds, but only
Amusement? That which is only above Reason, must be above a Rational Belief;
and must I be saved by an Irrational Belief? If a proposition be inconsistent
with its self, I cannot but believe it to be false.

But what does this signify less, than that whatever transcends our
Understandings, and is above our Reason, is an Absurdity, an Unintelligible
Doctrine, fit only to puzzle and amuse, and the belief thereof Irrational; so
that, if they cannot frame an Adequate Idea, or comprehend the whole of what
their thoughts are conversant about; if they cannot reduce every thing to their
own Preconceived order, and know it to perfection, it cannot in their opinion
be true, but must, you see, be rejected as Absurd, False, and Irrational.

Though nothing more manifest and clear, than that the most enlarged Create
Mind is Finite, Confined and Limited, and that there is a Being whose Essence
and Perfections are Boundless, Unconfined, Incomprehensible, and past finding
out; and that it is impossible, and a contradiction to suppose a Finite Mind,
able to comprehend what is Incomprehensible, or to get to the uttermost Bounds
and Limits of what is Boundless, and Unlimitable; yet with these Men the notion
of a Deity, if we assign unto it Infinite Perfections, though essential
thereunto, must be rejected, that is, they will believe nothing of God, unless
they may take him to be such another as themselves, or themselves such as He
is, as to the extent of his Being; nor must any things be received into our
Religion as true, that speak of his Transcendency, but must be esteemed as
false and irrational, which amounts to thus much, nothing in these matters must
be believed to be true, but what is impossible to be so.

However, to an unbyassed mind, its most evident that there is a God, with whom
are the Secrets of Wisdom, Job 11.7.
whose Being by searching cannot be found out, and who cannot be known to
Perfection? And that the Life of true Religion lies in the knowledge of this
God; and seeing an Adequate Knowledge, which is the same with a knowing to
Perfection, is impossible, and yet there can be no true Religion without some
knowledge of God; the inference is Manifest, Natural and Easy, viz. That we
may attain to a knowledge of God according to Truth, though we cannot have an
Adequate and Comprehensive knowledge of him, and that it is not sufficient to
say, we cannot comprehend it, therefore not true.

The most Momentous parts then of true Religion, being about the Perfections of
God; such as his Holiness, his Justice, as distinct from his Goodness and
Mercy, together with the unchangeableness of his Being, and the like, must be
above our Reason too, and yet may be true: The same may be said of the Blessed
Trinity and Incarnation of the Son of God; which are not more Transcendent and
Incomprehensible than what we find to be said of the Essential Perfections of
his Nature; nor is there any thing more difficult, and inscrutable in what is
revealed about the Eternal Decrees, and the Modes of Divine Operation, than
there is in the Doctrine of the Trinity, or Divine Attributes, and therefore
our belief of them equally Rational.

Well then, if the points in Controversy between us are all reduced to one, or
other of these heads, as really they are, for either to the Glorious
Attributes, Personalities, Decrees or Modes of Divine Operations; the Doctrine
of the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son, the necessity of a proper
satisfaction to Justice, and those other points about Election, Reprobation,
Irresistible Grace, are reducible; a rejecting these Doctrines, because there
is somewhat in them, exceeding the utmost extent of our Knowledge, and
Unsearchable; or, which is the same because there is somewhat Mysterious in
them, must be upon a reason, that necessarily obliges us to cast off the Belief
of a Deity.

Besides, the Grand Maxim of those Gentlemen, who pretend so much to Reason,
being, as I have already noted, this; that nothing is to be received into our
Religion as true, but what we can Comprehend; a spice of the first sin must be
at the bottom, as the cause of all their Errors; namely, an ambition to be like
unto God, in his essential Perfections; which, in good earnest, is the import
of this Maxim; for it is impossible for them to know God to Perfection, unless
the extent of their Understandings bears a proportion to his Perfections: So
that in the issue, they cannot fairly deny the mysteries of our Holy Religion;
but on a Topic, whereby they make themselves equal with God.

Thus you see, that by opposing our Holy Religion, for the sake of the
Mysteries there are in it; they are driven either to the denial of a God, or to
the making themselves Gods; either of which is, of all Absurdities, the most
vile and gross.

But to follow the Deist in his way of Arguing: He makes a Mystery to be an
unintelligible Doctrine, that can only puzzle and amuse, because in it there is
somewhat above our Reason; whereas it is very clear, that the Doctrine may have
somewhat unsearchable in it, and yet be intelligible enough; thus when it is
said Man's understanding is Finite, but God's is Infinite, I clearly and
distinctly enough perceive the meaning hereof, and have as good reason to
believe God's to be Infinite, as I have that Man's is Finite; and though there is
somewhat included in Infinity, that is above my Reason, yet the Revelation,
which says, that the Divine Understanding is Infinite, and unsearchable, is to
instruct, and not to puzzle or amuse.

Once more, seeing God, whose Perfections are Infinite, in creating all things,
has left such impresses of his Infinity on the things Created, that the
profoundest Philosopher, in his Closest searches into their Nature, sees enough
to conclude, there is somewhat in them, unsearchable, and past finding out,
which to me is an uncontrollable Argument, that an Infinitely wise Agent is
their Maker: Even so, when I read the Holy Scriptures, look into the Doctrines
therein contained, there are such clear and distinct Revelations of sundry
Glorious Mysteries, touching infinite Wisdom, and the other Divine perfections,
that I cannot but with strongest Assurances conclude, that God is their Author
too.

An Anti-Trinitarian, in a Letter to the Clergy of both Universities, page 33.
concerning the Trinity, and the Athanasian Creed, does, I confess, hope to
extricate himself out of this difficulty; by distinguishing between the things
themselves and the manner of them; affirming, that the things themselves, that
is, God's Eternity, Infinity, Omnipresence, are intelligible, but the manner of
them is impossible to be apprehended. The Idea's (says he) we have of God's
Eternity, Infinity, Omnipresence, Omniscience, and all that we are required to
believe concerning them, are so clear and distinct, that an ordinary Capacity
apprehends what we mean, when we say, God is Eternal, Infinite, Omniscient,
Omnipresent, though these things themselves are intelligible, yet the manner of
them is impossible to be apprehended, and as we are now framed, we are not
capable of having it revealed to us; and none but a blind Metaphysician, who
pretends to know all things, but really knows nothing, would be so vain, as to
attempt to explain the manner of God's Omnipresence, or his Omniscience. It is
no wonder there are insuperable difficulties about the manner of things of this
Nature, when there are as great difficulties in apprehending the manner of
Nature's Operating in the most common things, which things none disbelieveth,
because he does not apprehend how they are done. Who disbelievth there is such
a Creature as Man, though he does not know how he was formed? But it is quite
otherwise when we cannot apprehend the things themselves, there is then an
absolute impossibility of believing them.

A perfect Idea of the things themselves, that is, of Eternity, Infinity, etc.
(he says) we may have, but not of the manner; whereas if the Reason, why we
cannot have a perfect Idea of the manner of Infinity, Eternity, etc.. can be no
other, than what makes it as impossible to have an Adequate Idea of Infinity,
Eternity, etc. the things themselves; it cannot be more possible to apprehend
Eternity, than the manner of it. And it is manifest that the difficulty of
apprehending the manner, arises from its Infinity, we cannot have a perfect
Idea of the manner of Eternity, because of the Infinity is in it; and as we
cannot comprehend how God is Eternal, neither can we have a perfect Idea of
Eternity. It Is true, the Doctrine of Eternity, Omniscience, etc. is
intelligible, we know what we mean when we discourse of Eternity, etc. But then
must add, that we mean by Eternity somewhat with respect to duration that
exceeds the Bounds of the most enlarged Create understanding, of which we
cannot have a perfect Idea.

This Distinction then between the things themselves, and their manner is in
this Case insufficient to solve the difficulty; for there is as much of
Infinity in the things themselves, as is in their manner, and therefore equally
above our Reason; and the impossibility to frame a perfect Idea of either, is
the same. The Nature of God, is as unsearchable, as his ways are past finding
out.

Besides, if we apply this distinction to the Doctrine of the Trinity, it must
be acknowledged, that the Idea we have of a Person in the Blessed Trinity, is
as Intelligible as any one of the Divine Attributes; and that the difficulty,
in Controversy is about the manner how three persons can be in the unity of
Essence, not in the things themselves. A Trinity of Persons is as intelligible,
as a Variety of Attributes, and the manner of Conciliating a variety of
Attributes, with absolute simplicity, is as impossible as the conciliating a
Trinity of Persons with Unity of Essence.

The Error, therefore of these Men, lies in their insinuating that it is not
impossible to have a perfect Idea of Eternity, Infinity, Omniscience, etc. the
things themselves, but of their manner, when as the one and the other is
equally impossible, and that touching the Trinity, the Controversy is not
about the manner, but the thing it self; and yet nothing more evident than the
thing it self, to wit, the Trinity has nothing more insuperable in it, than a
variety of Attributes, and that in reality the objections are in this Case
raised from the manner of the thing, not from the thing it self: It is about
how it can be, not what it is.

Another therefore is more bold, averting, that he can comprehend Infinity, and
whatever is truly predicated of God; but not being able to comprehend the
Trinity, it cannot be true; whereby his own understanding is not only made the
measure of Divine Truths; but according to what I have already suggested, he
himself made equal with God, or the Infinite God made such another as himself.

When I read, that great is the Mystery of Godliness; 1. Tim. 3.16.
God manifest in the Flesh; justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. Prove.
8.22. to 31.
And when I reflect on those Sacred Texts, which speak of the Eternal
Generation of the Son; his being in the Bosom of the Father from everlasting;
his Revealing the Father to Us clearly, that we with open Face beholding, Mat.
11.27. 2 Cor. 3.18. 1 Cor. 13.12.
as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from
Glory unto Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: And now though we see but
through a Glass darkly, yet shall we hereafter see face to face. I say, when I
meditate on these Parts of the Holy Revelation, whilst I am convinced, that
these and such like Texts, speak of things Mysterious, and Unsearchable, past
finding out; yet am I hereby instructed to believe and hope, that though the
Saints shall never know the Almighty to Perfection, yet shall they be raised to
a clearer, and more distinct knowledge of those now unconceiveable, as well as
ineffable Glories.

And when I read in the Writings of some Men, who, in Reasoning about other
things, are strong and nervous, yet weak and feeble in their arguings against
the profound Mysteries of Christ's Gospel; I cannot but clearly perceive a
Truth in those words of the Apostle,; the Natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God for they are Foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2.14.
neither can he know them because they are Spiritually discerned, for which
reason these Men are rather to be pityed than envyed; prayed for, than Reviled;
that, 2 Timothy 2.25.
if 'twould please the Lord they might come to the acknowledgment of the Truth,
and see how great their Folly was, in making their Confined Understandings, the
measure of all Knowledge, which undoubtedly is done by them that reject all
things as Absurd and False, which are above, or beyond their Reason.

But the Deist adds, 'Twas once to serve a Turn against the Papists, that our
Church held all Doctrines necessary to save Souls, were plainly Revealed in
Scripture. How could you say plainly revealed, unless you understood the
Revelation?

And why to serve a Turn, and that once 'twas so, as if we had now forsaken our
Principles, and professed to believe unintelligible Revelations, whereas it is
our constant Judgment, that the Doctrines necessary to Salvation are not dark
and obscure, but Clear, Evident, and Perspicuous, that what is not clearly
delivered in the Scripture, is not of indispensible Necessity to be Known and
Believed, and Consistently assert, that the Mysteries our Adversaries reject,
are clearly revealed. The Revelation is very Plain, Clear, and Open; though the
things Revealed are Mysterious, Inscrutable, and past finding out: And yet
these Mysterious Points are in themselves Great, Glorious, True and Evident;
and only because our Understandings are Finite, Weak and Feeble, are we unable
to comprehend them. This Truth is by a Learned Divine thus Illustrated. We can
see other things by the Light of the Sun, better than we can see the Sun it
self; not because the Sun is less visible and discernable in it self, but
because our Visive Faculty is too weak to bear its Resplendent Light.

The Deists mistake therefore, (into which the Socinian has led him) is
complicated, and lies in a Confounding the Revelation with the thing Revealed,
and in a Persuasion, that because the Mystery is past out Knowing to
Perfection, therefore not in it self Evident, Clear, or Knowable: And if not to
be fully known by vain Mortals, it cannot, he thinks, be true, but must be
False, Absurd and Irrational: And thus, according to the Scripture-Revelation,
being Puffed up in his fleshly Mind, Col. 2.1^.
intrudes into those things, which he has not seen; and, contrary to the
Apostolical Prohibition, thinks of himself more highly than he ought to think;
Romans 12.3.
is resolved to penetrate into the Secrets of the Almighty, to make his own
mistaken; fanciful, and narrow Understanding the Measure, Rule, and Standard of
Truth; and like a Man, who is so weak as to imagine his visive Faculty able to
bear the Resplendent Light of the Sun, looks on it till his Eyes are so Dazzled,
that he cannot rightly judge of Colors; even to the Presuming Deist and
Ami-Trinitariants, who think they can look into the Deep things of God, and
Comprehend the Divine Perfections, are overcome by the Glory of Divine
Mysteries, their Minds darkened, and they plunged into the Depths of Error; and
thus, in a Measure, it is with others that have Erred from the Truth.

CHAP. II.
Radicated Prejudices against Gospel Doctrines, the Cause of Error. This seen
in the Opposition Man makes to Christ's Righteousness for Justification.

II. ANother thing that occasions Error, is a Radicated prejudice against
Gospel Doctrines, as their Tendency is to Exalt God, Depress man, and engage
him to Acts of greatest self-denial.

The Holy Ghost, having with much clearness, shown the insufficiency of Man's
best Righteousness for Justification, and his inability to think a good
Thought; or do the least good Work; and, that the Righteousness of Christ, who
is God-Man, can alone justify a believing Sinner, and the Omnipotent Spirit
alone enable us to believe; these Doctrines, though they are a display of the
manifold Wisdom of God, of the Glory of his Holiness, Justice, and Mercy, and
an illustrious Evincement of the satisfaction, and Merit of the Death and
obedience of Christ, God-Man, as also of the Powerful Operation of the third
Person in the Blessed Trinity; yet, because they lay us low, discovering the
Imperfection, Insufficiency, and Vanity of our own Endeavors; they reject
these Truths, exposing them, as if hereby a Door had been opened to let in all
manner of Vice and Licentiousness; and rather than they will submit themselves
to the Righteousness of God, or be owing to the power of the Holy Ghost,
they will venture first to publish that the believing in God the Son, and in God
the Holy Ghost, is not necessary to Salvation, and at length go on to deny the
Personality both of Son and Spirit.

As Adam, on the Fall, instead of seeking unto God, leaned to his own
understanding, and strength; so it has been ever since, the way of his
Offspring. In the Old Testament instances of Men's Glorying in their own Power,
and performances, are innumerable; and the Apostle Paul assures us in the New,
that this was the way of his Kindred the Jews: And ever since those days it
has been the general method of Heretics to trust in their own Righteousness,
and despise others.

This they found to be a Notion, as plausible, as it was to their Corrupt Minds
agreeable; and because the Orthodox, who pressed a Holy Life and Conversation
as necessary to Salvation, could not put their own Obedience into the place and
room of Christ's, it has been the common practice of the Erroneous to reproach
them as Enemies to Holiness and Mortification; as though they held, that we might
live as lewdly as we listed, and die as we lived, yet in the end obtain
Salvation through the Death and Righteousness of Christ.

And, as this was the burden of their Writings; in like manner, 'twas the care
of the most Eminent Heresiarchs, to give an agreeable Exemple, by which means
Multitudes of the weaker, but more zealous sort were ensnared to embrace their
Errors. And tho at this time the Professors of Arminian and Secinian Errors
have in this respect degenerated, and thereby have lost the advantage of this
pretense; yet Socinus. and after him Slichtingius, with many others, valued
themselves upon the Holiness of them of their way, which they assigned to the
hour and Influence of their Principles.

However, these Gentlemen not being able entirely to crase those Idea's, which
at first were implanted in their Souls, about the Holiness and Rnighteousness
of God, cannot but profess to believe, that there is no Justification to be had
in the sight of God w^^o it a perfect Righteousness, and to the end they may
the more easily quiet an awaken^d Conscience, without the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, they either hold that the Law of Works is Abolished,
and a New Law Erceled: A New, a mere easy Law, so siam^d, and squared to their
corrupt Natures, as to make their Defective Obedience a perfect Gospel
Righteousness, fully answering the New Rule they have invented: Or, affirm.
That their Faith, though it falls short of the Law, is nevertheless, counted by
God, for a complete Performance of it, as a late Author, supposed to deny the
Divinity of Jesus Christ, has expressed it in his Reasonableness of
Christianity, who says, The Law of Works, is that Law, which requires Perfect
Obedience, without any Remission or Abatement. -- The Language of this Law is,
Do this, and Live, Transgress and Die. P. 20.
-- Those that Obey are Righteous; those that in any part Disobey, are
Unrighteous, and must not expect Life, the Reward of Righteousness. But by the
Law of Faith, Faith is allowed to supply the Defect of full Obedience, and so
the Believers are admitted to Life and Immortality as if they were Righteous.
P. 22.
-- The Moral Law (which is every where the same, the Eternal Rule of Right)
obliges Christians and all Men every where, and is to all Men the standing Law
of Works. But Christian Believers have the Privilege to be under the Law of
Faith too; which is that Law whereby God justifies a Man for Believing, though
by his Works he be not Just, or Righteous, i. e. though he come short of
Perfect Obedience to the Law of Works. God alone does, or can justify, or make
just those, who by their Works are not so; which he does, by counting their
Faith for Righteousness, i. e. for a complete Performance of the Law. So far
this Learned Author, who, in Opposition to the former, that destroys the Old,
and invents a New Law so framed, as to turn our Defective into a Perfect
Obedience; does, first, by Reasons Invincible, Establish the Law of Works in
all its Parts: and then adds a New Law unto it, and God's Gracious Esteeming
our Faith, as fully answering the Law of Works, and so stretches our Defective
Faith to the utmost length of Perfect Obedience. As the one brings down the Law
to our Imperfection, the other raises our Imperfection to the same height with
the Law: But so long as the Law of Works remains in its Strength, there can be
no New Rule brought down to make Sin cease to be Sin, or turn a Defecrive into
a Perfect Obedience. And so long as the All-knowing God Judges of things as
they are, Imperfect Faith can never pass, at his Tribunal, for a Complete
Performance of the Law, there must be then a Perfect Righteousness fully
answering the Law of Works, or no Justification. And it is more easy, as well
as more conform to Holy Scripture, to believe, That the Righteousness of
Christ, which consists in a full Performance of the Law of Works, is given to
all that have Faith, and by Donation is really made theirs, and being really
theirs, may be justly esteemed to be theirs, and they justified by it.

But these Men, if not mistaking, yet surely misrepresenting the old Doctrine,
as covered with innumerable Absurdities, do not only drive their Admirers off
from Examining it, but so sill their Minds with Prejudices against it, as to
make them willing to take up with any thing, rather than with the Truth,
especially in a Case so pleasing, because somewhat of their own is made their
Justifying Righteousness.

CHAP. III.
The deceitful Methods used by Heretics a cause of Error, more generally
proposed: The approaches of Socinus, and his Followers toward the Orthodox.
The real difference, there is between them in Fundamentals. A Reflection on
these Methods. Arminians take the same course, etc.

SECT. I.
The deceitful methods used by Heretics more generally proposed. Their rise in
the Apostles days. The deceitful Methods, used by some Men of great Learning,
is another Cause of the growth of Error.

THERE being some Foundation-Truths so fully, clearly and distinctly revealed
in Holy Writ; as to command the Assent of the Church Universally in all Ages,
(excepting that in which the Christ an World became Arian,) they, who have been
their chief Opposers, have retained the Words and Phrases, by which those
Truths have been transmitted down unto us; and introduced their particular
Opinions, by an Heterodox sense they have fixed on them. And when suspected,
that they might the more effectually conceal their Errors, have subscribed
sound Catechisms and Confessions, whereby they have had the fairer opportunity
to instill their Dogmata into the minds of Youth, and other less studied
Persons, and under the Notion of being firm Adherers to the common Faith, have
engaged them to a closure with the unsoundest Parts of their Heretical Scheme.

In the Apostles days, they who erred from the Faith, attempted by good words,
and fair speeches to seduce the simple, Romans 16.18. And Irenaeus, who lived
near that time Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, describing the Heretics
of that Age, Digres. de (...) ^heol. Helmstad. R^g. Syn^. (...). page ^88.
as Calevius observes, tells us that they speak like unto the Orthodox.

This was the way Arius, after he was driven from Alexandria for his Heresy,
took to be restored to the Emperor's favor; though he retained his Error, yet
subscribed a found confession of Faith, as it is reported by Socrates in his
Ecclesiastical History. Lib. l. c. 25, etc.

Pelagius, when convened before a Provincial Synod at i^iospolis, in
Pelaestine, at which Fourteen Bishops were present, but not his Accusers,
August. ^e^ract. lib. 2 (...). 47. and (...). ad (...).
does concur with the Orthodox in condemning his own Opinions; but as Vossius
out of St. Austin observes, he d^d it very deceitfully. Pelagianamsententiam
pectore quidem ficto, sed tamen Catholicos judices timens Pelagius ipse
damnavit. And as the same Possius adds, Hierom. Epist. 79.
St. Hierom calls this Synod a miserable one; because, though they erred not in
Doctrines, yet not discerning the falsehood of the man, they ^rr^d in the
Judgment they past on him, who being better known at Rome, could not conceal
his Treacherous Endeavors, but was soon detected by the Bishops of that place.
V^ss Hest. Pelar. lib. 1. Cap. 41. Hare^ici imitantur Catholicos f^eut simiae
imitantur homine^ Cy^^^ian. ad Jubajanum.


This being the common practice of Heretics, St. Cyprian compares them to
Apes, saying they imitate the Orthodox as Apes do Men.

Now this having been a very successful, as well as a most pernicious Articice,
in constant practice amongst the Ancients; the Socinian and Armintan Leaders,
whose Reputation has been, and is still so great, that the respect multitudes
have for them, in regard to their Candor, and Integrity, which is supposed to
be conspicuous in the Representations they make of their own, and their
Adversaries Principles, have walked in the same Path, as I hope in the
following History, with some clearness to detect and make manifest.

SECT. II.
The seeming Approaches of Socinus, and his Followers toward the Orthodox.

THE Socinians, although they deny a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the
Divinity of Christ, and the Personality of the Holy Ghost; Christ's Satisfaction
and Merit; Justification by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; the work
of the Spirit in Conversion, etc. Yet in their Apologies, Confessions, and
other Writings, they give us their Opinions in such words, as if they held all
these necessary Doctrines.

Ruarus* who is justly esteemed by the excellent ^^l^husius, Specimen Refut.
Crell. de satisf. p. 3.5.
to be one of the most Learned Socinians, amongst the Reasons annexed to the
first Century of his Select Episi^les, persuading the Papists to express more
candor toward them, closes with this Protestation. That they do heartily
believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; that they Baptize in the Name of
the Father, Son, Ruar. Epist. Select. par. 1. page 464.
and Holy Ghost; and acknowledge an Unity in this Trinity; that they esteem
Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and the true God, and as such worship him;
that they believe Christ to have abundantly satisfied the Will of the Father in
all things, which he imposed on him to do, and suffer for our sins, and so by
the Victime of his Body has expiated them.

In an Epistle to Heing Veglerus, this Learned Ruarus thus writes. Ruar. Epist.
16. P. 107.
My most intimate Friends have often heard me Profess, that in most humble manner
I adore the Divine Nature in Christ, (and am most hearty in acknowledging his
true Merit and Satisfaction made for us, although these words are not in
Scripture.) I Challenge 'em all to accuse me if they can for denying the
Hypostasis, or Subsistence of the Holy Ghost, or for rejecting Infant Baptism,
or for placing our Righteousness in the Merit of our Works, or any thing like
it.

In an Epistle to Frederick Schossirus, whose perversion Ruarus does endeavor,
after he had advised him to cast off those prejudices, he had received with h^s
Mother, Milk, beseeches him to consider, th^^ they do not deny Christ's
satisfaction but hold that he satisfied the Will of his Father, both by doing,
and suffering all those things imposed on him by the Father for the sake of us,
and our Sins; Ruar. Epist. 23. p. 146, 147.
whence it comes to pass, that our sins are pardoned, and Eternal Life given
us. He is more full in what he writes unto Nigrinus, for (says he) I do
acknowledge that the Obedience, which Christ, as the Head of all the Elect, did
render unto God in his Life, and much rather in his Death, was a sufficient, or
full price for our Sins, and so equivalent to the sufferings, which by our Sins
we had deserved. But that I may more distinctly deliver my thoughts concerning
the Fruits of Christ's Death, I will reduce what I have taken out of the Holy
Scriptures to Three Heads, answerable to his Threefold Office. For Christ
being the Chief Prophet of God, even as was Moses, published a New Law unto the
People, and whatever he Taught, Commanded, Promised, or Did, when alive, he by
his Death, Eminently Confirmed, Sealed, and Sanction'd, whereby we are obliged
to believe him, and obey his Laws. And God himself engaged to perform all that
Christ has promised in his Name. Touching the Priestly Office which lies in
making Prayers for the People and Sacrificing, that is to say, Killing the
Victim, and then according to the Law offering it for the Expiation of Sin,
Christ a little before his Death pouring out most ardent Prayers to God, on
behalf of all that then did, or after should believe, and entering into Heaven
through Death, does now make Intercession for them, and freely offered up
himself upon the Cross. as one to be made an Atoneing Victim; and with this
Victim of his Body prepared for an Oblation, by Death he entered into the
Heavens, as into the Holy of Holies, and offered up this Sacrifice of himself
without Spot, by the Eternal Spirit unto God, who is amongst the Cherubims; or
rather with the Myriads of Angels, there appearing for ever before the Throne
of the Divine Majesty, to expiate the Sins of the People, and procure their
Pardon. And that he might enter on the Execution of his Kingly Office, whereby
he does all things which belong to the Salvation of the Elect, defending and
freeing them from all Evil, and at length making them meet for the partaking of
Spiritual and Heavenly Blessings: He did, by rendering Obedience to the Death
open a way, whence we owe all unto Christ, who so readily dyed for us.

The Causes also of our Salvation may be considered as Three fold. The First,
the freest Grace of the Immortal God? The Second is Christ, who as our Head
has undertaken for his Body with God: The Last is our Faith and Obedience
toward God, wrought by the Spirit of Regeneration.

To this of Ruarus, I will annex what Slichtingius, the Polonian Knight, has,
in the Pelonian Confession, and Apology. In the Preface to the Confession, they
say, That the Apostles Creed is most Ancient, containing the most pure, and
Apostolical Truth, as first delivered; that therefore in Publishing the Faith
of their Churches to express their Consent with the whole World, they keep most
close unto this Creed, and although they esteem the third Part about the Holy
Ghost, not to be so Ancient, as the other two Parts, yet they Profess, that
they believe all contained in it to be most true. And in their Exposition of
what is said about Christ's being Dead, they declare, That then Christ's Soul
was made an Offering for Sin, that all those Scriptures which assign the
Expiation and Remission of our Sins to the Blood of Christ, do make it clear,
that Christ's Death was tanquam victima ^iacularis, that is, as an Expiatory
Sacrifice, or Victim.

Besides on these Words, [the Remission of Sin] its thus: We believe all past
Sins, how gross soever, and all Sins of Infirmity committed after the
Acknowledging of the Truth, are through the Obedience, Blood and Oblation of
Christfully ^^^^ven them, that have the Communion (...) formerly spoken of; For
this (...) say they,) Justification is not (...) the Law, or our own (...) That
this Remission of (...), and Justification is on our part ob^^^ed by ^^ith, and
Repeniance, and contrued unto us by the Fruits thereof.

This is that part of the Socinian Confession, Vid. Curcel. ^u^^ern. Differ.
Theo. Adver. Mares. Differ. 4. Sect. 13.
with which Stephen Curcellaeus twits honest Maresius, as what is more Sound
than what is embraced by him and other Calvinists

Michtingius in his Apology, (which was occasioned by an Edict of the Lords of
Holland and West Frieseland, for the supp essing all Socinian Prints and
Conventicles, which they sent out in pursuance of the Supplication made unto
them by the Deputies of the Synod of South and North Holland, approved of by
Triglandius, Heidanus, and Cocceius, Professors at Leiden; I say, in this
Apology, he does his utmost by using Orthodox Phrases, to make their Errors
look, as though they differd but little from the Common Faith; For (says he,)
'twas never in our thoughts to deny the Unity of the Trinity; that we do with
our whole Heart Believe, and openly own the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be
One, that we confess Christ to be God, ascribing to him that Divinity, which
appertains to the Son of God, the like of the Holy Ghost. And whereas we are
charged for Denying Christ's Satisfaction, Apol. pro verit. accusat. p. 12.
if it be meant of the thing which in the Holy Scriptures is assigned unto it,
we do most firmly believe, that Jesus Christ, to the end he might obtain for us
the Remission of Sins, has so far satisfied the Divine Will, P. 24.
that there is nothing wanting to a most full and Complete Satisfaction.

As to the Merit of Christ, if by it they mean his Perfect Obedience, and
Righteousness, we do freely confess, that Christ's Obedience for our obtaining
Eternal Life does much more abound to us, than Adam's Sin to our Condemnation,
Apol. 25.
not excluding our Obedience, which all that have received Faith and the Spirit
of Christ, have, more or less, whose Defects are through the Grace of God
supplied by Christ's most Complete and Perfect Obedience.

We acknowledge, that we are Sinners, Apol. p. 53.
and fall very short of the perfect Rule of Righteousness, and therefore sly
unto Christ, that we may be justified by him, without the Deeds of the Law --
nor do we by the Faith of Christ destroy the Law, as it respects Moral
Precepts, which is the true Righteousness, but establish it.

That Conversion is by the Power of the Spirit we never denied, unless as held
by such, as make Men to be but as Stocks, utterly rejecting and banishing from
the Christian Religion all Virtue, and Vice, Re^^ards and Punishments, P. 26.
leaving it destitute of all Encouragements to true Piety. P. 87.
We trust not to the Strength or Power of our own Will, knowing that unless it
be excited, cherished, and helped by a Heavenly Power, we cannot so much as
Will, much less Perform any thing -- and seeing we can neither begin, P. 65.
nor finish any thing without the help of God's Grace, we lift up our Prayers
and Thanksgivings unto God ^or do we deny the Resurrection, P. 76.
but with the Apostle we have our Hope in God, touching the Resurrection of the
^^^d, both of the Just and Unjust, believing that the Just shall be raised to
the Joys of an Eternal Life, and the Unjust to the Punishment of Everlasting
Fire, wherefore knowing the Terror of the Lord we persuade Men.

^ru^peorius, a ^ni^ht, and Counselor of the Flector of ^randenlurg, Przip^^v.
Apol. (...) ^^^^cen.
in his Apology for afflicted Innocence, directed to the F^^^lar, and Supreme
Prince of Prussia, seems to speak as Ortho loxly as any one could wish. For,
(says he) we with due Honor receive the Doctrine of the Triatry, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, in whose Name we are Baptized: Concerning the Divinity of
our Lord, We acknowledge him to be properly, and truly speaking the only
Begotten Son of God, not merely because of the I ominion, and Omnipotence given
to him, but because of that Divine Nature, which he received by the voluntary
Generation of his most loving Father, in which, the Character and Image of the
Divine Sub stance of the Father shines, and so we Worship, Adore, and Invoke
him as the True God, even by Nature, in a proper Sense, now and for ever
Blessed. Then of the Holy Ghost he says. Nothing can by any Man be said so
sublime concerning the Holy Spirit, which we do not willingly admit, so that
the Name and Title of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ remain peculiar to
the Omnipotent Person of the Father: Then concerning the Merit of Christ's
Death We acknowledge the Merit of the Death of Christ, and our Redemption
effected by his most precious Blood poured out, but so as that the Grace and
Favor of Forgiveness, remain owing to his most merciful Father.

He is positive, that touching Magistracy, they confess with the Apostle Paul,
that the Magistrate is the Minister of God to Punish, by the Sword, evil Doers,
and protect the Innocent, and that they are not to be removed out of the Church
of Christ, that in the other Articles of Religion, they hold nothing
Blasphemous, Heretical, or Absurd, not daring to deviate in the least from the
Apostle's Creed, and Holy Scriptures.

Whoever considers that what is here delivered by this Author, is done
Apologetically to put a stop to the troubles they endured, or at least, to get
'em mitigated, cannot but concur with me in concluding, that He uses these
Orthodox Phrases, to the end He, and they might be esteemed as Men Sound in the
Faith, far from holding the Heresies they were charged with, and therefore no
way deserving the Severities, that were only due to Blasphemous Heretics; and
yet, (as we shall hereafter show) as there is a mixture of Unfound Expressions,
even in the Places, where he speaks thus of the Trinity, and Christ's Divinity,
so does he otherwhere deny these Doctrines.

^nyedinus, Superintendent of the Unitarian Churches in Transylvania, in his
Preface to his Explication of those places in the Old and New Testament,
produced by the Orthodox to prove the Trinity; does positively aver, Enjed.
Praes^ad explicat. Loc. V. and N. Test.
That the whole they believe is owned by Papists, Lutheran, and Calvinist,
Namely, That Jesus Christ called the Son of God, the Father Almighty, Maker of
the Heavens and the Earth; even he who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and
Born of the Virgin, the Man Christ Jesus is the One, and only Mediator between
God, and Men, by whose Death Salvation is procured for us, and through whom
both Jew and Gentile have Access to the Father, and in whose Name, by the Holy
Ghost we obtain a Pardon, and an Assurance of Eternal Life. This is the sum of
the New Testament-Doctrine, and the Faith, which we constantly Profess, and
Defend, And who dares deny it? Do the Papist, Lutheran, or Calvinist? No, by no
means.

I could easily add many other Socinian Authors, speaking after this very way,
as if they Dissented not from the Orthodox in any Important Points: But these
being enough to Evince the Truth of my Assertion, I will go on to show, that
notwithstanding these seeming Approaches toward the Truth, they are at the
utmost distance from it, denying those glorious Doctrines, they would be
thought to embrace.

SECT. III.
The real Distance there is between the Socinian and Orthodox. That the
Difference lies in Fundamentals.

THAT they deny the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the Divinity of Jesus
Christ, and Personality of the Holy Spirit is the Burden of all their
Writings. Who can cast his Eye on Socinus, Slichtingius, Crellius, Wolzogenius,
and Smalcius, and not see how much they expose these Doctrines? Enjedinus has
a large Quarto to prove, that not one Word either in the Old or New Testament,
can be found to favor the Trinity, or the Divinity of Christ.

Franciscus Davidis, and George Blandrata, in their Refutation of George Major,
insinuate, that this Blessed Doctrine is a Papal Antichristian Invention. The
Blasphemies of Servetus may be seen in Calvin's Refutation of them, but too
vile at this time to be mentioned. And in Calvin's Explication of Valentinus
Gentilis his Perfidiousness, there is an account of his Opposition to the same
Truths. And whoever will, may consult Sandius his Antitrinitarian Bibliothec,
where is a large Catologue of Socinian Writers against the Trinity, etc.

And Christ's Satisfaction, which is really subverted by the denial of his
Divinity, is also expressly Exploded. Though they grant a Satisfaction, the
Payment of a Price, the enduring a Punishment, a Punishment equipollent to what
we have by our Sins deserved, yet they mean quite another thing than what is
generally understood by us; which, as soon as they have, by the use of Orthodox
Expressions, ensnared their Readers to put a favorable Sense upon their
Writings, they discover, Insinuating, that the Satisfaction, they, and as they
will have it, the Holy Scriptures are for, is not to God's Justice, it is not
properly by paying a (...) a Price, a full Price, nor an Equivalent to what we
deserved: It is only a Satisfaction improperly, and in a Figurative, a
Metaphorical Sense, and that only to the Divine Will, and called Satisfaction,
for no other Reason than, because God is pleased freely to accept on it as such.
Ruarus therefore having called Christ's Sufferings a (...), a Price,
Equipollent to what our Sins deserved, adds, Not that it is so any otherwise
than Exclementi De^^^cceptatione, that is to say, Christ's Sufferings are
Satisfactory through God's Gracious Acceptance; not to his Justice, but Will,
which Smalcius, in his Answer to Smiglecius his Preface to his Discourse about
Christ^s Satisfaction, does thus explain. We do acknowledge that Christ did
satisfy in all those things imposed on him by God, Small. Fraef. ad Smigl. de
Satisf.
for the procuring our Salvation, but Christ did not satisfy that Justice of
God, which cannot suffer any Sin to go unpunished, and appease God's Anger,
reconc^le him unto us, by enduring those Punishments in our Stead, that were
due unto us, and meriting Salvation for us.

Though there can be no Redemption without a full, and satisfying Price, and
notwithstanding the Holy Scriptures speak much of Redemption, and of a Price, a
full Price, and of Christ's Redeeming us by his Blood, as the Price; which
Expressions can import nothing less than a proper Satisfaction; yet have they
the Confidence to assert, not only that Christ's Redemption may be, but must be
without Satisfaction; that such is the transcending Mercy of God in our
Redemption, that it cannot be otherwise. That the Righteousness of God exacting
Satisfaction, in order to the Pardon of our Sins is not so much as to be
mentioned, that there is no such Righteousness in God; That it is inconsistent
with the Excellency of his Grace and Mercy. So Small. ubi sup.

To put the best Colors they can upon this their odd Notion, they having
granted that (...), Price, and full Price, does signify a proper Price paid
for the Redeeming a Slave out of Captivity, they averr that in the Holy
Scriptures* it must be taken, otherwise, viz. improperly, and Metaphorically.

Wolzogenius in his Commentary on Matthew, interpreting these Words, Chap.
20.28.
[The Son of Man gave his Life a (...), a Ransom for many] confesses, That
(...), or (...), Wolz. Mat. 20.28.
Ransom does properly signify the Payment of a Price for a Captive, and a
Liberation or Deliverance from his Captivity: However, it is taken, amongst
Profane Writers, and almost every where in the Holy Scripture, Metaphorically,
for a Liberation; without respect to the Payment of any Price, -- for it cannot
(says he) be proved, That Christ did make any Payment to the Justice of God,
by his Death, for there is no such Justice in God, as does exact Vindictive
Punishment for Sins.

Crellius, in his Answer to Grotius, de Satisfactione, Crel. Respons. ad Grot.
de Satisf. c. 6. Socin. Praelect. Theol. 6.19.
argues after the same manner Wolzogenius does; and what both urge, was more
fully done before by Socinus himself, in his Theological Prelections.

As Redemption, which properly is the Paying a full Price for the Deliverance
of a Slave, carries in it Satisfaction, and therefore by the Enemies of
Christ's Satisfaction, the Scriptures, which speak of Redemption without the
least shadow of a Reason, are turned into Metaphors; so Christ's ^earing our
Sorrows though granted by them, meets with the same Treatment, For as Smalcius.
We confess, that Christ did truly bear our Griefs, and Sorrows, Smal^. contra
Smigl. de Satisf. c. 6. p. 223.
but we deny it to be in that manner which Smaglecius affirms it to be, namely,
that Christ bore the Punishment of our Sins, for as in this manner, it is
Impossible, Blasphemous, and Pernicious; so there are other ways in which
Christ may be said to bear our Sins, and they, such as are more conform to the
Holy Scriptures, more worthy of God, and safe for Men; namely, That Christ
suffered Death by Reason of our Sins, That he would never have Suffered, if Man
had not Sinned; and that he himself bore our Sins, that is, abolished them, it
being most certain, that the Word [Bearing] in Scripture, signifies a Power to
take away Further, -- God exacted not any Punishment due ex Justitia, being an
absolute Sovereign, Smalc. ubi sup. p. 293. and p. 300.
who can, as he pleases, forgive the Sins committed against him; nor did
Christ offer up himself to bear the Punishment of our Sins; nor if Christ had
so offered up himself, might God accept it. For, if God had Punished the
Innocent for the Nocent, he would have been not only Cruel, but Injust, and
Unwise. And within a few Pages after this, he insinuates, as if the Doctrine of
Satisfaction, as held by the Orthodox, makes God more Cruel than any Tyrant.

And whereas it is expressly asserted by the Holy Ghost, in 2 Cor. 5. and last
Verse, That Christ is made Sin, to take off the Force of the Argument we draw
from thence, Smalcius does assert, Smalc. Refut. Smigl. de satisf. c. 7. p. 229.
That to be made Sin cannot signify a Sacrifice for Sin, but Christ is said to
be made Sin, because he was dealt with by God, as if he had been a Sinner, from
which 'twill not follow, that therefore Christ made Satisfaction for us, or
endured the same Punishment that was due to us. -- We all acknowledge, that on
him, who knew no Sin, the Punishment that was due unto Sinners, was inflicted,
but not the same Punishment, nor what was Equivalent unto it, was, or could be
laid on him -- wherefore, what we have said concerning laying the Punishments
due for our Sins on Christ: By Punishments we mean Afflictions; which signifies
no more than what was carefully delivered a Page or two before, Smalc. ubi sup.
p. 226. Slicht. Annot. in 2 Cor. 5.21. Crell. Respons. ad Grot. de satisf. c.
4. Apol. Pol. Equit. p. 13.14. Przipcov. Cogit. in ^oc.
when he desires it may be Remarked, That when they speak of Christ's being
Punished for our Sins, they mean only that he was Afflicted. The same is
affirmed both by Slichtingius, and Crellius.

Again, they own no other Imputation of Righteousness* besides that of our
Faith, for, says the Polonian Knight, in his Apology, The Scriptures makes no
mention of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but simply of a
Righteousness imputed unto us by God through Christ, which is, when God does of
his Grace and Mercy, raise our Faith in Christ a living Faith, working by Love,
so high, that by it we, who are guilty of most gross Sins, may be esteemed
Just, and Righteous, which is also called the Righteousness of God; not ours,
because it is given us freely, and not for any Merit in us.

Now, as they do thus set the Imputation of an Inherent Righteousness of our
own in the stead of Christ; so, notwithstanding their many Pretenses about
ascribing Conversion to the Power of the Spirit, they mean nothing less.

Ruarus, in his Epistle to Peuschelius, Ruar. ad Joan. Peuschel. Epist. 9.
does very fully express the Socinian Sense. Conversion, which lies in a
Reformation of the Understanding, approving the Gospel, and of the Will,
resolved to Obey, or actually observing it, is caused immediately, by that
Conception, we have in the Mind, concerning God, and Christ, and the things
appertaining to Religion, and by such Arguments as move the Understanding to
approve, and the Will to obey the Gospel. This Conception is begotten in the
Mind, either by hearing the Word Preached, or Reading it; whence it is, that
the Word, whether by Voice, or Writing expressed, is a kind of Remote Cause of
Conversion, yet such as ought necessarily to go before, and if diligently
heard, or Read, is ordinarily sufficient to begin it in all, excepting some
dull Persons, whose Minds are too much under the influence of wicked Opinions;
and Wills distorted by a long custom in Sin. I say, that the Word is sufficient
to begin our Conversion, for, I do not deny, but that after we have rightly
used our Natural Faculties, the Help of the Divine Spirit is given for the
increasing the Strength is in us, to the completing and finishing of our
Conversion, which yet we could not know how to use, to so Holy an End, unless
we had been first moved by God, and excited by his Word. Hence it does appear,
that it is God, who works in us both to Will, and to i^o; the first, when
invited by a putting us in mind of the Gospel; the other, when by the moving of
his Spirit, he strengthens us; yet so, that there is still Room left for the
being excited to Virtue, by the Proposals of Rewards, and deterred from Vice,
by the threatening of Punishments. To which I add, That if any will have it,
that this Knowledge in our Mind, which precedes our Assent, be rather a part of
our Conversion, than a Cause, I will not content with him, only then the Word
of God Preached, or Read, must not be esteemed the Mediate, but immediate Cause
of our Conversion. Thus far Ruarus, who makes it very manifest, that the
Socinian Notion, touching the Power of the Spirit to Convert, lies in
ascribing the great turn from Darkness unto Light, and from the Power of Satan
to God, unto the Hearing, or Reading of the Word without any special Help of
God's Spirit.

There being then so great a Difference between the Orthodox Expressions, used
by the Socinians, and the corrupt Sense fo^s^ed in, under their Covert, we need
not wonder at Ruarus his asserting, that the Papists amongst all other Sects,
have most Reason to be kind unto the Socinian, for how Orthodox soever they
would seem to be, they embrace the most corrupt and hurtful parts of the Popish
Religion. I will clear this Assertion, by giving you Ruarus his own Words,
which are amongst the Reasons given by him to show, why the Papists ought not
to be so very angry with the Unitarians, whom they call Socinians, or Arians.
Another Reason (says he) is, Ruar.
because in the chief Articles of the Christian Faith, they agree with the
Church of Rome more than any other Sect whatsoever, namely, in the Doctrine of
Predestination, ^lection, and Conditional Reprobation, the Universality of
God's Grace, and Fruits of Christ's Death, of free Will, and its Interest in
the Conversion of Man to the Faith; of Justification, which is made effectual
by Charity, of the Necessity of Good Works, which they urge more vehemently
than any other Church, of the Possibility of keeping all God's Commands, of the
Difference between the Old and New Testament, preferring the New before the
Old, with respect to the Promises and Precepts, of the Difference between
Venial, and deadly Sins.

It is also manifest, That how Orthodox soever Przipeovius would have his
afflicted Innocence esteemed; and, though he differs from Socinus about the
Divinity of Christ, affirming him to be God, truly, in a proper Sense, and by
Nature: Yet he is as far from the Truths he would be thought to embrace, as any
of that Gang. For in that very place, where he opposes them, who ascribe to
Jesus Christ Divine Attributes, and yet deny his Divine Nature, to expose the
Ridiculousness of this Notion, he tells his Readers, that it is as Absurd as the
Doctrine received by the Orthodox about Distinction of Persons in the same
Essence: And, although he speaks of Christ's being God truly, in a proper
Sense, yet denies him to be Coeternal, and Co equal with the Father, and makes
him to be but a Subordinate God, Przipcov. Hypera. p. c. 4.
not properly God, and Man at the same, but at distinct Seasons, first Man,
then God: Nor does he hold, that the Holy Ghost is a Person distinct from the
Father, and is of the same Opinion with the Socinians about Satisfaction,
giving the same Interpretation of those Texts that speak of [Christ's being
made Sin] and [giving himself a full Price] that Wolzogenius. Crellius, and
Slichtingius have done before him, as may be seen in his Cogitations on the New
Testament.

What Socinus, and his Followers have herein done, it is very probable they
learned from their chief Leader, Bernhardinus Ochine; who, Writing more
Academicorum, did not only so deceitfully deliver his Sense, as to bring the
Truth in doubt, but urges Arguments so closely in defense of Error, as to give
it the Advantage.

Though Sandius, in his Antitrinitarian Bibliothec, accuses Hoornbeck, for
misunderstanding Zarnovecius; and Zarnovecius, for misrepresenting Matters of
Fact, when in the Preface of his Answer to Socinus de Servatore, he makes
Ochinus to be his Master, from whom he had his Errors, Sandius is under the
Mistake, and Zarnovecius in the right.

Zarnovecius, in his Preface, Zarvov. contra Socinum de servat. Praef.
having in one Paragraph shown too great an Agreement between Socinus, the
Jews, and Turks, does in the next assure us, That Socinus had not his
Blasphemies against the Son of God out of the Holy Scriptures, nor from the
ancient consent of godly Men, professing the Orthodox Faith from the Apostle's
Days to our Times, but out of the Dialogues of his Countryman, and undoubtedly
his Master Ochinus, who had written at large thirty years before.

By [Master] Zarnovecius cannot well be supposed to mean any more than One from
whom Socinus took his Notions, which is freely confessed by Socinus himself,
Socin. Epist. Vadovit.
in an Epistle to Vadovita Professor at Cracovia, where he is positive, That as
he never Published any thing, but by the Importunity of others, so the very
Notions complained or, had been long before propagated by others both in
Poland, and elsewhere, particularly by Ochinus, as Zarnovecius had observed.
For, really, that Opinion (says Socinus) is clearly asserted, and inculcated
in those Dialogues; and it is in short, this, That Christ did indeed, by his
Blood wash away, and expiate our Sins, but in another Manner than that vulgarly
received, viz. [That he, by pouring out his Blood, paid to Divine Justice, all
that we, by reason of our Sins, were indebted to it; or, that he made
Satisfaction for us, and our Sins] for neither was there any need of it, nor
would God require the Punishment of our Sins from another, or transact our
Debts on him, but freely forgive them. This Passage of Socinus does at once
clear Zarnovecius from Sandius his Charge, and prove Ochinus to be for the very
Notions, Socinus most heartily espoused, which compared with the Profession
Ochinus makes of the Orthodox Faith, and his manner of handling it, may
convince an Unbyassed Mind, that he made the first Publication of those Errors
in that deceitful way, since taken up by his Socinian Followers; for though
Socinus himself asserts, That Ochinus openly delivered and inculcated the same
Notion about Satisfaction he was charged with, yet Ochinus does it by his
Friend Jacobus, the other Dialogist, pretending an Answer to the Arguments he
had urged, as if he had been a Zealous Asserter of the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction.

SECT. IV.
A Reflection on the deceitful Methods of the Socinians.

THESE few Instances are, I presume, sufficient to Evince, that the Socinians
are not the Fairest, and most Candid Adversaries, nor ever can be justly so
esteemed, except Deceit, double Dealing, and Hypocrisy be made the Ingredients
of true Candor, and a generous handling of Controversies: For (as you have
seen) their Method is first to make their Heresies look most like the Doctrines
they oppose, and as soon as they find their ensnared Proselites able to bear
it, they take of their Mask, acknowledge the difference to be great, and then
go on to treat the Doctrines, that just before they would be thought to be for
(to use Dr. Edwards his Word) most n="*" See Dr Edward's Preface to his
Preservative against Socinianism.
scurrilously, and with the greatest Impudence, insinuating, as if they had
been the only Masters of Reason, and sincerest Professors of true Piety and
Holiness.

They are so humble, and modest, that it is become impossible for them to
forbear either the Despising others, or Applauding themselves. Socinus
therefore could not but write a Treatise on purpose to prove, That it is the
Duty of every good Man among the Reformed in Poland, Socin. in Append.
to separate from them as from Persons too Impious to be Communicated with, and
join themselves to the more Holy Assemblies of those, falsely and undeservedly
(to use his own Words) called Afrians, and Eb^onites. He takes it for granted,
that the Reformed were very Vicious and Debauched, and assigns the Reason
partly to their Doctrines, and partly to their Neglect of Discipline: And
glories in the Holiness of their own Assemblies, pretending, that such are
their Principles, and such the exactness of their Discipline, that it could not
well be otherwise.

This Book of Socinus was answered by Balthazzar Meisner, Slicht. cont. Meis.
p. 485.
a Lutheran, but defended by Slichtingius, who to expose the Reformed,
enumerates many vile Practices, observed in common by them: And in Vindication
of Socinus, and his Followers, makes no scruple to assert, That their Glorying
not being Rash, but well grounded, is no more than what the Apostle has done
before them; Ubi sup. p. 488.
nor did the Pharisee Sin in Publishing his Virtues, but in Exalting himself,
and Contemning others, when he should humbly have sought for the Pardon of his
own Sins, a thing they endeavored, even when they modestly mention the things
done by their Assemblies, that were worthy of Praise.

But though they usurp to themselves this Title, viz. [Great Masters of Reason)
they will not allow Reason the Privilege of being Competent enough to discover
the plainest and most necessary Truth in the whole of our Religion; namely,
That there is a God, and in some of those very Instances, in which they ascribe
most unto it, they oppose its clearest Maxims, which is most effectually done
in their Essays, to destroy the Divine Nature of our Blessed Redeemer, where,
struggling between plain Scripture, and their own Error; to maintain the
latter, which lies in their making him but a Finite Creature, and own what is
the burden of the former, that Infinite Perfections belong unto him, and he
the proper Object of our highest Adoration and Worship. They contradict the
clearest Reason as grossly as ever the Papists do, by making a Finite Subject
the Seat of Infinite Perfections.

Of this, Przipcovius being aware, he roundly asserts, That Jesus Christ is
truly God, in a proper Sense, and truly Man, but not at the same time; when on
Earth, he was properly Man, and after his Resurrection, and not till then truly
and properly God. A Notion as gross as the former, a true God in a proper
Sense, and by Nature, and yet a God, but Sixteen, or Seventeen Hundred Years
ago.

Nor are they more happy in their Morals, for (beside their Hypocrisy) their
denying all secret Assistances, and the certainty of God's foreseeing all
future Events, that depend upon the freedom of Man's Will, (as a very learned
Person has lately observed) must cut off the Exercise of many Devotions, and
much weaken our Confidence in God, our Patience under all Misfortunes, and our
Expectations of a Deliverance in due time. Further, their vacating and making
void the Fourth Commandment, which is attended with a neglect of the Lord's
Day, is an inlet into all manner of Vice, and the very Notions they frame of
God to support their other Errors, are such as lessen the Fear Men ought to
have of God's Judgments. And as Dr. Edwards has well observed. Socinus, by
denying the Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ, has plainly over-turn'd the
Foundation, Preser. against Socin. p. 42. 43.
upon which the Christian Church, and Religion have been built, and by his
other Methods has given a shrewd blow to all Religion whatsoever, whether
Natural, or Reveal^d, so that an unwary Reader, by perusing his Writings, may
find himself an Atheist, before he well perceives how he comes to be so, as he
says in another Case, viz. His Opinion against Hell Torments, that he had so
contrived the Matter, Vt lector prius sentiat Doctrinam istam sibi jam
persuasum esse quam suaderi animadvertat.

When I most impartially weigh these things, I mean, their deceitful Attempts
to ensnare the Unwary to favor their Opinions, their Contemptuous Treatment of
the Blessed Mysteries of the Gospel, and its Advocates, together with their
assuming to themselves the Character of being the most Rational Divines, and
Men of Excelling Piety and Holiness, even when none do more contradict the
plainest Maxims of Reason, and lay a surer Foundation for the utmost
Immoralities: When I lay these things together, I am so far from thinking, as
those great Men do, who represent them, to be the fairest Adversaries, that I
rather incline at least to fear, that the Account given of them by the despised
Lubbertus, which I will lay down in his own Words, is most true They are (says
he) Arrogant and Proud, who measure all things by va^n Glory, and empty Names
of Honor, when they see that those, who in other Disciplines invent some new
Notions to be Commended, they think it will be Laudable in them to Innovate in
Sacred Theology. And being unskilled in true Divinity, they despair of gaining
a Name by Explicating, or Defending the Orthodox Doctrine: But burning with a
desire of Praise, they disturb every thing, that they may be Famous, and had
rather be talked of for breaking of Churches, than grow old without Fame in the
true and Orthodox Religion. When they perceive other Learned Men to be
preferred before them, they are angry; and what is most base, they Dissemble
and Counterfeit the Orthodox Religion, pretend to a Zeal for defending sound
Doctrine; Lubbert. Praef. ad lib. de Jesu servat. cont. Socin. p. 2.
swear to our received Confessions and Catechisms, and with their own Hands
subscribe to what they swore; and yet, they with utmost Endeavors oppose the
Sound, and publicly embraced Doctrine, and craftily instill a new and wicked
One into their Disciples, and carry about Calumnies against the Orthodox.

Thus much touching the Methods used by Foreign Socinians to insinuate, and
spread their Errors, I will in the next place show how exactly they are
followed by the Remonstrants, and then acquaint the Reader with the Arts of out
English Socinians.

SECT. V.
The Arminians imitate the Socinians. They pretend an Agreement with the
Orthodox.

THE Arminians, to the end, they might with the greater Success insinuate their
Errors, do also their utmost to cover them. Nothing therefore (they say) can be
found amongst their Assertions, but what is conform to the Holy Scriptures, the
Heidelberg Catechism established A. D. 1578. by a Synod of Dort, for the
public use of their Churches, the Belgic, and other Reformed Confessions.
Armin. Epist. ad Hypolit.


Arminius, in his Epistle to Hypolitus a Collibus, protests, that he never,
either in the Church, or University, taught any thing, but what was according
to the Holy Scriptures, the Belgic Confession, and Heidelberg Cat^echism.

In a Letter to Johannes Matthisius. These things, which I have at this time
delivered, as they do agree with the Holy Scriptures, so they are not contrary
to our Confession, and Catechism, for which reason I do the more freely express
my self.

In another to Sebastian Egbert. I do publicly preach to a numerous Auditory,
and frequently dispute when my Reverend Colleagues are present, at which times I
have used the greatest freedom, in the Answers I have returned to Objections:
Besides I have a private College, at which thirty Students, or more attend; and
yet never has there been the least mention, that I ever uttered any thing
contrary to the Holy Scriptures, or our Confessions, and Catechism; although
some of my Colleagues, whose Zeal is such for the Purity of Doctrine, that they
would never have been silent, had they whereof to accuse me, have been
instigated thereunto. And whereas it is spread abroad, that I direct my Pupils
to Read the Writings of the Jesuits, and Coornhertius, the slander is so gross,
that I cannot find softer Words to express it by, than to say, It is a down
right Lie, for I never advised so much as one to any such thing. But this
indeed I do, after the Reading of the Scriptures, which I do most earnestly
press, yea more than any other, as the whole Academy can testify, I do direct
to the reading of Calvin's Commentaries, which I praise much more than
Helmichius himself ever did, as he has confessed. For I do esteem them to
excel all others so much in the Interpretation of Scriptures, that there are
none to be compared with them, in the Bibliotheca Patrum, that there was a more
excellent Spirit in him than in any other: As for Common Places, I Recommed his
Institutions to be read after the Catechism, as containing the best Explication
of it. For the truth of this I can bring a multitude of Witnesses.

In a Declaration of his Sentiments made to the States of Holland, and
West-Fr^ezeland, (wherein are the Reasons, why he declined to give any Answer
to the Questions proposed by Lansbergius, Fraxinus, and Dolegius, Deputies from
the Synod of South-Holland, and by Eogardus, and Rolandus, Deputies from the
Synod of North-Holland) his endeavor is to show an Agreement between his
Notions in each of the controverted Articles, and the Belgic Confession and
Catechism. I will give you what he says touching the Grace of God in
Conversion, and the Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God.

What concerns the Grace of God, I do, first of all, (says he) believe it to
be that gracious and free Affection, whereby God does take pity on a miserable
Sinner, by which he does, in the first place, give his Son, that whoever
believes in him, may have Everlasting Life; then does he justify him, and give
him the Privilege of a Child by Adoption, even a Right to Salvation. 2. This
Grace is an infusion of all the Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which are for the
Regenerating, and renewing of the Understanding, as well as Will, and
Affections, such as Faith, Hope, Charity, etc. without which Gifts of Grace no
Man is able to Think, Will, or Do any good thing. 3. It is the continued
Assistance, and help of the Holy Spirit, according unto which the Holy Ghost
does excite and stir up the Regenerate unto Good, by infusing into them
Spiritual and Heavenly Thoughts, inspiring them with good Desires, and enabling
them actually to Will that which is good; yea more, according to this Grace,
the Spirit does Will, and work with the Man, that what he Wills, he may be
enabled to Perfect. After this manner I ascribe unto Grace, the Beginning,
Continuation, and Consummation of all Good, even so far, that a Regenerate Man
without this Preventing, Exciting, Continued, and Cooperating Grace, can never
think, will, or do any good, nor resist the feeblest Temptation to Evil. How
then can I be said to be injurious to the Grace of God, or attribute too much
to free Will? The Controversy is not about the Actions, or Operations ascribed
to Grace; I am for as much as any Man whatsoever; but it is only about the
Mode, or Manner of its Oprations, whether it be by an Irresistible Force, or
not? Here, indeed, I do with the Holy Scriptures, hold, that many resist the
Holy Ghost, and reject the offered Grace.

And in his Letter to Hypolitus a Collibus, Concerning Grace, and free Will,
according to the Scriptures, and consent of the Orthodox, I do declare, That
Free Will without Grace, can neither begin, nor perfect any true Spiritual good
Work, and least any think I do (as Pelagius did) play with the Word, [Grace] I
mean that Grace, which is the Grace of Christ, and belongs to Regeneration;
which I hold to be simply, and absolutely necessary for the inlightning the
Understanding, regulating the Affections, and inclining the Will to what is
good, that infuses saving Light into the Mind, inspires the Affections with
Holy Desires, and boweth down the Will to act according to that saving Light,
and these good Desires. This Grace, Prevents, Begins, Accompanies, and Follows;
It stirs up, helps, and works, that we may Will; and that we may not Will in
vain, Co-operates with us. It secures us from Temptations, Assists, and helps
us against them, upholding us against the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. In
the Conflict it gives us the Victory, and if at any time, we are overcome, and
fall in the Temptation, this Grace recovers us, establishes and gives new
Strength, making us more watchful. It begins the Work of Salvation, promoves,
perfects, and consummates it. The mind of a Carnal Man, is, I confess,
dark'ned, his Assections vile and inordinate, his Will disorderly; yea, he is
dead in Sin, and that Preacher is most highly esteemed by me, who attributes
most to Grace, if so be, that, whilst he is extolling Grace, he does neither
Impeach God's Justice, nor take from Man Free Will to what is Evil. What any
Man can desire more, I know not.

About the Justification of a Man in the sight of God. Jacoh. Armin. Decla,
sentent. p. 127.
I am not sensible (says he) that I either teach, or hold any thing but what
is Unanimously received by the Reformed Protestant Churches, and most exactly
agrees with their Sense. There has been, I know, a Controversy in this
particular, between Piscator, and the French Churches, as whether the
Obedience, or Righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to Believers, and in
which the'r Righteousness before God does consist, be only Christ's Passive
Obedience, as Piscator affirmed? Or whether it be also his Active, which all
his Life he rendered to the Law of God, and that Holiness, in which he was
conceived, as the Gallick Churches hold. But I never interested my self in it.

And how oddly soever, he expressed himself in this place, he would still be
thought a good Calvinist. Armin. Decla. ubi sup.
For (says he) whatever I have in this Point delivered, I differ not so much
from Calvin, but that I am ready with my own Hand to subscribe what he has on
this Subject, in the third Book of his Institutes.

In his Disputations, Armin. Disput. These. 48. Sect. 5.
he is more particular, speaking distinctly of the several Causes of
Justification: Of the Meritorious, and Material, thus:

That Christ, by his Obedience, and Righteousness, is the Meritorious Cause of
Justification, who may therefore be deservedly called the Procatartick Cause.
The same, Christ in his Obedience and Righteousness is also the Material Cause
of our Justification, that is, as God gives to us Christ for Righteousness, and
imputes his Obedience and Rignteousness unto us; in respect to this double
Cause, namely, the Meritorious, and Material, we are said to be constituted
Just, or Righteous, by Christ's Obedience.

In this place Arminius (you see) does distinguish between the Meritorious, and
Material Cause of Justification, the One being Extrinsick, belonging to the
Efficient; the other Intrinsic, or made the Matter of our Justification. The
first is Christ, by his Obedience; the other is Christ for Righteousness;
Christ Given, and his Righteousness Imputed. He was too Learned to confound the
Material, and Intrinsic with the Meritorious, which is an External, and
Efficient Cause, asserting, that as Christ is the Meritorious Cause, so he, as
an Efficient, justifies us by his Righteousness: As he is the Material, he is
given by God for Righteousness, and his Righteousness is imputed to us for
Justification.

His Thoughts touching the Instrumental, Formal Cause, he expresses in these
Words. Faith is the Instrumental Cause, Armin. ubi sup. Sect. 7, 8.
or Action, by which we apprehend Christ, and his Righteousness offered unto us
by God, according to the Order and Promise of the Gospel; where it is said,
That whoever Believes shall be Justified and Saved. The Form of Justification
is the gracious Estimation of God, whereby he imputes the Righteousness of
Christ unto us, and imputes Faith for Righteousness; that is, God does forgive
unto us who believe our Sins, for the sake of Christ apprehended by Faith, and
esteems us as Righteous in him, which Estimation has annexed unto it the
Adoption of Sons, and a Collation of Right to the Inheritance of Eternal Life.

And among the Corollaries deduced from what he had asserted in his
Disputation, he is positive, That it is impossible for Faith, and Works to
Concur to Justification; that Christ did not Merit, that we be justified by
the Dignity and Merit of Faith, much less that we be justified by the Merit of
Works. But the Merit of Christ is opposed to Justification by Works, and Faith
opposed to Merit.

These Appeals to the Catechism, and Confession, and the consent of the
Reformed Protestants, his recommending Calvin's Commentaries, and Institutes to
his Pupils; and these, and such other Passages, make it clear, That Arminius
would fain be thought an Orthodox Calvinist; which was also the desire and
endeavor of his endeared Companions, and Followers, even of Vytenbogart,
Borrius, Poppius, Grievenchovius, Arnoldus, Corvinus, and Episcopius, at their
Conference, A. D. 1611. with Ruardus, Plancius, Becius, Fraxinus, Bogardus, and
Festus Homnius at the Hague, where 'twas their care in each of the Five
Articles, to show an Agreement between themselves and the Heidelberg Catechism,
the Belgic and other Reformed Confessions.

There is so much to this purpose in Bertius his Scripta Adversaria Collationis
Hagiensis, that the mention of a very small part thereof would fill up more
Room than I can spare for this purpose; besides, this very Method has been
taken by some later Arminians. Curcel. Dissert. 4. de Justisica. Sect. 7.
Curcellaeus, to clear himself from the Charge of Heresy, does in the Doctrine
of Justification, protest, That he does not think any Man is justified in the
sight of God, for the Merit or Dignity of his Works: But only through the mere
Grace, which is in Christ's Blood, do we obtain the Remission of Sin, we
amending our Ways, not walking according to the Flesh, but according to the
Spirit, Romans 8.13.

When its objected, that his making Repentance necessary to Justification,
which includes good Works, destroys its being freely of Grace, he Answers, Not
that Repentance, Curcel. ubi sup. Sect. 14
or our Works do Merit any thing from God; or are so perfect, as that, if God
should strictly search into them, they could stand before him in Judgment. God
forbid, that I should assert any such thing; but this I say, they are
necessary, because God will not make us partakers of the Salvation, purchased
by Christ's Blood, by any other Rule or Condition. And that he may the more
plausibly insinuate into the Minds of his Readers, his Orthodoxy in this
Matter, he tells us, That they who hold Repentance, and Conversion to be
required in order to Pardon, as the greatest part of Protestants, he thinks at
this time do, cannot contradict this Doctrine: For (says he) Remission of Sins
and Justification are with them equipollent, which may be safely enough
asserted; For, though they may be as things diverse separated from each other;
yet God according to the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant, forgives no Man's Sins,
but at the same time esteems him Righteous, and promises to give him the Reward
of Righteousness, which is Eternal Life, which is also carried in the full
Pardon of all our Sins: For, seeing our Sins must be reduced to these two
Heads, namely, Sins of Commission, and of Omission, He, Curcel. ubi sup. Sect.
9^
whose Sins of both sorts are pardoned, must be considered as perfectly
Righteous, and therefore worthy of the Reward.

SECT. VI.
The Difference between the Arminians, and the Orthodox.

BUT what Care soever Arminius, and his Partakers, heretofore, and the more
wary and fearful have since taken to cover the dangerous Notions they are for,
and appear as like the Orthodox, as may be; yet, unless they would abandon all
Essays to propagate their Dogmata, 'twas impossible for them, when most
cautious, perfectly to conceal either their Notions, or Designs.

'Twas therefore a vexatious Affliction to Arminius, Epist. Vytenbog. p. 55.
(as he often told Vytenbogardus) that he could not meet with Men of Learning, to
whom he might freely impart his Sentiments. This one thing I greatly bewail,
and lament, Epist. Vytenbog. p. 121.
(says he) that there is no one I can venture to converse with. The Reason he
assigns for this his Complaint, was the prevailing Humor, then amongst the
Orthodox, to call every thing Heresy, which they approved not, even when they
themselves either neglected close Study, or were destitute of that Learning,
See his Epi^^l^ to Vytenbogard. p. 57.
which was necessary to search into those deep Mysteries, whereby Arminius,
whose Learning and Abilities were too great to be confined within the old
narrow Circle of solid Divinity, where Men of as much Learning, and deeper
Judgment delighted to abide, breaks out, and makes Inquiries into the profound
and unscrutable things of God, where he was bewildred, and scon lost himself.

Had he been as gently treated by all, as he was by that profound Scholar,
Arminius's Intimacy with Juni* was A. D. 1597. Junius dyed A.D. 1602.
Franciscus Junius, he might have escaped the Snare, but this great Man soon
dying after Arminius had freely opened himself unto him, and others, being
severe in their Condemning his Inquiries, he had none to Confer with, but
Vytenbogard, and Adrian Borrius; Men whose Inclinations too much suited his own
to be a Balance to him in his Indagations. By these Men Arminius is confirmed
in the Errors his own Mind disposed him unto, and were then thrown in his way
by the Socinians, who had furbish'd up several Pelagian Heresies about
Predestination, These Writings were burnt. A.D. 1598.
Orig'nal Sin, and Free Will, which about this time, on the burning the
Writings of Ostorodius, and Voidovius, were as an Introduction to Socinianism,
Vid. Frid. Spanhem. F. Elench. co^tro^. p. 219*
crastily insinuated by Theodore Kemp, Koornhert and others.

Arminius, being thus provoked by the angry Passions of some, enticed by the
Flatteries of others, and undoubtedly instigated too much by his own Spirit, is
fixedly set against the Calvinian Doctrines, which he labors to Undermine,
even when he professed the most Zeal for them. For, although in pursuance of
Vytenbogardus's earnest Request, Armin. Epist. Vytenbog. p. 213.
Arminius was very careful (as he assured him he would be) to mention nothing
Dissonant from the Heidelberg Catechism, and Belgic Confession, Armin. Epist.
Vytenbog. p. 213
and boldly undertook to defend all he wrote by them, yet 'twas only, that
thereby he might the more effectually ensnare his Scholars to a Closure with
his unsound Principles; for 'twas his labor to get a review of the Catechism
and Confession, in order to a substantial Change or total Remove. Ep. Armin.
Vytenb. p. 202.


In a Declaration of his Judgment, made unto the States of Holland, and
West-Friezland, he ventures to offer his Reasons for the Review of both; which
being promised by a late Synod of South Holland, he was emboldened to do Some
of his Reasons are, that it might appear to all, they leaned chiefly on the
word of God, in matters Religious, that the Cathechism and Confession being
written by Men who are Fallible, might contain in them some one Error or other;
and it was not at all unmeet for a National Synod to enquire whether they did
agree in every part with the word of God; even for the words, and manner of
speaking, as well as touching their real Sense? Whether there be not somewhat
in them made necessary to Salvation, which is not in Truth so? whether there be
not some Words and Forms of speech used, which may be diversely understood, and
so give too much occasion to strifes and contentions! Whether there be not some
things in them repugnant to each other? many other enquires he made, which
sufficiently show, that Arminius could not heartily close with all he had
subscribed unto, and therefore as he rejoiced at the news of a n="(a)" Epist.
Vytenbog. p. 212. 213. Ubi sup. p. 123.
review, so nothing was more grievous to him than to here of a frequent
repeating their Subscriptions, which he compares to the Spanish and Trent
Inquisition.

In his Apology, and Answer to the one and thirty Articles, said to contain the
Opinions of himself and Adrian Borrius; he gives a particular account, how he
was by his Friend betrayed in too free a discovery of his dissatisfaction with
the Catechism and Confession: For (says he) about two Months ago, a certain
Minister would fain know, why I was for a submitting the Catechism and
Confession to the Examination of a National Synod? to whom I freely replied;
that my sense of the thing was included in this Syllogism, viz. Every Humane
Writing, not (...), not of Divine Inspiration, and consequently, what might
contain in it Error, may, yea must be examined, when it may lawfully, and
orderly be done in a Synod, to which such Examinations belong: But such are the
Cathechism and Confession; therefore, to prove his Assumption, he gave a
particular instance out of the Catechism, which instance, as he too justly
complains, was soon in every bodies mouth. But though Arminius his Friend did ill
to betray him, yet it is hereby manifest, that notwithstanding his pretentions
to an agreement with the Catechism and Confession, he did really Dissent from
them.

The next step made, to show a Dissatisfaction, was by them, who were to
prepare matters for the Synod, at which time they proposed, that until the
Examination was over, and all things settled, there might be no more
Subscriptions imposed; and that the Obligation might be taken off from them,
who had already subscribed.

This Proposal, was no sooner made by Arminius and Vytenbogard, but the
Calvinists are alarmed, and think on nothing less than that the design is to
make a Change in the Doctrines of Faith: Several Letters are therefore written
unto the Learned in diverse Countries, particularly by Lubhertus unto Dr. Meivin
at St. Andrews in Scotland, a Copy of which is within a year transmitted out of
England unto Arminius and Vytenbogard, who sent a defense of themselves to
Melvin, showing how they were abused by Lubbertus, however, Vid. Prae^^^nt and
Illusir. vir^r. E^^^t^. 23^.243.
confess they were for a freeing the Subscribers from their Subscriptions,
until all was finished about it in a National Synod: which, they say, was with
a Caution, that during this time there should be no disputing, nor Preaching on
the Controverted points.

A Recognition, or Review was pressed again by the Remonstrants at the Hague
Conference, with a desire, that they might be freed frm their Subscriptions,
till the Review was over. In the National Synod of Dort, they also urge it,
boldly declaring, that, by the Fundamentals of the Reformation, and the
constitution of our Churches, Script. Hist Remonstrant p. 20.
no one ought to be censured merely because he taught any Doctrine, contrary to
the Confession, so long as it was not contrary to the word of God; for a
Confession was not the infallible rule of every Doctrine. Ubi sup. 41.
And one of the conditions, proposed by them to be observed by the Synod, was
this, That in examining the matters in Controversy, the enquiry be not only
whether they agree or not agree with the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, as
may be supposed to be in their Confessions; but that in the first place, and
above all things they consider, whether they agree with the word of God, and
that with respect to the necessity, as well as Truth of every Article: For
which reason, let every one, be, by solemn Oath, bound to promise, that he will
not in judging respect Confessions, Catechisms, or any other Humane Writings,
but only the word of God, etc. And that, touching the Review of the Confession,
and Catechism, every one have liberty to offer his Considerations on them,
without any danger of incurring a Censure.

Who ever will consider, how vehemently they press for a Review; how earnest
they were for the Examining every point in Controversy, without a respect to
the Confession, or Catechism, though they were never made the Rule of Faith; and
how eagerly they sought a Freedom from their Subscriptions, and from a Censure
in case they objected against anything in them, and will also carefully peruse
their considerations, against both; where, amongst Seven and Thirty Articles in
the Confession, he will meet with at least Thirty, and in the Catechism where
are about a hundred and Thirty Questions and Answers, he will find above
Threescore to fall under their sharp reflections: And that in opposition to the
Canons of the Dort Synod, they did publish a Confession of their own. Whoever
will, I say, put all these things together, and compare the Catechism, and
Belgic Confession with the Remonstrants Declaration, cannot but be abundantly
satisfied, that, nor Arminius, nor the Remonstrants his Followers, were sincere
in their Protestations and Subscriptions, but very corrupt and deceitful, and
whilst they pretended to approve of the Confession and Catechism, they esteemed
many things in both Dissonant from the word of God.

Thus much is not only the Language of these endeavors, but ingeniously
granted by Vtenhogard, Respon U^eaboe. ad specim. Hem. p. 6.
who, in h^s answer to Festus Homnius his Specimen, professes himself to be one
of them who thought it necessary, who desired and prayed, that there might be a
Review of their Public Confession, and an examining of it by the Word of God,
for this very end, that what he, or others thought was not so agreeable with the
word of God, might be proposed to the common consideration of the several
Churches. And Episcopius, in his reply to Festus Homnius his Specimen, tho he
falls very severely upon Homnius, for bringing him in as an Asserter of what he
positively denied, yet yields, that in the five Articles, they differed from
the Belgic Confession. His words are, That, Opt. Fid. Fest. Homn. p. 2.
excepting the five Articles, all that Episcopius is charged with, are either
about Matters frivolous, next to nothing, or such as differ not from the
Confession.

Arnoldus Poelenburg, in his Letter to Hartsooker, opens himself in this matter
more freely. He is not ashamed, Vid. Poeledb. Hartsook. p. 222. Cornelius
Wigger. A. D. 1597. or near that time, opposed the Confession and Catechism, as
a Lesbian Rule, that might be turned to either side. He was suspended, sets up
Conventicles and stiffly adberes to his peculiar notions. Vid. Epist. Cor. Wig.
p. 35. etc.
nor afraid to revive the memory of Coornhertius (for whom Arminius would not
be thought to have any respect) and Cornelius Wiggerus, as opposers of the
Catechism, and Confession, lamenting a want of success in the many attempts
made against them by diverse other Persons, not only Arminians, but by some, who
were their most violent opposers, such as Piscator, and the like.

Besides, it cannot be denied, but that the Arminian Doctrines are too
manifestly a Contradiction to the Heydelberg Catechism, and Belgic Confession,
to admit of a Conciliation with them: How zealous soever Arminius was to be
taken for a Calvinist, none more eagerly endeavored to subvert the very
foundations of the Doctrines embraced, explained and defended by Calvin. There
is so much craft, and yet open contradiction to be found in his, as well as in
his Followers Writings, that I see no reason to doubt of the Truth of those
things related of him and them in the Preface to the Acts of the Synod of Dort,
Pras. ad Ecles. p. 3.
where it is affirmed, that Corvinus ingenuously confessed in a certain Writing
in Dutch, that Arminius defended many things against his own Judgment; that
Gomarus humbled him by producing a Paper of his own Writing, Page 10.
in which he had asserted, That the Righteousness of Christ is not imputed for
Righteousness in the Justification of Man in the sight of God, but Faith it
self, or the (...) credere: The very Act is by God's gracious Acceptance that
Righteousness of ours, whereby we are justified before God. What Gomarus here
asserts to the silencing of Arminius, is no more than what he himself Pleaded
for in his answer to the one and thirty Articles, and may at any time be seen
in some of his other Writings.

SECT. VII.
They separate from the Calvinists.

BUt their separating from the Apprevers of the Heydelberg Catechism, Belgic
Confession, and Acts of the Synod of Dort, even when they communicated with the
Menonists, and Socinians, is an uncontrollable Evidence of their renouncing the
Calvinian Doctrines, and of the favorable Opinion, they have of the
Mennonistical and Socinian Heresies.

In their Letter to Madame de la Hague, they give several reasons for their
Separation, Epist page 628.
which I take to be the effect of much deliberation and advice for Conradus
Vorstius, Epist. p 540.
in his Letter to Stephen De Ryeger, to whom (having blamed him for want of
Courage to appear on behalf of the Remonstrants Cause, which the Lutherans
universally, and more moderate Papists approved,) he imparts their purpose of
entering a Protestation against the Synod, and of separating openly from the
Contra-Remonstrants: A matter not yet ripe enough to be divulged, which yet he
had communicated to Huberus

In a Letter of an Anonymus to Episcopius, it is reported from an old
Acquaintance of Episcopius, that the Remonstrants did ill to abandon Communion
with the Reformed and at the same time list Socinians amongst their Brethren,
to whom Anonymus, as himself assures us, Vid. Epist. N. N. ad Episcop. p. 690.
made no other answer than this; He knew not that there was any such intimacy
between the Remonstrants, and Socinians, but the reason of the separation was
because the Reformed expressed no greater dislike of Manichaeism, and were so
much for Persecution.

Poelenburg, tho he brings in many odious Charges against the
Contra-Remonstrants, yet one Principal Argument for their Secession is grounded
on their Dissent from the Doctrines contained in the Heydelberg Catechism, and
Belgic Confession, which he thinks they must be thought to approve, if they
join with them in the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper. What shall I
think of them (says Poelenburg) who hold Communion with the
Contra-Remonstrants, Catech. Heydeth. Quaest. 65. and 66.
who offer either themselves, or Infants to be Baptized by them, and join with
the Prayers at Baptism; for seeing, as the Heydelberg Catechism will have it,
the Sacraments are Seals of their Faith, how can ours, (ours I take them to be,
who in judgment and heart are with us, though bodily present with the Adversary)
How, I say, can ours desire the Sealing, and Confirmation of that Doctrine they
can by no means approve? And seeing in the Celebration of the Communion, we
declare an Unity in Faith, and mutual Charity, how can we profess to hold
Communion in that Doctrine, we are persuaded is altogether false? Does not the
Apostle command us to abstain from all appearances of Evil? Is it not a vile
thing to profess to believe that to be true, which we do really judge is false?
Is it not a thing most abominable to turn the Blessed Sacrament which the Lord
has made the Bond of Love, and mutual Fellowship, into a Banner of Schism, and
Division?

So far Poelenburg, who has many other Arguments against Communicating with
the Contra-Remonstrants, in his Epistolary Disquisition, whether the
Remonstrants may lawfully join themselves to the Assemblies of the Contra
Remonstrants? But this little I have out of him, being sufficient to show that
their separation is an impregnable evidence of their rejecting the Doctrines
contained in the Heydelberg Catechism and Confession; I will go on to give an
impartial account of the Charitable Opinion they have of the Heresies of
Socinus, and the Mennonists; which will farther evince, how far they were from
a Closure with the Calvinian Doctrines, even when they would be thought sincere
in their Subscriptions to them.

SECT. VIII.
Their good Opinion of the Socinians and Conjunction with the Mennonists.

FEstus Homnius, just before the Synod of Dort met, sends forth a Specimen of
the Belgic Controversies, and in it showing, how far in some Momentous Points
of Christian Faith, the Remonstrants differed from the Belgic Confession, does
in several instances make it manifest, that they agree with the Socinians,
particularly in denying the Simplicity, Vnchangableness, Infinity and
Praescience of God, that no knowledge is to be had of God but by Divine
Revelation, thereby destroying all natural Religion; that the Doctrine of the
Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, is not only contrary to common sense, but
plainly opposite to Divine Testimonies: In these and several other particulars
the Agreement between the Arminians and Socinians may be gathered from what
Festus has taken out of their own Writers; such as Vorstius, Welsingius,
Episcopius, and Arminius himself.

The Synod of Dort, soon meeting after this Specimen was published, a complaint
is brought against it to the Synod; however, the Synod confirming the opposed
Catechism, and Confession, and strictly enjoining subscription to them, and
their own Acts; the Remonstrants compose and emit a Confession of their own,
which the Learned ^odecherus. A. D. 1624. very diligently examines, and
comparing it with the Racovian Catechism, the Writings of Faustus Socinus,
Smalcius, Ostorodius, and many others of that Party, does in many instances,
with much clearness show a Parallel between the Socinians and Remonstrants to
be so exact as to move the Reader to conclude, that the Confession of the one
was taken out of the Writings of the other.

Polyander, Rivet, Walaeus, and Thysius, Professors at Leyden, do not only
prefix their Approbation to Bodecherus, but within two Years after, they
censure the Remonstrants Confession, wherein they are very positive, that under
the pretense of Peace, Censur. Praef ^ope finem.
they would introduce Socinianism. Thus much is in the close of their Censure
of the Preface, and in several places of the Book it self, which they do so
closely urge, that the Remonstrants in their Examen are forced to be more free
in their Acknowledgements than their open ^^igns would otherwise have admitted

It Is true, Episcopius, in his answer to Homnius, and in his Bodecheru^
Inep^^ens, would fain clear himself, and his Partners from this Charge, and to
do them right, (for I would not willingly misrepresent them) I must confess,
that in an instance, or two the Report made of Episcopius was not so well
grounded, as might be wished. For Homnius in his Specimen Quotes Episcopius for
denying, that we can attain unto the knowledge of God by the Light of Nature,
which is a Notion advanced by Socinus; Episcop. disput. private de Cognit. Dei.
Corol. 2. Vid. Fest. Homn. Spec. Controver. Art. 3.
that Festus might fasten this imputation on Episcopius, he refers his Reader
to his private Disputations about the knowledge of God, where the question is,
whether the knowledge of God be Natural? To which Episcopius is said to answer
by a distinction thus. We distinguish whether the knowledge of God, which is
attained unto by Nature, be Natural? and holds it in the Negative. This very
passage, is several years after the Synod of Dort, repeated by Peltius.

To this Episcopius does Satyrically enough reply, charging Homnius for being a
Falsarius, who not only perverted his sense, but changed his very words,
putting into his corollary, [Naturalis] instead of [Salutaris.] This charge,
(if true) being so very high, I could not satisfy my self till I had examined
the Place, to which Homnius does refer, and whatever was in the Manuscript, in
the Print I found it thus, viz. in the close of Episcopius his Disputation
about the knowledge of God, there are three Corollaries, the second and third,
being in these words.

2. An Cognitio Dei sit Naturalis? 3. An Cognitio Dei, quae ex Natura habetur,
Salutaris sit? N.
This third Corollary, supposing the knowledge of God to be Natural, cannot
without a too severe Reflection on Episcopius his understanding, be taken as
Homnius has Represented it; for, as it is thus, the question must be, whether
the knowledge of God had from Nature, be Natural? whereby as the question is it
self an absurdity, so the denial carries in it a contradiction, as gross as
that Light is not Light; that what is from Nature is not Natural, can signify
no less than that what is Natural is not Natural. But to hold that the
knowledge of God, which is from Nature is not saving, is a truth aptly enough
expressed, and what the Remonstrants profess to be for, as I hope on another
occasion more fully to observe.

However, the Matter of Fact, concerning the Remonstrants disposition toward
the Socinians, is too manifest to admit of doubt, and there is much more said
by Homnius, Bodecherus, Peltius, Vedelius, and many others, about their
Agreement in Principles, than has been fully answered either by Grotius,
Episcopius, or any other that I have met with.

Besides, the Applauses given the Remonstrants by the Socinians: and the
numbering them amongst the supporters of their Dogmata; with the Remonstrants
declining to condemn them; the Reasons why they do so; their setting them in a
higher Class than the Calvinists; and maintaining Communion with them amongst
the Mennonists, sets it above all Dispute.

Vorstius, tho a celebrated Remonstrant, yet in good earnest a Socinian, as may
be inferred from what Smalcins, a great defender of Socinus in an Epistle,
represents him to be, namely, a most useful Man, for whom many Prayers were
sent to Heaven by their Churches in Poland. It Is true, Sandius was a while in
doubt, whether he should place this Vorstius among the Antitrinitarian Writers;
but, when he considered how much he valued the Writings of the Sarmatian
Unitarians, that he was the Author of the Compendium Socinianismi answered by
Cloppenburg, and supposed to have been written by Ostorodius and Voidovius,
that the Lublinse Synod, did in the Year 1600, call him to the Government of
one of their Schools, and had seen a Confession of his Faith composed by him on
his Dying Bed, where he spoke more freely of God and Jesus Christ. When
Sandius, Sand. Biblioth. Anti-trin. page 98, 99.
had weighed these things, he does with utmost assurance give him a place in
the Antitrinitarian Bibliothec, as he also does his Son William Henry Vorstius,
Pastor of a Church among the Remonstrants; and Curcellaeus who succeeded
Episcopius in the Professors Chair at Amsterdam.

Furthermore, I add out of Bogermanus his Notes, on the defense of Vorstius,
and the Remonstrants, Praef. Lib. de Authorit. S* Script.
made by Grotius, that Vorstius his zeal for Socinianism, remarkably appeared
in his publishing Socinus his Discourse concerning the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, which he recommended to the Reader as solid, nervous, profitable,
and almost necessary for those times, tho 'twas really full of Socinianism, and
esteemed by that Party as an introduction to their Religion.

What therefore has been urged by Grotius, Episcopius or others, in defense of
Vorstius, or by Vorstius, himself to throw off the charge of Socinianism, does
serve only to convince us of the Hypocrisy of the Man, and that according to
the fears of some of his Socinian Friends, Epist Smalc. Vorstio.
he had got so much of the Serpentine Craft, as to have lost the Innocence of
the Dove.

What less than this can be the Import of Vorstius's recommending a Book, in
which Socinus had laid the Foundation of his Heretical Superstructure as
nervous, profitable, and necessary; and yet in a Letter to David Paraeus,
Vorst. Epist. ^araeo.
declares that he condemned the Errors of Socinus about the Person and Office
of Christ, of Faith, Justification, and the like, and whatever smelt of
Socinianism?

But this deceitful method they learned of Ochinus, who sometime before Faustus
Socinus wrote any thing, vended the very Errors, that are now called
Socinianism, who, as I have already observed, whilst he brought many Arguments
against the Truth, would be thought an embracer of it.

And as Vorstius, Father and Son, with Curcellaeus, Vid. Dedi cat. Pes^i^ ad
Harmon. Remonst. and Socin.
are set in the Anti-trinitarian Bibliothec, so Arminius himself, as Peltius
out of Paraeus averrs, is received by the Socinians as theirs. His words are "
Paraeus in an Epistle dated the first of March 161^. writes thus; the Socinians
in Poland have expressly named your Arminius, as their own, together with
Bonfinius, and Acontius, their secret Followers, by whose Authority they
demanded Admittance to the Communion of the Orthodox, but 'twas Resolutely
denied them.

And as the Socinians Reckoned the Remonstrants amongst their Worthies, even
such as Arminius himself Applauding them for supporting their Dogmata; in like
manner, tho the Socinians deny the Deity of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, as
also the satisfaction of our Redeemer, the Remonstrants, in return to their
Socinian Brethren, will by no means allow them to be Heretics.

Episcopius, tho in his Bodecherus Ineptiens, his answers to Homnius, and his
Apology, often strenuously endeavored to clear himself, and Remonstrants, from
the charge of Socinianism; yet, in his answer to the Specimen of Calumnies, and
elsewhere, is bold enough to own that he cannot condemn them as guilty of
Heresy. Episcop. Resp. ad specim. Calum. ad Ca^al.
The reason (says he) why we are not fully persuaded that the Socinians are to
be condemned for Heretics are these. 1. Because it is certain, that in the Holy
Scriptures, neither expressly, nor by manifest Consequence, was any Anathema
denounced against such as erred only as the Socinians do. 2. That they seem to
have some weighty Reasons for their Error, securing them from a Pertinacious
adherence thereunto, and consequently from the Fault of Heresy.


The Reasons that seem to favor them are, 1. Many places in Holy-Writ at first
view appear to be for them. 2. That what is urged against them from the Holy
Scriptures, Councils or Writings of the Orthodox, are either so confounded by
the variety of Interpretations, given by the Orthodox themselves, or feebly
pressed; or, so as to be accommodated to Socinian Errors. 3. They who write
against them, freely yield, that the Socinian Notions are more conform to
Humane Reason than their own. 4. That in every age from the first rise of
Christian Churches, they mention Christians not a few, even Doctors, and
Bishops, Eminent for Learning, and Holiness of Life, that have thought and
spoke differently of this matter -- And many wholly ignorant of the Eternal
Generation of the Son of God from the Father, even most of the Fathers before
the Nicene Council, such as Irenaeus, Justin, Tertullian, Oreign, and many
others. 6. Because there have arisen incredible Dissentions, Inexplicable
Questions, Innumerable Controversies, not only about the Doctrine it self, but
the terms and words used to explain it, which after utmost endeavors they
could never understand. 7. Because, out of Justin, the most ancient Writer, who
lived next the Apostles times, a Martyr for the Truths of Christ, they have
reason to believe, that the most Primitive Church held Communion with them, who
professed to believe that Christ was but (...) a mere Man, begotten only of
Man, and made Christ by Election.


These are some of the Reasons adduced by Episcopius (but learnedly answered by
Dr. Bull) for Vindicating their refusal to condemn the Socinians, as Heretics;
in which, abating the words, [Error,] given the Socinian, [^nd Orthodox] given
to their Adversaries, he insinuates as if the Socinians had the better of it in
the Controversy. What the Orthodox offer to explain their Sense, is said to be
with so much obscurity and Confusion, that it is not easy to be understood;
they are divided amongst themselves, and give different Interpretations of
Texts; are loose in their Arguing, and do often in their opposition fall in with
their Adversaries; whilst on the other hand, the Socinians have the Holy
Scriptures in their first appearances, and the most reason, the Orthodox
themselves being Judges and all the Fathers till the Council of Nice, for them,
all which is about the very Doctrines, wherein the Socinians differ from the
Orthodox.

But touching the Points, wherein the Socinians fall in with the Orthodox, the
Calvinists are not to be compared with them. We cannot (says Episcopius)
forbear giving in our Testimony on behalf of Soci^^s, Episcop. B^decher.
Inepti. p 65.
and let the whole World, if they please, consider it, He disputes most
closely, giving the Adversary scope enough, granting whatever may be without
prejudice to Truth and his Cause. Where he is to press hard upon him, there he
fastens his Foot, and with much Pungency brings home his Arguments to the
Conscience; he will rather urge plain Scripture* than insist on other
Hypotheses, and brings Reasons without prejudice, and not argue after the
manner in the Calvinian Schools, nor hide himself in Clouds of Sophistry, nor
seek Evasions, but hasten to the Merits of the Cause. So far Episcopius, whose
farther endeavor is contemptuously to expose the Calvinist^s, having just
before boldly asserted, that the Socinians do really agree with the Orthodox
touching the substance of these following Doctrines viz. The Authority,
Perfection, Episcopius ubi sup.
Perspicuity, the Reading, and Interpretation, of the Holy Scriptures; the
Nature, Properties, and Actions of God; the Creation of Men and Angels;
Providence and Predestination, the Precepts, Promises, Lords Prayer,
Discipline, Church, etc. In all these things (says Episcopius) as to what
belongs to their substance, Socinus agrees with the Orthodox. And about these
very points lies the Vitals of Socinianism, even their denying the necessity
of the Old Testament, their confirming the whole of Christian Religion to the
New, as if Christ had never been foretold, Praefigur'd, or Promised in the Old.
The Scripture's so perspicuous, that we may attain to the saving knowledge of
them without the help of the Holy Spirit. That there is but one Person in the
Nature of God. That God is not Immense, Omnipotent, Omniscient, as in the Holy
Scriptures it is declared and asserted. That Man was not created in Knowledge,
and Righteousness, that the Image of God on Man lies only in having Rational
Faculties and Dominion over the Creatures. That in his first make he was
Mortal, and should have dyed though he had never sinned. That future Contingents
cannot be known by God himself. That on the admitting the Infallible
Praescience of all things Future, there could be no withstanding the Calvinian
Doctrine of Praedestination. That the Precepts given Adam were adjusted to the
Infant state of Mankind, and were imperfect; that Jesus Christ gave new, and
more perfect Laws. That he enlarged the Obligation of some of the Moral Laws,
abolished others, and added three new Moral Precepts to the Old given by Moses.
That the Promises of the Old Testament were only of Temporal Blessings; and
that Men under it, were not saved as we are under the New, by Faith in the
Messiah.

Whatever Episcopius means by the Socinians Agreement with the Orthodox, these
are the Doctrines of Socinus, and his Followers, most opposite unto, and
inconsistent with what is held by the Orthodox, and cannot be sound, and true,
in the Judgment of Episcopius himself, unless he himself be a Socinian. And
sure I am, that whatever they suggest to the contrary, about their being in
suspense, and doubt in this Partit^cular, they look on the Socinians to be good
Christians, as appears further, by their holding Communion in Acts of Religious
Worship, with them amongst the Mennist^s.

What I have taken out of these Arminian Writers does, as any one may easily
perceive, make it clear, that it has been their, as well as the Socinian
Method, by the use of Orthodox Phrases, and Subscriptions to sound Catechisms,
and Confessions of Faith, to hide, for a while, their erroneous Opinions; and
when they have gain^d a Reputation with the People then to open themselves, and
appear above board, slily insinuating a New, and wrong Sense on Orthodox Terms,
and Phrases.

To clear this, I will only observe, That, as they will have the Term,
[Instrument] when spoken of Faith in Justification, to signify the same with
[Condition] whereby there is a great Turn made in Controverse, as the Arminians
Improve it; so they impose on the Phrases, [Vice nostra, Loco nostro] a Sense,
most contrary to their ancient, and constant Meaning

It Is well known, that Socinus, Crellius, and their nearest Followers, did
concur with the Orthodox about what was the Genuine Imports of those Phrases;
holding, that they signified a Proper Surrogation, where one is put into the
Place, State, or Condition of another; sustaining his Person, and one with him,
In conspectu fori* Sabrogatam sapit naturam ejus in cujus Locum Sabrogatur.

These Phrases, taken in this Sense, the Socinians stoutly opposed, loading the
Orthodox, with all the horrid Consequences which slow only from an Assertion,
that Christ did take on him the Condition of the Sinner, in every little
Circumstance, or Accident: But my Lord Bishop of Worcester has cleared the
Maxim of Surrogation from the least Pretense of such a Charge, by
distinguishing Inter Naturam Primordialem; and Accidentalem, and proving that
Sarrogatum sapit tantum naturam Primordialem, non Accidentalem.

That in this Sense, the Orthodox Universally understand these Phrases, [Vice
nostra, Loco nostro] is so manifest, that, whoever is acquainted with their
Writings, cannot but acknowledge it: And it is no less Evident from the
Scriptures, That (...) [for] when it is said, Christ Suffered, [for us]
signifies a Proper Surrogation, which is Essential unto Satisfaction, made to
Punitive, or Vindictive Justice. However, there are a set of Men, of the
Arminian Tang, who will have it, That [ Vice nostra, or Loco nostro] signify
no more than [nostro ^^co] that when it is said, Christ dyed in our stead, the
meaning is, Christ dyed to bes^^^ad us; and only, that the Blessed Effect, of
his Death might be made ours.

Another expresses it thus: If Christ dyed for our Benefit, so as some way or
other by Virtue of his Death and Sufferings, to save us from the Wrath of God;
this, for ought he knows, is All, that any body means, by his dying in our
stead.

By such Practices, as these, it is, that many are unawares ensnared into
diverse Pernicious, and hurtful Errors: First, to the entertaining corrupt
Apprehensions about Christ^s Satisfaction, and then to a downright denial of
it; whence it is apparent, that the Arminian Errors lead the way to the
Socinian, as the Socinian do to the Abomination of the Deist.

Thus much may suffice, touching the Methods, taken by Foreign Socinians, and
the Arminians, to instill, and propagate their Doctrines. I will go on, in the
next place, to consider what Arts are used by our English Socinians, to spread
their Heresies.

CHAP. IV.
Some of the Various Methods, taken by the English Socinians, to Insinuate, and
spread their Errors, Detected.

SECT. I.
The English Socinians cannot agree in any one Particular Formula of Faith, or
Catechism: Sundry Differences amongst themselves in Matters of Importance:
Their Unanimity in taring up the Foundations, and commonly received Systems of
Divinity.

IT being the Expectation of our English Socinians, that, Consid. ^n the
explic. of the Trin. p. 32.
if we attack the Doctrine of their Books; or describe their Opinions, we do it
out of their own Writings, not from the Books of Foreigners, I will confine my
self, in the Account I give of them, to their own Prints.

First then, it must be observed, That the English Socinians have not made such
Advances in their New Divinity, as to be able to give a distinct Idea of what
it is they do Believe.

The Reason is Obvious: To Invent, (...) Improve a New Religion, which they,
who Reject the Old must do, if they will have any, is not Easy: Nor is there a
Man, amongst them, Great enough to Prescribe to the Party: And the Fondness,
Heretics have for their own Particular Notions, is such, as will not suffer
them to Part with any thing of their Own, for the sake of a Scheme, or System
of another Composure.

Though Mr. Biddle did some Years ago Emit a Confession, (Reprinted 1691.) and
a Catechism; yet I cannot find that the English Socinians do Adhere thereunto,
any more than the Followers of Socinus beyond the Sea's have done to the
Racovian Catechism, which, as My Lord of Worcester Observes, was so far from
Pleasing all, that the New Editions were with some, Important Alterations. And,
whoever will Consult what has been Written, by our Gentlemen, since 1690, will
see, that they Pretend not to give a Particular Summary of the Positive Parts
of their Religion.

It Is true, they Generally Profess a Zeal for the Apostles Creed, One of 'em
tells us, That he Resolves his System into the Creed of the Universal Church,
Some Thought sup^^ Dr. Stel. Vindic. p. ^8.
which by Reason of it is Antiquity, but especially of the Authority of its
Doctrines, is Rightly called the Apostles Creed, and Admitted of all
Christians, notwithstanding their Implacable Hatreds, and Divisions. Thus, they
Confining themselves to Generals, leave us in the Dark^ about the Particular
Articles of their Faith; besides, their Presences about the ANTIQUITY of this
Creed, are, as has been Unanswerably Proved by the Learned Vossius, most Weak
and without the least Shadow of Reason, and their Sense of it, if in favor of
their Anti-Trinitarianism, Contrary to that, Received in the Churches, ever
since its first Composure; whereby, we are as much at a loss, touching the
System of their Faith, as if they had said nothing at all of it.

We will therefore Look into the Brief Hystory of these Unitarians, Letter 1.
p. 3.
as they call themselves, and see, what they say there. Sir, In Answer to
Yours, Demanding a Brief Account of the Unitarians, called also Socinians; also
their Doctrine concerning GOD (in which only they differ from other Christians;
the Remonstrants PROFESSEDLY Agreeing with them in other Points of Faith and
Doctriney and the Defense they usually make of their Haeresie -- They Affirm,
GOD IS ONLY ONE PERSON, not THREE. They make our Lord Christ to be the
Messenger, Minister, Servant, and Creature of GOD; They Confess, He is also the
Son of GOD, because He was Begotten on Blessed Mary, by the Spirit, or Power of
GOD, Luke 1.35. But they Deny, that He, or any other Person but the Father is
GOD Almighty, and Eternal. The Holy Ghost, or Spirit, according to them, is the
Power and Inspiration of GOD, Luke 1.35.

Though, we might Reasonably Expect a very Particular, and Exact Account, in this
History, of what they hold; yet, they stick in Generals, Referring Us to the
Remonstrants, for a Catalogue of all, besides their Renouncing the Blessed
Loctrine of the Trinity; so that we are still where we were before we saw this
History: For, as the Remonstrants do not PROFESSEDLY Agree with them in the
other Points of Doctrine, They in like manner send us to the Calvinists with an
Assurance, we shall find a great Part of Socinianism in their Writings.

Episcopius, I Presume, does, in the Opinion of these Gentlemen, Understand
what the Remonstrants held, as well as any man; who, notwithstanding the High
Thoughts He had of the Socinians, does positively Aver, that there is a most
Exact Agreement betwixt them and the Calvinisis. Having, Cap. 2.
(says he, in his Podecherus Ineptians,) sufficiently Cleared the
Remonstrants, from the Calumny of being Socinian, I will Retort upon them, and
show; that, with much more Appearance of Argument, we can fasten on the
Contra-Remonstrants the Charge of Socinianism, even in those Points, which are
Proper and Peculiar to Socinus, and are Deservedly called Socinian.

This Episcopius, though, probably enough, touching the Trinity, an Arian; and in
other Points a Professed Remonstrant, will yet by no means Allow a PROFESSED
Agreement between the Remonstrants and Socinians. How then can we Hope to find
in Their writings, a Formula or Summary of Socinian Doctrines? That there is
too great an Alliance between the Remonstrants and the Socinians; that the
Doctrines of the Former are too near akin to what are held by the Latter, and
Praeparatory unto them, I have cleared: But, Chap. 3. Sect. 6. etc.
that in ALL other Points, excepting the Trinity, the Remonstants PROFESSEDLY
Agree with the Socinians, is too Notorious a Mistake, for the Socinian
Historian, to Impose upon us.

However, they go on to Assure us, they sincerely Believe^ That GOD is truly
Omniscient; Consider. on the Explic, of the Trin. p. 32.
That he Foreseeth all Events, how Contingent soever they may be to us. But are
they all of this mind? No; Others of 'em Ask; Def. Reason. of Christianity
against Mr. Edward^. p. 18.
Which is more Dishonorable to God, to be the Author of all the Sin and
Wickedness that ever was, or ever will be in the World, or to Deny his
Foreknowledge of the Certainty of that, which is not Certain?

2. They Believe the Real Omnipresence of God; That He is Present in his
Essence, or Person in all Places: And not only by his Power, Knowledge, or
Ministers. There are others of them, who Deny such an Immensity of God, which
makes him to be ESSENTIALLY, and wholly in every Point of Space; because such
IMMENSITY would take away all Distinction between God, and the Creature. And,
[as the Examiner of Edwards affirmes] has indeed an ATHEISTICAL TANG, for the
greater part of Atheists, hold the Universe to be God. Another of 'em says;
"To Know whether there is an Immensity of ESSENCE, or Operation, these are
Metaphysics out of my Reach, Some Tho. upon Dr. S. Vindic. p. 14.
and are no Helps to the Settling my Confidence, and Trust in God. Therefore it
is, that Revelation does not speak Precisely of this.

These Passages, do not only show how much our English Socinians Disser from
each other in matters of most Importance; But some of them, as well as Foreign
Socinians, Deny Gods Omniscience and Immensity. One cannot be, some of 'em
suggest, without making God the Author of Sin: And the other has an
Atheistical Tang. Why then are they so Angry with the Learned Dr. Edwards, for
charging them with the Denial of those Essential Perfections of the Divine
Nature? It Is also affirmed by the English Socinians.

3. That the Holy Ghost is a Person. How could the Holy Spirit search all
things, Biddles Confess. of Faith. p. 21, 22.
even the Depths of God? 1 Cor. 2. How make Intercession for the Saints, with
Greans Unutterable? Romans 8 How could He say to the Christians at Antioch,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work, whereunto I have Called them, Acts
13.2. -- If these things, and sundry more, which may be alleged out of
Scripture, do not Evince the Holy Spirit to be a Person, what can?

In Opposition hereunto they say, Brief Hest. Sect. 1. p. 7.
That Romans 8. -- God's Spirit, or Inspiration being Designed to be a continual
Director, and Guide to the Faithful, is spoken of in these and some other
Texts, as a Person, by the same Figure of speech, that Charity is Described as
a Person, etc. The Holy Spirit, you see, is and is not a Person with them.

4. They Generally, not only Grant, Brief Hist. Sect. 3. p. 38.
but Earnestly Contend that Christ is to be Worshipped, and Prayed to, because
God has, say they, by his inhabiting word, or Power, given to the Lord Christ
a Faculty of Knowing all things; and an Ability to Relieve all our Wants.

In Opposition hereunto it is said, Ans. to Mith. p. 50.
There are no Acts of Worship ever Required to to be Paid to Christ, but such
as may be Paid to a Civil Power; to a Person in High Dignity and Office, or to
Prophets, or Holy Men; or to such as are actually Possessed of the Heavenly
Beatitudes.

They are, I confess, Answer to Milb. p. 49.
so Ingenuous as to Acknowledge, That the Question about the Invocation of
Christ has very much Divided them, and if I take 'em Right, the English
Socinians generally fall in with the Notions of Francisous Davidis, and
Christianus Franken, in Opposition to George Blandra^^, and Faustus Socinus,
who were followed by the Foreign Unitarians, as they call themselves, and
notwithstanding the specious Pretenses to Liberty of Conscience, Brief Hist.
Let. 4. p. 48.
which they Reckon the Peculiar Principle of the Socinians, and Remonstrants,
the prevailing Party severely Persecuted their Brethren. They in Transylvania
would not suffer any to come into any Places in the Ministry, unless they
obliged themselves under their Hands, not to speak against Worshipping Jesus
Christ. They in Poland, more Rigid, ^xcommuni^ating and Deposing from the
Ministry, such as held, Christ might not be Worshipped with Divine Worship

This Persecution had some what of Extraordinaty Cruelty in it, as it was
against men, who differed so very little from them. For the Persecutors did not
affirm, that they were always Bound to Invocate, and Worship Christ, but that
it might Lawfully be done. Nos non teneri Invocare Christum; sed tantum Jure
omnino Posse, says Socinus again and again: Ay so often, that he thought
himself Obliged, in a Praemonition to what he Wrote against Francisous Davidis,
to Explain himself* which he did briefly by declaring, that there were Two
Cases, in which to omit the Worshipping of Christ is a Sin. The first, when they
join with them in Worship, who call on the Name of Christ; The second, When the
Spirit does move them to do it; not to call on Christ in these Two Cases is a
Sin.

These few Intimations make it Plain, that a^tho' they give us no Formula, nor
Catechism in which we may find a particular Account of what it is they Believe,
yet in those few things they Profess to Own, they cannot Agree about the Nature
of God, whether Omniscient and Immense? About the Holy Ghost, whether a Person,
or not. About the Invocation of Jesus Christ, whether a Duty or not? So that
from any thing has been Published by ^em, we cannot be sure that any two of
them are of the same Religion.

Howbeit, although they cannot Agree what Religion to be of; they are most
Unanimous in Determining what to be against, it being their Masterpiece to
Quarrel with our Confessions, and Catechisms, Destroy our Systems, and Tare up
old Foundations. One says, He cannot find any Satisfaction, or Consistency in
any of our Systems. Praes. to Reas. of Christian.
Another Complains, that there is no Catechism, yet Extant, (that he could ever
see, or hear of) from whence he could Learn the True Grounds of Christian
Religion, Praes. to Bid. Catechism.
as the same is Delivered in the Holy Scriptures. The Examiner of Mr. Fdward's
Exceptions runs higher, Declaring, that the Obscurity, p. 4.^.
Numerousness and Difficulty of Understanding Systematical Fundamentals
Promotes Deism, and Subverts the Christian Faith. These are some of their ways.

SECT. II.
The English Socinians do studiously Endeavor to Conceal the Religion, They
are of.

THat they may make it the more Difficult for us, to Know what it is, they are
for, they Hide themselves under the Comprehensive Name of Unitarians, and
Anti-Trinitarians, whereby they Reserve to themselves the Liberty of setting
up, either for Arians, Photinians, Jews, Mahometans, or Deists, who Call
themselves Unitarians; nor will they, when hard Put to it, Undertake the
Defense of any One; no, not of Socinus himself, although they hold what is
Peculiar to men of his Spirit.

Though, they say, That Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Some The. p. 4.
only in a sense of Consecration and of Mission; and consequently, that his
Unity with the Father, is not an Essential, and Natural Unity, but a mere
Moral, and Relative Unity, which consisting in the Equality of Works, not of
Essence, which is Absolutely Incommunicable. etc. When this is Socinianism all
over, p. 18.
yet, are they not Socinians, any more than they are Papists, Lutherans, or
Calvirists. Answer to Dr. Wallis Four Letters. p. 16.
They do not Profess to Follow Socinus, but the Scripture. If Socinus has at
any time spoken Erroneously; or Unadvisedly; or Hyper bolically, it is not
Socinus, who is their Master, but Christ.

When they Pretend to tell, us what they are, it is so Mysteriously, that no one
can tell what to make of 'em. They are Christians, they thank God, they Side
with Truth, Some The p. 18.
and take Shelter in the Bosom of that Catholic Church which stands
Independently upon any thing, that goes under the Name of a Party. But, where
shall we find such a Church? Not among Ebionites, Nazarenes, Meneans, Alogi,
Arians or Socinians; All these go under the Name of Parties. Wherefore, seeing
they Renounce the Fundamentals of Christianith as Embraced by us, they must be
Acknowledged to wrap themselves up in some Mastery; Or, to have no Catholic
Church to Shelter themselves in.

To Complete the Mystery, They are upon Dr. S's Terms, heartily of the
Communion of the Church of England, but Independently upon any Faction
whatsoever. It Is like we have Anti-Trinitarians as well as Trinitarians in the
Communion of the Church of England, which is not more Possible, nor less
Mysterious, than that the Denial of the Trinity should fignify the Affirmation,
and Belief of it. However, giving them this, 'twill unavoidably sollow, that
two Distinct Parties, as contrary to each other as Light and Darkness, do
constitute the Church. And such of us as want their Sagacity, are Tempted to
conclude, that so long as they are against the Doctrine of the Trinity, they
are Anti-Trinitarians; And, if they think, we are a Faction, we know them to be
so: If therefore, they are not of the Orthodox Party, except they believe with
Teague, that my Lord Duke is neither Dead, nor Alive, they must be of the
Anti-Trinitarian Faction, and yet be heartily of the Communion of the Church,
Independently upon any Faction whatsoever. That is to say, they are of a
Communion made up of but two Parties, vid. Trinitarian, and Anti-Trinitarian,
without being in Communion either with the One, or the Other.

But, do we what we can, seeing they Profess to Believe, there is but One
Person Only in the Godhead, they must be, we count, Anti-Trinitarians; and the
Belief of the Trinity being essential to our Christianity, as Christianity is
to Church Communion, it is as impossible for any One to be of the Communion of
the Church, whilst an avowed Anti-Trinitarian, as it is to be a Christian
without the Essentials of Christianity. We cannot therefore Comprehend, How
these Men can be of the Churches Communion: If they have a Distinction to solve
this Difficulty, it must be a monstrous Mysterious One, Whether Intelligible,
or Contradictions, let them Judge. Touching their Sincerity in the using these
Methods I will not concern my self, knowing that however it be, it is clear,
that their Design is to Conceal their Religion, which, I confess, is their
wifest Course, seeing it is such, as cannot bear the Brightness and Glory of the
Light.

SECT. III.
The English Socinians judge more Charitably of the Salvation of Jews, and
Turks, than of Orthodox Christians, whom they make to be as Bad as Egyptian,
and Roman Pagans.

WHen I first made Enquiry after the Reason, why these Gentlemen declined a
Defense of the Foreign Socinians, and Refused to be Described from their Books,
I was of Opinion, they thought themselves Unable for so great an Undertaking;
But on a more close Examination, I am convinced, that this is not the Only
Reason: there is another, namely this, They cannot Extend their Charity so far
toward us, as Foreign Socinians have done.

How ill soever, I have Proved the Foreign Socinians to be, it must still be
Acknowledged, that not only in Learning, but in Temper they greatly Excel the
English. And though they looked upon the Orthodox to have Erred from the Truth,
yet esteemed them not to be either Idolaters, or Heretics, or out of the Way
to Salvation.

Ruarus, in an Epistle to Mersennus, Ruarus Epist. 56. p. 260.
does clear us from the guilt of Idolatry, tho we Worship the Divinity of
Christ, as Eternal, which he esteems an Error; For, says he, Who is there of
our own way, that dares arrogate to himself so perfect a Knowledge of the
Divine Nature, that another more sharp and acute than himself may not Convince
him, that in some respect, he had Framed a False Idea of God?

Socinus in his second Answer to Volanus, enters his Protestation against the
making us Heretics: Partic. 5^.
His words are, Although I hold, that Christ before he was Born of Mary, had no
Existence; yet do I Confess him to be God, even to be True God, in Opposition
to a False, and Imaginary God: And although I Deny Christ to be that God, who
Created the Heavens and the Earth, yet do I not make them to be Heretics, who
Affirm him to be so. If we take the word [Heretick] in the most common
Acceptance, for one who is without the Pale of the Church (in which Sense,
it is manifest that Volanus himself uses the Word in this Place) that they do
greatly Err, I firmly Believe. But, I do not therefore Exclude them from the
Fellowship of the Saints, so long as in other Respects, they Persevere in the
Right Way to Salvation, approving themselves Obedient unto Christ.

Nor were they so Fond of the Mohammedan Religion, as not to think it a Reproach
to be numbered amongst its Favorers. This is sufficiently Cleared by Ruarus;
For, whereas Beza, Epist. 16.^ 122, 123.
in an Epistle to Peter Statorius, mentions Valentilis Gentilis his Accusing
Paulus Alciatus for turning Turk, Abraham Calovius no sooner mentions this
Story, in a Letter to Ruarus, but Ruarus, as one who Abhorred the Mohammedan
Religion, Epist. 47. p. 225, 226.
does what he can to Vindicate Alciatus from so Vile a Calumny: Most Worthy
Sir, (says he to Calovius) Forgive me that I attempt to Free you from a
Mistake in a Point of History. It is about what is Reported of Paulus Alciatus,
and Nuserus, closing with the Turkish Religion, as if they had abandoned
Christianity, and had taken up with the Alcoran. I am apt to think, Beza, in
one of his Epistles, lead you into this Mistake, when he mentions what Gentilis
accused him of before the Magistrates of Bern. But this might be done by
Gentilis, only to Ingratiate himself with the Magistrates, especially seeing he
knew, Alciatus did acknowledge only the Father of Jesus Christ to be the most
High God; And he himself, after a sort making a Profession of Three Gods, might
be the more easily Induced to load him with the reproachful Charge of Turcism
-- But whatever Gentilis imagined, you know very well that Alciatus did for
many Years in this City lead a Pious Life according to the Christian Rules, and
when he dyed, he commended his Soul to Christ, the Savior. Thus much has been
Attested by many and some now Living, etc.

But though Socinus and Ruarus, were so kind as to clear us from the Guilt of
Idolatry and Heresy, Reckoning us to be Members of that Church, in which
Salvation may be had; yet so much Candor must not be looked for from the
English Socinians. For,

They esteem us so Biased against their Religion by Prejudices and the like,
Exhort. to ^ice Enqu. p. 3.
that we use not a reasonable Diligence to obtain the Knowledge of what they
call Truth, and therefore we are told, That as to the Jen^s and Turks, N^tes on
Athanas. p. 3^.
who Believe, and Worship the One True God, and him only, perhaps they are in a
Nearer Proximity to Salvation, than such as against sufficient Opportunities of
a right Information, and for Worldly Interests, have Apostatized from the
Christian Faith to the Athanasiam.

Thus they make us Apostates from Christianity, further off from Salvation than
Jews or Turks. And that we may see what Charity they have for the Mahometans,
and their Religion, they add, Diverse Historians will have it, Re^^l^^ co^^^^^ng
the T^^^i^^ and Incarnat. p. 18, 19.
that Mahomet meant not, his Religion should be esteemed a New Religion, but
only the Restitution of the true Intent of the Christian Religion. They affirm
moreover, that the Mohammedan Learned Men, call themselves the True Disciples of
the Messiah or Christ, intimating thereby that Christians are Apostates from
the most Essentians Parts of the Doctrine of the Messiah.

This Plea, our English Socinians make for Mahomet and his Religion
(Representing the Turkish Topperies to be a more Refined Christianity than that
Embraced by the Orthodox) brings to my Remembrance an Old Prophecy of Simler,
which on the Reviving of the Errors of Servetus, by ^oelius, Socinus,
Blandrata, and others, he wrote Anno 1568. A part of it is to this Purpose.
When Matters Religious are in Agitation, I would not willingly Immix with them
what are of a Civil Nature; nor would I rashly Fore bode Evil to any Man.
However, if we may make a Judgment of things Future, by what has heretofore
f^ln out I am afraid this Doctrine [ viz. of the Socinians will prepare the way
for Mahometanism, and Portend Ruin to those Flourishing Countries, in which it
is sown, etc. The whole Prophecy is in the Close of that Historical Preface,
which Cloppenhurch has set before his Con^rtation of the Compendi^lum
^ocinianismi, supposed by him, to have been Written by Ostorodius, and
^oidovius; but, as Sandias has it; by Conradus Vortius To return.

The Malignity of these English Socinians runs higher, they cannot consent
themselves to throw us into a worse state than the Turks are in. Placing us in
the next Rank to them. But to vent their Spite, they make our very Religion,
as bad as the Impostures, and Dotages of the Egyptian, and Roman Pagans.

Touching the Mystery of the Trinity, they say, There is no Parallel for it in
all, Trinitarian Scheme. p. 7.
either History, or Nature, but the Mysteries of the Egyptians. For, as the
Egyptians were at prodigious Cost, in making, and setting up a great number of
Images, in and about their Temples -- by which Lieroglyphicks they pretended to
Teach men the Secrets of Natural Philosophy -- But when asked to Explain their
meaning, they gave a very mean and triffling sense; or a sense very absurd and
false. So, after Trinitarians have long Amused their Disciples with Terms, as
mystical as the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, such as Trinity -- We would easily
forgive them the foll; of their Mysteries, if their Hieroglyphick Language were
not as False and Contradictory, as it is Vain, and Trifling -- A little after
this, speaking of the Blessed Trinity; This is Egyptian all over: It Is the very
Genius and Spirit of the old Mystical Hieroglyphics: That is to say, Partly
Foolish and Partly False. Once more, "For my Part, I never think of these,
whether Dotages or Impostures, without such an Inclimation as I hardly Resist,
of applying to our Athanasian Doctors, what Cato said of the Roman Augures and
Aruspices -- He knew their pretended Learning and Discipline, was the Religion,
Established by Law, warranted by Custom and Prescription, and Auth^rized by the
Consent of Laws. For all that, 'twas a Cheat so Gross and Palpable, that he
could not but Admire the Augures were such stark Fools, or such perfect Knaves,
that (meeting) they could carry a grave look upon one another.

This is the Kindness the English Socinians have for the Orthodox, and more
especially for the Religion by Law Established. They make us worse than Turks,
and as bad as Pagans; as if all we teach were a Gross and Palpable Cheat. And
by their Complaints of the Evils arising from Church Preferments, Consid^^.
(...). p. 44.
and the Care and Favor of a Wealthy Mother, they show they have an aching
Tooth at the Church Revenues. Let the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters look to
themselves.

SECT. IV.
The Difference there is between the English and Foreign Socinians. The Foreign
Socinians Represent the Principles Embraced by the Generality of the English,
to be Heretical, tending to Mahometanism, and Judaism.

THE English Socinians do not make us so bad, but Socinus, and his Partisans
abroad, are even with them, making their Case the same with the worst of
Heretics, Mahometans, and Jews.

To clear thus much, I must show what the Foreign Socinians hold, touching
Christ's Divinity, and the Worship due unto him; together with the
Representation given of such as do herein differ from them.

When Vujekus charged the Socinians with Mahometanism, Socinus in his Answer
declares, Resp. ad Praef. Vujek. p. 8. Ed. A. D. 1624.
That they held Jesus Christ to be that Man, who was by the Holy Ghost
Conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and Born of her, that this Man is the
only begotten Son of God, whom the Holy Scriptures Recommend unto us, nor is
there any other besides, or before him. To this Man is given, by God the
Father, such a Divine Power and Authority, that the Name of God and Divine
Worship is Deservedly and Necessarily, perse, given unto him.

This is their Doctrine, the Foundation of their Religion, the Great and
Glorious Mystery of their Gospel, without the Belief of which no Salvation can
be had Although, (say they) Christ never Expressly said He was the true God,
S^^in. ubi s^p. p. 19.
yet from what he has often declared, it may Easily, yea Necessarily be inferred
that He is; that is to say, as he is really and truly Invested with Divine
Power and Authority -- And there are several Texts in the Holy Scriptures which
make it most clear, that not only the One God, p. 26.
but that Jesus Christ also, as he is distinguished from that One God, is to be
Adored with Divine Worship. Time would fail me to enumerate the many Texts,
that are not only in the New Testament, but also in the Old, for the
Worshipping Jesus Christ, as distinguished from that One God, with Divine
Adoration They then, ubi sup. p. 27.
who deny it to be Lawful to give Divine Worship to Two Gods, whereof One is
Subordinate unto the Other, and wholly depends on him, may as well deny the Sun
shines in the clearest Day, and do moreover discover their Ignorance of the
Greatest Mystery of Christian Religion, and if Treated with Rigor, must be
Deprived of the very Name of Christians -- That they who are against rendering
unto Christ Divine Worship or oppose the Invocating him, are to be Condemned
for Heretics, yea for worse than Heretics, in that truly they deny unto him
the Care of the Church, which is the same, with their Denying him to be Christ.

This is the Notion they have Espoused of Jesus Christ, They Affirm him to be a
True God, a True Subordinate God, entirely depending on that One, Most High
God. A True God, because this One God has given to him Divine Power and
Authority; or as they sometimes Express it, because God has by his Inhabiting
Word, or Power, given to the Lord Christ a Faculty of Knowing all things, and
an Ability to Relieve all Wants. This Divinity in Christ they make to be the
Ground and Reason of their Adoration, and Invocation. They do also make God's
dwelling in Christ by his Spirit, a Ground of Worship. Socinus, in the Defense
of his Animadversions, on the Theological Assertions of the Posnan College,
Cap. 8. p. 250, 251. Ed. A. D. 1618.
against Gabriel Eutropius, tells us, To justify our Adoring Christ, it is
sufficient, that God does in an Eminent manner, by his Spirit, dwell in him,
speak in him, give Answers, whence he is called the Image of the Invisible God,
and they who have seen Christ are said to have seen the Father, and they who
Adore him, do in him Adore the Father: If then the Israelites, who Worshipped
before the Ark of the Covenant, because God showed himself in it present to
them, and as from his proper and peculiar Place, There gave Answers, and after
a sort There dwelt, were free from the Guilt of Idolatry, much more may we be
so, though we Worship Christ, of whom the Ark was but a Type, or Shadow, and
infinitely below him.

This way of Arguing, though used by a Man of Note amongst our selves, was so
turned by Vujekus, and Bellarmine, two Jesuits, against Socinus, as to Confound
him -- That Christ is worthy of Divine Worship (say they) because God dwells in
him, Res. ad Vujek. p. 418.
is by no means to be Allowed; For then 'twould follow, that the whole World
may be Worshipped, especially the Angels, and ^oly Men, in whom God does in a
more peculiar manner dwell.

And as the Socinians do make this sort of Divinity, the Reason of their giving
Divine Worship unto Christ, even so, their Ascribing this Divinity, and giving
Divine Worship unto him, makes the Discriminating Character, Animadv. in
Assert. p. 49.
by which alone they hope to clear themselves, from being of the Religion
Invented by Mahomet, which does not Invocate, nor Worship him No One says
Socinus) who is in his Wits will affirm that False Notion Mahomet had of Jesus
of Nazareth, Vid. Defens. Animadv. p. 373.
is what Paulus Samosatenus held: For Samosatenus acknowledged Jesus Christ to
be the True, and only Begotten Son of God and our Lord; affirming, that he
ought to be Worshipped, etc. which things Mahomet denied

They insist so very much on the Adoration of Christ, that they esteem those,
who are against it, to be such Heretics, as subvert the very Foundations of
Christianity, and deserve not the Name of Christians. I do not (says Socinus)
see any thing throughout the whole Christian Religion of more Importance to be
Published, De Invocat. Christ. ex Epist. ad Quend. Tom. I. p. 353.
than a Demonstration, that Invocation, Adoration or Divine Worship belongs to
Christ, although he is a Creature -- If this be but once fully proved, all the
strong holds of the Trinitarians will fail them. For, they lean on this one
Foundation, viz. That that Adoration, and Invocation, which is due only to the
Most High God, must be given unto Christ. And on the other hand, the True
Power, and Majesty of Christ, will hereby be cleared and firmly fixed in the
minds of all; whereas without the Knowledge of it, neither God himself, nor any
thing Divine can be Rightly Understood, nor the way of our Salvation clearly
Known; but what is said in the Holy Scriptures of the Expiation of our Sins by
Christ, will be strangely mistaken; the whole of Christian Religion brought
into Doubt, or at least be exposed to a sudden Change, if not to utter Ruin:
and the Chiefest, and most Principal Foundations of our Hope, and Trust in God
destroyed. And elsewhere he says, Socin. Christ. Rel. Instit. Tom. I. p. 656.
That they, who are against the Worship of Christ, cannot be Christians,
because in good earnest they own not Christ, though they dare not Openly, yet
Really do they deny Jesus to be the Christ.

Besides Vujekus, upbraiding the Socinians, with the Opinion and fatal end of
Jacobus Palaeologus, who with Johannes Sommerus, Matthias Glirius, and many
others, opposed the Adoration of Christ, and was at last Burnt for his Heresies
at Rome; Socinus in his Reply tells them his Sense thus: But as to Palaeologus,
Resp. ad Vujek p. 42.
whom they take for granted to be One of Us, I answer, that his being
Reconciled to the Church of Rome, was so far from being a Token of God's Favor
unto him, that it was a due Reward of his Impiety. For, besides his not
sticking to Traduce our Party, how Innocent soever, as the most Arrant Knaves,
whom in the mean time he Blushes not to call Brethren: He also was one, and if
I mistake not, a leading Man among them, who now a days affirm, that Christ is
neither to be Adored, nor Invocated. And yet they Impudently Profess themselves
Christians, a Device, to deprave our Religion, in my Opinion, so Wicked, that
there could hardly be a Worser invented.

And as they could not Oppose the Adoration of Christ and Remain Christians, so
this their Principle, leads 'em to Judaism; For (says Socinus) ever since I
saw what Franciscus Davidis had Written against the Invocation of Christ, I
openly declared my Sentiments, touching the Tendency of his Notion to Judaism;
and how it exalted Moses above Christ: For this Reason more especially; because
if they hold, that Christ may not be of Right Invocated, he is not Really, but
only in Name, Christ. Socin. Praef. ad Resp. F. David.
And I Remember very well, that in the Presence of Franciscus Davidis, I
pressed Glirius freely to tell me whether he believed Jesus of Nazareth to be
the Christ. But he would give me no Answer, etc.

What Socinus has on this occasion delivered, does sufficiently evince, that
he Condemns not only Franciscus Davidis, but all whosoever they be, that are
against the Rendering Divine Worship unto Christ, even our English Socinians
themselves, if they do so, for being far worse than Heretics, who in Reality
deny Jesus to be the Christ, and therefore cannot be Christians, nor clear
themselves from the Charge of Mahometanism, nor their Principles from a
Tendency to Judaism.

Now that the Generality of the English Socinians do Reject the Adoration of
Christ, and are for giving him no other sort of Honor, than they do to Men in
Civil Power, to Prophets or Saints in Glory, is manifest from what they avouch.

There are, Answ. to Milbern, p. 50.
say they, no Acts of Worship ever required to be paid to the Lord Jesus
Christ, but such as may be paid to a Civil Power, to a Person in High Dignity
and Office; to Prophets and Holy Men, or to such as are actually possessed of the
Heavenly Beatitudes.

Though some may be otherwise minded, yet the Generality of them fall in with
Palaeologus, Sommerus, Glirius, Davidis, and Others, in their Rejecting the
Adoration of our Blessed Redeemer as appears further from what is Reported of
them, by their own Historians, who Represents their Opinion to the utmost
Advantage he could; page 33.
intimating, that the most Learned of the Ancients Reject this Invocation; that
Christ Himself, when consulted about the Object, and matter of Praver, directed
his Disciples to God; that he forbad them to pray to Himself; and that to make
Christ himself the Object of Prayer, is to destroy his Mediatory Office. Thus
much, and abundantly more, is urged by the English Socinians, against our
Adoring and Invocating the Lord Jesus Christ; whereby they make themselves in
the Esteem of the Foreign, who are the more learned Socinians, to be worse than
Heretics, even Destroyers of the Chiefest, and most Principal Foundations of
the Christians Hope and Faith in God; who in Reality deny Jesus of Nazareth to
be the Christ, and cannot clear themselves from Mahometanism, nor their
Principles from Judaism.

Thus we see what manner of Men our Socinians are, what Enemies to Christian
Religion, and whither their Principles do lead, the Chief among themselves
being Judges.

And when I consider what manner of Notions the most Ingenious, of their way,
are Advancing, I cannot but think on what Mersennus did intimate to Ruarus,
Epist. Ruar. 50. page 239.
about the Attempts of some, to bring all that part of Religion, which is
necessary to Salvation, unto one Article. There are (says he) some Men, and I
doubt not but there are such amongst you, who contend, that this one Article of
Faith only, namely, That Jesus is the Messiah, is necessary unto Salvation;
that they who believe it, may be called the Children of God; that this is the
One Article the Apostles urged. To which others add, that a Believing this
Article with the Heart, is not required as necessary, a Confession of it with
the Mouth being Sufficient. That is to say, if there be a rendering Obedience to
the Magistrates Commands. Thus we see whither Men, when left to themselves,
will run. They Will suspect all Religion to be false, and a Politic Contrivance;
then turn Atheists, not only denying a Providence, but the very Being of God
Himself.

Mersennus writing thus much to a Grave and Learned Socinian, who in his Answer
taking no notice of it, though very careful to rectify the most inconsiderable
Mistakes in other Instances, moves me to conclude, the Charge was true, and the
Atheistical Consequences too manifest to admit of a Penial, which I the rather
suggest, to the end I may stir up the more sincere amongst our English
Scocinians, to consider the Tendency of their Notions.

SECT. V.
They fall in with the Papists in some momentous Points. They imitate the
QUAKERS, in their crying down LEARNING, a LEARNED MINISTRY, and in REVILING
THEIR ADVERSARIES.

. 1. THE Papists we confess, that they may support their Temporal Grandeur and
Dominating Will, when pressed by the invincible Arguments of Protestants, lower
the Mysteries of the Blessed Trinity and Incarnation; and level them with their
Unscriptural, Unreasonable, and Nonsensical Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
rather than Hazard their Temporalties, which they do by placing
Transubstantiation and these Mysteries in the same Rank.

Now, although the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation, are most firmly
believed by Protestants, as supported by the clearest Revelations in Holy Writ,
yet the English Socinians, as if their Design had been to prepare the Minds of
the People, Acts of Great Athanasius page 3.
to close with the most pernicious part of Popery, are bold to declare, that
the whole of Popery has as much Evidence for it, as these Foundations of
Christianity. Biddles Catechism Pres.
They do not only press us with the Assertion of the Popish Doctors, that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is Founded, not in the Scriptures, but on the Tradition
of the Church? and with the Charge, that we Blasphemously make the Holy
Scriptures a Nose of Wax. But are (I cannot forbear saying) so Impudent, as to
tell us, Letter of Resolu. concerning the Trinity and Incarnation p. 1^.
That the Supremacy of the Pope, was the Firstborn of the Trinity; that from
the Doctrine of the Incarnation, arose the Worshipping of the Blessed Virgin,
the Apostles and other Saints, Transubstantiation, and the Worship of Images.

But, what Connection can there be betwixt the Trinity and the Pope's
Supremacy? Or why must the Apostles be Religiously Worshipped, because the
Humane Nature of Christ, who is God, was born of the Virgin? Is there any
Sense, or any Learning in such Sophistry? No certainly, and therefore,

. 2. They do with the Quakers, in the next place, Acts of Athanasius page 4.
cry down Learning. They Charge us, for doing what is next to the Denial of the
Holy Scriptures, in that we elude (say they) the Plainest Text by Scholastic,
and Metaphysical Subtilties. I know very well (says One, Some Thoughts page 12.
speaking of Us) why they fancy Socinians to be Subtle Men; It is because they
oppose that Vain Learning, which has been introduced into the most Popular
Catechisms, and unto which, most Men are Inured -- The Dirty Spring, which has
Afforded their False Learning, is the Gnosticism, which boasted of Great
Mysteries; but of no Holy Practices. They were the first Heretics, who made
Perfection to consist in High Knowledge.

They also talk of the Mischievous Feats of Learning, confirmed by Disputes,
between Protestants and Papists. Both of 'em (say they) will make use of
Metaphysics, and by the Help of such Theological Instruments, each one will
free himself from Difficulties, and it shall not be known, which of them gets
the better. In Effect, each one will avoid the most pressing Arguments, by
contriving a Distinction more absurd than the very Opinion which he maintains,
one absurdity helping on another; or by finding out a New Sense of the
Authority brought against them.

They being sensible, that, when we Discourse of the Blessed Trinity, and
Incarnation, by the help of such Learning as their Sophistical Arguments are
Detected, and Exposed, do find themselves necessitated to cry it down, or give
up their Cause. The Latter they are not willing to do, and therefore oppose the
Former, whereby the Herd of that Party are led Blindfold to a closure with such
Notions of God, as are Destructive of his very Being. For, whilst they are
arguing against Scholastic Terms, such as Trinity, Coessentiality, Modality,
Personality, Eternal Generation, Procession, Incarnation, Hypostatical Union
and the like; They meet with another Army of School Terms; which are necessary
to give us the clearer Ideas, of what may be known of God, such as Infinity,
Eternity, Immensity, Absolute Simplicity, Pure Act, Incorporeity,
Incomprehensibility, And that they may the more roundly reject the Trinity, and
Incarnation, they set themselves against the Infinity, Immensity, Simplicity,
Incomprehensibility, etc. of the Deity; Some Thoughts p. 14.
and thereby turn the Glory of the Incorruptible God into the Image of
Corruptible Man.

To know (says One of 'em) whether there is an Immensity of Essence or of
Operation, these are Metaphysics, out of my Reach -- Revelation does not speak
precisely about this. A page or two before -- The Confessions of Faith which
are puffed with Metaphysical Terms are nothing else but a Debaucht Faith.

What Notion then have they formed of God? Their Admired Biddle will tell you,
God has a Shape, Pr^sace to his Catechism.
has his place in the Heavens, and knows not our free Actions, till they
come to pass -- Thus they make God to be another such as themselves, which is
the Effect of that Contempt they cast upon Learning. For when once they have
with the Papists made Ignorance the Mother of Devotion they soon impose what
they list on their Illiterate Admirers.

But seeing so long as Learned Men are amongst us in Reputation, 'twill be
impossible for them to conceal from every body the real worth of such Studies;
or, for themselves to escape the strength of their Arguments. To make sure work
therefore of it, their next Endeavor is to load such Persons with the v^lest
Reproaches.

. 3. They vilify the Learned now, as the Quakers formerly have done. The
Learned say they (if you speak of such as are Priests, (...), to Fre^ Enquity.
p. 3.
and Ministers, or Beneficed Men) have such a Brass given to their Minds by the
Awe of their Superiors, to whom they are Accountable by Fears of Deprivation,
in Case of Professed Heterodoxy, by their Subscriptions (before they were able
to Judge) to the Articles of their several Churches; that it may be said their
Learning gives no Authority to their Opinion. It Is plain enough their Opinions
are such as the Conditions and Terms of Preferment, (appointed by the Laws of
the Country) do Require of them, except when a Party is grown Powerful enough
to despise or to evade the Laws. -- While they are shackled by early
Subscriptions, Hopes of Preferment, Fears of Punishment, and the like
Restraints, they are fitter to support the Kingdom of Darkness, than to revive
the true Light, and Genuine Gospel of our Lord Christ.

None can escape their Revilings, neither my Lord of Worcester, nor my Lord of
Gloucester: No, not his Grace the late Archbishop. Answer to the Archbishop.
p. 44.
These are made the great Pensioners of the World.

It Is certain (say they) we have a mighty Propensity to believe, as is for our
Interest and Turn. Men will persuade themselves to a great deal, only to be
Quiet. But if you bribe 'em too, with great Rewards, what w^ll they not say?
what will they not do? But the Church has taken a further care to keep her
Sons in the Right way; for the Fears, and Awes, she proposes are even Greater
than her Bribes. For as they who bestow their Children upon the Church, reckon
they are Amply provided for, in the Care and Favor of so Wealthy a Mother; and
therefore seldom give those Children any further Inheritance: So this is the
Occasion that these Adopted Sons, should they do, or affirm any thing contrary
to the Commands, or the Declarations of the Church, they are sure to starve,
because they are sure to be cast out. I think therefore it is no Immodesty to
say, that our Opposers being under the Power of such Fatal Biasses; their
Doctrine is the more to be suspected, and the more to be examined, because it is
theirs. They are Great Men indeed, every way great, that Defend against us the
Doctrine of the Trinity; but then, it is that they must maintain it. Set 'em at
Liberty, Discharge 'em of their Awes and Fears: Let the Church Preferments be
proposed only as the Rewards of Learning and Piety, as they were first
intended, not of holding these, or those Opinions and Doctrines; and it shall
be soon seen how many Eyes this Liberty would open.

These Passages do show with what Tenderness, Respect and Modesty, English
Socinians do Calumniate their Learned Adversaries: Representing them as Guilty
of some great Hypocrisy and vile Sensuality.

To pass such Fury toward single Persons (as when they call one Trifling
Undertaker, and speak of the Farce of his Life; Answer to Mi^h.
and another must be not Furious Jehu, but Mad Driver) I cannot forbear
intimating how they deal with the Orthodox by whole sale. And first for the
French: Such as know the French Ministers (say they) know very well that they
are so far from being Socinians, Answer to L^m. p. 20.
that they never rightly understood what Socinianism is. They are so perfectly
ignorant of the Merits of the Socinian Cause, and Questions: And it is
notoriously known, they are not Conversant enough in good Books to Distinguish
Socinianism from Remonstrantism. Ubi sup. p. 21. If he, and his Fraternity
would not be further exposed, not only here, but in France -- they will for the
time to come take some Ho^^ster Course. Answer to Lam. p. 21.
Nor is their Rage only against their Doctrines, but so great, that as French
Refugees, they Represent them for Peepers, Lurchers, Trepans, Vile Informers,
Perjured Persons, and the like; as if the Deprivation of their Liberty,
Property, and Native Air in their own Land, did not satisfy their Malice,
unless they exposed them as much as they could in another. The Learned
Calvinists then next, in Holland, are made to be as sottishly Ignorant as the
French. But I will forbear such Quotations; and returning to our own Country
Men, I cannot but take particular Notice of one Passage, in Reference to the
Reverend and Learned Doctor Bull. Answer to Dr. Bull. p. 77.
Take their own words. Doctor Bull has (say they) expressed such Male-volence,
and has so Notoriously and Infamously broke the Chartal of Honor and
Civility; -- that no Respect nor Tenderness can be shown to him, by any
Unitarian. His Barbarities, and Immanities, toward a Person so little
deserving that usage, and so much above Mr. Bull in all regards, as Sandius
was, and his Arrogance toward, and hair-brained Contempt of all Unitarians,
whether Ancient or Modern. I say his Temerity, and Extravagancy in this kind,
is so excessive, or rather so Outrageous, that he has left to himself no
manner of Right or Claim, to the very least Degree of Humanity, or good manners
toward him.

But what has this Learned Doctor done to deserve all this. He never calls the
Arians by any other Name but Ariomanitae, the Mad Arians; and Socinianism is
always with him, the Atheistical Heresy. Of Sandius he says, He has
shipwrackt his Conscience, as well as his Faith. He complements the Author of
Irenicum Irenicorum (who was Dr. Zwicker, M. D. a Socinian) with such Flowers
as these -- Bipedum ineptissimus, The Greatest ^op in Nature: Omnium od^o, qui
veritatem and Candorem amant, dignus.

This is a Summary of the Provocations given to the English Socinian by Doctor
Full; Whether they deserve that Wrath, and Rage, with which they have Treated
him, I will distinctly Examine.

1. As to the Doctor's esteeming Socinianism an Atheistical Heresy, as there
is too much Reason for such an estimate, so in due time, it may be fully
Cleared.

2. That the Dr. calls the Arians, Arinmanitae, Ju^^^ce. Eccles. ^ath. de
ne^^s. ^re^end^.
is no more than what some Fathers and many others have done before him, as the
Doctor himself has Observ^d against Episcopius, where he shows, that as
Fusebius, in Representing the Madness of the Manich^es alludes into the Name of
Manes, as signif^ing so much; De A^^^ Orat. 20. Ari^^i vocantur (...) ab
Epiphanio Haeresi LXIX. p. 311. ab Athanasio Tra^ian. de Synod. Tom. 1. p. 929.
Su^^er. Thesau^^ verb^ (...) Brief Hist. p. 12.
Even so Gregory Nazianzen makes the same Observation on the Name of Arius,
(...) -- A furore nomen habens Arius. On which, the Note of Nicaetas, is, Arius
(...) -- a Mart dictus furioso. and bellacissimo Daemone. And what harm in
Rehearsing what the Ancients have done. But,

3. The Doctor says that Sandius has ship-wrackt his Conscience. Whether this
be true, or not, let an English Socinian Determine, who says, That Sandius, in
all his Books, Refuses in Words to be called either Arian or Socinian, but has
written an Ecclesiastical History on purpose to prove, that all Antiquity was
Arian, or Socinian -- He has also under the Borrowed Name of Cingallus,
written a small Treatise, with this Title; Scriptura Trinitatis Revelatrix:
Here, under Pretense of Asserting the Trinity, he has as much as he could
defeated all the Strengths of the Catholic Cause.

Thus this Learned Sandius openly declares against the Arian, and Socinian
Heresies, and Pretends to write in Defense of the Trinity, and therein does his
utmost to enervate all the Arguments brought to support this Bessed Doctrine,
and Defeat the Cause of the Orthodox, which is such an Evincement of a
deliberated double-dealing, lived and delighted in, that none but an English
Socinian, can look on it to be less, than a Shipwracking of his Conscience.

4. Zuicker is called Socinian by our Author, and for ought I know, might be in
his Heart so, although he positively Declares, He is neither Lutheran, Calvinist,
Irenicomast. perpet. convict. p. 8.11.
Remonstrant or Socinian. However according to the New Rule of these Gentlemen,
he may be a very Sincere one.

But what is it that moved Doctor Bull to write so contemptibly of this
Zuicker: What it is in Particular, being a perfect Stranger unto the Learned
Doctor, I Will not pretend to Determine: And yet am apt to think, that amongst
other Reasons, this may be one, viz, Daniel Zuicker, being a Physician,
Publishes a Discourse, Entitled Irenicum Irenicorum, in which he pretends to
do Wonders, boasting of his Infallible and Universal Remedy for the most
obstinate Mental Distempers, which he does with as much Vanity, and as little
Reason, as ever Quack has done of his Elixir Salutis, or Orvietan. That the
Reader may see I have not by this suggestion broke the Chartal of Honor and
Civility, I will Transcribe some of Zuicker's Boasts, and then add his
Infallible Cure.

In the Title Page, of his Book, we have enough of his boasts. For there he
has it thus -- Irenicum Irenicorum, seu Norma Triplex Fxemplo peculiari
Theologico, eoque Illustrissimo -- it a ob oculos Posit a; ut fi secundum ejus
Fundamentales Infallibilesque Decisiones procedatur, Controversiae quaevis,
etiamsi Gravissimae, feliciter, breviter, and sine tumultu, conciliorumque
Convocatione ulla decidi; amissa, ignorata hactenus Veritas recuperari;
Adversarii autem Quilibet vel pertinacissimi, juxtim cum Conciliis Haereticis,
judicari, convinci, and confundi queant.

And lest any should be frightened with this Rhodomontado-Title, he does what he
can in his Preface to Cajole his Reader to think well of it: Noli (says he)
mirari Lector Titulum hujus libri, Talia tibi Promittere, quae a multis retro
seculis, imo ab ipso paene Apostolorum aevo inaudita fuere.

Once more I must Observe that this Renowned Zuicker, was so puffed up with the
Conceit he had of his Catholicon, that he cannot forbear making a Break in the
Beginning of his Book, to the end he might insert another Pompous Title, before
the third Branch of his Argument, by which he endeavors to Prove the Soundness
of his Conciliatory Rule. The Title begins thus, ORBIS CATHOLICUS in potissi^is
suis Traditionibus de Fide primorum Christianorum EXTREME ERRANS -- seu VERA
primae Antiquitatis fideique primorum Christianorum MONUMENTA: Ad dudum anissam
Veritatem, pacemque Ecclesiae post liminio restituendam, ORBI CHRISTIANO
clarius quam unt quam antehac ob oculos posita.

This is it our Socinian Doctor tells the World: He has a rare Secret, scarce
heard of since the Apostles Days, till he Discovered it, but now so admirably
well done, that if there be an Observing his Fundamental, and Infallible
Decisions, 'twill without any other help, safely and suddenly decide the most
Important Controversies, Recover lost Truth, Judge, Convince, Confound any
Adversary with their Heretical Counsels, be they never so Pertinacious and
Obstinate. And whereas the Catholic World, has been ext^eamly Ignorant of the
Traditions of the Primitive Christians, unknown to every body, (...) he took
'em out of Petavius, and Published them.

But what is this rare Secret? this Wonderful Catholicon, I mean his
Conciliatory Rule? It lies only in the Denial of Christ's Divinity. All, if
they will have Peace with them, must hold that Jesus Christ is not the most
high God. This is his healing Truth; which he undertakes to prove from the Holy
Scriptures, Sound Reason and Ancient Tradition, being induced to pitch on this,
as the most likely Expedient, ^^^nicamast. page 14.
by the Observations he made, of Men's casting off, their malevolent Humor on
their turning Socinians; Of the certainty and clearness with which 'twas
Demonstrated, and the Hopes he hereupon conceived of the Conversion of Infidels.

But can any Man, in his Wits, think; that we, who are fully Persuaded in our
Consciences, of the Truth of Christ's Divinity, and that the Belief of it is
absolutely Necessary to Salvation, can renounce this Principle for the sake of
Peace with them? This is as if one, amongst us, should start up and cry
earnestly for a Peace with France, proposing no other Terms, than an ent^re
Resignation of our Laws. Liberty and Property, to the Pleasure of their Grand
Monarch. What could the English think of such a Fellow? would they think him
Compos Mentis? or would they not be for sending him to Bedlam? And yet of this
Nature is Zuicker's Project for a Catholic Union: And that made Doctor Bull
speak so Rightfully of it. Whether the Doctor, has herein broke the Chartel of
Honor, and Civility; or deserved such Usage from this English Socinian, I
leave to the Palate of the whole English Church, unto whom a Belief of Christ's
Deity, which he would have us Reject, is as Necessary to our Future Bliss, as
our Laws, Liberties, and Properties are to the Present Peace, and Tranquillity
of the Nation.

These few Intimations are sufficient to convince us, that the English
Socinians have undertaken the Defense of a bad Cause, and therefore are driven
to so many miserable shifts; one while striking in with the Papists, yet
otherwile with the Quakers. crying down Learning, Railing at Learned Men, and
become more shameful Revilers of their Adversaries than others.

SECT. VI.
Their Boasts of Learned Men on their Sid. Their Claim to the Fathers, in the
Opinion of some Foreign Socinians Groundless. Calvin not Displeased with the
Term [TRINITY.] Grotius not Socinian allover.

A Suspicion that these Methods may fail of the desired Success, puts 'em on
Attempts of a contrary kind: And therefore, in case Learning, and Learned Men
keep up their Esteem, they tell us, That the ^^nitarians have a particular
Reputation, Exhort. to a Free Enq. p. 3.
as most skillful in that, which is the Proper Learning of Divines, The Sacred
Criticism, and are talked of by their Adversaries, as a sort of Subtle,
Rational and Discerning Men.

They lay a Claim to the Anti-Nicene Fathers: and to several Learned Men
amongst Modern Writers, who indeed are none of theirs. Whence it is, that the
most Lear^^^ ^^^^ians abroad, such as Socinus, Crellius a ^ittichius averrs,
confined themselves in their Arguments, to the Holy Scriptures, and Sound
Reason.

This Gittichius saw the Fathers to be so much against them, that instead of
Appealing unto them, He represents them, as a Company of Ignorant Foolish
Scriblers, Epist. Resp. ad Ruar.
not more sit to determine Controversies of this Nature than Blind Men are to
Judge of Colors. And whereas a very Eminent Person, had offered some Scruples
against the Doctrines of Socinus, amongst which one was their being Embraced
only by the Thionites, Cerinthians, and Arians, in the first Ages of
Christianity: Socinus in his Answer, tells us, that their Doctrines were
clearly Revealed in Scripture: That if some men perceived it not, it was their
own Fault: That how great soever their Ignorance was, 'twas not in those Points
without the Knowledge of which there could be no Salvation. And what was said
of Ebion, Cerinthus, and Arius, concerned not them, Quae hic de Ebione,
Cerintho, and Ario dicuntur ad rem non faciunt cum nemo illorum ipsam
sententiam nostram Defenderit -- Socin. Solut. Scrupul. --
for not one of them Defended what they held.

And in his Answer to Vujekus, he is more full; Declaring, that as the
Authority of the Fathers could be of no weight when put in the Scales against
the Holy Scriptures, so they, lay no claim unto them, no not to those, who were
before the Nicene Council. The many Authorities and Testimonies, (says he)
taken out of the Fathers and Councils, are of no Force at all, especially
amongst us, who Own that we dissent from them, which are extant: Nor can it be
shown, Socin. Resp. ad Vujek. p. 444.
that any of our way affirmed the Anti-Nicene Fathers, which are now extant, to
be of our Opinion: Although we are all persuaded, they are no less, if not more
against our Adversaries.

Howbeit, there have been some feeble Efforts put forth toward the Proving
that the Fathers are Theirs, but such as have been to their shame, fully
Confuted.

They have therefore endeavored to shelter themselves under the Wings of
Calvin, and Luther, as if They had been such Nominal Trinitarians as the
Sabellians, and much displeased with the Use of the Term [Trinity.] M. Luther
complains the word Trinity sounds odly, Nom. Real Trin. p. 40.
it were better to call Almighty God GOD, than Trinity, Postil. major. Dominic.
Mr. Calvin is less pleased with these kind of Terms: He says, I like not this
Prayer, O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity.] it savours of Barbarity -- The
Word Trinity is Barbarous, Insipid, Profane, an Human Invention grounded on no
Testimony of God's Word. The Popish God, unknown to the Prophets and Aposiles.
Admonit. 1. ad Polon.

What ^uther is brought in for, is not much to the Purpose, but if our
Socinians have truly Represented Calvin, it is, I confess, a Quotation driven to
the Head. But when upon this account I could not but very carefully examine his
Admonition to the Polonians, unto which he Refers us, I can find there no such
Thing.

That the English Socinian's Truth and Candor therefore may be the more set in
the Light, I will bring to the Reader's View, what it is, Calvin does say on
this Occasion.

In C^lvin's Theological Tractates, there is an Answer to the Polenian
Brethren, Refuting the Error of Stancarus, who held that Christ was a Mediator,
only with Respict to his Human Nature, whereby Christ's Satisfaction, Epist. 1.
p. ^2.
and Man's Redemption, are subverted, and as Beza affirms a Door is opened unto
the Tritheists, who lead the Way to Arianism, as Arianism brings in the
Blasphemies of Samosatenus, [the Grand Idol of Socinus] After this Answer there
is a Irief Admonition sent to these Polonians, cautioning them against a
closure with I landrata, ^^xct. Theol. Ed. 3. Genec. A. D. 2611. p. 683. etc.
in making to themselves Three Gods, by Imagining the Three Persons to be Three
Essences. But neither in the Answer, nor Admonition is there a Word in Favor
of the English Socinians. There is also an Epistle sent to the Polonian
Nobility, and Gentry, and to the Worthy Citizens of Cracow, occasioned by what
Christophorus Trecius, Stanislaus Sarnictus, and Jacobus Sylvius, wrote to
Calvin about the Various Arts, and Fraudulent Methods used by Heretics, to
ensnare the People into a Denial of Christ's Divinity, and a Trinity of Persons
in the Unity of Essence. But nothing in this Epistle to Justify the Charge of
our Gentlemen; it being notoriously Manifest, that Calvin was for the use of
the Terms [ Trinity, and Persons.]

In his Answer to Blandrata's Question, about the Name [Person] he is Positive,
That the use of it is Necessary to Detect the Frauds of them, who craftily
endeavor to subvert the Foundations of our Faith. And in his Epistles, Calv.
Epist. Edit. 2. A. D. 1576. p. 290.
it is more fully declared, that the Terms [ Trinity, and Persons] are very
Profitable to the Church of Christ, as by which the true Destinction between
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is more clearly discovered, and Vexatious
Controversies more Essectually Prevented, for which Reason they were by no
means to be laid aside.

It Is true Calvin in his Letter to the Polonian Nobility expresses his Dislike
of this Prayer, [Sancta Trinitas, Vnus Deus miserere nostri] Precatio mihi non
placet (says he) and omnino Barbariem sapit. The Prayer, not the word [Trinity]
disgusted him. And whereas Stancarus had wrested the Scriptures; affirming,
that when it is said -- There is One God, and One Mediator. [GOD] there
signifies the Trinity. That they may know thee the only true [GOD,] that is the
Trinity. Whatever ye ask of the Father, that is, of the Trinity: Calvin, in
Opposition to these wretched Interpretations of Stancarus, says, We reject
them not only as Insipid but as Profane. But what is this to his saying the
Word [Trinity is Barbarous, Insipid, Profane, the Popish God, etc.? Or what
Credit is there to be given to the Reports of an English Socinian?

Amongst many others, Grotius is said by them to be Socinian all over. This
Great Man (say they) in his Younger Years attacked the Socinians in a Principal
Article of their Doctrine, Hist. S^^he. Let. 1 p 11.
But being Answered by J. Crellius, he not only never Replied* but thanked
Crellius, for his Answer, and afterward writing Annotations on the whole
Scriptures, he Interpreted every where according to the Sentiments of the
Socinians. There is nothing in all his Annotations, which the more strict
followers of Socinus his Doctrine do not approve, and applaud. His Annotations
are a Complete System of Socinianism, not excepting his Notes on the first
Chapter of St. John's Gospel, which are written so Artificially and Interwoven
with so many different Quotations, that he has covered himself, and his Sense
of that Portion of Scripture from such as do not read him carefully.

But to clear it, that this Great Man, the Learned Grotius is not theirs: I
will offer the following Considerations.

First then, it is Manifest from what, Grotius himself has often avowed, that
although he did not Answer Crellius, yet he had not changed his Opinion touching
what he had written of Christ's Satisfaction -- In a Letter to Reigersbergius,
he says thus: In that I did not make Reply to Crellius, I acted, as I think,
very Prudently, and according to the Advice and Desire of the Reformed Pastors
in France, who not having that Controversy started amongst them, Praved that I
would not by writing a Confutation of Crellius bring it in amongst their
People. And in his Letter to Vossius he adds, What need is there of my
Repeating what has been already so fully done? I am not afraid (as he told
Reigersberg) of any ones comparing the Texts I produced, together with those
Explications and Arguments I urged to defend 'em, with what has been writ
against them: Nor do I in the least doubt, but that an Equal Judge will
determine for me. And to Vossius: If Crellius cannot Prove, that it is Unjust,
for One, by his own Consent to bear the Punishment due to another, which he
will never be able to do, the contrary being Agreeable to the Sentiments of the
Wise in every Nation; which, in that very Book Crellius answered, and since the
Publishing his Answer, in my Book de Jure Belli and Pacis: ^it. de Poenarum
Commun. xi. I have fully shown, and design to do it yet more largely in my
Annotations Matt. 20.28. from Testimonies out of Hebrew Writers, a Copy of
which I have given to Mr. ^^sse, an English Divine, who came over chiefly to
make me a Visit; 'twill most certainly follow, that neither Socinus nor
Crellius had any Reason to leave the proper sign s^ation of the Word (...), the
Price of our Redemption, contrary to the most plain and manifest Sense of all
Antiquity.

2. This Great Man does moreover provoke them to his Verity of Christian
Religion, for their Conviction, that he had not ^har^d his Opinion about
Christ's Satisf^ction. If any, says he desire to know what my Judgment is
about the Points Controverted between Crellius, and my self, since the coming
out of his Book, he may see it from what I have written on the fifty third of
Isay, (...)
in my Disputation with the Jews, and from what I have said in the close of my
Book, de Veritate.

The fifty third of I say he proves to be a Prophecy concerning the Messiah,
and gives such a Sense of Heb. 1.3. as is most opposite unto the Doctrine of
Socinus. How then could our Historian Venture to make him Socinian all over? It
is because Grotius wrote a Letter of thanks unto Crellius, on the Publishing
his Book: To this I Will give you Grotius's own Reply, which is,

3. An Eminent English Divine spoke to me of some Letters, Epist. ad Gul. G^te.
p. 8^^.
which a while ago I had written unto Crellius, who writing with the greatest
Candor, and Civility unto me, I returned an Answer with the same Respect unto
him: This Civility and Respect of mine to Crellius, the Followers of Socinus,
have turned into an Argument for my Agreement with them, and to Insinuate thus
much have scattered abroad some Parts of my Letters, I wish, with all my heart,
they had Published them whole and entire. Then it would appear plainly, that I
have not, in the least altered my Judgment. In another Letter to his Brother
William, he says, I have had some Discourse about these things with
Bisterfield, page 884.
who told me, he understood from you, and I also have heard the same, that
Crellius a little before his Death should say, that had he seen what I have
written de Poenarum Communicatione, in my Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, he
would never have answered my Book de Satisfactione.

4. That he could not be Socinian all over, is Evident from what he wrote to
Graswinkelius, to whom he declared, Epist ad. Graswink* p. 53^.
That he did strictly Adhere to the Doctrines of the Fathers, not only about
the Trinity but the Two Natures in Christ, satisfaction and other Points
oppugned by Socinus and his Followers.

5 As for his Annotations, it is not clear to me, that the Socimanism, which is
in them, is his; it looks rather as if those parts were some Excerpta taken out
of Socinian Commentators, with a Design to Examine them. And sure I am that
Grotius did not only suspect Curcellaeus, F^ct. (...). Grot. (...) ^93.
the Correcter of the Press, as an Inconstant Man, under the Influence of such
as were no Friends to him, hoping to be Restored to his Ministry in ^^ance^ but
is Positive, that Curcellaeus made several changes in his Annotations, contrary
to his mind, and will -- In Annotatis quaedam contra meum Sensum, Page 910.
Curcellaeus mutavit -- quod nolim fieri.

However, the English Socinians say, That Grotius is for them even in his
Notes, on the first Chapter of St. John's Gospel, but then they Confess, He
has written them so Artificially, and Interwove them with so many Quotations,
that he has cover^d him self and his sense of that Portion of Scripture, from
such as do not read him carefully. This is a Generous sort of Confession,
cunningly devised, and might have passed, had there not been some Learned and
Careful Readers amongst us to Detect the Falsehood of the Insinuation, which is
very Excellently well performed to the Reproach of these bold Assertors, and
pretendedly Wise Interpreters of Scripture.

These few Intimations I suppose may suffice to show what Pitiful Shifts the
English Socinians are driven to, for the support of their Tottering Cause,
wherein I confess they fail of the Learning, Candor, and Integrity of some
Foreign Socinians. If Grotius must be looked on as a Socinian, says Gittichius,
who has with a freedom Answerable to his Heat, Expressed his Resentments, he
is a Betrayer of the Faith.

To this Purpose, Gittichius expresses himself, in an Epistle to Ru^rus, where
he charges Grotius for Writing in such a way, that without putting his Words on
the Rack, it is impossible to secure 'em from Error. Thus it is with what he
says, concerning an Appeasing of the Wrath of God against us, by the Grievous
Sufferings of Christ. When Grotius says that the Pardon of Sin first offered
to the Israelites, then to the whole World, Preached by Christ, Confirmed by
his Miracles, Death, and Exaltation, was Purchased for us by that most Perfect
Sacrifice, the Bloody Death of Christ, he affirms what is most contrary to the
Holy Scriptures, and yet thus does he do, in his Explicating the sixth Verse of
the first of the Ephesians. Gittichius concludes his Epistle with this Prayer,
The Lord grant unto Grotius a Sounder Judgment, and secure his Church from such
as he is, and put forth his uttermost Power, that there may not be at any time
such Grotius's in his Church: seeing the Church is in much greater Danger from
such than from any open Enemies and Antichrists.

Thus much Gittichius wrote to Ruarus, who, because of Grotius's Candor,
represented him a Friend to their Party: but, as any one may see, Grotius was
far from being Socinian all over.

SECT. VII.
The deceitful Practices of Foreign and English Socinians. Blandrata, the
Socinians Patron, by Flatteries and Subscriptions, gains a Reputation amongst
the Orthodox. Calvin detects his Heresies and Frauds. He is reprimanded by
Protestants, who look on Blandrata as an Angel. Calvin continues his
Opposition. English Socinians break through Subscriptions, and profane
Sacraments for the carrying on their Designs.

THE English Socinians, suspecting the Success of those deceitful and
unrighteous Methods which they use to propagate their Errors openly; tho they
reject what is most valuable in their Brethren abroad, yet have imitated them
in what has, in the Esteem of their candid and judicious Adversaries, most
exposed them. Thus much they have done, by joining themselves ^o the Orthodox,
with no other Design, than to subvert the Foundations of that Religion they
profess, subscribe, and swear unto.

Valentinus Gentilis, and Blandrata, amongst many others, are famed Instances
of the Truth of this Assertion; but I will only observe, what manner of Person
Blandrata was, and what were his Practices.

George Blandrata, Vid. Socin. Epist. ad Blandrat. p. 687. edit. 1618.
an Italian by Birth and sometimes chief Physician and Counselor to Stephen
King of Poland, was highly esteemed by Faustus Socinus, who dedicated to him
his Answer to Volanus, as the great Patron of their Religion, as undoubtedly he
was. However, Blandrata did for a long while so behave himself, as to obtain
Applauses from the most eminent amongst the Orthodox, for the soundness of his
Faith, and unspotted Sincerity.

It Is true, Calvin, after some considerable Converse with him, began to suspect
him, and at last detected some of his Heresies, and the fraudulent Practices by
which he attempted their Propagation. But soon was he reprimanded, by Men sound
in the Faith, and of great Worth: One eminent Person rebukes him for exposing
Blandrat^ his singular Friend, and as a Father to him most dear. Felix
Cruciger, a Polonian Minister, after he had, in an Epistle to Calvin, evinced
their Faith to be exactly the same with what was embraced by the Reformed at
Geneva and elsewhere, says, That it appeared to em, that George Blandrata did
some Weeks ago seriously Vid. Cat. Ep. p. 25^.
subscribe their Confession; and, (say they) we earnestly pray you, diligently
and prudently to consider his Case, and impart to us a faithful Account
thereof. The Ministers and Elders of the Church at Vilna were much moved at
Calvin's writing against him; and therefore, after they had reprov^d him, do
advise him to reconcile himself unto Blandrata, who was, to their Knowledge,
Ubi sup. 258.
a most sincere Man, free from the least Suspicion of Errors. For they believed
not a word of what Calvin had said to the contrary.

However, Calvin persists in the Opinion he had of Blandrata, and can by no
means be taken off from exposing his Heresies and evil Practices; expressing
his Trouble to observe him, by his crafty method, to get such an Interest in
the favor of so eminent a Person as his Anonymous Friend was. In his Letter to
Stanislaus says he, I cannot but observe, how all men, in a manner, as if they
had been under a Fascination, admire Blandrata; it is you alone who begin to
suspect the Truth of what is said of him: but, that you may obtain a more
certain Knowledge of him, I must tell you, that Valentinus Gentilis, whose wild
Notions I have confuted, is of the same Faction, and another Blandrata, although
the one will not give place unto the other. If his Frauds, his Ensnaring, and
crafty Courses, had not been taken notice of in Poland, it might have been more
tolerable; but I am amazed to think, that a Man who has nothing else but Pride
and Ostentation to recommend him, should get such a Reputation amongst you, as
to be esteemed the Atlas, that bears the Church on his Shoulders.

In his Answer to Felix Cruciger, and his Colleagues, and other faithful Pastors
and Ministers in Lesser Poland; There is o^e thing I cannot but suggest unto
you, (says he) that they who did with so much Humanity and Respect entertain
Blandrata, were not so cauti^ns and wary, nor did they consult your Reputation
as they should have done; and am more surprised, that some of the Chiefest Rank
are greatly offended, because I did, as it became me, discover the Man. I
beseech you not to believe that I have hastily taken up any Reports; I have
written a Narrative, which will clear the Truth of Matter of Fact. And to the
Ministers and Elders of the Church at Vilna, Tho you (says he) have no
Suspicion touching Blandrata (his Errors and Practices) yet with me he is
clearly convicted, and so he is before this Church. Ye believe not what I say,
why then should I believe what you say? You have much time to spare to call
Synods about such Tristes. You admire him as if he had been an Angel dropped down
from Heaven; but he is, in other Nations, a Man of no Account. A brief History
of him I will give you; and lest you should have no regard to what I say, it is
attested by the Elders of the Italian Church with us, and by the Renowned Peter
Martyr.

The History they give of him is to this purpose (...) ^^orge Blandrata, a
Physician, demean^d himself amongst us for some time very peaceably, and with
much Temper, desirous of Instruction; so that we innocently receiv^d him into
our Number: At length he began to talk as if he designed to call in question
the Article of Christ's Divinity, and privately spread this Notion amongst the
more ignorant. Then would he weary Calvin with his Enquiries, and seem
abundantly satisfied with his Answers; but carried it so, that at last Calvin
discovered his persidious and deceitful Courses, and his Carriage to be such,
as made it necessary for the Senate to deal with him; where, although he was
convicted of notorious Falsehoods against Calvin, yet never blushed. His
intimate Friend and Companion was Johannes Paulus Alciatus, who said, that we
worship three Devils, much worse than all the Popish Idols, because we hold
Three Persons. There arose a fresh Complaint of the Italian Church against him,
for using Clandestine Arts to ensnare the Vulgar to a Closure with his Dotages.

Thus this Man, a real Enemy to the Fundamental Doctrines of Christian
Religion, the great Patron of Socinus and his Partisans, to the end he might
the more effectually propagate his Errors, pretends a Zeal for the Truth, joins
himself to the Orthodox, subscribes sound Confessions, gains a Reputation
amongst the ch^efest of the Orthodox for being sound and sincere.

This deceitful Method of ^landrata has been exactly observed, as by many of
the same Principles abroad, so by the Socinians in our Country; who,
notwithstanding the Contradiction there is in the Doctrines by Law established
to their Tenants, and the strict Subscriptions required of all that enter into
the Ministry, get into the Church, and fix their Communion there.

That they may pave the way for the Consciences of others, their Attempts are,
to make the Subscription to the Th^rty-nine Articles, to signify nothing. The
Belief of the Athanasian Creed not requi^ed by the Ch^ef Eng. p. 2.
Those Thirty-nine Articles (say they) are not Articles of Faith, but Peace: As
several of her most learned Bishops have declared; and, in a word, the Title of
the Articles says as much, and the Preface before them. And yet in the Title,
it is declared, that these Articles were agreed upon, for the avoiding
Diversities of Opinion, and for the Establishing of Consent, touching true
Religion. And in the Preface it is declared, That the Articles do Contain the
True Doctrine of the Church of England, agreeable to Gods word: And the Charge
his Majesty gives is, That no Man shall either Print or Preach to draw the
Article aside, any way; but shall submit to it, in the Plain, and full meaning
thereof; And shall not put his own sense or Comment, to be the Meaning of the
Article, but shall take it in the Literal or Grammatical Sense. So that
whatever any Bishops have declared, The Import of the Title and Preface is,
That the Subscribers Agree in Believing the Doctrines contained in the Articles
to be True; that the Articles taken in the Literal and Grammatical Sense, are
agreeable to God's word.

How can a Socinian then subscribe the first Article, where it is said; There is
but One Living and True God, and in Unity of this Godhead, there be Three
Persons, of one Substance, Power and Eternity, the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost: Does this Article contain in it the Truth? If it does, the Socinian
Principle is False? If it does not, they subscribe to a Lie. And though the
Church did not Require the Belief of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as
del^vered in the Athanasian Creed, as Necessary to Salvation; Yet, seeing it
Requires the Belief of this Doctrine as True, they who deny this Doctrine,
cannot, without being gu^lty of grossest Hypocrisy, subscribe it. But what cannot
a designing English Socinian do?

Thus, you see, that though the Thirty-nine Articles are as expressly against the
Dogmata of our ^nglish Socinians, as words can make them yet can they not keep
an English Socinian out of the Church. And having broken their Subscriptions,
they go on to tell us, Trinitar. Scheme Consid. p. 28
That they Place not Religion in Worshipping God by themselves or after a
Particular Form or Manner, but in a Right Faith, and a just and charitable
Conversation: We Approve of known Forms, say they, of Praising and Praying to
God, as also in Administering Baptism, the Lords Supper Marriage, and the other
Religious Offices: We like well of the Discipline of the Church by Bishops, and
Parochial Ministers. We have an Esteem for the Eminent Learning and Exemplary
Piety of the Conforming Clergy. For these Reasons, we Communicate with that
Church as far as we can, and Contribute our Intrest to Favor her against all
Others, who would take the Chair. We would not therefore, be Understood to be
Enemies to the Church, nor as seeking to undermine her.

And that they may hold Communion with the Church in her Sacraments, they have
framed such an Idea of 'em, as makes it easy, for Men of their Opinions, to
join in the Sacraments, not only with the Church of England, but with
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Lutheran, or Papist. They do not look on
the Sacraments as Ordinances of the Gospel, to which they must go, that they
may Partake of Spiritual Blessings: In their Opinion, the Person that Receives
Baptism, is only to Resolve and Purpose Renovation and Newness of Life.
Trinitar. Scheme Consid p. 26
He does (say they) thereby Profess he will purge his Mind and Conscience, and
his whole Conversation from Impurity and Wickedness. And concerning the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, They commemorate, and represent the shedding
the Lord's Blood, and breaking h^s Body for Mankind. But for the miraculous
Effects and Consequences ascribed to the right partaking of this Sacrament,
Unitarians can find them no where but in the Books and Sermons of the
Superstitious Admirers (I might have said Idolaters,) of External Things.

If they had been persuaded that the Sacraments were Ordinances designed of God
for the conveying of spiritual Blessings to such as do aright partake of them,
then they could nor be Protestants and yet communicate in the Sacrament with
Papists, because their way of Administration is not right. But, now, to serve a
Turn, they can take the Sacrament according to the Church of England; or, to
promote their Cause, go to Mass.

They are so well pleased with this Piece of Jesuitism; they do, it is like,
find it so advantageous for the propagating their Notions, that they can^t
forbear an exposing the opposite Truth held by Protestants as most vile and
rid^culous. Trinitar. Scheme Consid. p. 24
The Sacraments, according to the Sense of the Orthodox, are a sort of Means
which works on our Minds, as Spells, Charms, and Incantations. (and such l^ke)
obtain their pretended Effects by a preternatural Power, extraordinarily given
to them by God or by those Spirits who preside over such Af^^^s. ^^et a Man in
Black sprinkle you with some of the Churches Water, or give you a bit of Bread,
or sup of Wine, over which he has pronounced the wonder-working Words
prescribed in Mother Churches Ritual, tho by Nature you are as bad as the
Devil, you shall presently be inclined to as much Good as will save you from
Hell, and qualify you for Heaven: And this no less certainly if you are one of
the Elect; for else the Churches Incantation produces only a momentary Effect,
and a false Appearance of Good: no less certainly I say, than by tying the
Norman Knot you may gain the Love of the Person you desire; or by other Devices
recorded in the learned Books (so Fools esteem them) of Magic, you may cause
Hatred, raise Winds, and do a thousand other Feats, which have no more natural
or real Agreement with those Causes that are said to produce 'em, than Faith
and Obedience have with a bit of Bread, or with a sprinkling of Water.
Therefore when St. Augustine defined a Sacrament to be the outward visible Sign
of an inward invisible Grace or Energy, the good Father should have considered
that this is the Definition of a Charm, not of a Gospel Sacrament: for a Charm
is a bare outward visible Sign, that has no natural or real Agreement with the
Effect; and if the Effect prove for the Good of the Person concerned, it may be
called the inward invisible Grace of such Sign or Charm: As when the Effect is
to beget Love, or such like. But if the Effect of the Charm be hurtful, as to
kill, or such like, then it must be called the Energy, not the Grace of the
Charm: as that damning Power or Quality which our Opposers impute to the
Sacrament of the Supper when not receiv^d aright, cannot be called the Grace of
that Sacrament, but only the Energy. So that let them turn themselves which way
soever they can, they have turn^d the Gospel-Sacraments, as I have said before,
into Charms and Spells.

Th^se are the Evincements of English Socinian Modesty, whose D^sign of
bringing the blessed Sacraments into the greatest Contempt, is manifest* But
what I chiefly urge it for* is, that hereby they prepare the M^nds of their
Followers to prostitute their Consciences to a Compliance with any Religion to
the end they may promote their own (if it may be called a) Religion. For when
on^e they have debauch^d their Consciences so thoroughly, that they can take the
Sacrament any way without Remorse, as their Notion of it leads Men to do, then
may the more learned of their Party profess themselves to be either Papisis or
Lutherans, Calvinists or Remonstrants, and carry on the Socinian Design either
by a clandestine Ins^^t^asion of their Errors, as Blandrata and sundry others
of them have done; or, in the^r Opposition to Socinus, pitch on such Topics as
weaken the Truth; which is done by them who assert the Persons in the Blessed
Trinity to be Three distinct Essences; or, represent the Socinian Error to be
less dangerous than really it is, and the Socinians themselves to be Men of
greater Learning and Probity than most of them are. Such Methods as these have
been taken by Przipcovius, Daniel Zuickerus, Forstius, Episcopius, Curcellaeus,
and many others; and not altogether without Success. However, I must and do
acknowledge, Johannes Niemojevius, a Polonian Knight, and once a Judge, tho a
Socinian, yet generously opposed Georgius Schomannus, who pleaded for this very
Principle, about the Use and End of the Lord's Supper. He freely declared, That
in this Point, he differed as much from Socinus as the Heavens are distant from
the Earth. Vid. Secin. Oper. tom. 1. p. 756.
And in Defense of what he wrote against the Theses of Emanuel Vega, he
expressed the religious sense of his Soul, by that Grief he conceived on the
spreading of this pernicious Error amongst them. Do we not read (says he) that
Faith comes by Hearing, which is confirmed and increased in pious Minds by the
same means? And shall we ascribe less to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
than to Hearing of the Word? Socinus may perhaps do so; but I suppose no Men,
fearing God, studied in Divinity, and rightly judging of these things, will be
in this Particular of his Mind. -- There was brought unto me, when sick in Bed,
a Writing from Schomannus, which I did no sooner read, but found my Distemper
to increase upon me; so very much did it grief me, to see such Hurtful Op^nions
brought into our Church; Opinions, that disquiet the more Infirm, and give
Great Offense to others who are not of our way -- Once more -- If Socinus
designs an Answer, I wish he would not; I must confess the Truth, I must tell
you, that their Writings are stuffed which most Offensive Paradoxes, to the
extreme Grief of my Soul.

Besides, this Disputation between Niemojevius and Schomannus, makes it plain
to me that this Notion about the Sacraments was not started 'till the Year
1588, although Socinus fixed his dwelling in Poland A. D. 15^9. That when it did
first arise, it startled the more Pious of their own Party; and that from
Niemojevius his Resolution of Proposing it to the next Synod at Lublin, it is
very likely, the Generality were then against it; so far were they from that
full Agreement, which our Gentlemen pretend to be almost their Peculiar
Property.

SECT. VIII.
An Account of the Italian Combination entered into, to bring the Doctrine of
the Trinity into Doubt. The Chief of 'em Assert Three distinct Essences, to
introduce the Pre-eminence of the Father, and a Subordination in the Essences
of the Son and Holy Spirit. These things cleared out of the Writings of
Gentilis and others. The late Assertion of Three Essences the same with that of
Gentilis, etc.

ALthough the English Socinians do, in some Instances, so very much differ from
them beyond the Seas, that an exact Description of them cannot be given out of
the Writings of the Pratres Poloni, yet it must be yielded, that they are
nevertheless of the Offspring of that Faction. For which Reason, I will
consider what Combinations have been amongst them, what Shapes they have formed
themselves into, and what Principles they advanced, to the end they might
subvert the blessed Doctrine of the Trinity.

There was in Italy a strong Combination entered into by near Forty, who formed
themselves into a Society, had their Colleges and Conferences, where they
consulted how to bring the Doctrines of the Trinity, and Christ's Satisfaction,
into Doubt.

This was, says Wissowatius, about the Year 1546. The chief of their Number,
mention^d by Sandius, Narrat. Comp^nd. Biblioth. Antitrin. p. 18.
were, Leonardus Abbas Busalis, Laelius Socinus, Bernardinus Ochinus, Nicholaus
Paruta, Valentinus Gentilis, Julius Trevisanus, Franciscus de Ruego, Jacobus de
Chiari, Tranciscus Niger, Darius Socinus, Paulus Alciacus, etc. who continued
together till their Design took Air: at which time they being severely
prosecuted, some of 'em went into Helvetia, others into France, Britain,
Holland, Germany, and Poland, and some into the Turkish Territories, where they
had their Liberty; only Julius Trevisanus and Franciscus de Ruego were taken
and executed: and Jacobus de Chiari, as Lubieniescius says, died a natural
Death.

These Men, wherever they went, took all Occasions to instill their Errors;
which they did, by offering Objections against the Truth, that, as was
pretended, they might be the more firmly established in the Faith, and be more
able to defend it. And having seared their Consciences with fraudulent
Subscriptions, and Perjury, they formed themselves into sundry Shapes, not
scrupling to subscribe and swear to what they neither Believed nor Intended:
nor did they care what Methods they used, might they thereby subvert the
Doctrine of the Trinity and Christ's Satisfaction.

That they were set at work by the Papists is no way improbable; especially, if
we consider how at Lions the Papists d^sch^rged Valentinus Gentilis so soon as
they und^rstood his Design was to oppose Calvin, and how safely Servetus,
Lubie^. Hist^r. P^s^^, Po^o^. l. 2. c. 5. p. 1^^. etc.
notwithstanding his Blasphemies, lived amongst them

The Principle which at first they advanced, as what was most l^kely to bring
the Doctrine of the Trinity into ^ontempt, was their turning the Three Persons
into Three distinct Essences, and their appropriating a peculiar Pre-eminence
to the Father.

Servetus, who is by Stanislaus Lubieniescius, in his History of the Polonian
Deformation, Lubi^n ^bi sup. p. ^^.
highly applauded for his Diligence in Consulting the ^lcoran of Mahomet, out
of which he extracted the Opinions he held about the Trini^y, having by his
Sufferings gotten a Reputation, it became the Province of Valentinus Gentitis,
and Alciatus, after the Disperson of these designing Incendiaries, to go to
Geneva, and try what they could do toward the carrying on that Work, which
Servetus had with so much Labor and Travail begun And that their Success might
be the greater, 'twas the Care of Gentilis to clear himself as much as possibly
he could, from the Charge of being a Favourer either of Arius or Servetus; and
therefore pretends a Zeal for the True Trinity, as he expresses it in a Letter
to Copus, Raymundus, and Henocus, learned Ministers in Geneva, explaining his
Notion thus. Ca^e T^^^^^. Th^^^. p^^. 6^0, 6^^.
The Father is that one only Essence, that is from it self. The Word is the
Brightness of the Glory of God, the express Image of his Substance, and in this
respect distinct from the Father* who is (as Christ himself says) the only
True God, the Essent^^tor, that is, the ^nformator Individuorum. The Word is
the Son, and also he True God, and yet not Two Gods but one and the same. God.
Or, as Aretius, in his Brief Account of Valentinus Gentilis: A True Trinity
ought to consist of Three eternal distinct Spirits, differing from each other
essentially, rather than personally. The Father he styles (...) God of himself,
as he is more eminently, truly, and properly God: But the Essence of the Son is
not (says he) of himself, but an Essentiatum, derived from the Essence of the
Father, and is a Secondary God.

And what says Servetus of this Notion? Deus p^st Christum man^e ^atum, in
ties Essentias Divisus, maneat tamen Un^^ Deus: ^^ia haec Dispens^ ^io nihil
^^^^o mutat. Trac^. Theo^. p. 657.
Calvin tells (...) That he holds the Deity to (...) divided into Three
Essences, and yet there is but One God. For the Socinians greater Satisfaction,
I will giv^^ Servetus his Sense, Hist^^ for. Poton. l. 2. c. 5. p. 9^^ etc.
out of a Discourse he delivered some time before his Execution (...) published
by Lubieni^scius, from the Auto^raph; In which he having opposed the Opinion of
them who affirm Three substantial Persons to be j^ God, by Nature equal to one
another, which he looks upon to be Blasphemy, and an execrable Impiety, he
freely gives us his own Sentiments, to this effect. 1. That the Name [God] is
Appellative, signifying one to whom all Power, Dominion, and Superiority does
properly belong, who is above all, the chief of all, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, from whom all things are, and on whom they depend. The Name [God] taken
less properly, may be applied to such Creatures as have Power and Superierity
given them of God, as Moses and Cyrus had, etc. who were Gods not by Nature but
Grace. -- 2. That the Lord Jesus Christ is called the True Son of God; and God,
because he received his Deity from God the Father, is True God of True God: God
of all Creatures; not God of the Father, who subjects all things to him. --
Moreover, the Father himself, who alone is by Nature God, from himself, is Lord
and God of the Son, as the Son himself expresses it, John 14.28
-- The Son is fall of the Deity, and yet the Superiority the Father has over
the Son remains; whence, tho the Son is made to us by ^^e Father, Lord and God
and our Head, yet the Father is God and Head of the Son, and the Son as our God
and head ^^ognizeth the Deity and Superiority of the Father over him. See then*
how the Scriptures do constantly disting^^^^ between God and the Son of God! If
we diligently search, we shall find, that excepting in three or four places,
the Scriptures do simply and absolutely call the Father God, and Jesus, his
Christ, and Son. -- The Divinity of the Son differs from that of other Gods: He
is the True, Natural, and in a proper Sense, the Son of God; we the Adoptive
Sons of God: To him the Deity was given without measure, to us in measure. The
Deity, Power, and Glory of the Son, is adequate to that of the Father, and
equal with it; but received from the Father, not equal with respect to the
Father, but equal with the Father with respect to the Creatures: This Equality
the Son will not abuse by turning it into Tyranny or Rapine, Philip. 2.

The Agreement then, between Valentinus Gentilis and Servetus, lies in these
Points: They both affirm Three distinct Essences to be in the Trinity; that the
Father only is (...); that the Essence of the Son is not from it self, but from
the Fathers; that there is but one most High God: so that although Gentilis
would cover himself under a Vizor, that it might not appear, he was an Embracer
of Servetus^s Errors, and therefore took a different way to explain himself;
yet it is plain enough, that their Notions, for substance were the same: and
notwithstanding their pretended Zeal for the Unity of God, they were a sort of
Tritheists.

However, it must be acknowledged, that their designed Obscurity was such, that
it is not easy to understand what Principles Servetus would substitute instead
of a Trinity of Persons in the God head: only, they generally pleaded for the
Pre-eminence and Superiority of the Father^s Essence above the Son's, as it had
a necessary Tendency toward the Subversion of the Trinity: and to this very
end, Servetus, Talentinus Gentilis, and Gonesius a Polonian Tritheist, against
whom Zenchy wrote, urged it.

This Gonesius, Biblioth. Antitri^. p. 41.
as Sandius observes, was the first that oppugned the Doctrine of the Trinity
in Poland, and as Wisso^atius, he asserted the Pre-eminence of the Deity of the
Father above that of the Son, Nurat. Compead.
for the most part according to the Placita of Servetus and Gentilis: Stoinius,
in his Epitome, affirms the same of Genesius, and so does Lubieniescius,
adding, that in a Synod held Ann 1556 he owned it: and out of Sim^er, Hist.
Ref. Pol. l. 2. c. 6. p. 111. 116
Lubieniescius tells us, That as in Transi^vania, Franciscus Davidis was
Servetus Illustratus, so Gonesius was in Po^and Kazonovius and Farnovius were
of the same Mind with Gonesius.

But, that they might be the more successful, they took another Method to
introduce Three Essences into the Trinity, still finding that to be the most
likely way to expose the Faith of the Orthodox touching this blessed Doctrine
which was thus managed.

Stankarus, perhaps of the same Faction with Gentilis, and his Disciples,
started a peculiar Notion about Christ's Mediatorship, affirming, That the Word
[God] in Scripture signified Trinity; that when 'twas said, There is one God,
the Meaning is, there is Vnus Deus Trinitas: for which Reason, if Christ be
Mediator, as God, the Trinity (says he) must be the Mediator, or Christ must
be God of a distinct Essence from the Father, and inferior to him And the
Orthodox believing Christ to be Mediator, as God-Man, were accused by Stankarus
for being Arians.

This Notion occasion^d Great Distractions amongst the reformed in Poland, as
appears from what some of ^em wrote to Calvin, craving his Thoughts of it; and
from what Felix Cruciger, Gregorius Pauli, Stanislaus Latomirski, Paulus
Gilovius, Martinus Crovitius, Franciscus Lismaninus, and Sundry others, who met
in a Synod at Pinczow did Anno 1562. send to the Professors of Divinity, and
Pas^ors of the Church at Argentine, where was a particular Account of Mankarus
his Errors with a Confession of the True Faith; But as ( Calvin seared)
Bl^ndrata, and his Partisans, pretending a Great Zeal for the Doctrine of the
Trinity, did, in a seeming Opposition to Stankarus, own the Consequences he had
sa^^ed on the Doctrine embraced by the Orthodo^, as what did naturally flow
from Christ's being Mediator, as God-Man; and a Table was soon published, Ta^^
^am nus^^^ Po^^^ Edi^am, quae Christum and Spiritum Sanctum alios a Patre Deo
facit, no^ sine moerore inspexi. Calv. Tract. Theol. p. 683.
in which they declared Jesus Christ, anc the Holy Ghost, to be Two Gods,
distinct from the Father; and that the Three Persons were Three distinct
Essences.

This Table, as Calvin apprehended, was written by Blandrata; but Sandius
says, that Gregorius Pauli, in an Epistle to the Tigurine Ministers, owns
himself to be the Author of it. For though Gregorius Pauli, Latomirski,
Lismaninus, and many others subscribed a sound Confession of Faith in
Opposition to the Error of Stankarus, yet did they fall in with Blandrata, and
though Calvin sent them an Admonition, in which he dehorted them against taking
the Three Persons to be Three Essences, least they should Frame to themselves
Three Gods: yet it was, says Beza, to very little purpose: For the Polonian
Ministers, Epist. 81. p. 363.
being bewitched with Blandrata's Hypocrisies, were generally ensnared to a
Closure with his Errors. And Blandrata himself Observing how efficaciously this
Engine wrought, An docuit te Dei verbum multiplicari posse Dei Essentiam.
Epist. Bez. ad Pet. Stator.
called in the Help of Valentinus Gentilis, and Petrus Statorius, who with
Matthaeus Gribaldus, and others, were indefatigable in their Labors to
establish a sort of Tritheism, as the most Effectual Means to Introduce their
Samosatenian Heresies: And their Success this way was Answerable to their
Industry and Expectations; for in a little time, to the Admiration of the
Orthodox in other Parts of Europe, many of the Reformed in Poland were ensnared
into a Closure with Socinianism.

Plures Deos, si non ve. bo, Re ta^en ipsa prof^tentes, Epist. 19. p. 129. Vid.
Epist. 81. p. 361, etc.
That their first Effort against the Trinity was a setting up of Tritheism; not
avowedly, but Clandestinely, is Affirmed by Beza. In the beginning, (says he)
they were, for the most part, Tritheists, transforming the Three Persons into
so many Essences; Then did they Appropriate the Appellation of the One True God
unto the Father, to whom they also ascribed an Hyperoche, a Pre-eminence, or
Superiority above the Son. This was the Principle, which at first they
advanced, as most likely to bring the Blessed Trinity of Persons in one
undivided Essence, into contempt. Against which, Calvin, Zanchy, and the
Reformed, did set themselves, as against a most Pernicious, and Hurtful
Heresy, as undoubtedly it is; For, it being affirmed, that every Person has a
Peculiar Substance of his Own, there must be as many Substances or Essences, as
there are Persons, which being of the same Nature, must be as many Gods as they
are Persons; which is Tritheism. Three Distinct Infinite substances, or Three
Eternal Spirits, cannot be less than Three Gods.

But* though its affirmed (1) That it is gross Sabellianism to say, That there
are not Three Personal Mands or Spirits, or Substances. (2) That a distinct
Substantial Person, must have a distinct substance of his own; Proper and
Peculiar to his own Person; yet if it be owned, that there are not Three Gods,
but One God, or One Divinity which is entirely and Inseparably in Three
distinct Persons, or Minds; it cannot be Heresy: As a very Learned Person
avers, because in this case (says he) the Fundamental Article is Believed, and
the Error is only a Mistake in the Explication.


However, the Doctrine of Three. Distinct Substances has been, not only
Learnedly as well as sharply charged with Tritheism; but Condemned for being
Impious and Heretical. I will therefore, it lying so much in my way, venture,
humbly to Offer what inclines me to Conclude, that this turning the Three
Persons into Three Essences is Heretical. For tho I am far from Hereticating
every one that differs from me in Matters of Moment; or from making every
Erroneous Explication of a Fundamental Article to be Heresy; yet I am
persuaded, that the Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in one undivided Essence
is of such a Nature; that many, in their explicating it, have fallen into
diverse Heresies; and that thus it is in the Present Case.

The Doctrine condemned for Heretical is a making the Persons in the Blessed
Trinity to be Three Dictinct Substances, or Individual Natures; which is as
Direct a Contradicton to the One Entire, and Indivisible Nature of God, as can
be. Three Individual Essences are as much Opposed to one Individual Essence, as
Three Persons are to one Person; and Three Persons may be as well One Person,
as three Individual Essences be one Individual Essence.

The Author therefore of this Notion cannot, in Reason, be supposed to Believe
these Contradictory Propositions to be both true: and being so vehement in his
Asserting Three Individual Natures as to make the Denial thereof to be Heresy
and Nonsense, we must be so Civil to him, as to suppose, that he does not
Believe the Essence of God to be one Entire Indivisible Essence; which I do the
more readily suppose, because it is so Common for Tritheists to do so.

It is owned, That Photius grants that Conon, and his Followers, held a
Consubstantial Trinity, and the Unity of the Godhead; Phot. Bibl. Cod. 24.
and so far were Orthodox; but then adds, they were far from it, when they
Asserted Proper and Peculiar Substances to Each Person.

I have not that Bibliotheke by me, but Suicerus, in his Account of the
Tritheists, says, they held Three Substances and Natures in all things alike,
and yet would by no means own Three Divinities or Three Gods; and refers to the
Bibliotheca Photij, where it is thus; These men [vid. Severus and Theodosius*]
spoke many things excellently well; Cod. 24. p 16.
as, that there was a Consubstantial Trinity, of the same Nature; and but one
God, one Divinity; (...), etc. But they Blasphemed, when they said, the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost, had their Proper Natures and Divinities, or
Particular Substances, and so contradicted themselves as well as the Truth,
etc. So that their asserting the Consubstantiality of the Trinity, and it is
being of the same Nature, could not secure their making the Three Persons three
Distinct Substances, from being Blasphemy.

But what I mostly Press, is this Consideration; that if the contradictory
Affirmation of three Individual Essences being but one Individual Essence, will
clear the Notion from being Heresy, then Valentinus Gentilis, Lismaninus,
Blandrata, and the many other Propagators of the Socinian Abominations, must be
also for the same reason cleared from Heresy.

I will begin with Gentilis, who held, Lubien. Histor. Ref. l. 2. c. 5. p. 107.
that there were three distinct Eternal Spirits or Minds in the Trinity; that
the Son was Begotten from Eternity [Ante Saecula in Latitudine Aeternitatis,]
Thus much Lubieniescius: And Gentilis himself, in his Epistle to the Ministers
at Geneva, was Positive, that the Father only is true God, and the Son also
true God; Tract. Theol. p. 660, 661.
and yet not Two but One and the same God, because Christ has one and the same
Essence with the Father, and therefore (says he) I am neither Arian nor
Servetian, Lismaninus, and Blandrata held the same for Substance with Gentilis.
To clear thus much, I must Observe what Lubieniescius reports of Laelius
Socinus, who was one of the forty Italian Combinators; It is to this Effect.
Laelius Socinus (says he) traveled first into Helvetia, then into Italy,
Britain, and Germany; and about the year 1551. he got into Poland; from whence,
after he had instilled his Errors into the Hearts of Lismaninus, and many
others, he went into Moravia, and then returned to Helvetia. That in Moravia,
Paruta, Gentilis, Darius, and Alciatus, of the same Combination with Laelius,
did their Part to spread their Notions, sending into Poland their Theses about
the Trinity, and doubtful Phrases in the Holy Scriptures.

There were near twenty Theses about the Trinity, Ubi sup. l. 3. c. 1.
which they did put into the hands of their Friend Prosper Provana, who
committed them to the Care of Budzinius. He no sooner Read 'em, but gave them
unto Johannes Pustelnecius from whom Stanislaus Lutomirskius got a Copy, which
being communicated to sundry others, the Controversy about the Trinity had
there its Rise; some firmly adhering to the Faith, received from the Lord
Christ and his Apostles; others, ensnared by the Objections raised against it
by the Italian Combinators, vehemently opposed the Truth: not that they did it
openly, but (as our Vindicated Author) displeased with the Old, offered their
New Explications, in the very same manner He has done. Amongst others,
Lismaninus and Blandrata were very active.

Lismaninus, who was first infected by the Endeavors of Laelius Socinus, and
confirmed in his Heresies by George Blandrata, falling into Suspicion, takes
Heart, and in a Letter to Stanislaus Ivanus Karninscius, boldly defends
Blandrata. But, that he might do his part to remove all grounds of jealousy
touching his Orthodoxy, he Prefaces his Epistle with a short Prayer to God the
Father, from whom are all things, through the Lord Christ, by whom are all
things, Consubstantial and Coeternal with the Father and the Holy Ghost. And,
in the Epistle it self, he gives a summary of his own Faith, and of the Faith
of them who dwelt at Pinczow, in these words. We Believe in God the Father,
from whom are all things, who is Infinite without beginning, and from whom, not
only all Creatures are, but also the Divinity and Bonity of the Son and Holy
Ghost; as Nazianzen teaches in his Apology.

We Believe also in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is the Incarnate
Word, God-man, God of God, Light of Light, True God of True God,
Consubstantial, Coeternal, and Coequal in Essence, or Nature, Power, Glory,
Authority, and Honor, with the Father. And,

We Believe in the Holy Ghost the True God of the Father and the Son; or, as
the Greek Doctors teach, in an unutterable manner, from Eternity, proceeding
from the Father by the Son, Consubstantial, Coeternal, and Coequal with the
Father and the Son, in his Essence, Power, Majesty, Glory, Authority, and
Honor.

Blandrata in a Synod at Xiansia, Anno Dom. 1562, declared his Belief, Lubien.
Hist. Ref. Pol. l. 2. c. 6. p. 130.
In one God the Father, in one Lord Jesus Christ his Son, and in one Holy
Ghost; each of which is Essentially God: A Plurality of Gods I Abhor (says he)
for with us there is but One God only, whose Essence is Indivisible: I do
confess that there are Three distinct Hypostases; that the Deity of Christ, and
his Generation, is Eternal; and, that the Holy Ghost is True and Eternal God,
proceeding from both.

In these Confessions, there is the Denial of a Plurality of Gods and a
Profession, that the Son, and Holy Spirit are of the same Essence,
Consubstantial, Coeternal, Coequal with the Father; in words, as full as its
Possible for the Vindicated Author, (who holds the Persons of the Trinity to be
Three distinct Essences) to express it; Howbeit these Men were justly Charged
with the Tritheistical Heresy. Peter Martyr, as Lubieniescius reports, does in
a Letter Anno Dom. 1558, Hist. Ref. Pol. l. 2. c. 6. p. 126.
speak of Blandrata's bringing into the Deity a Certain kind of Monarchy,
denying the Essence of the Father and the Son to be the same, from whence a a
Plurality of Gods, does follow, which thing, as he was told, Gribaldus, did in
express words Assert. In like manner Lubieniescius himself tells us, That
Lismaninus, and Blandrata, Agreed in this, that unless it be settled, Ibid. page
131.
that God, who in the Holy Scriptures, is called the Father of Jesus Christ, is
the most High God, no satisfying Answer can be made to Stancarus; nor can that
Worship, which is due unto the most High God, he given him, for Christ himself
does say, my Father is Greater than I.

These Men, and their Followers, notwithstanding these Confessions, were so far
from believing the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be Coessential, Coeternal,
and Coequal, that as Gentilis made the Father to be the Essentiator, and the
Son and Spirit to be the Essentiati; so these were Positive; that there was a
Pre-eminence of Causality in the Father above the Son and Holy Ghost; that the
Essence of the Son and Holy Spirit was not Vnoriginated, Vncaused, and from it
self only; but from the Essence of the Father, that is to say, the Father was
the Essentiator, and the Son and Spirit the Essentiati; and making the Essence
of the Son, and Spirit so very distinct from the Essence of the Father they
were for three Essences in the Trinity; Three distinct Essences, and therefore
were called Trideitae, which is not only the Observation of Beza, but the
Confession of Lubieniescius, who says, That they were injuriously by the
Adversary called Trideitae, though nothing more manifest than that they being the
Worshippers of God the Father by Jesus Christ the only mediator, were therefore
in Transylvania, called Unitarians.

The Notion then of Gentilis Lismaninus and Blandrata was, that the Son and
Holy Ghost were Consubstantial, Coequal and Coeternal in Essence with the
Father; they were of one, and the same Nature, and yet three Infinite, and
Eternal distinct Essences, and Spirits; which is the same for substance with
what our Vindicated Author so Vehemently Contends for; whence I argue, If our
Authors Asserting one Individual Essence, or Deity will secure his Three
Infinite Essences, or Minds from Heresy, it must also clear Gentilis,
Lismaninus, Blandrata and their disciples; ay Severus, and Theodosius too, from
the same Charge: But if it will not clear them from being Heretical, it cannot
sufficiently Vindicate Him.

But this Tritheism is not only, as I have already intimated, an Heresy; But
the same, that the Italian Heretics pitched on to Introduce their
Samosatenianism; and whoever will make a close search, will see, that it has a
Tendency thereunto, not only as hereby a Trinity of Persons is made a Trinity
of Gods, to the setting the Minds of many against the Truth it self; but as
this their Principle leads its Embracers to take into their Faith, the several
Consequences, which Naturally, and Necessarily flow from it. For, Answerable to
the various Capacities, Inclinations, and Interesis of them, who will have it
that the Persons in the Trinity are three distinct Essences, Sundry Errors do
arise. But (...) to insist upon them; to escape the Blasphemous Absurdities,
which flow from their a^^erting Three distinct Infinite Essences, Spirits, or
Minds, As for instance, their making them Three distinct Infinite Coequal
Gods; they ascribed unto the Father an Hyperoche, a Pre-eminence and
Superiority above the Son, and Holy Ghost. But then the Inequality, which did
immediately follow from the Pre-eminence, and Superiority, assigned to the
Father being such, as was in every Bodies Judgment, inconsistent with the Sons
and Holy Ghosts being Consubstantial and Coequal with the Father they were at
a loss how to Explain themselves. An Inequality, as to the Economy,
Dispensation, and Office, they look^d on as insufficient. The Arians and
Samosatenians therefore say, it must be an Inequality of Essence. But this
being so Gross a Contradiction to the Son's and Holy Ghost^s being of the same
Nature, and Coequal with the Father, Server us, Gentilis, with the
Pinczovians, would not at first expressly allow of more than an Inequality as a
Cause or Principle; making the Essence of the Father to be the Principle or
Cause of the Essence of the Son and Holy Ghost; affirming, that tho the Essence
of the Father was Vnoriginated, and from it self; yet so was not the Essence of
the Son, and Holy Ghost: These Essences, they said, were Caused; the one by an
Eternal Generation from the Father, the other through an ineffable Procession from
the Father, by the Son. Thus by a deriving distinct Essences from the Essence
of the Father, they rejected the Autotheiry of the Son and Spirit, and with
their Causalities brought in such dependencies of the Son and Spirit on the
Father as interfered with a being absolutely Infinite in every Perfection; and
thus, in a more Artificial manner, they ran the same length with the Arian and
Socinian as to the Inequality; For that Essence which is not of it self is not,
cannot be, in a strict Proper Sense, God; for the Essence of God is only from
it self, uncaused, unoriginated; an Essence that has a beginning, and is
caused, cannot be Absolutely Eternal; for what is Absolutely Eternal, never had
a beginning, never was caused, never received its Essence from another.

There is a Great difference between Causing a Distinct Essence, and a
communicating the same Individual Essence to another; for though the causing
another necessarily implies that the Caused Essence was from another, a
communicating it does not so. The Father's communicating his own Essence unto
the Son, does not argue the Son's Essence is from another, for it is still the
same it was before it was communicated. But the Father's causing an Essence
distinct from his own, imports Imperfection in the Caused Essence, even the
want of a truly proper and absolute Eternity and Independence, and necessarily
infers an Inequal^ty of Essence, which is the thing the Arians and
Samosatenians saw and asserted, and the Pinczovians intended; who, as they
observed their Disciples prepared to embrace this Error, insinuated it.

This appears from Blandrata's Endeavor in an Epistle which Beza had of his,
^p^st. 81. p. 364, (...).
to persuade Gregorius Pauli, a Tritheist, to close with the Opinions of
Samosatenus, and from what Petrus Statorius, a Companion of Blandrata, when he
dwelt at Pinczow [from which Place the Tritheists had their Name of
Pinczovians, with whom Franciscus Lismaninus, Martin Crovicius, Schomannus,
Gregorius Pauli, ^relius, Biblioth. Antitrin. p. 48.
Tricessius, and (as Sandius observes) Ochinus, Stancarus, Alciatus, etc, had
their Habitations] did offer in a Synod at Pinczow, about the Insufficiency of
the Answer which a Synod, held in the same place, did some time before give
unto Remianus Chelmius about what he wrote against the Invocation of the Holy
Ghost. The Story is thus:

Remianus Chelmius sent to a Synod held at Pinczow the 12th of November An.
1559, a Letter, in which several things were objected against the Invocation of
the Holy Ghost. Peter Statorius, who, Biblioth. Antitrin. p. 48.
as Sandius suggests, instilled this Opinion into Chelmius, does with Gregorius
Pauli and others move, that the Doctrine of the Trinity might be diligently
examined, and tried by the Holy Scriptures. An Answer is sent from this Synod
unto Chelmius. But Statorius, in a Synod held at the same place November the
19th 1561. declared, that Chelmius was not satisfied with the Answer sent unto
him. The Synod therefore obliged him to return a fuller one, which he did, but
in such a manner, Epit. Hist. Orig. Unit. in Pol.
that no one could tell what it was he himself held. Stoinius, who was Grandson
to Statorius, represents matters of Fact thus. In this Synod Anno 1561,
Statorius was directed to write an Answer unto Chelmski, which he did, but so,
that it did not appear what he himself believed of it: He only said, that
Blandrata was Represented by Calvin as one who had drank in the Poison of the
Serverian Impiety. As for the Opinion which he proposed to the Synod, 'twas
acceptable to all, but Questioned by him, whether the Relief, that the Father
was one Unbegotten, and the Son Begotten, did not infer a Plurality of Gods.
But all they (they are Statorius his own Words) that dwell with Blandrata are
suspected for holding some Heresies. But if they are Heretics, who according
to the Holy Scriptures Believe the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, I do cheerfully
(says he) acknowledge my self to be of that Number, etc.

Lubieniescius, passing by what Regenvols^ius in his History of the Sclavonian
Churches says of Statorius, does out of Budzanius tell us, That Statorius
succeeding Paulus Orsacius in the Government of the School at Finczow,
Professed the True Faith, affirming that The Invocation of the Holy Ghost is
Idolatry; That there is not one Text in the Holy Scripture either for the
Deity, or Invocation, or Adoration of the Holy Spirit, Lul^en. Hist. l. 2. c.
8. p. 149.
or for Faith in him. That the Holy Ghost is not the third Person of the Deity,
nor God, but the Power and Gift of God.

On this occasion there arose several Disputes amongst the Learned, at which
time Statorius persuaded many to embrace this Opinion: notwithstanding which,
and although Alexius Rodecius told Statorius to his Face, that he Learned this
Principle from him; yet did he in the Year 1567, openly deny it, declaring,
that the Spirit is God, and to be Worshipped as God; and whoever taught
otherwise was of his Father the Devil: for which Reason, Budzinius looked on
him as a Proteus, forsaken of the Holy Spirit. And Orphinovius says, God
Entrusted him with Sundry Talents, which he did not Employ in defense of the
Truth; but the Trinitarians being the stronger Party, he did, at last, turn
unto them.

Thus these Pinczovians, vid. Lismaninus, Gregorius Pauli, Ochinus, Statorius,
Stancarus, Alciatus, etc. their Partisans, did not only set up Tritheism with a
Design to bring in the Samosatenian Heresy, but formed themselves into sundry
Shapes, and were unwearied in their Attempts, first to turn the Three Persons
into Three distinct Essences, insinuate an Inequality amongst them, ascribing
to the Father a Pre-eminence; and then bring the Deity of the Holy Spirit into
Doubt, and make the Lord Christ a subordinate God; and thus establish their
Socinianism.

That Learned Doctor therefore, who has confuted this Pinczovian Heresy of
Three distinct Essences in the Trinity, deserves greatly from the Church of
God; For, by turning his Strength against the Notion of Three distinct Infinite
Essences, Substances, Spirits, or Minds he has taken an Effectual Course to
break those Socinian Measures which were most likely to expose the blessed
Trinity, and prepare the Minds of many to take in their Vnitarianism, or rather
Bideism. And they who have condemned the Assertion of Three distinct Essences,
or Minds, for Heretical, have done honorably to their Eternal Praise.

When the old Socinian Game is Playing over again, and some who pretend a Zeal
for the Trinity walk in the same Path, and plead for Three distinct Essences,
as the Italian Heretics heretofore did, it is time for the Orthodox to look to
themselves: They cannot be too cautious in a matter of such Consequence; and
what Persons soever are industrious in their Endeavors to propagate this
Doctrine of Three Infinite Minds, or Spirits, are justly suspected: Especially
since it is in a case where Solemn Protestations, Sacred Subscriptions, and
Oaths, have been used only as a Blind to delude the Orthodox. Respond. ad Comp.
Mat. Sladi. Seg. 104.


Conradus Vorstius made many a Protestation of his Orthodoxy in this very
Point, expressly declaring, that he was neither Arian nor Socinian. I can
(says he) with a good Conscience solemnly Testify, and Declare, as in Presence
of God and Men, that I have not designed the promoting either Socinianism or
Arianism, etc. And in his Preface to this answer he sets down a Confession of
his Faith; and in the close of what he had said of the Trinity he Declares,
That the Faith of the Holy Trinity, of the Person and Office of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he will by the Grace of God Constantly and Religiously adhere unto, for
which reason (he adds) I cannot, without manifest Injury, be condemned for
holding either the Arian, Samosatenian, or any other such Heresy.

Howbeit he is Positive, That the Three Persons are Three distinct Real Entia,
or Beings, and that it is a Contradiction, that any thing should truly Exist
that had not its Proper Essence. It is therefore manifest, (says he) that in
the Trinity there are distinct Things; That no one can deny thus much, unless
he does with Praxea and Sabellius hold only Three Names, or Respects and
Offices, etc. (as we observed.) Every Being has a certain peculiar Essence;
and it undoubtedly follows that each Person has a Certain Proper Essence of
his own: Vorst. Apol. Exeg. c. 9. p. 37, 38. Vorst. de Deo vid. Not. ad disput.
3. p. 208, 220, 221.
So Vorstius, who nevertheless expressly asserts, that the Substance of God, is
but one Numerical or Individual Substance; That he is so one, as to be an
Individual, that cannot be Divided either into Species or Parts.

This was Vorstius his Notion; which, notwithstanding his Solemn Protestations
of adhering unto the Orthodox Faith, he did his uttermost to propagate; he
himself, as I have already proved, in the 70th. Page of this Discourse, Living,
and Dying an Antitrinitarian. And as it was thus with him so it may be now with
others: They may Profess to Believe one Divinity, which is Entirely and
Inseparably in Three distinct Persons or Minds, and hold these Three Persons to
be Three distinst Essences with a design to introduce Socinianism. For, from
what I have said it is clear, that the Italian Consult. Professed to Believe
there was but One God, and Pitched on the Doctrine of Three distinct Essences,
that from thence they might introduce an Inequality of Essences, assign a
Pre-eminence and Superiority to the Essence of the Father, and make the Son but
a Subordinate God; which is the Point the Socinians would be at.

These are some of the Methods which the Foreign Socinians have taken to expose
the Trinity and Propagate their Heresies; and whoever will consult the Writings
of our English Gentlemen, who are their Offspring, will see, that there are a
Set of Men amongst us, who have, in Imitation of the Italian Heretics, entered
into a Combination to bring into contempt the same Blessed Truths, after the
same manner their Predecessors have done.

SECT. IX.
The Socinian Trinity proposed: Their Explications of it mysterious. They
affirm the Holy Ghost to be Eternal, and yet not God, nor a Creature. That
Jesus Christ is but a Creature, and yet God. That the Father is the most High
God, but not Infinite, Immense, or Omniscient.

BY what has been hitherto asserted of the English Socinians, it is apparent,
that whatever their Religion is, they are not prepared, as yet, for that
Concord, as to be able to Compose, and Publish an Exact Scheme of it; but do
they bend their Strength rather to tear up old Foundations, covering themselves
in such a manner under Generals, that it is Impossible to sind out what they
would in Particular be at. And, that they may strew the way for the most easy
making Proselytes, they apply themselves to such Methods, as I have in the
foregoing Sections observed: And whereas the different Explications given of
the Trinity by some Orthodox Divines, are made by them the Matter of so much
Triumph, I will, as an agr^able Return, show how Mysterious the^ selves are in
Explaining their Trinity.

It must be acknowledged, that about the Year 1562. these Heretics did their
uttermost to engage the Ministers to abstain from Philosophical Terms, or
Humane Forms of Speech. Epit. Hist.
And, as Stoinius observes, it was this Year concluded in a Synod at Pinczow,
that the Ministers do not use any Philosophical Modes of Speech about the
Trinity, Essence, Generation, or Mode of Proceeding; but that every one should
Confine himself to the Terms used in the Writings of the Prophets, and
Apostles; and in the Apostles Creed. But notwithstanding this Decree Sarnicius
contended earnesty against Gregorius Pauli, for their use; on which occasion,
Stanislaus Szafranicius did, in a Synod met the same Year at Rogow, labor to
compose the Differences between them, but in vain; only 'twas then Decreed,
that they should tolerate one another, and abstain from such Forms as are
unscriptural.

But, Hist. Ref. Pol. l. 3. c. 1. p. 167.
says Lubieniescius, in June the Year following viz, 1563. another Synod met,
which wrote unto Prince Radzivil, That although they could not because of some
weak Brethren, wholly suppress the use of the Word Trinity; yet they had in a
great measure purged it from the present Abuse. And in the Year 1567 it was
Decreed, That the Trinity is to be Piously, and Religiously Retained on this
Condition, that Brotherly love, according to the Rule given, by the Son of God
be observed, each one bearing with the Infirmities of one another, etc.

The Orthodox adhered so firmly to the use of those Terms (as what did most
clearly express the Truth and Distinguish it from Error,) that the Socinian
Party judged it convenient to continue the use of these Terms, and therefore
had their Trinity too: tho they opposed a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead;
yet they still professed to believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Andreas Dudicius, in an Epistle to Beza, sets before him a Confession of the
Socinian Faith, and the Athanasian Creed, with his reasonings on the one, and
the other: Their Confession is very short in these Words. We believe in one
only True God; The Creator of Heaven and Earth, Socini Oper. Tom. 1. p. 529.
and of all things in them, or elsewhere, Genesis 1.24. Ex. 20. Deuteronomy. 4.6.27.32.
-- see the Refutation of Johannes Sommerus, Lib. 1. cap. 4. We believe also in
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things -- Cor. 8. etc. vid. ibid. We
believe that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of God the Father and Son, Mat. 3.10.
Luc. 4. Romans 8. -- That he proceeds from the Father, Joh. 15. That he is given
to them, who believe, by the Son, Titus 3. vid. Sommerum. Lib. 2. cap. ult.
page 171.

Besides, whatever else is in the Holy Scriptures ascribed to the most High
God, or to his Son Jesus Christ, or to the Holy Ghost, which through haste we may
have omitted, we do most readily, and with the Profoundest Submission, ascribe
to them, most sincerely confess, and without the least Hesitation believe.

I will add but one Authority more to clear this, which you may see in the
Polonian Catechism, where they do not only acknowledge, Sect. 3. c. 1. p. 18.
that Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7. and 1 John 5.7. do show, there is the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and that they are United; but they constantly
assert it. So that, say they, we declare, that he, who is ignorant of this
Doctrine, or does not believe it, cannot be a Christian.

This Notion after much Deliberation had of it, is Published as theirs by
Crellius, Sclichtingius a Bukowiec, Martin Ruarus, and Andreas Wissowatius, and
not only embraced by the Foreign, but by the English Socinians, as appears from
what is in their Unitarian History, and in Biddble's Confession, which by
Reprinting, and Placing it in the Collection of their Writers, they have made
their Own.

In this Confession it is declared, that they believe, there is one most High
God, Creator of Heaven, and Earth, and that this God is none but the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ the first Person of the Holy Trinity. -- They believe,
there is one Chief Son of the High God; and this Son of the most High God, is
none but Jesus Christ the Second Person in the Trinity. They believe that there
is comprised in the Holy Trinity, the Holy Spirit, the Minister of God, and
Christ.

But though they believe a Holy Trinity, yet they cannot agree about what this
Holy Trinity is. They are Three Persons, as Ruarus, Przipcovius, John Biddle,
and his Followers affirm: They are but Two in the Judgment of Socinus,
Sclichtingius, Crellius and the Generality of em both at home and abroad, whose
Sentiments I will examine, and begin with what they say of the Holy Ghost.

1. The Holy Ghost is, in their Opinion, one of the Three, but not a Person;
nor God, nor a Creature.

In their Attempts to Explain this Notion, they heap up Mystery upon Mystery,
even such Mysteries, as seem to our dull Understandings, as full of
Contradictions as a Mystery of the grossest sort can be: For they Acknowledge,
that what is Peculiar unto God, is Artributed to the Holy Ghost, yea his very
Eternity, That the Holy Ghost is a thing truly Divine and Eternal, and the
Third in order with Respect to the Father, and the Son, and proceeding from the
Father and the Son, we shall, Cont. Meis. p. 604.
(says Sclichtingius) easily agree with them in, but yet deny him to be God.
And although it is natural for us to suppose that Being, which is not God, and yet
exists, to be a Creature, they are express that he is neither God nor Creature.

In Grawerus, Pol. Sacr. p. 635.
the Controversy about the Spirits being the Third Person in the Godhead, is
fairly stated; where, among other Things, he accquaints us with a Dispute
between Ostorodius, and Tradelius. In this Dispute Tradelius arguing against
the Socinian Notion, said, That in his Opinion, if the Holy Spirit be not God,
seeing every Thing that is, is either a Creator, or his Creature, he must
necessarily be his Creature.

To him Ostorodius thus replied. 1. It Is one thing to say, that an Absurdity
flows from such a Man's Notion; another to say, that this Man holds the
Absurdity: For Doctor Tradelius does not only endeavor to draw from what I
hold, that the Holy Spirit is a Creature, but says Categorically, that I am of
Opinion, That the Holy Ghost is a Creature: A thing, that never came into my
Mind: For on the contrary I affirm, that if the Holy Spirit be the Power of
God, he is not a Creature; for the Power of God is not Created. (2) I further
say, that though the Holy Spirit be not God 'twill not immediately follow, that
he is a Creature; for that Maxim, Omne quod Creator non est, est Creatura, is
Uncertain; For the Justice, Love, Grace and other Properties and Attributes of
God, are not Creatures, nor are they God in that sense Tradelius will have the
Holy Spirit to be God.

Thus far Ostorodius; who delivering the Socinian sense, says, That the Holy
Spirit is neither God nor a Creature, but a Somewhat between them boeh; though
the Opposition between God and the Creature is so immediate, that non datur
Tertium, Yet contrary to the Plainest Reason, the Socinians Affirm the Holy
Spirit to be an Eternal Somewhat, that is neither Creator, nor Creature. A
Contradiction so gross, that it cannot be either solv^d o^ covered by
Ostorodius his Allusion to the Attributes of God; for though they are not God in
the Sense Tradelius says the Holy Ghost is God, that is, they are not God
Personally, yet they are Essentially, and are Infinite; and whatever is
Infinite is God: Infinite Justice is God, and yet not many Gods but One,
because there can be but One Infinite.

If then the Holy Ghost be the Power of God, it is either Finite, or Infinite:
If Finite, it cannot be Eternal, it must have a Beginning, receive its being
from another, and be a Creature; If Infinite, it is God; or, somewhat besides
God is Infinite, that is to say, there are Two Infinites the One God, the other
not, which to our understandings is Contradiction all over.

How they can come off, I cannot see, especially considering another Opinion of
theirs, which is, That though it be a Sin to Worship the Holy Ghost, yet it is not
Idolatry to do so.

Sclichtingius does, I confess, Con. Meis. p. 11, 12.
with much Candor toward us, endeavor to Vindicate our Worshipping the Holy
Ghost from being Idolatry; tho he be not God. But thus much he does, by
affirming that there is so close an Union between the Holy Ghost, and the most
High God; that the giving Divine Worship to him, cannot be either Impious or
Idolatrous. And in his Answer to what Meisner urged, from the Attribution of
the Divine Properties to the Holy Ghost, in Proving him to be God; he turns it
all off, by saying, That does not Evince the Holy Ghost to be a Person, but it
is sufficient to my Purpose, that they Acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be as
Divine, as Infinite, and Eternal, as the Attributes of God are, seeing hereby
they must either own him to be God; or that somewhat besides God is Infinite.

II. As they say the Holy Ghost is neither a Creature nor God, so on the other
hand, they make Christ to be but a Creature; and yet to be God also.

1. They affirm Jesus Christ to be a True God; True, in Opposition to the False
Gods of the Gentiles, who are indeed False Gods, because they are Gods without
a Deity: A God without a Deity is a false God because he wants Infinite
Perfection; a true God then has Infinite Perfections, and therefore must be
the most High God, except there are Perfections more High than what are
Infinite.

But thus much they Deny, though Christ be a true God, yet he is not the Most
High God. He is but a Subordinate God in his Essence. This then is their
Notion, Christ is a True Subordinate God, i. e. A True God whose Perfections
are Infinite; a Subordinate God in his Essence whose Perfections can be but
Finite, and therefore can be no God at all* Again,

2. Christ is, they say, God, on the Father's giving him Absolute Dominion over
all things, with a Power, and Knowledge, whereby he knows the Distresses of
all, and is able to Relieve the Distressed; But, seeing Nothing, short of
Omniscience, and Omnipotence, can know, and Relieve, and these together with
absolute Dominion, are Essential Properties of the Most High God, How comes it
to pass, that Christ is not the most High God? Here are the Essential
Properties of such a God, and yet no such God.

These are some of their Mysteries. The Holy Ghost is an Eternal Omnipotent.
Increate Being, but not God. He is neither a Creator, nor a Creature, but an
Omnipotent Somewhat, different from Both: Increate or Unoriginated Omnipotence
is not sufficient to evince the Eternal Spirit to be God; but a Derived
Omnipotence is enough to make a Creature to be a True God. Unoriginated
Omnipotence is not Reason enough for the adoring the Eternal Spirit; but
Derived Omnipotence is a good Ground for Rendering Divine Worship to a Creature.
These Gentlemen, you see, are the Grand Transubstantiators; for they can
Transubstantiate a Creature into a True God, and still remain a Creature, they
can Transfer the Essential Properties from one being to another; and each Being
remain the same it was before the Translation; They can Order and Dispose of
the Divine Properties in such a Way, that they shall be insufficient to
Denominate him a True God, in whom they were from all Eternity, and yet be
Powerful enough to make him, in whom they were not two Thousand Years ago, to
be a True God. Whether these are Real Mysteries, or Real Contradictions, let
the Prudent judge.

I will not treat these Over-Wise Men with that Scurrilous Language they do the
Mysteries of the Holy Trinity; But without Exaggeration I will proceed to
Examine what they say of God the Father.

III. That God the Father is only the most High God, is their Assertion; of
whom they have nevertheless formed such an Idea as fails of Infinite
Perfections. So that if we pursue their Notion of a Deity to its utmost Length,
we must at last sit down amongst the Atheists.

For the clearing this, I do in Concurrence with the Common sentiments of
Mankind, averr, that what Being soever is destitute of an Infinite Perfection
is not, cannot be God. The Essential Properties belong to the Divine Nature,
including Infinite Perfection; that being which is destitute thereof, wants
what is Essential to God, and cannot be the True God.

If then the Socinians deny any one Infinite Perfection to belong to their God,
it must be acknowledged, that he wants what is essential unto God, and is not
God. And that they Deny thus much, is Evident, from the Notion they frame of
his Eternity, and their Rejecting his Immensity and Omniscience.

I might begin with what they say of God's Eternity, but I will only observe
what the English Socinian says of my Lord of Worcester's arguing from God^s
Eternity, to prove Somewhat in the Attributes of God incomprehensible, who
instancing in Eternity, says, If God was from Eternity he must be from
himself. In their Answer they tell us, To say a Person, Ans. to the Bp. Worces.
Sermon. p. 5.
or Thing was from it self, is a Contradiction. It implies this Contradiction,
It was before it was, Thus our English Socinian; who adds, I am sorry an
Eternal God must be a Contradiction, had he no way to Defend the New Mysteries,
but by Espousing the Cause of Atheists?

In Return to this Gentleman, passing by what his Lordship has said in his
Consu^ation of him, I will only observe, how he does at once expose himself,
and his Leaders, such as Socinus, Crellius, etc. who speaking of what is the
Essence of God, say it is from it self.

Socinus, in his Institution of the Christian Religion, answering the Question,
Tom. 1. p. 651.
What ought we to know of the Nature, and Essence of God? says, These two
Things chiefly, That he is, and that ^e is only One. Quest. What is it to know,
That He is? Ans. It is to know, that he has from himself a Divine Fu^pi^^ o^^r
us. Besides, He tells us, that Eternity (...) necessarily included in God's
having Divine Dominion over us from Himself, and so is his Justice, Wisdom, and
Power. A little after this, he further says, That when it is said God is One;
The meaning is, There is but one who has Dominion over us from himself. t^^i.
Sup. p. 681.
In like manner the Tenth Argument Crellius presses to prove, that the Father
of Jesus Christ is the only Supreme God, is this, That his Nature and whatever
else is proper to the Supreme God, he received from Himself.

On this Notion of God it is, that they build the whole of their Religion, and
on which they insist, to the End they may the more effectually enervate our
Arguments for Christ's being God though from the Father. But as Socinus,
Crellius, etc. fail of their Design, in that when t^s said* God is from
Himself, it must be meant of God, taken Essentially, not Personally; so, this
Gentleman makes the whole of the Socinian Religion to be founded on a Chimera
or Contradiction. For, if the Nature of God, his Dominion, Eternity, Justice,
Wisdom, and Power, be from Himself, he must be before he had Dominion, Justice,
etc. What then was He? He was, before he was; or as the English Socinian
phrases it, He must be a Contradiction. But as I said, waving the Consideration
of this Contradiction, and their Notion of Eternity, which they make to be a
sort of Time, where are the successive Parts of Past, Present, and to Come,
which cannot be without a First, Second, and a Third, and yet must be without
'em, or Eternity must have it is Beginning. I will urge against them their
denying Immensity and Omniscience to belong to God.

First then, they deny God's Immensity, and Circumscribe his Essence within the
Heavens, acknowledging him to be no otherwise every where Present, than as he
is by his Power, Providence, and Works.

Socinus assures us, Soci. Frag. Catec. Tom. 1. p. 685.
he could see no Reason to conclude God's Essence to be Immense, because his
Power was so; expressly declaring, That the Divine Essence is not Infinite.
Crellius, and Smalcius hold the same. Resp. ad. ^ranc. Dav. Tom. 2. p. 735.
But if Gods Essence be not Infinite, it is only Finite; if but Finite, how can
his Power be Infinite? can, a Finite Essence be the subject of an Infinite
Perfection? Or can a Finite Being be from it self? or be self-Originated? Or
can any one Finite Essence be so Great, that another cannot be as Great? After
this manner we may have Twenty or Thirty Thousand Gods as well as One. But a
Million of these put together, cannot make One Infinite God. Thus by denying
the Divine Essence to be Infinite, they Oppose God's Immensity, and do their
Part to give up the Cause to the Atheist.

Secondly, They deny also God's Omniscience, which necessarily follows from the
other; it being impossible for the Knowledge of a Finite Being to be Infinite.

After Socinus had discoursed very largely of Divine Prescience, he Ushers in
his Conclusion thus, Seeing therefore there is no Reason, Praeb^c. Theol. c.
11. P. 549.
nor One Text of Scripture from which it can be clearly inferr^d, that God
knows all things, which ^re done before they come to pass. We must Conclude,
that we may in no wise Assert his Divine Prescience: especially, considering
there are Reasons not a few, as well as sundry Testimonies in Holy Writ, from
whence it plainly appears that we ought to deny it. Smalcius and Crellius say
the same. And Episcopius himself would have fallen in with 'em, had it not
been, that all Prophecies must then have been destroyed From this Notion of
theirs, in the first place, Revealed Religion receives a Wound; for if God does
not know Future Contingents, how can he Foretell them? And if he cannot Foretell
them, of what Use is the Prophetiacal Part of the Holy Scriptures? And if they
must be rejected, as useless, will not the Deists be Abundantly Gratified? Or,
if it be yielded that God does not foreknow Future Contingents, 'twill
necessarily follow, that his Knowledge is not Infinite, and he cannot be God.

These few, amongst many Instances, may suffice, to Convince us, that the
Socinians, whatever their Boasts are, have no Reason for the exposing the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as they have done; nor for their Railing at
Gospel-Mysteries, as if they had been full of Monstrous Contradictions. For you
see, that they have their Trinity too, a Trinity throughout Mysterious; for, as
they make the Holy Ghost an Increate Omnipotent Spirit, but not God, and Jesus
Christ to be but a Creature, and yet a God, a True, though but a Subordinate God;
so God the Father, the most High God, is left by them destitute of Infinite
Perfections. His Essence is but Finite, and therefore without a Contradiction
cannot be infinitely Perfect.

Their Trinity you see is a most Mysterious one, and their Vnitarianism lies
in the Belief of Two distinct Gods, a Greater and a Lesser, to wit the Father
and his Son Jesus Christ; which issues in the Denial of an Infinite God. For
which Reason, amongst others, Mr. Edwards has very justly charged their
Principles, for being Atheistical, as Bisterfield accuses them for their
Tendency unto Paganism, Adversari is merito exprobramus, quod unum verum Deum
agnoscere nolunt, Duos Deos in Ecclesiam introducant, ficque si id omne
crede^dum esset, quod ex ipsorum Opinione necessario sequitur, Paganismum
revocent, ac stabiliant, ipsomet Paganismi non accusamus: speramus enim, quod
non videant absurdissima hac dogmata ex ipsorum Doctrina necessaria sequi, etc.
Bisterfield contra Crel. de Uno Deo, Lib. 1. sect. 2. cap. 18.
whilst He is so Charitable as to hope they see it not.

Much more might be said of our Socinians, but being Apprehensive that what I
have Remarked is sufficient to move such as are ensnared by their Crafty and
Deceitful Guides, to consider how much they are Concerned to take heed to
themselves. I will at this time forbear.

SECT. X.
The Agreement between the English Socinians, and the Mahometans Detected. They
both Believe Jesus the Son of Mary to be the Messiah. Sundry other Instances,
wherein they are Agreed. They both Deny Christ's Divinity, and the giving to
him Divine Adoration. The Impostor Mahomet a Lascivious Wretch, who Propagated
his Religion by Force of Arms.

THe Good Opinion our English Socinians have of the Turkish Religion; whose
Embracers, they place in a nearer Proximity to Salvation than Orthodox
Christians, moved me to Enquire, whether they had, according to their own
Principles, any Reason for the^r Charity toward a People, whose Religion is as
full of Blasphemy, as their Souls are of Rancour against us Christians: And
after the most Free and Impartial Disquisition, it appeared unto me, that the
Principles which themselves Affirm to be most Important, are so very much the
same, That our Socinians may be justly styled English Turks, and the Turks
English So^inianized Christians.

I do not say, That every English Socinian does understand the Principal
Articles of his own, or of the Mohammedan, Religion; much less, that they Design
to Introduce Mahometanism. There are, I am Confident, many amongst us, who Love
the Socinians, but know very little of their Socinianism. They are startled at
the Noise raised against the Orthodox, their Systematical Niceties, and
Obscurities, their Mysteries, and Contradictions, and the like; but hereby they
are more set against the Truth. than disposed to close with their Errors; and
are so far from taking in the whole of their new Scheme; that, did they but see
what it is, and what are its Tendencies, they would Abhor it.

For the sake of these, I will show what Arts are used by their Leaders, in the
Representations they make of the Mahometans, which they must be esteemed to do
either with a Design to give such an Advantage to the Papists against
Protestants now, as the Socinians gave heretofore unto Reynolds and Gifford, to
write their Calvino-Turcismus; or, to bring in the Turkish Religion amongst us;
or, rather, knowing how False the Popish, and how Ridiculous as well as
Blasphemous the Mohammedan Religion is, to take the People off from all
Religion, that they may the more easily take up with Deism, or Atheism.

Thus one, speaks (as I have already noted,) so Honorably of Mahomet, and so
much of the Future Happiness of the Mahometans; and another, whom I cannot but
Respect for his learning, has, in his Reasonableness of Christianity, reduced
the Vital Principles of our Holy Religion to what is received into the Alcoran.
This was, says the Author of this Discourse, the Great Proposition that was
controverted concerning Jesus of Nazareth, Reason ab. of Christi. p. 26. etc.
whether He was the Messiah or no? And the Assent to that was that which
distinguished Believers from Unbelievers. -- That this is the sole Doctrine,
Pressed, and Required to be Believed in the whole Terour of our Saviors, and
his Apostles Preaching we have showed through the whole History of the
Evangelists, and the Acts. And, I Challenge them (says he) to show, that there
was any other Doctrine upon their Assent to which, or Disbelief of it, men were
Pronounced Believers or Unbelievers.

Thus you see that the whole of Christianity is brought within the Compass of
these few words, To believe that Jesus of Narareth, or Jesus the son of Mary,
is the Messiah. They that Believe thus much, are Good Christians, such as were
Received into the Church of Christ, as Members of his Body, as far as mere
believing could make them so.

Now I say, that according to this Principle the Mahometans are good
Christians, and ought to be Receiv^d into the Church of Christ, as Members of
his Body. For they do Profess to believe, That Jesus the Son of Mary is the
Messiah, in the second Chapter of the Alcoran. Certainly we gave the Law to
Moses, and after him sent many Prophets: We Inspired Knowledge into Jesus the
Son of Mary, and Strengthened him by the Holy Ghost. In the next Chapter, The
Angels called Zachary and said unto him. I Declare to thee from God, that thou
shall have a Son, called John, he shall affirm the Messiah to be the Word of
God; that he shall be a Great Person, Chaste; a Prophet, and one of the Just.
-- Remember thou, how the Angels said, Oh! Mary, God Declares unto thee a
Word, from which shall Proceed the Messiah, named Jesus, the Son of Mary, full
of Honor in this World, and that shall be in the other of the Number of
Intercessors, with his Divine Majesty -- I will teach him the Scriptures the
Mysteries of the Law, the Old Testament, and the Gospel and He shall be a
Prophet sent to the Children of Israel. Jesus said to the Children of Israel, I
come to you with evident signs of my Mission from your Lord -- I am come to you
with Signs of my Mission, that Testify that I am truly sent from your Lord --
Remember thou how the Lord God sald, O Jesus I will cause thee to Die, I will
Raise thee to my self, and Remove thee far from Infidels, and Prefer those that
have Obeyed thee to Infidels, at the Day of Judgment. And of the Jews, (in the
fourth Chapter,) it is said, God Imprinted Infidelity in their Hearts, they
shall never Believe in his Law, except very Few of them, because of their
Malice, and the Blasphemies, they Vomited against Mary. They said, we have
slain the Messiah, Jesus the Son of Mary, the Prophet and Apostle of God: Chap.
5. Chap. 61.
-- The Messiah the Son of Mary is a Prophet and Apostle of God. -- Remember
thou, that Jesus the son of Mary, said to the Children of Israel, I am the
Messenger of God; He has sent me to Confirm the Old Testament -- so far the
Alcoran.

Mahumed Ben Achmed, an Eminent Interpreter of the Alcoran by [His Word]
understands [the Son,] which when spoken absolutely, points us only unto the
Son of God. Lib. 1. c. 1.
Elmacinus, in his History of the Saracens, says, that the Mahometans hold
Christ the Son of Mary to be the Son of God And, as Borcardus, The Saracens do
affirm, and confess Christ to be truly the Son of God: De Ter. S. p. 1. c. 7.
Sect. 12.
Besides, it is also said, that they believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God,
Ascended into Heaven, setting on the Right hand of the Father, and Mahomet on
the Left. Thus Sandius in his Church History so much Admired by our English
Socinians. Hist. Enuc. lib. 3. Sec. 7. p. ^2, etc.
Now seeing what our Author Insists on as Necessary to make a man a True
Believer, is in the Turkish Alcoran, I would fain know, whether the Mahometans,
who Believe these Points, are not in his Esteem such Christians as ought to be
Received into the Church of Christ, as Members of his Body? What is it that He
requires as necessary to our being such that the Turks do not profess to hold?
Does not he enjoin them to Believe, that Jesus the Son of Mary, is the Messiah
sent of God, (which he proved by Miracles) that he Dyed, Rose again, and is one
the Right Hand of the Omnipotent God? The Turks Believe the same. Will he have
us worship Christ but not with that Adoration which is due to the most High
God? The Turks will do it, so Sandius. Christum esse adorandum, sed non eo
summo Cultu, (...). ^^i. su^.
quo Adoratur ejus Dominus and Deus. Does he say, that Jesus is more highly
exalted than Mahomet himself? Mahomet in his Alcoran grants it; not only that
Jesus is on the Right Hand, and himself on the Left, but that he is Inferior
to the Blessed Virgin, the Mother of our Lord So Sandius out of Bellonius,
Cusanus, Richardus, and others. Does He Require us to Believe that Christ Dyed,
Rose again, and that there shall be a Resurrection of our Souls and Bodies? the
Turks Believe it. Will he have it, that Christ shall Appear Personally, and
erect a Glorious Kingdom on Earth when all must Believe in him? The Mahometans
say the same, only they will allow unto Jesus but forty, not a thousand years
for his Personal Reign. Does he Require us to Believe the Old and New Testament
to be Inspired? It is no more than what is affirmed in their Alcoran where it is
express, Chap. 2.
that God sent Mahomet to Confirm the Scriptures, namely the Old Testament and
the Gospel, that God Inspired into him to Confirm the Ancient Scripture. And
Nicholaus Cardinal de Cusa, in the Prologue to his Cribratio Alcorani, says,
that Balthazar de Luparis, sometime a Merchant at Constantinople, often told him
that the Mohammedan Doctors did greatly respect and love the Gospel, preferring
it to the Book of their own Law: That one of the most Learned of their Doctors
being Instructed out of the Gospel of John, touching the Truth, Proposed to
Balthazar his Design of going to Rome with Twelve others, might he have safe
Conduct, which the Cardinal de Cusa procured; but the Learned Turk was hindered
by Death And Sandius, ^hi supra.
out of Borcardus Reports, That these Saracens have Saint John in the Highest
Esteem, next unto Jesus Christ, and the Blessed Virgin, counting Him the
greatest, and most Holy amongst the Prophets. Does our Author urge the
Necessity of Repentance? The Turks press the same, as necessary unto the Pardon
of Sin, though not of that Sin which is unto Death. What then is it that can
hinder their being good Christians in the Judgment of our English Socinians?
Or, seeing our Socinians believe no more touching what they judge necessary to
Salvation, than the Turks do; what is it that makes them better Christians than
the Mahometans are?

Our Author is pleased to challenge Us, to show, that there is any other
Doctrine; upon our Assent to which, or Disbelief of it, Men were pronounced
Believers or Unbelievers. But I crave leave to tell him, amongst other
Doctrines, that of Christ's Divinity is one. If he will consult John 5.18, 23,
24, etc. He Will find it to be clearly Revealed, and sufficiently proved by the
Lord Jesus Himself, that the Belief of his being God, Equal with the Father, is
so necessary, that without it, we cannot be pronounced Believers

The Holy Evangelist, in the Account he gives of the Discourse that was between
Christ, and the Jews, expressly declares, that the Jews sought to kill Jesus;
because he said, that God was his Father, making Himself equal with God.
Notwithstanding which, the Lord Jesus went on to the Proofs, assuring them,
that His doing the same Works which the Father does, does evince him to be God,
equal with the Father; adding, that the Father has so committed all Judgment
unto the Son, that all Men should Honor the Son, even as they Honor the
Father: That is, with the same Honor, Worship, and Adoration: For, he that
Honors not the Son, Honors not the Father, which has sent him; which
Words do plainly show, that it is the Will of the Father, That we believe his
Son Jesus to be God, equal with himself. For a rendering the same Honor to the
Son which is due unto the Father, carries in it, an Ascription of those
Essential Perfections of God to him, which make him to be God, equal with the
Father; which cannot be lawfully done by any, but such as believe him to be so;
as appears not only from the Nature of the thing, but from Romans 10.14. where
it is said, that we cannot call, or give Divine Honor to him, in whom we have
not believed. If then Honoring the Son as we Honor the Father be so necessary
a Duty, that they who neglect it do not Honor the Father, a believing the Son
to be God, in the same Sense the Father is God, is so necessary, as a believing
the Father to be God; which is so very necessary, that on the Disbelief of it,
Men were pronounced Unbelievers

This is, I confess, a Parting Point, between Orthodox Christians on the one
Hand, and the Mahometans, and English Socinians on the other. For, if Assent to
this Doctrine, viz. That Jesus Christ is God, equal with the Father, be so
necessary, that without it, we cannot be pronounced Believers, they who
disbelieve it, cannot be Christians; whence it is, that the Mahometans, and
English Socinians, denying the Divinity of Christ, and the lawfulness of
rendering to him Divine Worship* are for the same Reason, link^d together, as
Enemies to the Christian Religion.

The most learned, and sober amongst Foreign Socinians, being aware of this;
though, they denied Christ's Deity, yet urged the giving Divine Worship unto
Christ, as necessary to the distinguishing themselves from the Mahometans, and
proving themselves to be good Christians. But the English Socinians falling in
with Franciscus Davidis, and that Party in Poland, are of opinion, that they
must be guilty of Idolatry, if they give Divine Worship to him that is but a
Creature; and to escape Idolatry, refuse to give to the Son, Divine Worship,
and so put it out of their Power to prove themselves to be better Christians
than the Turks are, or to plead their own Cause without defending the
Mahometans; which as I take it, is the true Reason; why the more Learned
amongst them do write so Respectfully, and Charitably of these Ishmaelites and
do, not only speak Honorably of the Impostor Mahomet's Design, as if it had
been only to reform the Christian Religion; but assign the Reason of the
Propagation of that Religion, not to the Sword, but to their Denial of the
Blessed Trinity. And yet it is most manifest, that Mahomet, a very vicious Man,
being under the Conduct of Sergius, a Nestorian, did, by his Assistance, invent
a Religion, with a Design, if possible, to please the Pagan, Jew, and
Christian; and, considering the Ignorance and Debauchery of the People amongst
whom he was; He prepared such a Heaven for them who observed his Alcoran, as
mostly suited their sensual and voluptuous Dispositions: And, being himself a
most lascivious Wretch, whilst he would by his Alcoran restrain others,
pretends to have an Indulgence from Heaven, for the Gratification of his own
Lusts.

Thus the Amorous Prophet being taken with the Beauty of his Slave, Zeid's
Wife, obliged Zeid to Repudiate her, bringing in the one God, Chap. 33.
saying; When Zeid did Repudiate his Wife, we married thee to her, to the End
there might remain no Error among the True Believers -- The Prophet sins not
in doing what God has permitted -- O Prophet, we permit thee to know the Women
to whom thou have given Dowry, the Women slaves, which God has given thee, the
Daughters of thine Uncles, and of thine Aunts, that have abandoned with thee
the Company of the Wicked; -- Thou shall retain whom of thy Wives thou shall
desire to retain; and shall repudiate such as thou shall desire to repudiate,
and shall lie with them that shall please thee.

Thus much out of the Alcoran, where it is also said, that amongst his Slaves
(which were many) he might, if their Beauty pleased him, make exchanges; and
least his lascivious Practices should encourage his Wives to do the like with
True Believers; He charges his Believers not to come into his Houses without
Permission; and when permitted, not to tarry long, for that molesteth the
Prophet; and, modest Man, he is ashamed to bid them be gone. -- The Wives of
the Prophet shall have their Faces covered when they speak unto 'em; they ought
not to importune the Prophet of God, neither to know his Wives, this would be a
most Enormous Sin.

Besides, Mahomet did constantly Preach, that God had sent him to confirm his
Law by Force of Arms, and not by Miracles. This is so notoriously true, that it
cannot but amaze the least acquainted with the Turkish Stories, to hear any
Pretender to Learning affirm, that Mahomet was against forcing any to a Closure
with his Blasphemies.

Though they proclaimed Liberty to all that would submit to their Alcoran; yet,
so far resolved on the propagating their Religion by Force, that no Truce could
prevent their using violent Methods, when they had a Tendency to promote their
Design; whence it is, that in the Alcoran, the ninth Chapter, entitled by the
Mohammedan Doctors [the chapter of Punishment] but by Mahomet [the Chapter of
Conversion] begins not as the rest, with these Words [in the Name of God,
Gracious and Merciful] because these are Words of Peace and Salvation; and
Mahomet, in this Chapter, commands to break Truce with his Enemies. To kill
them wherever they shall meet them, take them Slaves, detain them Prisoners,
and observe where they pass, to lay Ambush for them; But if they be converted,
if they pray at t^me Appointed, and pay Tithes, leave them in Quiet, God is
merciful to them that repent.

Whether the lascivious, and bloody Mindedness of this Mahomet, and his
Partisans be some of the Trifles of whom Sandius speaks, who, after he had
given the fairest Representation of the Faith and Morals of the Turks, adds,
Caetera, quae in Alcorano invenimus, sunt merae nugae, I submit to the Reader,
it being to me very clear, that they who would be Advocates for Mahomet, or his
Religion, have very little Reason for their Pretenses to Sobriety, or Liberty
of Conscience, which is no otherwise granted by them than as it is subservient
to their secular Interests. And touching that ingenious Gentleman, who under
the plausible Covert of the Reasonableness of Christianity, has lopt off so
many of the most Essential Parts of Christ's Religion, as to defend no more of
it, than that Grand Impostor Mahomet would have done; he has, I think, done no
service at all to Christianity; and it must be acknowledged, that those English
Socinians, who write so Honorably of Mahomet, his Design, and Religion, may be
more justly looked on as Pensioners of the Great Turk, than the learned
Opposers of Socinian Heresies can be represented as the Grand Pensioner of the
World*

The CONCLUSION.
THESE are some of those Methods, which the Arminians, the Foreign and English
Socinians have taken to Instill, and Propagate their Errors, which, for the
Help of the less studied, I will reduce to the Following Heads.

Sect. I. These Gentlemen, not being able to comprehend some of the most
Important Points of Christian Religion, because of their Mysteriousness, do
reject them as Contradictious, and Unreasonable On this Ground the Socinians
Explode the Doctrines of the Blessed Trinity, and Incarnation, Christ's
Satisfaction, and that Mystical Union which is betwixt Him and Believers; And
the Arminians Oppugn the Absolute and Eternal Decrees, together with the
Irresistible Operations of Grace in the Conversion of Sinners.

But that they may the more consistently Prosecute their Design they find
themselves necessitated to Frame such an Idea of God, as comes short of a Being
Infinitely Perfect, and thus lead their Followers into Atheism. Chap. 1.

Sect. II. The Erroneous finding in their corrupt Hearts an Innate Antipathy
against Justification by the Righteousness of another; do, endeavor to
establish a Righteousness of their own. To compass thus much, the more Learned,
knowing that there is an Eternal Law of Right, of which no one Precept or Rule
is, or can be Abrogated, or Repealed, whilst God is an Holy, Just and Righteous
God, and Man a rational Creature, do hold, that this is the Law, by which all
Men shall be judged at the last day. Only those, who have believed Jesus to be
the Messiah, and have taken Him to be their King, with a sincere Endeavor
after Righteousness, in obeying his Law, shall have their past Sins not imputed
to them: And shall have that Faith taken instead of Obedience, that is, their
Faith shall be taken for a Complete Performance of this Law, where by
Imperfection is stretched to the utmost length of Perfection: But the more
unlearned, to escape this Rock, have vacated the Penal Sanction of the old Law,
and erected a New, which threatens no Sins but final Unbelief, and Impenitence,
with Eternal Death, who must hold, that no other Sins but Unbelief and
Impenitence are in their own Nature mortal and deadly, deserving everlasting
Misery; or, at least by setting up this New Law, to the End imperfect Obedience
may answer their New Rule, they must make all their Deficiencies, which by the
Eternal Law were Sins, to be no Sins at all; and thus framing their Rule to our
Imperfections, instead of Christ's Righteousness they constitute one of their
own for Justification. And to make out these things they give us a New Scheme
of Divinity, more suited to the Socinian, than Gospel Rule* though it must be
acknowledged, that these Gentlemen, and some others nearly all^ed unto 'em by
Principles, observing, ^ow unsuccessful the Candor, and Sincerity of Foreign
Socinians has been, in owning the Genuine Import of some Phrases, which,
because expressive of what they approved not, they rejected; these Gentlemen
have imposed a wrong sense on em, and in the Controversies about Christ's
Satisfaction retained their Use, and pervert the Truth in this important
Article of our Holy Religion, Cap. 2. and Cap. 3. Sect. 8. Page 82, etc.

Sect. IV. That the Foreign Socinians, and Arminians, might the more easily
propagate their Errors, they did at first appear under the Character of Men
found in the Faith, using Orthodox Terms and Phrases, and subscribing the
commonly received Catechisms and Confessions of Faith, whereby they gained
great Reputation amongst the Orthodox. Thus was Blandrata, who (as Calvin
says) had nothing but Pride and Ostentation to recommend him, esteemed by Men
of Eminence and Soundness in the Faith, as the Atlas, that bears the Church on
his Shoulders.

And thus other Men also of little Learning, great Industry, instigated by
greater Pride, have by their Flatteries and deceitful Subscriptions to Orthodox
Confessions insinuated themselves into the Hearts of well-meaning People, and
lead 'em into Errors of a most pernicious ^^endency, as has been cleared in
sundry Instances throughout Chap. 3. and Chap. 4. Sect. 7.

Sect. V. The English Socinian wanting both the Learning and Candor of their
Brethren beyond the Seas* are not willing to abide by their Confessions, or
Catechisms, nor are they prepared to emit any of their own Composure, and
therefore they do studiously labor to conceal what it is they are for, and
bend their strength against the Truth, and turn themselves into any shape, may
they thereby advance their Designs. If it be their Interest to profess, they
are of the Church of England, or to plead the Cause of Mahomet, and reduce the
Christian Religion to one Article, found in the Turkish Alcoran, they do it.
And it must be confessed, that by their refusing to give Divine Worship to
Jesus Christ, they have put it out of their Power to prove themselves to be
better Christians than the Mahometans are; no wonder then, that they are
sometimes for acting the Part of a Quaker, and again for pleading the Cause of
the Papists, but any thing, every thing, rather than an Orthodox Christian. For
as they cannot be held by Subscriptions, neither are the Blessed Sacraments
sacred enough to bring 'em under Obligation. These are with them, but
Incantations, Charms, Spells, Norman Knots, etc. and seeing no spiritual
Blessing is in their Opinion, annexed to the Right partaking of a Sacrament, it
cannot in any Christian Kingdom whatever, be a Test to keep them out of the
Government, so wisely have they ordered their Affairs in matters Religious;
that however it goes with them in the next World, it may be well with them in
This. See how these things are cleared, Chap. 4. Sect. 1, 2.4.10.

Sect. VI. And that they may the more easily impose their Dotages upon the
Unlearned, They represent the Principles believed by the Orthodox to worse than
Judaism, or Mahometanism; and as bad as Egyptian and Roman Paganism, Crying
down Learning, and a learned Ministry, and most bitterly reviling their
Judicious Adversaries. How virulently have they treated the Reformed Divines in
France, and Holland? And with what Contempt and Scorn have they fallen upon the
Learned Clergy; not only Dr. Bull, but, amongst many others, on my Lord of
Worcester, who may be justly styled, Malleus Socinianorum; And when this Art
fails 'em, they tack about, and on a sudden pretend a Zeal for Learning,
claiming a Right in the Anti-Nicene Fathers, and the first Reformers, such as
Luther, and Calvin, and will have it that the Great Hugo Grotius is theirs. But
their pretense are without the least shadow of Reason, Vid. Chapter 4. Sect. 3.5, 6,
and such as are neglected by the more Learned of their own Way.

Sect. VII. To the End they may prepare a Place for their Dagon, their Care is
to cast what Reproach they can on the Blessed Trinity, which they cannot more
effectually do, than by pleading for a Trinity of Essences; or a Plurality of
Gods; which was the Masterpiece of the Italian Combination. What Pranks these
prevaticating Heretics played, I have briefly intimated; a Conspiracy, which,
in its Tendency, was not very different from that entered into by Vaninus, and
twelve more, who went into diverse Parts of the World, on purpose to propagate
Atheism, as Gualterius the Jesuit (as I have some-where Read) does, in his
Cronological Tables, report. That there is a Combination of the same Nature
with the Old Italians entered into by the English Socinians, who-ever will
consult their Writings will see but little Reason to doubt of it. And when I
come to show what Methods have been taken to corrupt and subvert the Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction, I hope, (...), to show, that some have as
industriously acted their Part, as if they had been in a Combination to bring
that blessed Doctrine into doubt, which was a Branch of the Contrivance of
Laelius Socinus, Paruta, Ochinus, and their Partisans. Chap. 4. Sect. 8.
There is one thing more to be observed, it is this.

Sect. VIII. That notwithstanding their grievous outcries against the Gospel
of our Lord Christ, because of the Mysteries, which are in it, they have their
Trinity and Mysteries too. Only they are not so sublime, nor so clearly
revealed in Scripture as what we believe, and though full of Contradictions, yet
without Scruple received by 'em. It Is true, they strugled hard to bury in an
Eternal Oblivion, the Terms, Trinity, Incarnation, etc. because, as they said,
not found in the Letter of the Sacred Text, which if they could have done, we
should have heard nothing of their Trinity: But failing of Success here, as
they retained the Term Trinity, so they substituted in the Place of a Trinity
of Persons in the Godhead, a Trinity of Somewhats of their own Invention. Chapter
4. Sect. 9.

I shall trespass no further on my Reader, in the Repetition of what is done;
and as for what else I have more to do, if God permit, and Prudence directs, I
shall take my Time.

FINIS.

