LICENSED.
Aug. 23. 1689.

I. Fraser.

TWO TREATISES OF Government: In the former, The false Principles, and
Foundation OF Sir ROBERT FILMER, And his FOLLOWERS, ARE Detected and Overthrown.

The latter is an ESSAY CONCERNING THE True Original, Extent, and End OF Civil
Government.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane, by
Amen- Corner, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,

THou have here the Beginning and End of a Discourse, concerning Government;
what Fate has otherwise disposed of the Papers that should have filled up the
middle, and were more than all the rest, it is not worth while to tell thee.
These, which remain, I hope, are sufficient to establish the Throne of our
great Restorer, Our present King William; to make good his Title, in the
Consent of the People, which being the only one, of all lawful Governments, he
has more fully and clearly than any Prince in Christendom. And to justify to
the World, the People of England, whose love of their just and natural Rights,
with their Resolution to preserve them, saved the Nation, when it was on the
very brink of Slavery and Ruin. If these Papers have that evidence, I flatter
my self, is to be found in them, there will be no great miss of those which are
lost, and my Reader may be satisfied without them. For I imagine I shall have
neither the time, nor inclination to repeat my Pains, and fill up the wanting
part of my Answer, by tracing Sir Robert again, through all the Windings and
Obscurities which are to be met with in the several Branches of his wonderful
Systeme. The King, and Body of the Nation, have since so thoroughly confuted his
Hypothesis, that, I suppose, no Body hereafter will have either the Confidence
to appear against our common Safety, and be again an Advocate for Slavery; or
the Weakness to be deceived with Contradictions dressed up in a popular Style,
and well turned Periods. For if any one will be at the Pains himself, in those
Parts which are here untouched, to strip Sir Robert's Discourses of the
Flourish of doubtful Expressions, and endeavor to reduce his Words to direct,
positive, intelligible Propositions, and then compare them one with another, he
will quickly be satisfied, there was never so much glib Nonsense put together
in well sounding English. If he think it not worth while, to examine his Works
all through, let him make an Experiment in that Part where he treats of
Usurpation; and let him try whether he can, with all his Skill, make Sir Robert
intelligible, and consistent with himself, or common sense. I should not speak
so plainly of a Gentleman, long since past answering, had not the Pulpit, of
late Years, publicly owned his Doctrine, and made it the Current Divinity of
the T^^es. It Is necessary those Men, who, taking on them to be Teachers, have
so dangerously misled others, should be openly showed of what Authority their
Patriarch, whom they have followed, is, or ought to be; that so they may either
recant what, upon so ill Grounds, they have vented, or justify his Opinions.
For I should not have writ against Sir Robert, or taken the pains to show his
Mistakes, Inconsistencies, and want of (what he so much boasts of, and pretends
wholly to build on) Scripture-Proofs, were there not Men amongst us, who, by
crying up his Books, and espousing his Doctrine, save me from the Reproach or
writing against a dead Adversary. They have been so zealous in this Point, that
if I have done him any wrong, I cannot hope they should spare me. I wish, where
they have done the Truth and the Public wrong, (there being scarce a greater
mischief to Prince and People, than the propagating wrong Notions concerning
Government) they would be as ready to redress it. And that all times might not
have reason to complain of the Drum Ecclesiastic. If any one, concerned really
for Truth, undertake the Confutation of my Hypothesis, I promise him either to
recant my mistake, upon fair Conviction; or to answer his difficulties. But he
must remember two Things: First, That cavilling here and there, at some
Expression, or little Incident of my Discourse, is not an Answer to my Book.
Secondly, That I shall not take Railing for Arguments, nor think either of
these worth my notice. Though I shall always look on my self as bound to give
satisfaction to any one, who shall appear to be conscientiously scrupulous in
the point, and shall show any just Grounds for his Scruples.

I have nothing more, but to advertise the Reader, that A. stands for our
Author, O. For his Observations on Hobbs, Milton, etc. And that a bare
Quotation of Pages always means Pages of his Patriarcha.


THE CONTENTS of BOOK I.
Chap. I. THE Introduction p. 1. Chap. II. Of Paternal, and Regal Power p. 6.
Chap. III. Of Adam's Title to Sovereignty, by Creation p. 18. Chap. IV. Of
Adam's Title to Sovereignty, by Donation, Genesis 1. 28. p. 27. Chap. V. Of Adam's
Title to Sovereignty, by the Subjection of Eve p. 55. Chap. VI. Of Adam's Title
to Sovereignty, by Fatherhood p. 64. Chap. VII. Of Father-hood and Propriety,
considered together as fountains of Sovereignty p. 94. Chap. VIII. Of the
Conveyance of Adam's Sovereign, Monarchical Power p. 103. Chap. IX. Of
Monarchy, by Inheritance from Adam p. 107. Chap. X. Of the Heir to Monarchical
Power of Adam p. 132. Chap. XI. Who Heir p. 136.
THE CONTENTS of BOOK II.
Chap. I. THE Introduction p. 217. Chap. II. Of the State of Nature p. 220.
Chap. III. Of the State of War p. 235. Chap. IV. Of Slavery p. 241. Chap. V. Of
Property p. 243. Chap. VI. Of Paternal Power p. 271. Chap. VII. Of Political,
or Civil Society p. 297. Chap. VIII. Of the Beginning of Political Societies p.
316. Chap. IX. Of the Ends of Political Society, and Government p. 345. Chap.
X. Of the Forms of a Commonwealth p. 351. Chap. XI. Of the Extent of the
Legislative Power p. 353. Chap. XII. Of the Legislative, Executive, and
Federative Power of the Commonwealth p. 365. Chap. XIII. Of the Subordination
of the Powers of the Commonwealth p. 369. Chap. XIV. Of Prerogative p. 382.
Chap. XV. Of Paternal, Political, and Despotical Power, considered together p.
392. Chap. XVI. Of Conquest p. 397. Chap. XVII. Of Usurpation p. 418. Chap.
XVIII. Of Tyranny p. 420. Chap. XIX. Of the Dissolution of Governments p. 432.
The End of the Contents.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
. 1. SLavery is so vile and miserable an Estate of Man, and so directly
opposite to the generous temper and courage of our Nation; that it is hardly to
be conceived, that an Englishman, much less a Gentleman, should plead for it.
And truly I should have taken this as any other Treatise, which would persuade
all Men, that they are Slaves and ought to be so; for such an other exercise of
Wit, as was his who writ the Encomium of Nero, rather than for a serious
Discourse meant in earnest, had not the gravity of the Title and Epistle, the
Picture in the Front of Sr. Rbts, Book, and the applause that followed it,
required me to believe that the Author and Publisher were both in earnest, I
therefore took the Patriarcha of Sr. R. Filmer into my hands with all the
expectation, and read it through with all the attention due to a Treatise, that
made such a noise at it is coming abroad, and cannot but confess my self
mightily surprised, that in a Book which was to provide Chains for all mankind,
I should find nothing but a Rope of Sand useful perhaps to such whose skill and
business it is to raise a dust, and would blind the People the better to
mislead them, but is not of any force to draw those into Bondage, who have
their Eyes open and so much Sense about them, as to consider that Chains are
but an ill wearing, how much care soever has been taken to file and polish
them.

. 2. If any one think I take too much liberty in speaking so freely of a Man
who is the great Champion of absolute Power, and the Idol of those who worship
it; I beseech him to make this small allowance for once, to one, who even after
the reading of Roberts Book, cannot but think himself as the Laws allow him a
Freeman, and I know no fault it is to do so, unless any one better skilled in
the Fate of it than I, should have it revealed to him, that this Treatise which
has lain dormant so long, was when it appeared in the World to carry by
strength of its Arguments, all Liberty out of it, and that from thence forth
our Authors short model was to be the pattern in the Mount and the perfect
Standard of Politics for the future. His System lies in a little compass it is
no more but this, That all Government is absolute Monarchy, and the ground he
builds on is this,

That no Man is born free?



3. Since there have been a generation of Men sprung up in the World that would
flatter Princes with an Opinion that they have a Divine Right to absolute
Power, let the Laws by which they are constituted and are to govern, and the
Conditions under which they enter upon their Authority, be what they will, and
their engagements to observe them never so well ratified by solemn Oaths and
Promises, they have denied Mankind a Right, to natural Freedom, whereby they
have not only as much as in them lies exposed all Subjects to the utmost Misery
of Tyranny and Oppression, but have also so unsettled the Titles, and shaken
the Thrones of Princes. (For they too, by these Men's Doctrine, except only one,
are all born Slaves, and by divine Right are Subjects to Adams right Heir) as
if they had designed to make War upon all Government, and subvert the very
Foundations of Human Society.

4. However we must believe them upon their own bare words, when they tell us
we are all born Slaves and there is no remedy for it, we must continue so; Life
and Thraldom we entered into together, and can never be quit of the one, till
we part with the other, though I do not find Scripture or Reason any where say
so, however these Men would persuade us that Divine Authority has subjected us
to the unlimited Will of another. An admirable State of Mankind, and that which
they have not had wit enough to find out till this latter Age. For however Sr.
Rob. Filmer seems to condemn the Novelty of the contrary Opinion, Patr. p. 3.
yet I believe it will be hard for him to find any other Age or Country of the
World, but this which have asserted Monarchy to be Iure Divino. And he
confesses Patr. p. 4. That Heyward, Blackwood, Barclay and others that have
bravely vindicated the Right of Kings in most Points, never thought of this,
but with one Consent admitted the Natural Liberty and Equality of Mankind.

By whom this Doctrine came at first to be broached and brought in fashion
amongst us, and what sad Effects it gave rise to, I leave to Historians to
relate or the Memory of those who were Contemporaries with Sibthorp and
Manwering to recolect my business at present, being only to consider what Sr.
R. F. who is allowed to have carried this Argument farthest, and is supposed to
have brought it to perfection, has said in it; For from him every one who would
be as fashionable as French was at Court, has learned and runs away with this
short System of Politics, viz. Men are not born free, and therefore could never
have the liberty to choose either Governors or Forms of Government, Princes
have their Power Absolute and by Divine Right, for Slaves could never have a
right to Compact or Consent; Adam was an absolute Monarch, and so are all
Princes ever since.

CHAP. II. Of Paternal and Regal Power.
6. SIR R. F's great Position is, that Men are not naturally free, this is the
Foundation on which his absolute Monarchy stands, and from which it erects it
self to an height that it is Power is above every Power, Caput inter nubila, so
high above all earthly and human Things, that thought can scarce reach it, that
Promises and Oaths which tie the infinite Deity, cannot confine it. But if this
Foundation fails, all his Fabric falls with it, and Governments must be left
again to the old way of being made by contrivance and the consent of Men
((...)) making use of their reason to unite together into Society. To prove
this grand Position of his, he tells us, p. 12. Men are born in subjection to
their Parents, and therefore cannot be free. And this Authority of Parents, he
calls Royal Authority, p. 12, 14. Fatherly Authority, Right of Fatherhood, p.
12, 20. one would have thought he would in the beginning of such a Work as
this, on which was to depend the Authority of Princes and the Obedience of
Subjects, have told us expressly what that Fatherly Authority is, have defined
it, though not limited it, because in some other Treatises of his, he tells us
it is unlimited, and unlimitable, he should at least have given us such an
account of it, In Grants and Gifts that have their Origiginal from God or
Nature, as the Power of the Father has, no inferior Power of Man can limit nor
make any Law of prescription against them, O. 158.
that we might have had an entire Notion of this Fatherhood or Fatherly
Authority when ever it came in our way in his Writings; This I expected to have
found in the first Chapter of his Patriarcha. But The Scripture teaches that
Supreme Power was Originally in the Father without any limitation, O. 245.
instead there of having, 1. en Passant made his Obeisance to the Arcana
imperii, p. 5. 2o made his Complement to the Rights and Liberties of this or
any other Nation, p. 6. which he is going presently to null and destroy; And 3o
made his Leg to those Learned Men who did not see so far into the Matter as
himself, p. 7. he comes to fall on Bellarmine, p. 8. and by a Victory over him,
Establishes his Fatherly Authority beyond any question; Bellarmine being routed
by his own Confession, p. 11. the day is clear got, and there is no more need
of any Forces: For having done that, I observe not that he states the Question
or rallies up any Arguments to make good his Opinion, but rather tells us the
Story as he thinks fit of this strange kind of domineering Phantom, called the
Fatherhood, which whoever could catch presently got Empire and unlimited
absolute Power. He assures us how this Fatherhood began in Adam, continued it is
course, and kept the World in order all the time of the Patriarchs till the
Flood, got out of the Arch with Noah and his Sons, made and supported all the
Kings of the Earth till the Captivity of the Israelites in Egypt, and then the
poor Fatherhood was under hatches till God by giving the Israelites Kings,
Re-established the Ancient and prime Right of the lineal Succession in paternal
Government. This is his business from p. 12 to 19. And then obviating an
Objection, and clearing a Difficulty or two with one half reason, p. 23. to
confirm the Natural Right of Regal Power, he ends the first Chapter. I hope
it is no Injury to call an half Quotation an half Reason, for God says, Honor
thy Father and Mother, but our Author contents himself with half, leaves out
thy Mother quite, as little serviceable to his purpose, but of that more in an
other place.

7 I do not think our Author so little skilled in the way of Writing Discourses
of this Nature, nor so careless of the Point in hand, that he by oversight
commits the fault that he himself in his Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy, p. 239.
Objects to Mr. Hunton in these words. Where first I charge the A that he has
not given us any Definition^ or Description of Monarchy in general, for by the
Rules of Method, he should have first defined. And by the like Rule of Method
Sr. Rob. should have told us, what his Fatherhood or Fatherly Authority is
before he had told us, in whom it was to be found and talked so much of it. But
perhaps Sr. Rob. found that this Fatherly Authority, this Power of Fathers and
of Kings, for he makes them both the same, p. 24. would make a very odd and
frightful Figure, and very disagreeing, with what either Children imagine of
their Parents, or Subjects of their Kings, if he should have given us the whole
d^aught together in that Gigantic Form, he had Painted it in his own Fancy,
and therefore like a wary Physician, when he would have his Patient swallow
some harsh or Corrosive Liquor, he mingles it with a large quantity of that,
which may delute it; that the scattered Parts may go down with less feeling and
cause less Aversion.

8. Let us then endeavor to find what account he gives us of this Fatherly
Authority, as it lies scattered in the several Parts of his Writings. And first
as it was vested in Adam, he says not only Adam, but the succeeding Patriarchs,
had by Right of Fatherhood, Royal Authority over their Children, p. 12. This
Lordship which Adam by Command had over the whole World, and by right
descending from him, the Patriarchs did enjoy; was as large and ample as the
Absolute Dominion of any Monarch, which has been since the Creation. p. 13.
Dominion of Life and Death; making War and concluding Peace, p. 13. Adam and
the Patriarchs had Absolute Power of Life and Death, p. 35. Kings in the right
of Parents, succeed to the Exercise of supreme jurisdiction. p. 19. As Kingly
Power is by the Law of God, so it has no inferior Law to Limit it, Adam was
Lord of all, p. 40. The Father of a Family governs by no other Law, then by his
own will, p. 78. The Superiority of Princes is above Laws, p. 79. The unlimited
jurisdiction of Kings, is so amply described by Samuel. p. 80. Kings are above
the Laws. p. 93. And to this purpose see a great deal more which our A --
delivers in Bodins's words. It is certain that all Laws, Privileges and Grants
of Princes have no Force, but during their Life; if they be not ratified by the
express Consent or by sufferance of the Prince following especially
Privileges. O. p. 279. The reason why Laws have been also made by Kings, was
this; when Kings were either busied with Wars, or distracted with Public Cares,
so that every private Man, could not have Acc^ss to their Persons, to learn
their Wills and Pleasure, then were Laws of necessity invented, that so every
particular Subject, might find his Princes Pleasure Decypher'd unto him in the
Tables of his Laws. p. 92. In a Monarchy, the King must by necessity be above
the Laws, p. 100. A perfect Kingdom is that, wherein the King Rules all things
according to his own Will, p. 100. Neither Common nor Statute Laws, are or can
be any Diminution of that General Power, which Kings have over their People by
right of Fatherhood, p. 115. Adam was the Father, King and Lord over his
Family, a Son, a Subject and a Servant or Slave, were one and the same thing at
first. The Father had Power to dispose or sell his Children or Servants, whence
we find that at the first reckoning up of Goods in Scripture, the Manservant
and the Maidservant, are numbered among the Possessions, and substance of the
Owner, as other Goods were. O pref. God also has given to the Father a Right
or Liberty, to alien his Power over his Children; to any other whence we find
the Sale and Gift of Children, to have been much in use, in in the Beginning of
the World, when Men had their Servants for a Possession and an Inheritance, as
well as other Goods, whereupon we find the Power of Castrating and making
Eun^chs^ much in use in Old times. O. p. 155. Law is nothing else but the will
of him, that has the Power of the Supreme Father, O. p. 223. It was Gods
Ordinance, that Supremacy should be unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the
Acts of his Will, and as in him, so in all others that have Supreme Power. O.
p. 245.

9. I have been fain to trouble by Reader, with these several Quotations in our
A -- s own words, that in them might be seen his own Description, of his
Fatherly Authority, as it lies scattered up and down in his Writings, which he
supposes was first vested in Adam, and by Right, belongs to all Princes ever
since. This Fatherly Authority then or Right of Fatherhood, in our A -- s sense
is a Divine unalterable Right of Sovereignty, whereby a Father or a Prince,
has an Absolute Arbitrary unlimited and unlimitable Power, over the Lives,
Libertys, and Estates of his Children or Subjects, so that he may take or
alienate their Estates, sell, castrate, or use their Persons as he pleases,
they being all his slaves, and he Lord and Proprietor of every thing, and his
unbounded Will their Law.

10. Our A -- having placed such a mighty Power in Adam, and upon that
supposition, founded all Government, and all Power of Princes, it is reasonable
to expect, that he should have proved this with Arguments clear and evident,
suitable to the weightiness of the Cause. That since Men had nothing else left
them; they might in slavery had such undeniable Proofs of its necessity, that
heir consciences might be convinced, and oblige them to submit peaceably to
that Absolute Dominion, which their Governors had a Right to Exercise over
them, without this; what good could our A -- do, or pretend to do, by erecting
such an unlimited Power, but flatter the Natural Vanity and Ambition of Men,
too apt of its self to grow and increase, with the Possession of any Power? And
by persuading those, who by the consent of their fellow Men are advanced to
great, but limited degrees of it, that by that Part which is given them, they
have a Right to all that was not so, and therefore may do what they please,
because they have Authority to do more then others, and so tempt them to do
what is neither for their own, nor the good of those under their Care, whereby
great mischeifs cannot but follow.

11. The Sovereignty of Adam, being that on which as a sure basis, our A --
builds his Mighty Absolute Monarchy, I expected that in his Patriarcha, this
his main supposition would have been proved and established, with all that
evidence of Arguments, that such a Fundamental Tenet required, and that this on
which the great stress of the business depends, would have been made out with
reasons sufficient to justify the confidence, with which it was assumed. But
in all that Treatise, I could find very little tending that way; the thing is
there so taken for granted without Proof, that I could scarce believe my self,
when upon attentive Reading that Treatise, I found there so mighty a Structure,
raised upon the bare supposition of this Foundation; for it is scarce credible,
that in a Discourse where he pretends to confute, the Erroneous Principle of
Man's Natural Freedom, he does it by a bare supposition of Adams Authority,
without offering any Proof for that Authority. Indeed he confidently says, that
Adam had Royal Authority. p. 12, and 13. Absolute Lordship and Dominion of life
and death, p. 13. An Universal Monarchy, p. 33. Absolute Power of life and
death, p. 35. He is very frequent in such Assertions, but what is strange in
all his whole Patriarcha, I find not one pretense of a reason, to Establish
this his great Foundation of Government; not any thing that looks like an
Argument, but these words; To confirm this Natural Right of Regal Power, we
find in the Decalogue, that the Law which injoyns Obedience to Kings, is
delivered in the Terms, Honor thy Father, as if all Power were Originally in
the Father. And why may I not add as well, that in the Decalogue, the Law that
injoyns obedience to Queens, is delivered in the Terms of Honor thy Mother, as
if all Power were Originally in the Mother? The Argument as Sr. Rob. puts it,
will hold as well for one as the other, but of this more in its due place.

12. All that I take notice of here, is that this is all our A -- says in this
first, or any of the following Chapters, to prove the Absolute Power of Adam,
which is his great Principle, and yet as if he had there settled it upon sure
Demonstration, he begins his 2 d. Chapter with these words, by Confering these
Proofs and Reasons, drawn from the Authority of the Scripture. Where those
Proofs and Reasons for Adams Sovereignty, are, bateing that of Honor thy
Father above mentioned, I confess, I cannot find unless what he says, p. 11. In
these words we have an evident Confession, viz. of Belarmin, that Creation made
Man Prince of his Posterity, must be taken for Proofs and Reasons drawn from
Scripture, or for any sort of Proofs at all: though from thence by a new way of
inference i^ the words, immediately following. And indeed he concludes) the
Royal Authority of Adam, sufficiently settled in him.

13. If he has in that Chapter, or any where in the whole Treatise, given any
other Proofs of Adams Royal Authority, other then by often repeating it, which
among some Men goes for Argument, I desire any body for him to show me the
Place and Page, that I may be convinced of my mistake, and acknowledge my
oversight. If no such Arguments are to be found, I beseech those Men, who have
so much cried up this Book, to consider whether they do not give the World
cause to suspect, that it is not the Force of Reason and Argument, that makes
them for Absolute Monarchy, but some other by interest, and therefore are
resolved to applaud any Author, that writes in Favor of this Doctrine, whether
he support it with reason or no. But I hope they do not expect that rational
and indifferent Men should be brought over to their Opinion, because this their
great Dr. of it, in a Discourse made on purpose, to set up the Absolute
Monarchical Power of Adam, in opposition to the Natural Freedom of Mankind, has
said so little to prove it, from whence it is rather naturally to be concluded
that there is little to be said.

14. But that I might omit no care to inform my self in our A -- s full Sense,
I consulted his Observations on Aristotle, Hobs, etc. To see whether in
disputing with others he made use of any Arguments, for this his Darling Tenet
of Adam's Sovereignty, since in his Treatise of the Natural Power of Kings, he
had been so sparing of them: And in his Observations on Mr. Hobs's Leviathan I
think he has put in short, all those Arguments for it together, which in his
Writings I find him any where to make use of, his Words are these. If God
Created only Adam, and of a piece of him made the Woman, and if by Generation
from them two, as parts of them all Mankind be propagated: If also God gave to
Adam not only the Dominion over the Woman and the Children that should Issue
from them, but also over the whole Earth to subdue it, and over all the
Creatures on it, so that as long as Adam lived, no Man could claim or enjoy any
thing but by Donation, Assignation or Permission from him, I wonder, etc. O.
165. Here we have the Sum of all his Arguments, for Adams Sovereignty and
against Natural Freedom, which I find up and down in his other Treatises, which
are these following, Gods Creation of Adam, the Dominion he gave him over Eve:
And the Dominion he had as Father over his Children, all which I shall
particularly consider.

CHAP. III. Of Adams Title to Sovereignty by Creation.
15. SIR Rob. in his Preface to his Observations on Aristotle's Politics tells
us, A Natural Freedom of Mankind cannot be supposed without the denial of the
Creation of Adam; but how Adams being Created, which was nothing but his
receiving a Being immediately from Omnipotency, and the hand of God, gave Adam
a Sovereignty over any thing, I cannot see, nor consequently understand how a
Supposition of natural Freedom is a denial of Adams Creation, and would be glad
any body else (since our A -- did not vouchsafe us the favor) would make it
out for him: for I find no difficulty to suppose the Freedom of Mankind, though
I have always believed the Creation of Adam; He was Created or began to exist
by Gods immediate Power, without the Intervention of Parents or the pre
existence of any of the same Species to beget him, when it pleased God he
should, and so did the Lion, the King of Beasts before him, by the same
Creating Power of God, and if bare existence by that Power, and in that way,
will give Dominion without any more ado, our A -- by this Argument will make
the Lion have as good a Title to it as he, and certainly the Ancienter. No! for
Adam had his Title by the appointment of God, says our A -- in another place.
Then bare Creation gave him not Dominion, and one might have supposed Mankind
Free without denying the Creation of Adam, since 'twas Gods Appointment made
him Monarch.

16. But let us see how he puts his Creation and this Appointment together. By
the appointment of God, says Sir Rbt. as soon as Adam was Created he was
Monarch of the World, though he had no Subjects, for though there could not be
actual Government till there were Subjects, yet by the Right of Nature it was
due to Adam to be Governor of his Posterity, though not in act, yet at least
in habit, Adam was a King from his Creation, I wish he had told us here what he
meant by Gods appointment. For whatsoever Providence orders, or the Law of
Nature directs, or positive Revelation declares, may be said to be by Gods
appointment, but I suppose it cannot be meant here in the first Sense, i. e. by
providence; because that would be to say no more, but that as soon as Adam was
Created he was de facto Monarch, because by Right of Nature it was due to Adam,
to be Governor of his Posterity. But he could not de facto be by providence
Constituted the Governor of the World at a time, when there was actually no
Government, no Subjects to be governed, which our A -- here confesses. Monarch
of the World is also differently used by our Author, for sometimes he means by
it a Proprietor of all the World exclusive of the rest of Mankind, and thus he
does in the same page of his Preface before cited, Adam says he being Commanded
to Multiply and People the Earth and to subdue it, and having Dominion given
him over all Creatures, was thereby the Monarch of the whole World, none of his
Posterity had any Right to possess any thing but by his Grant or Permission or
by Succession from him, 2o Let us understand then by Monarch Proprietor of the
World, and by Appointment Gods actual Donation, and revealed positive Grant
made to Adam, 1 Genesis 28. as we see Sir Robt. himself does in this parallel
place, and then his Argument will stand thus, by the positive Grant of God; As
soon as Adam was Created, he was Proprietor of the World, because by the Right
of Nature it was due to Adam to be Governor of his Posterity, in which way of
arguing there are two manifest Falsehoods. First, it is false that God made
that Grant to Adam, as soon as he was Created, since though it stands in the
Text immediately after his Creation, yet it is plain it could not be spoken to
Adam till after Eve was made and brought to him, and how then could he be
Monarch by appointment as soon as Created, especially since he calls, if I
mistake not, that which Gods says to Eve, 3 Genesis 16. The original Grant of
Government, which not being till after the fall, when Adam was somewhat, at
least in time and very much, distant in condition, from his Creation, I cannot
see, how our A can say in this Sense, that by Gods appointment as soon as Adam
was Created he was Monarch of the World. Secondly, were it true that Gods
actual Donation appointed Adam Monarch of the World as soon as he was Created,
yet the Reason here given for it would not prove it, but it would always be a
false Inference that God by a positive Donation appointed Adam Monarch of the
World, because by Right of Nature it was due to Adam to be Governor of his
Posterity; for having given him the Right of Government by Nature, there was no
need of a positive Donation, at least it will never be a proof of such a
Donation.

17. On the other side the Ma^ter will not be much mended, if we understand by
Gods appointment the Law of Nature (though it be a pretty ha^sh Expression for
it, in this place) and by Monarch of the World, Sovereign Ruler of Mankind; for
then the Sentence under consideration must run thus. By the Law of Nature, as
soon as Adam was Created he was Governor of Mankind, for by Right of Nature it
was due to Adam to be Governor of his Posterity, which amounts to this, he was
Governor by Right of Nature, because he was Governor by Right of Nature; But
supposing we should grant that a Man is by Nature Governor of his Children,
Adam could not hereby be Monarch as soon as Created, for this Right of Nature
being founded in his being their Father, how Adam could have a Natural Right to
be Governor before he was a Father, by which only he had that Right, is,
methinks, hard to conceive unless he will have him to be a Father before he was
a Father, and to have a Title before he had it.

18. To this foreseen Objection, our A -- answers very logically, he was
Governor in Habit and not in Act: A very pretty way of being a Governor
without Government, a Father without Children, and a King without Subjects. And
thus Sir Robt. was an Author before he writ his Book, not in Act it is true, but
in Habit, for when he had once Published, it was due to him by the Right of
Nature, to be an Author as much as it was to Adam to be Governor of his
Children when he had begot them; And if to be such a Monarch of the World, an
absolute Monarch in Habit but not in Act will serve the turn: I should not much
envy it to any of Sir Robts. Friends that he thought fit graciously to bestow
it upon, though even this of Act and Habit, if it signified any thing but our A
-- 's skill in destinctions, be not to his purpose in this place; for the
question is not here about Adams actual Exercise of Government, but actually
having a Title to be Governor, Government says our A -- was due to Adam by the
Right of Nature, what is this Right of Nature, a Right Fathers have over their
Children by begetting them, Generatione jus acquiritur parentibus in liberos,
says our A -- out of Grotius, O. 223. The right then follows the begetting as
arising from it, so that according to this way of reasoning or distinguishing
of our A --, Adam as soon as he was Created, had a Title only in Habit and not
in Act, which in plain English is he had actually no Title at all.

19. To speak less Learnedly and more Intelligibly, one may say of Adam he was
in a possibility of being Governor, since it was possible he might beget
Children and thereby acquire that Right of Nature, be it what it will to govern
them that accrues from thence, but what Connection this has with Adams Creation
to make him say, that as soon as he was Created he was Monarch of the World;
for it may be as well said of Noah, that as soon as he was born he was Monarch
of the World, since he was in possibility; which in our A -- s Sense is enough
to make a Monarch, a Monarch in Habit, to out live all Mankind but his own
Posterity, I say what such necessary Connection there is betwixt Adams Creation
and his Right to Government; so that a Natural Freedom of Mankind cannot be
supposed without the denial of the Creation of Adam, I confess for my part I do
not see. Nor how those words by the appointment, etc. O. 254. however
explained, can be put together to make any tolerable Sense at least to
Establish this Position, with which they end, viz. Adam was a King from his
Creation, a King says our A -- not in Act but in Habit, i. e. actually no King
at all.

20. I fear I have tired my Readers Patience by dwelling longer on this passage
then the weightiness of any Argument in it, seems to require: but I have
unavoidably been engaged in it by our A -- s way of Writing, who hudling
several Suppositions together, and that in doubtful and general terms makes
such a medly and confusion, that it is impossible to show his Mistakes without
examining the several Senses, wherein his Words may be taken, and without
seeing how in any of these various Meanings, they will consist together, and
have any Truth in them; for in this present passage before us, how can any one
argue against this Position of his, that Adam was a King from his Creation,
unless one examine whether the Words from his Creation, be to be taken as they
may for the time of the Commencement of his Government as the foregoing words
import, as soon as he was Created he was Monarch, or for the cause of it, as he
says, p. 11. Creation made Man Prince of his Posterity. How farther can one
judge of the truth of his being thus King, till one has examined whether King
be to be taken, as the words in the beginning of this passage would persuade,
on supposition of his Private Dominion, which was by Gods positive Grant,
Monarch of the World by Appointment; or King on Supposition of his Fatherly
Power over his Off spring which was by Nature, due by the Right of Nature,
whether I say King be to be taken in both, or one only of these two Senses or
in neither of them, but only this, that Creation made him Prince in a way
different from both the other; for though this assertion, that Adam was King
from his Creation be true, in no Sense yet it stands here as an evident
conclusion drawn from the preceding words, though in truth it be but a bare
assertion joined to other assertions of the same kind, which confidently put
together in words of undetermined and dubious meaning, look like a sort of
arguing, when there is indeed neither Proof nor Connection: A way very familiar
with our A -- of which having given the Reader a taste, here, I shall as much
as the Argument will permit me, avoid touching on hereafter, and should not
have done it here, were it not to let the World see how Incoherences in Matter
and Suppositions, without Proofs put handsomely together in good Words and a
plausible Style, are apt to pass for strong Reason and good Sense, till they
come to be looked into with Attention.

CHAP. IV. Of Adams Title to Sovereignty by Donation, 1 Genesis 28.
21. HAving at last got through the foregoing Passage, where we have been so
long detained, not by the Force of Arguments and Opposition, but the intricacy
of the words, and the doubtfulness of the meaning; let us go on to his next
Argument, for Adams Sovereignty our A -- tells us in the words of Mr. Seldom,
that Adam by Donation from God, 1 Genesis 28. was made the General Lord of all
things, not without such a private Dominion to himself, as without his Grant
did exclude his Children. This Determination of Mr. Seldom, sa^s our A --, is
Consonant to the History of the Bible, and natural reason. O. 210. And in his
Pref. to hi^ Ob. on Arist. he says thus; The first Government in the World was
Monarchical in the Father of all flesh, Adam being Commanded to Multiply and
People the Earth, and to Subdue it, and having Dominion given him over all
Creatures, was thereby the Monarch of the whole World, none of his Posterity
had any right to Possess any thing, but by his Grant or Permission, or by
Succession from him, the Earth, says the Psalmist, has he given to the
Children of Men, which show the Title comes from Fatherhood.

22. Before I examine this Argument, and the Text on which it is founded, it is
necessary to desire the Reader to observe, that our A -- according to his usual
Method, begins in one Sense, and concludes in another, he begins here with
Adams Propriety, or Private Dominion, by Donation, and his conclusion is, which
show the Title comes from Fatherhood.

23. But let us see the Argument, the words of the Text are these; And God
Blessed them, and God said unto them, be Fruitful and Multiply and Replenish
the Earth end Subdue it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over
the Fowl of the Air, and over every Living thing that moves upon the Earth, 1
Genesis 28. from whence our A -- concludes, that Adam having here Dominion given
him over all Creatures, was thereby the Monarch of the whole World; whereby
must be meant, that either this Grant of God, gave Adam Property, or as our A
-- calls it, Private Dominion over the Earth, and all inferior or irrational
Creatures, and so consequently, that he was thereby Monarch, or 2o that it gave
him Rule and Dominion over all Earthly Creatures whatsoever, and thereby over
his Children, and so he was Monarch; for as Mr. Seldom has properly worded it,
Adam was made General Lord of all things, one may very clearly understand him,
that he means nothing to be granted to Adam, here but Property, and therefore
he says not one word of Adams Monarchy. But our A -- says, Adam was hereby
Monarch of the World, which properly speaking, signifies Sovereign Ruler of all
the Men in the World, and so Adam by this Grant, must be constituted such a
Ruler. If our A -- means otherwise, he might with much clearness, have said,
that Adam was hereby Proprietor of the whole World. But he begs your Pardon in
that Point, clear, destinct Speaking, not serving every where to his purpose,
you must not expect it in him, as in Mr. Seldom, or other such Writers.

24. In opposition therefore to our A -- s Doctrine, that Adam was Monarch of
the whole World, founded on this Place, I shall show.

1o. That by this Grant, 1 Genesis 28. God gave no immediate Power to Adam over
men, over his Children, over those of his own Species, and so he was not made
Ruler, or Monarch by this Charter.

2o. That by this Grant, God gave him not Private Dominion, over the inferior
Creatures, but right in common with all Mankind, so neither was he Monarch,
upon the account of the Property here given him.

25. 1o. That this Donation, 1 Genesis 28. gave Adam no Power over Men, will
appear if we consider the words of it. For since all Positive Grants, convey no
more then the Express words, they are made in, will carry, let us see which of
them here will comprehend Mankind, or Adams Posterity, and those I imagine, if
any, must be these, every living thing that moves, the words in the Hebrew
are, (...) i. e. Bestiam Reptantem, of which words, the Scripture it self, is
the best Interpreter, God having Created the Fishes and Fowls the 5 th day, the
beginning of the 6 th, he creates the Irrational Inhabitants of the dry Land,
which Ver. 24 th are described in these words, let the Earth bring forth the
living Creature after his kind; Cattle and Creeping things, and Beasts of the
Earth, after his kind, and ver. 2. and God made the Beasts of the Earth after
his kind, and Cattle after their kind, and every thing that Creeps on the
Earth, after his kind; Here in the Creation of the Brute Inhabitants of the
Earth, he first speaks of them all under one general Name, of Living Creatures,
and then afterward, divides them into three Ranks, 1o. Cattle, or such
Creatures as were or might be tame, and so be the Private Possession of
Particular Men 2o. (...) which ver. 24 and 25 in our Bible, is Translated
Beasts, and by the Septuagint (...), Wild Beasts, and is the same word, that
here in our Text, ver. 28. where we have this Great Charter to Adam, is
Translated Living thing, and is also the same Word used, Genesis 9. 2. where this
Grant is renewed to Noah, and there likewise Translated Beast, 3o. The third
Rank were the Creeping Animals, which ver. 24 and 25 are comprised under the
word, (...), the same that is used here ver. 28. and is Translated, moving but
in the former Verses Creeping, and by the Septuagint in all these places,
(...), or Reptils; from whence it appears that the words, which we Translate
here in Gods Donation, ver. 28. Living Creatures moving, are the same which in
the History of the Creation, ver. 24, 25. signify two Ranks of Terrestrial
Creatures, viz. Wild Beasts and Reptils, and are so understood by the
Septuagint.

26. When God had made the Irrational Animals of the World, divided into three
kinds, from the places of their Habitation, viz. Fishes of the Sea, Fowls of
the Air, and Living Creatures of the Earth, and these again into Cattle, Wild
Beasts and Reptils, he considers of making Man, and the Dominion he should have
over the Terrestrial World, ver. 26. and then he reckons up the Inhabitants of
these three Kingdoms; but in the Terrestrial, leaves out the second Rank (...),
or Wild Beasts, but here ver. 28. where he actually executes this design, and
gives him this Dominion the Text mentions; the Fishes of the Sea, and Fowls of
the Air, and the Terrestial Creatures in the words that signify the Wild
Beasts and Reptils, though Translated Living thing, that moves, leaving out
Cattle. In both which places though the word that signifies Wild Beasts, be
omitted in one, and that which signifies Cattle in the other, yet since God
certainly executed in one place what he declares he designed in the other, we
cannot but understand the same in both places, and have here only an account,
how the Terrestrial irrational Animals, which were already created and reckoned
up at their Creation, in three distinct Ranks of Cattle, Wild Beasts and
Reptils were here, ver. 28. actually put under the Dominion of Man, as they
were designed O. 26. nor do these words contain in them, the least appearance
of any thing that can be wrested, to signify God's giving one Man Dominion
over another, Adam over his Posterity.

And this further appears from Genesis 9. 2. where God renewing this Charter to
Noah and his Sons, he gives them Dominion over the Fowls of the Air, and the
Fishes of the Sea, and the Terrestrial Creatures, expressed by (...) and (...)
Wild Beasts and Reptils, the same words that in the Text before us 1 Genesis 28.
are Translated every moving thing, that moves on the Earth, which by no means
can comprehend Man, the Grant being made to Noah and his Sons, all the Men then
living, and not to one part of Men over another, which is yet more evident from
the very next words ver. 3. where God gives every (...), every moving thing,
the very words used Chapter 1. 28. to them for Food. By all which it is plain, that
Gods Donation to Adam, Cha. 1. 28. and his designation, v. 26. and his Grant
again to Noah and his Sons, refer to, and contain in them, neither more nor
less, then the works of the Creation the 5 th day, and the Beginning of the 6
th, as they are set down from 20 th, to 26 th, ver. inclusively of the 1 st.
Chapter and so comprehend all the Species of irrational Animals of the Teraqueous
Globe, though all the words whereby they are expressed in the History of their
Creation, are no where used in any of the following Grants, but some of them
omitted in one, and some in another, from whence I think it is past all doubt,
that Man cannot be comprehended in this Grant, nor any Dominion over those of
his own Species be conveyed to Adam. All the Terrestrial irrational Creatures
are enumerated at their Creation, ver. 25. under the Names, Beasts of the
Earth, Cattle and Creeping things, but Man being not then Created, was not
contained under any of those Names, and therefore whether we understand the
Hebrew words right or no, they cannot be supposed to comprehend Man in the very
same History, and the very next Verses following, especially since that Hebrew
word, (...) which if any in this Donation to Adam, Cha. 1. 28. must comprehend
Man, is so plainly used in contradistinction to him, as Genesis 6. 20. 7. 14. 21.
23. Genesis 8. 17, 19. And if God made all Mankind slaves to Adam and his Heirs,
by giving Adam Dominion over every Living thing, that moves on the Earth,
Chap. 1. 28. as our A -- would have it, me thinks Sr. Rob. should have carried
his Monarchical Power one step higher, and satisfied the World, that Princes
might have eat their Subjects too, since God gave as full Power to Noah and his
Heirs, Cha. 9. 2. to eat every Living thing that moves, as he did to Adam, to
have Dominion over them, the Hebrew words in both place being the same.

28. David, who might be supposed to understand the Donation of God in this
Text, and the right of Kings too, as well as our A -- in his Comment on this
place, as the Learned and Judicious Ainsworth calls it, in the 8 th Psalm,
finds here no such Charter of Monarchical Power, his words are, Thou have made
him, i. e. Man the Son of Man, a little lower then the Angels, thou made him
to have Dominion over the works of thy hands, thou have put all things under
his Feet, all Sheep and Oxen and the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowl of the
Air, and Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the Paths of the Sea.
In which words, if any one can find out that there is meant any Monarchical
Power of one Man over another, but only the Dominion of the whole Species of
Mankind, over the inferior Species of Creatures, he may for ought I know,
deserve to be one of Sr. Rob. Monarchs in habit, for the rareness of the
discovery. And by this time, I hope it is evident, that he that gave Dominion
over every Living thing, that moves on the Earth, gave Adam no Monarchical
Power over those of his own Species, which will yet appear more fully in the
next thing I am to show.

29. 2o. Whatever God gave by the words of this Grant, 1 Genesis 28. It was not to
Adam in particular, exclusive of all other Men, whatever Dominion he had
thereby, it was not a Private Dominion, but a Dominion in common, with the rest
of Mankind. That this Donation was not made in particular to Adam, appears
evidently from the words of the Text, it being made to more then one, for it
was spoken in the Plural Number, God blessed them, and said unto them, have
Dominion, God says unto Adam and Eve, have Dominion, thereby says our A -- Adam
was Monarch of the World, but the Grant being to them, i. e. spoke to Eve also,
as many interpreters think with reason, that these words were not spoken till
Adam had his Wife, must not she thereby be Lady, as well as he Lord of the
World? If it be said that Eve was subjected to Adam, it seems she was not so to
him, as to hinder her Dominion over the Creatures, or Property in them, for
shall we say that God ever made a joint Grant to two, and one only was to have
the benefit of it.

30. But perhaps 'twill be said Eve was not made till afterward; grant it so,
what advantage will our A -- get by it the Text will be only the more directly
against him, and show that God in this Donation, gave the World to Mankind in
common, and not to Adam in particular. The word Them in the Text must include
the Species of Man, for it is certain Them can by no means signify Adam alone.
In the 26 th Verse where God declares his intention to give this Dominion, it
is plain he meant, that he would make a Species of Creatures, that should have
Dominion over the other Species of this Terrestrial Globe, the words are, and
God said let us make Man in our Image after our Likeness, and let them have
Dominion over the Fish, etc. They then were to have Dominion. Who? even those
who were to have the Image of God, the Individuals of that Species of Man that
he was going to make, for that Them should signify Adam singly, exclusive of
the rest, that should be in the World with him, is against both Scripture and
all Reason: And it cannot possibly be made Sense, if Man in the former part of
the Verse do not signify the same with Them in the latter, only Man there, as
is usual, is taken for the Species, and them the individuals of that Spceies,
and we have a Reason in the very Text; for God makes him in his own Image after
his own Likeness, makes him an intellectual Creature and so capable of
Dominion; for wherein soever else the Image of God consisted, the Intellectual
Nature was certainly a part of it, and belonged to the whole Species, and
enabled them to have Dominion over the Inferior Creatures, and therefore David
says in the 8 th Psalm above cited, thou have made him little lower then the
Angels, thou have made him to have Dominion, it is not of Adam King David speaks
here, for Verse 4. it is plain, it is of Man and the Son of Man, of the Species
of Mankind.

31. And that this Grant spoken to Adam was made to him, and the whole Species
of Man, is clear from our A^^ own Proof out of the Psalmist^ The Earth, says
the Psalmist, has he given to the Children of Men, which shows the Title comes
from Fatherhood, these are Sir Robts. words in the Preface before cited, and a
strange Inference it is he makes, God has given the Earth to the Children of
Men, ergo the Title comes from Fatherhood. It Is pity the Propriety of the
Hebrew Tongue had not used Fathers of Men instead of Children of Men, to
express Mankind, then indeed our A -- might have had the Countenance of the
Sound of the words, to have placed the Title in the Fatherhood; but to conclude
that the Fatherhood had the Right to the Earth, because God gave it to the
Children of Men is a way of arguing peculiar to our A -- and a Man must have a
great mind to go contrary to the Sound as well as Sense of the Words, before he
could light on it; But the Sense is yet harder and more remote from our A -- s
purpose: for as it stands in his Preface, it is to prove Adams being Monarch,
and his reasoning is thus, God gave the Earth to the Children of Men, ergo Adam
was Monarch of the World, I defy any Man to make a more pleasant Conclusion
then this, which cannot be excused from the most obvious Absurdity, till it can
be shown that by Children of Men, he who had no Father Adam alone is signified,
but whatever our A -- does the Scripture speaks not Nonsense.

32. To maintain this Property and Private Dominion of Adam, our A -- labors
in the following page to destroy the Community granted to Noah and his Sons, in
that parallel place, 9 Genesis 1, 2, 3. and he endeavors to do it two ways.

1o. Sir Robt. would persuade us against the express words of the Scripture,
that what was here granted to Noah was not granted to his Sons in Common with
him; His words are. As for the general Community between Noah and his Sons,
which Mr. Seldom will have to be granted to them, 9 Genesis 2. the Text does not
warrant it, what warrant our A -- would have when the plain express words of
Scripture, not capable of another meaning, will not satisfy him, who pretends
to build wholly on Scripture is not easy to imagine. The Text says, God Blessed
Noah and his Sons, and said unto them, i e. as our A -- would have it unto him,
for says he, although the Sons are there mentioned with Noah in the Blessing,
yet it may best be understood, with a Subordination or Benediction in
Succession, O. 211. That indeed is best, for our A -- to be understood, which
best serves to his purpose, but that truly may best be understood by any body
else, which best agrees with the plain construction of the words, and arises
from the obvious meaning of the place, and then with Subordination and in
Succession, will not be best understood, in a Grant of God, where he himself
put them not, nor mentions any such Limitation. But yet, our A -- has reasons,
why it may best be understood so. The Blessing, says he, in the following
words, might truly be fulfilled, if the Sons either under or after their
Father, enjoyed a Private Dominion, O. 211. which is to say, that a Grant whose
express words give a joint Title in present; for the Text says into your hands
they are delivered, may best be understood with a Subordination or in
Succession, because it is possible, that in Subordination, or Succession it may
be enjoyed, which is all one as to say, that a Grant of any thing in present
possession, may best be understood of reversion; because it is possible one may
live to enjoy it in reversion. If the Grant be indeed to a Father and his Sons,
who is so kind as to let his Children enjoy it presently in common with him,
one may truly say as to the event, one will be as good as the other; but it can
never be true, that what the express Words grants in possession and in common,
may best be understood, to be in reversion. The sum of all his reasoning
amounts to this. God did not give to the Sons of Noah, the World in common with
their Father, because 'twas possible they might enjoy it under, or after him, a
very good sort of Argument, against an express Text of Scripture; But God must
not be believed, though he speaks it himself, when he says he does any thing,
which will not confist with Sr. Robt's. Hypothesis.

33. For it is plain, however he would exclude them, That part of this
Benediction, as he would have it in Succession, must needs be meant to the
Sons, and not to Noah himself at all, Be Fruitful and Multiply and Replenish
the Earth, says God, in this Blessing, this part of the Benediction as appears
by the sequel concerned not Noah himself at all; for we read not of any
Children he had after the Flood, and in the following Chapter, where his
Posterity is reckoned up, there is no mention of any, and so this Benediction
in Succession, was not to take place, till 350 Years after, and to save our A
-- s imaginary Monarchy, the Peopleing of the World, must be deferred 350 Years;
for this part of the Benediction cannot be understood with Subordination,
unless our A -- will say, that they must ask leave of their Father Noah, to lie
with their Wives. But in this one point our A -- is constant to himself in all
his Discourses, he takes only care there should be Monarchs in the World, but
very little that there should be People, and indeed his way of Government is
not the way to People the World; For how much Absolute Monarchy helps to fulfill
this great and primary Blessing of God Almighty, be Fruitful and Multiply and
Replenish the Earth, which contains in it the improvement too of Arts and
Siences, and the conveniences of Life, may be seen in those large and rich
Countries, which are happy under the Turkish Govermnent, where are not now to
be found 1/3, nay in many, if not most parts of them 1/30, perhaps I might say
not 1/100 of the People, that were formerly, as will easily appear to any one,
who will compare the Accounts we have of it at this time, with Ancient History,
but this by the by.

34. The other Parts of this Benediction of Grant, are so expressed that they
must needs be understood, to belong to Noah's Sons, not with a Subordination or
in Succession, but as far forth and equally as to Noah himself. The fear of
you, and the dread of you, says God, shall be upon every Beast, etc. Will any
Body, but our A -- say, that the Creatures feared and stood in awe of Noah
only, and not of his Sons without his leave, or till after his death; And the
following words into your hands they are delivered, are they to be understood
as our A -- says, if your Father please, or they shall be delivered into your
hands hereafter. If this be to argue from Scripture, I know not what may not be
proved by it, and I can scarce see how much this differs from that Fiction and
Phansy, or how much a surer Foundation it will prove then the Opinions of
Philosophers and Poets, which our A -- so much condemns in his Preface.

35. But our A -- goes on to prove that it may best be understood with a
Subordination or a Benediction in Succession, for, says he, it is not probable
that the private Dominion' which God gave to Adam, and by his Donation,
Assignation or Cession to his Children, was Abrogated, and a Community of all
things instituted between Noah and his Sons. -- Noah was left the sole Heir of
the World, why should it be thought that God would disinherit him of his
Birthright, and make him of all Men in the World the only Tenant in Common
with his Children, O. 2. 11.

36. The Prejudices of our own ill grounded Opinions, however by us called
Probable, cannot Authorize us to understand Scripture contrary to the direct
and plain meaning of the Words; I grant, it is not probable that Adams private
Dominion was here Abrogated, because it is more then improbable, for it will
ever be proved that ever Adam had any such Private Dominion: and since parallel
places of Scripture are most probable to make us know, how they may be best
understood, there needs but the comparing this Blessing here to Noah and his
Sons after the Flood, with that to Adam after the Creation, 1 Genesis 28. to
assure any one that God gave Adam no such Private Dominion. It Is Probable, I
confess, that Noah should have the same Title, the same Property and Dominion
after the Flood, that Adam had before it. But since Private Dominion cannot
consist with the Blessing and Grant God gave to him and his Sons in Common,
it is a sufficient Reason to conclude that Adam had none, especially since in
the Donation made to him, there is no words that express it, or do in the least
favor it; And then let my Reader Judge whether it may best be understood, when
in the one place there is not one word for it, not to say, what has been above
proved, that the Text it self proves the contrary, and in the other, the Words
and Sense are directly against it.

37. But our A -- says, Noah was the sole Heir of the World, why should it be
thought that God would disinherit him of his Birth-right-Heir, indeed in
England signifies the Eldest Son, who is by the Law of England to have all his
Fathers Land, but where God ever appointed any such Heir of the World, our A --
would have done well to have showed us, and how God disinherited him of his
Birthright, or what harm was done him if God gave his Sons a Right to make use
of a part of the Earth for the support of themselves and Families, when the
whole was not only more then Noah himself, but infinitely more then they all
could make use of, and the Possessions o^ one could not at all Prejudice, or as
to any use straighten that of the other.

38. Our A -- probably foreseeing he might not be very successful in persuading
People out of their Senses, and say what he could, Men would be apt to believe
the plain words of Scripture, and think as they saw, that the Grant was spoken
to Noah and his Sons jointly. He comes, 2^ to insinuate as if this grant to
Noah, conveyed no Property, no Dominion; because Subduing the Earth and
Dominion over the Creatures are therein omitted, nor the Earth once named. And
therefore, says he, there is a considerable difference between these two Texts,
the first blessing gave Adam a Dominion over the Earth and all Creatures, the
latter allows Noah Liberty to use the Living Creatures for Food, here is no
alteration or diminishing of his Title, to a Property of all things, but an
Enlargment only of his Commons, O. 211. so that in our A -- s Sense, all that
was said here to Noah and his Sons, gave them no Dominion, no Property, but
only Enlarged the Commons; their Commons, I should say since, God says, to you
are they given, though our A -- says his, for as for Noah's Sons, they it seems
by Sr. Robt's. appointment during their Fathers Life time, were to keep Fasting
days.

39. Any one but our A -- would be mightily suspected, to be blinded with
Prejudice, that in all this Blessing to Noah and his Sons, could see nothing
but only an Enlargment of Commons. For as to Dominion which our A -- thinks
omitted, the fear of you and the dread of you, says God, shall be upon every
Beast, which I suppose, expresses the Dominion, or Superiority was designed Man
over the living Creatures, as fully as may be, for in that fear and dread,
seems chiefly to consist what was given to Adam, over the inferior Animals, who
as Absolute a Monarch as he was, could not make bold with a Lark or a Rabbit to
satisfy his hunger, and had the Herbs but in common with the Beasts, as is
plain from 1 Genesis 2. 9. and 30. In the next place, it is manifest that in this
Blessing to Noah and his Sons, Property is not only given in clear words, but
in a larger extent then it was to Adam. Into your hands they are given, says
God, to Noah and his Sons, which words if they give not Property, nay Property
in Possession, 'twill be hard to find words that can, since there is not a way
to express a Man's being possessed of any thing more Natural, nor more certain
then to say, it is delivered into his hands. And verse 3 d to show that they
had then given them the utmost Property Man is capable of, which is to have a
right to destroy any thing by using it, every moving thing that Lives, says
God, shall be Meat for you, which was not allowed to Adam in his Charter. This
our A -- calls a Liberty of using them for Food, and only an Enlargment of
Commons, but no alteration of Property, O. 211. What other Property Man can
have in the Creatures, but the Liberty of using them, is hard to be understood.
So that if the first Blessing as our A -- says, gave Adam Dominion over the
Creatures, and the Blessing to Noah and his Sons gave them such a Liberty to
use them, as Adam had not; it must needs give them something that Adam with all
his Sovereignty, wanted something that one would be apt to take for a greater
Property; for certainly he has no Absolute Dominion over even the Brutal Part
of the Creatures, and the Property he has in them, is very narrow and scanty,
who cannot make that use of them, which is permitted to another; should any
one, who is Absolute Lord of a Country, have bidden our A -- Subdue the Earth,
and given him Dominion over the Creatures in it, but not have permitted him to
have taken a Kid or a Lamb out of the flock, to satisfy his hunger, I guess,
he would scarce have thought himself Lord or Proprietor of that Land, or the
Cattle on it, but would have found the difference between having Dominion,
which a Shepherd may have, and having full Property as an owner, so that had it
been his own Case, Sr. Rob. I believe would have thought here was an
Alteration, nay an Enlarging of Property, and that Noah and his Children had by
this Grant, not only Property given them, but such a Property given them in the
Creatures, as Adam had not, for however in respect of one another, Men may be
allowed to have Propriety in their distinct portions of the Creatures, yet in
respect of God the maker of Heaven and Earth, who is sole Lord and Proprietor
of the whole World, Man's Propriety in the Creatures, is nothing but that
Liberty to use them, which God has permitted, and so man's Property may be
altered and Enlarged as we see it was here, after the Flood, when other uses of
them are allowed, which before were not; from all which I suppose, it is clear
that neither Adam nor Noah, had any Private Dominion, any Property in the
Creatures, exclusive of his posterity, as they should successively grow up into
need of them, and come to be able to make use of them.

40. Thus we have examined our A -- s Argument for Adams Monarchy, founded on
the Blessing Pronounced, 1 Genesis 28. Wherein I think it is impossible for any
sober Reader, to find any else but the setting of Mankind above the other kinds
of Creatures, in this habitable Earth of ours. It Is nothing but the giving to
man, the whole Species of man, as the chief inhabitant, who i^ the Image of his
Maker, the Dominion over the other Creatures. This lies so obvious in the plain
words, that any one but our A --, would have thought it necessary to have
shown, how these words that seemed to say the quite contrary, gave Adam
Monarchical Absolute Power over other Men, or the Sole Propriety in all the
Creatures, and me thinks in a business of this moment, and that whereon he
Builds all that follows, he should have done something more then barely cite
words which apparently make against him, For, I confess, I cannot see any thing
in them, tending to Adams Monarchy, or Private Dominion, but quite the
contrary. And I the less deplore the dullness of my apprehension herein, since I
find the Apostle seems to have as little notion of any such Private Dominion of
Adam as I, when he says, God gives us all things richly to enjoy, which he
could not do, if it were all given away already, to Monarch Adam, and the
Monarchs his Heirs and Successors. To conclude, this Text is so far from
proving Adam Sole Proprietor, that on the contrary, it is a confirmation of the
Original Community of all things amongst the Sons of Men, which appearing from
this Donation of ^od, as well as other places of Scripture, the Sovereignty of
Adam, built upon his Private Dominion, must fall, not having any Foundation to
support it.

41. But yet if after all, any one will needs have it so, that by this Donation
of God Adam was made sole Proprietor of the whole Earth, what will this be to
his Sovereignty, and how will it appear that Propriety in Land gives a Man
Power over the Life of another, or how will the Poffession even of the whole
Earth give any one a Sovereign Arbitrary Authority over the Persons of Men; The
most specious thing to be said, is, that he that is Proprietor of the whole
World may deny all the rest of Mankind Food, and so at his Pleasure starve
them, if they will not acknowledge his Sovereignty and obey his Will. If this
were true, it would be a good Argument to prove that there was never any such
Property, that God never gave any such Private Dominion, since it is more
reasonable to think that God who bid Mankind increase and multiply, should
rather himself give them all a Right to make use of the Food and Raiment and
other Conveniences of Life, the Materials whereof he had so plentifully
provided for them, then to make them depend upon the Will of a Man for their
Subsistence, who should have Power to destroy them all when he pleased, and who
being no better then other Men, was in Succession likelyer by want and the
dependence of a scanty Fortune, to tie them to hard Service then by liberal
Allowance of the Conveniences of Life promote the great Design of God, Increase
and Multiply, he that doubts this, let him look into the Absolute Monarchies of
the World, and see what becomes of the Conveniences of Life and the Multitudes
of People.

42. But we know God has not left one Man so to the Mercy of another, that he
may starve him if he please, God the Lord and Father of all has given no one of
his Children such a Property in his peculiar Portion of the things of this
World, but that he has given his needy Brother a Right in the Surplussage of
his Goods, so that it cannot justly be denied him when his pre^^ing wants call
for it. And therefore no Man could ever have a just Power over the Life of
another by Right of Property in Land or Possessions, since 'twould always be a
Sin in any Man of Estate to let his Brother perish for want of affording him
Relief out of his Plenty; For as Justice gives every Man a Title to the product
of his honest Industry, and the fair Acquisitions of his Ancestors descended to
him, so Charity gives every Man a Title to so much out of another Plenty as
will keep him from extreme want, where he has no means to subsist otherwise;
And a Man can no more justly make use of another necessity, to force him to
become his Vassal by withholding that Relief, God requires him to afford to the
wants of his Brother, then he that has more strength can seize upon a weaker,
master him to his Obedience, and with a Dagger at his Throat offer him Death or
Slavery.

43. Should any one make so perverse an use of Gods Blessings powered on him
with a liberal Hand, should any one be Cruel and Uncharitable to that
extremity, yet all this would not prove that Propriety in Land, even in this
Case, gave any Authority over the Persons of Men, but only that Compact might;
since the Authority of the Rich Proprietor and the Subjection of the Needy
Beggar began not from the Possession of the Lord, but the Consent of the poor
Man who preferred being his Subject to starving. And the Man he thus submits to,
can pretend to no more Power over him then he has consented to, upon Compact,
upon this ground a Man's having his Stores filled in a time of Scarcity, having
Money in his Pocket, being in a Vessel at Sea, being able to Swim, etc. may as
well be the Foundation of Rule and Dominion, as being Possessor of all the Land
in the World, any of these being sufficient to enable me to save a Man's Life
who would perish if such Assistance were denied him; And any thing by this Rule
that may be an occasion of working upon another necessity to save his Life or
any thing dear to him, at the rate of his Freedom may be made a Foundation of
Sovereignty as well as Property; From all which it is clear that tho God should
have given Adam Private Dominion, yet that Private Dominion could give him no
Sovereignty; But we have already sufficiently proved that God gave him no
Private Dominion.

CHAP. V. Of Adams Title to Sovereignty by the Subjection of Eve.
44. THE next place of Scripture we find our A -- Build his Monarchy of Adam on
is 3. Genesis 26. And thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall rule over
thee. Here we have (says he) the Original Grant of Government, from whence he
concludes, in the following part of the Page O. 244. that the Supreme Power is
settled in the Fatherhood, and limited to one kind of Government, that is to
Monarchy; For let his premises be what they will, this is always the
conclusion, let but Rule in any Text, be but once named, and presently Absolute
Monarchy is by Divine Right Established, if any one will but carefully Read our
A -- s own reasoning from these Words, O. 244. and consider among other things,
the Line and Posterity of Adam, as he there brings them in, he will find some
difficulty, to make Sense of what he says; But we will allow this at present,
to his peculiar way of Writing, and consider the Force of the Text in hand. The
words are the Curse of God upon the Woman, for having been the first and
forwardest in the Disobedience, and if we will consider the occasion of what
God says here to our first Parents, that he was Denouncing Judgment, and
declaring his Wrath against them both, for their Disobedience, we cannot
suppose that this was the time, wherein God was granting Adam Prerogatives and
Privileges, investing him with Dignity and Authority, Elevating him to
Dominion and Monarchy; For though as a helper in the Temptation, as well as a
Partner in the Transgression, Eve was laid below him, and so he had
accidentally a Superiority over her, for her greater Punishment, yet he too had
his share in the fall, as well as the sin, and was laid lower, as may be seen
in the following Verses, and 'twould be hard to imagine that God in the same
Breath, should make him Universal Monarch over all Mankind, and a day labourer
for his Life. Turn him out of Paradise, to till the Ground ver. 23. and at the
same time, advance him to a Throne, and all the Privileges and Ease of
Absolute Power.

45. This was not a time, when Adam could expect any Favors, any Grant of
Privileges from his offended Maker. If this be the Original Grant of
Government, as our A -- tells us, and Adam was now made Monarch, whatever Sr.
Rob. would have him, it is plain, God made him but a very poor Monarch, such an
one, as our A -- himself would have counted it no great Privilege to be, God
sets him to work for his living, and seems rather to give him a Spade into his
hand, to Subdue the Earth, then a Scepter to Rule over its Inhabitants. In the
Sweat of thy Face, thou shall eat thy Bread, says God to him ver. 19. This was
unavoidable, may it perhaps be answered, because he was yet without Subjects,
and had no Body to work for him, but afterward living as he did above 900
Years, he might have People enough, whom he might command to work for him; no
says God, not only whilst thou art without other help, save thy Wife, but as
long as thou live, shall thou live by thy Labor. In the Sweat of thy Face,
shall thou eat thy Bread, till thou return unto the Ground, for out of it wast
thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return, v. 19. It will
perhaps be answered again, in Favor of our A --, that these Words are not
spoken Personally to Adam, but in him, as their Representative to all Mankind,
this being a Curse upon Mankind, because of the fall.

46. God, I believe, speaks differently from Men, because he speaks with more
Truth, more Certainty, but when he vouchsafes, to speak to Men; I do not think,
he speaks differently from them, in crossing the Rules of Language, in use
amongst them, this would not be to condescend to their Capacities, when he
humbles himself to speak to them, but to loose his design in speaking, what
thus spoken, they could not understand. And yet thus must we think of God, if
the Interpretations of Scripture, necessary to maintain our A -- s Doctrine,
must be received for good; For by the ordinary Rules of Language, it will be
very hard to understand what God says; if what he speaks here, in the Singular
Number to Adam must be understood to be spoken to all Mankind, and what he says
in the Plural Number, 1 Genesis 26. and 28. must be understood of Adam alone,
exclusive of all others, and what he says to Noah and hi^ Sons Jointly, must be
understood to be meant to Noah alone, Gen 9.

47. Farther it is to be noted, that these words here of 3 Genesis 16. which our A
-- calls the Original Grant of Government were not spoken to Adam, neither
indeed was there any Grant in them made to Adam, but a punishment laid upon
Eve, and if we will take them as they were directed in particular to her, or in
her, as a representative to all other Women, they will at most concern the
Female Sex only, and import no more but that subjection they should ordinarily
be in to their Husbands, but there is here no more Law to oblige a Woman to
such a Subjection, if the Circumstances either of her Condition or Contract
with her Husband should exempt her from it, then there is that she should bring
forth her Children in Sorrow and Pain, if there could be found a Remedy for it,
which is also a part of the same Curse upon her, for the whole Verse runs thus,
unto the Woman he said, I will greatly Multiply thy sorrow and thy conception;
In sorrow thou shall bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be to thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee. 'Twould I think have been a hard matter
for any Body, but our A -- to have found out a Grant of Monarchical Government
to Adam in these Words, which were neither spoke to, nor of him, neither will
any one, I suppose, by these Words, think the weaker Sex, as by a Law so
Subjected to the Curse contained in them, that it is their duty, not to
endeavor to avoid it. And will any one say that Eve, or any other Woman,
sinned, if she were brought to Bed, without those Multiplied Pains, God
threatens her here with, or that either of our Queens Mary or Elizabeth, had
they Married any of their Subjects had been by this Text, put into a Political
Subjection to him, or that he thereby should have had Monarchical Rule over
her, God in this Text, gives not that I see any Authority to Adam over Eve, or
Men over their Wives, but only foretells what should be the Woman's Lot, how by
his Providence he would order it so, that she should be Subject to her Husband,
as we see that generally the Laws of Mankind and Customs of Nations, have
ordered it so, and there is, I grant, a Foundation in Nature for it.

48. Thus when God says of Jacob and Esau that the Elder should serve the
Younger, 25 Genesis 23. no body supposes that God hereby made Jacob Essaus
Sovereign, but foretold what should de facto come to pass.

But if these words here spoke to Eve must needs be understood as a Law to bind
her and all other Women to Subjection, it can be no other Subjection then what
every Wife owes her Husband, and then if this be the Original Grant of
Government and the Foundation of Monarchial Power, there will be as many
Monarchs as there are Husbands: If therefore these words give any Power to
Adam, it can be only a Conjugal Power, not Political, the Power that every
Husband has to order the things of private Concernment in his Family, as
Proprietor of the Goods and Land there, and to have his Will take place in all
things of their Common Concernment before that of his Wife; But not a Political
Power of Life and Death over her, much less over any body else.

49. This I am sure: If our A -- will have this Text to be a Grant, the
Original Grant of Government, political Government, he ought to have proved it
by some better Arguments then by barely Saying, that thy desire shall be unto
thy Husband, was a Law whereby Eve and all that should come of her, were
subjected to the Absolute Monarchical Power of Adam and his Heirs. Thy desire
shall be to thy Husband, is too doubtful an Expression, of whose signification
Interpreters are not agreed, to build so confidently on, and in a Matter of
such moment and so great and general Concernment; But our A -- according to his
way of Writing, having once named the Text, concludes presently without any
more ado, that the meaning is, as he would have it, let the Words Rule and
Subject be but found in the Text or Margent, and it immediately signifies the
Duty of a Subject to his Prince, and the Relation is changed, and though God
says Husband, Sr. Robt. will have it King, Adam has presently Absolute
Monarchial Power over Eve, and not only Eve but all that should come of her,
though the Scripture says not a word of it, nor our A -- a word to prove it.
But Adam must for all that be an Absolute Monarch, and so to the end of the
Chapter quite down to Chapter 1. And here I leave my Reader to consider whether my
bare Saying, without offering any Reasons to evince it, that this Text gave not
Adam that Absolute Monarchial Power, our A -- supposes, be not as sufficient to
destroy that Power as his bare Assertion is to Establish it, since the Text
mentions neither Prince nor People, speaks nothing of Absolute or Monarchial
Power, but the Subjection of Eve, a Wife to her Husband. And he that would
treat our A -- so, although he would make a short and sufficient answer to the
greatest part of the Grounds he proceeds on, and abundantly confute them by
barely denying; It being a sufficient answer to Assertions without proof to
deny them without giving a Reason, and therefore should I have said nothing but
barely denied that by this Text the Supreme Power was settled and founded by God
himself, in the Fatherhood, Limited to Monarchy, and that to Adams Person and
Heirs, all which our A -- notably concludes from these Words, as may be seen in
the same Page O. 244. and desired any sober Man, to have read the Text, and
considered to whom and on what occasion it was spoken, he would no doubt have
wondered how our A -- found out Monarchical Absolute Power in it, had he not
had an exceeding good Faculty to find it himself, where he could not show it
others; And thus we have examined the two places of Scripture, all that I
remember our A -- brings to prove Adams Sovereignty, that Supremacy, which he
says, it was Gods Ordinance should be unlimitted in Adam, and as large as all
the Acts of his Will. O. 254, viz. 1 Genesis 28. and 3. Genesis 16. one whereof
signifies only the Subjection of the inferior Ranks of Creatures to Mankind,
and the other the Subjection that is due from a Wife to her Husband, both far
enough from that which Subjects owe the Governors of Political Societies.

CHAP. VI. Of Adams Title to Sovereignty by Fatherhood.
50. THere is one thing more and then I think I have given you all that our A
-- brings for proof of Adams Sovereignty, and that is a Supposition of a
natural Right of Dominion over his Children, by being their Father, and this
Title of Fatherhood he is pleased with, that you will find it brought in almost
in every Page, particularly, he says, not only Adam but the succeeding
Patriarchs had by Right of Fatherhood Royal Authority over their Children, p.
12. And in the same page. This Subjection of Children being the Fountain of all
Regal Authority, etc. This being as one would think by his so frequent
mentioning it the main basis of all his Frame, we may well expect clear and
evident Reason for it, since he lays it down as a position necessary to his
purpose, that every Man that is born is so far from being Free, that by his
very Birth he becomes a Subject of him that begets him, O. 156. So that Adam
being the only Man Created, and all ever since being begotten, no body has been
born free: If we ask how Adam comes by this Power over his Children, he tells
us here it is by begetting them: And so again, O. 223. This natural Dominion of
Adam, says he, may be proved out of Grotius himself, who teaches that
generatione jus acquiritur parentibus i^ liberos. And indeed the act of
beget^ing being that which makes a Man a Father, his Right of Father over his
Children can naturally arise from nothing else.

51. Grotius tells us not here how far this jus in liberos, this Power of
Parents over their Children extends, but our A -- always very clear in the
point assures us, it is Supreme Power, and like that of Absolute Monarchs over
their Slaves, Absolute Power of Life and Death: He that should demand of him
how, or for what Reason, it is, that begetting a Child gives the Father such an
Absolute Power over him, will find him answer nothing, we are to take his word
for this as well as several other things, and by that the Laws of Nature and
the Constitutions of Government must stand and fall; Had he been an Absolute
Monarch, this way of talking might have suited well enough, pro ratione
voluntas, may there be allowed: But it is but an ill way of pleading for
Absolute Monarchy, and Sr. Robts. bare Sayings will scarce Establish it, one
slaves Opinion without proof is not of weight enough to dispose of the Liberty
and Fortunes of all Mankind; If all Men are not as I think they are naturally
equal, I Am sure all Slaves are, and then I may without presumption oppose my
single Opinion to his, and be as confident that my Saying, that begetting of
Children makes them not Slaves to their Fathers, sets all Mankind Free, as his
affirming the contrary makes them all Slaves. But that this position, which is
the Foundation of all their Doctrine, who would have Monarchy to be Iure divino,
may have all fair play, let us hear what reasons others give for it, since our
A -- offers none.

52. The Argument, I have heard others make use of, to prove that Fathers by
begetting them, come by an Absolute Power over their Children is this; That
Fathers have a Power over the Lives of their Children, because they give them
Life and Being, which is the only proof it is capable of, since there can be no
reason, why naturally one Man should have any claim or pretense of Right over
that in another, which was never his, which he bestowed not, but was received
from the bounty of another. 1o. I answer that every one who gives an other any
thing, has not always thereby a Right to take it away again; But 2o. they who
say the Father gives Life to his Children, are so dazzled with the thoughts of
Monarchy that they do not, as they ought, remember God who is the Author and
giver of Life, it is in him alone we live, move and have our Being. How can he
be thought to give Life to another that knows not wherein his own Life
consists, Philosophers are at a loss about it after their most diligent
enquiries; And Anatomists after their whole Lives and Studies spent in
dissections and diligent examining the Bodies of Men, confess their Ignorance
in the Structure and Use of Many parts of Man's Body, and in that Operation
wherein Life consists in the whole; And does the rude Plough Man or the more
Ignorant Voluptuary Frame or Fashion such an admirable Engine as this is, and
then put Life and Sense into it; can any Mansay, he formed the parts that are
necessary to the Life of his Child, or can he suppose himself to give the Life,
and yet not know what Subject is fit to receive it, nor what Actions or Organs
are necessary for its Reception or Preservation?

53. To give Life to that which has yet no being is to Frame and make a living
Creature, fashion the parts and mould and suit them to their uses, and having
proportioned and fitted them together to put into them a living Soul. He that
could do this might indeed have some pretense to destroy his own Workmanship.
But is there any one so bold, that dares thus far Arrogate to himself the
Incomprehensible Works of the Almighty? who alone did at first and continues
still to make a live Soul, he alone can breath in the Breath of Life. If any
one thinks himself an Artist at this, let him number up the parts of his Child's
Body which he has made, tell me their Uses and Operations, and when the living
and rational Soul began to Inhabit, this curious Structure when Sense began,
and how this Engine he has framed Thinks and Reasons; If he made it, let him
when it is out of order mend it, at least tell wherein the defects lie? shall
he that made the Eye not see, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 94. 9. See these Men's
Vanities: The structure of one part is sufficient to convince us of an All wise
Contriver, and he has so visible a claim to us as his Workmanship, that one of
the ordinary Apellations of God in Scripture is, God our Maker and the Lord our
Maker. And therefore though our A -- for the magnifying his Fatherhood be
pleased to say, O. 159. That even the Power which God himself exercises over
Mankind is by Right of Fatherhood, yet this Fatherhood is such an one as
utterly excludes all pretense of Title in earthly Parents; for he is King
because he is indeed Maker of us all, which no Parents can pretend to be of
their Children.

54. But had Men Skill and Power to make their Children, it is not so slight a
piece of Wormanship, that it can be imagined they could make them without
designing it, what Father of a thousand when he begets a Child thinks farther
then the satisfying his present Appetite, God in his infinite Wisdom has put
strong desires of Copulation into the Constitution of Men, thereby to continue
the race of Mankind, which he does most commonly without the intention, and
often against the Consent and Will of the Begetter. And indeed those who desire
and design Children, are but the occasions of their being, and when they design
and wish to beget them, do little more toward their making then Deucalion and
his Wife in the Fable did toward the making of Mankind, by throwing Pebles
over their Heads.

55. But grant that the Parents made their Children, gave them Life and Being,
and that hence there followed an Absolute Power. This would give the Father but
a joint Dominion with the Mother over them; for no body can deny but that the
Woman has an equal share, if not the greater, as nourishing the Child a long
time in her own Body out of her own substance. There it is fashioned, and from
her it receives the Materials and Principles of its Constitution; And it is so
hard to imagine the rational Soul should presently Inhabit the yet unformed
Embrio, as soon as the Father has done his part in the Act of Generation, that
if it must be supposed to derive any thing from the Parents, it must certainly
owe most to the Mother: But be that as it will, the Mother cannot be denied an
equal share in begetting of the Child, and so the Absolute Authority of the
Father will not arise from hence, our A -- indeed is of another mind; for he
says, We know that God at the Creation gave the Sovereignty to the Man over the
Woman, as being the Nobler and Principal Agent in Generation, O. 172. I
remember not this in my Bible, and when the place is brought where God at the
Creation gave the Sovereignty to Man over the Woman, and that for this Reason,
because he is the Nobler and Principal Agent in Generation, it will be time
enough to consider and answer it: But it is no new thing for our A -- to tell
us his own Phancies for certain and divine Truths, though there be often a
great deal of difference between his and divine Revelations; for God in the
Scripture says, his Father and his Mother that begot him.

56. They who allege the Practice of Mankind, for exposing or selling their
Children, as a Proof of their Power over them, are with Sr. Robt. happy Arguers
and cannot but recommend their Opinion by founding it on the most shameful
Action and most unnatural Murder, humane Nature is capable of. The dens of
Lions and Nurseries of Wolves know no such Cruelty as this; These Savage
Inhabitants of the Desert obey God and Nature, in being tender and careful of
their Offspring; They will Hunt, Watch, Fight and almost Starve for the
Preservation of their Young, never part with them, never forsake them till they
are able to shift for themselves; And is it the privilege of Man alone to act
more contrary to Nature then the Wild and most Untamed Part of the Creation?
Does God forbid us under the severest Penalty, that of Death, to take away the
Life of any Man, a Stranger, and upon Provocation? and does he permit us to
destroy those he has given us the Charge and Care of, and by the dictates of
Nature and Reason as well as his revealed Command, requires us to preserve? He
has in all the parts of the Creation taken a peculiar care to propagate and
continue the several Species of Creatures, and makes the Individuals act so
strongly to this end, that they sometimes neglect their own private good for
it, and seem to forget that general Rule which Nature teaches all things of
self Preservation and the Preservation of their Young, as the strongest
Principle in them over rules the Constitution of their particular Natures; Thus
we see when their Young stand in need of it, the timorous come Valiant, the
Feirce and Savage Kind, and the Ravenous Tender and Liberal.

57. But if the Examples of what has been done, be the Rule of what ought to
be, History would have furnished our A -- with instances, of this Absolute
Fatherly Power in its height and perfection, and he might have showed us in
Peru, People that begot Children on purpose to Fatten and Eat them. The Story
is so remarkable, that I cannot but set it down in the A -- s Words. In some
Provinces, says he, they were so liquorish after Man's Flesh, that they would
not have the patience to stay still the Breath was out of the Body, but would
suck the Blood as it ran from the Wounds of the dying Man; They had public
Shambles of Man's Flesh, and their Madness herein was to that degree that they
spared not their own Children which they had begot on Strangers, taken in War:
For they made their Captives their Mistrisses and choisly nourished the
Children they had by them, till about thirteen Years Old they Butchered and Eat
them, and they served the Mothers after the same fashion, when they grew past
Childbearing and ceased to bring them any more Roasters, Garcilasso de la vega
hist. des yncas de Peru, l. 1. c. 12.

58. Thus far can the busy mind of Man, carry him to a Brutality below the
level of Beasts; when he quits his reason, which places him almost equal to
Angels, nor can it be otherwise in a Creature, whose thoughts are more then the
Sands, and wider then the Ocean, where fancy and passion must needs run him
into strange courses, if reason, which is the only Star and Compass, be not
that he Steers by; the imagination is always restless and suggests variety of
thoughts, and the will, reason being laid aside, is ready for every extravagant
project; And in this State, he that goes farthest out of the way, is thought
fittest to lead, and is sure of most followers; And when Fashion has once
Established, what Folly or Craft began, Custom makes it Sacred, and 'twill be
thought impudence or madness, to contradict or question it. He that will
impartially survey the World, will find so much of the Religion, Government and
Manners of the Nations of the World, brought in, and continued by these means,
that he will have but little Reverence for the Practices, which are in Fashion
amongst Men, and will have reason to think, that the Woods and Forests, where
the irrational untaught Inhabitants keep right by following nature, are fitter
to give us Rules, then Cities and Palaces, where those that call themselves
civil and rational, go out of their way, by the Authority of Example.

59. Be it then as Sr. Rob. says, that Anciently, it was usual for Men, to sell
and castrate their Children, O. 155. Let it be, that they expose them, add to
it, if you please, for this is still greater Power, that they begat them for
their Tables to fat and eat them, if this proves a right to do so, we may by
the same Argument, justify Adultery, Incest and Sodomy, for there are examples
of these too, both Ancient and Modern; Sins, which I suppose, have their
Principal Aggravation from this, that they cross the main intention of nature,
which wills the increase of Mankind, and the continuation of the Species in
the highest perfection and the distinction of Families, with the security of
the Marriage Bed, as necessary thereunto.

60. In confirmation of this Natural Authority of the Father, our A -- brings a
Lame Proof, from the positive command of God in Scripture; His Words are, to
confirm the natural Right of Regal Power, we find in the Decalogue, that the
Law which injoyns Obedience to Kings, is delivered in the Term, Honor thy
Father, p. 23. whereas many confefs, that Government only in the Abstract, is
the Ordinance of God, they are not able to prove any such Ordinance in the
Scripture, but only in the Fatherly Power, and therefore we find the
Commandment that injoyns Obedience, to Superiors, given in the Terms, Honor
thy Father; so that not only the Power and Right of Government, but the Form of
the Power Governing, and the Person having the Power, are all the Ordinances of
God. The first Father had not only simply Power, but Power Monarchical, as he
was Father immediately from God, O. 254. To the same purpose, the same Law is
cited by our A -- in several other places, and just after the same Fashion,
that is, and Mother, as Apocriphal Words, are always left out; a great Argument
of our A -- s ingenuity, and the goodness of his Cause, which required in its
Defender, Zeal to a degree of warmth, able to warp the Sacred Rule of the Word
of God, to make it comply with his present occasion, a way of proceeding, not
unusual to those, who embrace not truths, because Reason and Revelation offers
them, but espouse Tenets and Parties, for ends different from Truth, and then
resolve at any rate to defend them; And so do with the Words and Sense of
Authors, they would fit to their purpose, just as Procustes did with his
guests, top or stretch them, as may best fit them to the size of their Notions,
and they always prove like those, so served, deformed and useless.

61. For had our A -- set down this command without Garbling, as God gave it,
and joined Mother to Father, every Reader would have seen, that it had made
directly against him, and that it was so far from Establishing the Monarchical
Power of the Father, that it set up the Mother equal with him, and enjoined
nothing but what was due in common, to both Father and Mother; for that is the
constant Tenor of the Scripture, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20. He
that smites his Father or Mother, shall surely be put to death, 21. 15. He
that Curses his Father or his Mother, shall surely be put to death, ver. 17.
Repeated Lev. 20.9. and by our Savior, Math. 15. 4. ye shall fear every Man
his Mother and his Father, Lev. 19. 3. If a Man have a Rebellious Son, which
will not obey the voice of his Father or the voice of his Mother, then shall
his Father and his Mother lay hold on him, and say this our Son is Stuborn and
Rebellious, he will not obey our voice, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. Cursed be he
that sets light by his Father or his Mother, 28. 16. my Son, hear the
instructions of thy Eather, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother, are the
Words of Solomon a King, who was not ignorant of what belonged to him, as a
Father or a King, and yet he joins Father and Mother together, in all the
Instructions he gives Children quite through his Book of Proverbs, woe unto
him, that says unto his Father, what begettest thou, or to the Woman, what
have thou brought forth, Isa. 11. v. 10. In thee have they set light by Father
or Mother, Ezekiel. 28. 2. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet
Prophesy, then his Father and his Mother that begat him, shall say unto him,
thou shall not live, and his Father and his Mother that begat him shall thrust
him through when he Prophesies, Zech. 13. 3. Here not the Father only, but
Father and Mother jointly, had Power in this Case of Life and Death. Thus ran
the Law of the Old Testament, and in the New they are likewise joined, in the
Obedience of their Children, Ephesians. 6. 1. The rule is, Children obey your
Parents, and I do not remember, that I any where read, Children obey your
Father and no more, the Scripture joins Mother too in that homage, which is due
from Children, and had there been any Text, where the honor or obedience of
Children, had been directed to the Father alone, it is not likely that our A --,
who pretends to Build all upon Scripture, would have omitted it, nay the
Scripture makes the Authority of Father and Mother, in respect of those they
have begot, so equal that in some places it neglects, even the Priority of
Order, which is thought due to the Father, and the Mother is put first, as Lev.
19. 3. from which so constantly joining Father and Mother together, as is found
quite through the Scripture, we may conclude that the honor they have a Title
to from their Children, is one common right belonging so equally to them both,
that neither can claim it wholly, neither can be excluded.

62. One would wonder then how our A -- infers from the 5 th Commandment, that
all Power was Originally in the Father. How he finds Monarchical Power of
Government, settled and fixed by the Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother; If all the honor due by the Commandments, be it what it will, be the
only right of the Father, because he, as our A -- says, has the Sovereignty
over the Woman, as being the Nobler and Principal Agent in Generation, why did
God afterward all along join the Mother with him, to share in this honor, can
the Father by this Sovereignty of his discharge the Child from Paying this
Honor to his Mother. The Scripture gave no such License to the Jews, and yet
there were often Breaches wide enough betwixt Husband and Wife, even to divorce
and separation, and I think no Body will say, a Child may withhold honor from
his Mother, or as the Scripture Terms it, set light by her, though his Father
should command him to do so, no more then the Mother could dispense with him,
for neglecting to Honor his Father, whereby it is plain, that this command of
God, gives the Father no Sovereignty, no Supremacy.

63. I agree with our A --, that the Title to this Honor, is vested in the
Parents by nature, and is a right which accrews to them, by their having
begotten their Children, and God by many positive Declarations has confirmed it
to them, I also allow our A -- s Rule, that in Grants and Gifts, that have
their Original from God and Nature, as the Power of the Father, let me add and
Mother, for whom God has joined together, let no Man put a sunder, no inferior
Power of Men can limit, nor make any Law of Prescription against them, O. 158.
So that the Mother having by this Law of God, a right to Honor from her
Children, which is not Subject to the Will of her Husband, we see this Absolute
Monarchical Power of the Father, can neither be founded on it, nor consist with
it; And he has a Power very far from Monarchical, very far from that
Absoluteness our A -- contends for, when another has over his Subjects the same
Power he has, and by the same Title, and therefore he cannot forebear saying
himself, that he cannot see how any Man's Children can be free from Subjection
to their Parents, p. 12. which in common Speech, I think signifies Mother as
well as Father, or if Parents here signifies only Father, it is the first time I
ever yet knew it to do so, and by such an use of Words, one may say any thing.

64. By our A -- s Doctrine, the Father having Absolute jurisdiction over his
Children, has also the same over their Issue, and the consequence is good, were
it true, that the Father had such a Power, and yet I ask our A -- whether the
Grandfather by his Sovereignty, could discharge the Grandchild from Paying to
his Father, the honor due to him by the 5 th Commandment; If the Grandfather,
has by right of Fatherhood, Sole Sovereign Power in him, and by Honor thy
Father be commanded, that Obedience which is due to the Sovereign, it is certain
the Grandfather might dispense with the Grand-Sons Honoring his Father, which
since it is evident in common Sense, he cannot it is evident Honor thy Father
and Mother, cannot mean an Absolute Subjection to a Sovereign Power, but
something else. The right therefore which Parents have by nature, and which is
confirmed to them by the 5 th Commandment, cannot be that Political Dominion,
which our A -- would derive from it, for that being in every civil Society,
Supreme somewhere, can discharge any Subject, from any Political Obedience, to
any one of his fellow Subjects. But what Law of the Magistrate, can give a
Child liberty, not to Honor his Father and Mother; it is an eternal Law,
annexed purely to the relation of Parents and Children, and so contains nothing
of the Magistrates Power in it, nor is Subjected to it.

65. Our A -- says, God has given to a Father, a right or liberty to Alien his
Power over his Children to any other, O: 155. I doubt whether he can Alien,
wholly the right of Honor that is due from them; But be that as it will, this
I am sure, he cannot Alien, and retain the same Power, if therefore the
Magistrates Sovereignty, be as our A -- would have it, nothing but the
Authority of a Supreme Father, p. 23. it is unavoidable, that if the Magistrate
has all this Paternal Right as he must have, if Fatherhood be the Fountain of
all Authority, then the Subjects though Fathers, can have no Power over their
Children, no right to honor from them; for it cannot be all in another hands,
and a part remain with them, so that according to our A -- s own Doctrine,
Honor thy Father and Mother, cannot possibly be understood of Political
Subjection and Obedience, since the Laws both in the Old and New Testament,
that commanded Children to Honor and obey their Parents, were given to such,
whose Fathers were under such Government, and fellow Subjects with them in
Political Societies, and to have bid them Honor and obey their Parents in our
A -- s Sense, had been to bid them be Subjects to those, who had no Title to
it, the right to Obedience from Subjects, being all vested in another, and
instead of teaching Obedience, this had been to foment Sedition, by setting up
Powers that were not; If therefore this command, Honor thy Father and Mother,
concern Political Dominion, it directly overthrows our A -- s Monarchy, since
it being to be paid by every Child to his Father, even in Society, every Father
must necessarily have Political Dominion, and there will be as many Sovereigns,
as there are Fathers, besides that the Mother too has her Title, which
destroys the Sovereignty of one Supreme Monarch. But if Honor thy Father and
Mother, mean something distinct from Political Power, as necessarily it must,
it is besides our A -- s business, and serves nothing to his purpose.

66. The Law that enjoins Obedience to Kings is delivered, says our A --, in
the Terms, Honor thy Father, as if all Power were Originally in the Father, O.
254. And that Law is also delivered, say I, in the Terms, Honor thy Mother, as
if all Power were Originally in the Mother, I appeal whether the Argument be
not as good on one side as the other, Father and Mother being joined all along
in the Old and New Testament, where Honor or Obedience is enjoined Children,
again our A -- tell us, O. 254. that this command Honor thy Father gives the
right to govern, and makes the Form of Government Monarchical. To which I
answer, that, if by Honor thy Father, be meant Obedience to the Political
Power of the Magistrate, it concerns not any duty we owe to our Natural Fathers
who are Subjects, because they by our A -- s Doctrine, are divested of all that
Power, it being placed wholly in the Prince, and so being equally Subjects and
Slaves with their Children, can have no right by that Title, to any such Honor
or Obedience as contains in it Political Subjection; If Honor thy Father and
Mother signifies the duty we owe our Natural Parents, as by our Saviors
Interpretation, Math. 15. 4. and all the other mentioned places, it is plain it
does, then it cannot concern Political Obedience, but a duty that is owing to
Persons, who have no Title to Sovereignty, nor any Political Authority, as
Magistrates over Subjects, for the Person of a private Father, and a Title to
Obedience, due to the Supreme Magistrate, are things inconsistent, and
therefore this command, which must necessarily comprehend the Persons of our
Natural Fathers, must mean a duty we owe them distinct from our Obedience to
the Magistrate, and from which the most Absolute Power of Princes cannot
absolve us, what this duty is, we shall in its due place examine.

67. And thus we have at last got through all that in our A -- looks like an
Argument for that Absolute unlimited Sovereginty described, Sect. 8. which he
supposes in Adam so that Mankind ever since have all been born slaves, without
any Title to Freedom; But if Creation which gave nothing but a Being, made not
Adam Prince of his Posterity; If Adam, Genesis 1. 28. was not constituted Lord of
Mankind, nor had a Private Dominion given him exclusive of his Children, but
only a Right and Power over the Earth, and inferior Creatures in common with
the Children of Men; If also Genesis 3. 16. God gave not any Political Power to
Adam over his Wife and Children, but only Subjected Eve to Adam, as a
punishment, or foretold the Subjection of the weaker Sex, in the ordering the
common concernments of their Families, but gave not thereby to Adam, as to the
Husband Power of Life and Death, which necessarily belongs to the Magistrate;
if Fathers by begetting their Children acquire no such Power over them, and if
the command Honor thy Father and Mother, give it not but only enjoins a duty
owing to Parents equally, whether Subjects or not, and to the Mother as well as
the Father; If all this be so as I think, by what has been said, is very
evident, then Man has a Natural Freedom, notwithstanding all our A --
confidently says to the contrary, since all that share in the same common
Nature, Faculties and Powers are in Nature equal, and ought to partake in the
same common Rights and Privileges, till the manifest appointment of God, who
is Lord over all Blessed for ever, can be produced to show any Particular
Persons Supremacy, or a Man's own Consent Subjects him to a Superior. This is so
plain that our A -- confesses, that Sr. John Heyward, Blacwood and Barclay the
great vindicators of the Right of Kings, could not deny it, but admit with one
consent the Natural Liberty and Equality of Mankind, for a Truth
unquestionable. And our A -- has been so far from producing any thing, that
may make good his great Position, that Adam was Absolute Monarch, and so Men
are not Naturally free, that even his own Proofs make against him, so that to
use is own way of Arguing. This first erroneous Principle failing, the whole
Fabric of this vast engine of Absolute Power and Tyranny, drops down of it
self, and there needs no more to be said in answer to all that he builds upon,
so false and frail a Foundation.

68. But to save others the pains, were there any need, he is not sparing
himself to show by his own contradictions, the weakness of his own Doctrins,
Adams Absolute and Sole Dominion is that which he is every where full of, and
all along builds on, and yet he tells us, p. 12. that as Adam was Lord of his
Children, so his Children under him had a Command and Power over their own
Children. The unlimited and undivided Sovereginty of Adams Fatherhood, by our A
-- s computation, stood but a little while, only during the first Generation,
but as soon as he had Grandchildren, Sr. Rob. could give but a very ill
account of it, Adam as Father of hi^ Children says he, has an Absolute,
Unlimited Royal Power over them, and by virtue thereof over those that they
begot, and so to all Generations, and yet his Children, viz. Cain and Seth have
a Paternal Power over their Children at the same time, so that they are at the
same time Absolute Lords, and yet Subjects and Slaves; Adam has all the
Authority, as Grandfather of his People, and they have a part as Fathers; He
is Absolute over them and their Posterity, by having begotten them, and yet
they are Absolute over their Children by the same Title, no says our A --,
Adams Children under him, had Power over their own Children, but still with
Subordination to the the first Parent. A good distinction that sounds well, and
it is pity it signifies nothing, nor can be reconciled with our A -- s Words, I
readily grant that supposing Adams Absolute Power over his Posterity, any of
his Children might have from him a delegated, and so a Subordinate Power, over
a part or all the rest; But that cannot be the Power our A -- speaks of here,
it is not a Power by Grant and Commission, but the Natural Paternal Power, he
supposes a Father to have over his Children; for 1o, he says as Adam was Lord
of his Children, so his Children under him, had a Power over their own
Children; They were then Lords over their own Children after the same manner,
and by the same Title that Adam was, i. e. by right of Generation, by right of
Fatherhood; 2o, it is plain he means the Natural Power of Fathers, because he
limits it to be only over their own Children, a delegated Power, has no such
limitation, as only over their own Children, it might be over others, as well
as their own Children; 3o, If it were a delegated Power, it must appear in
Scripture, but there is no ground in Scripture to affirm that Adam's Children,
had any other Power over theirs, then what they naturally had as Fathers.

69. But that he means here Paternal Power, and no other, is past doubt from
the Inference he makes in those words immediately following, I see not then how
the Children of Adam or of any Man else can be free from Subjection to their
Parents, whereby it appears that the Power on one side and the Subjection on
the other, our A -- here speaks of, is that Natural Power and Subjection
between Parents and Children; for that which every Man's Children owed could be
no other, and that our A -- always affirms to be absolute and unlimited. This
natural Power of Parents over their Children, Adam had over his Posterity, says
our A --, and this Power of Parents over their Children, his Children had over
theirs in his Life time, says our A -- also; so that Adam by a natural Right of
Father, had an absolute, unlimited Power over all his Posterity, and at the
same time his Children had by the same Right absolute unlimited Power over
theirs, here then are two absolute unlimited Powers existing together, which I
would have any body reconcile one to another, or to common Sense; for the
Salvo, he has put in of Subordination, makes it more absurd: To have one
Absolute, Unlimited, nay Vnlimitable Power in Subordination to another, is so
manifest a Contradiction, that nothing can be more, Adam is Absolute Prince
with the Unlimited Authority of Fatherhood over all his Posterity; All his
Posterity are then absolutely his Subjects, and, as our A -- says, his Slaves,
Children and Grand Children are equally in this State of Subjection and
Slavery, and yet says our A --, the Children of Adam have paternal, i. e.
Absolute, Unlimited Power over their own Children, which in plain English is,
they are Slaves and Absolute Princes at the same time, and in the same
Government, and one part of the Subjects have an Absolute Unlimited Power over
the other by the natural Right of Parentage.

70. If any one will suppose in favor of our A -- that he here meant that
Parents who are in Subjection themselves to the Absolute Authority of their
Father, have yet some Power over their Children: I confess he is something
nearer the truth, but he will not at all hereby help our A --; for he no where
speaking of the Paternal Power, but as an Absolute Unlimited Authority, cannot
be supposed to understand any thing else here, unless he himself had limited it
and showed how far it reached: And that he means here paternal Authority in
that large Extent is plain from the immediate following words; This Subjection
of Children being, says he, the Fountain of all Regal Authority, p. 12. The
Subjection, then that in the former Line, he says, every Man is in to his
Parents, and consequently what Adam's Grand Children were in to their Parents,
was that which was the Fountain of all Regal Authority, i. e. According to our
A -- s Absolute, Vnlimitable Authority, and thus Adams^ Children had Regal
Authority over their Children, whilst they themselves were Subjects to their
Father, and Fellow Subjects with their Children; But let him mean as he
pleases, it is plain he allows Adams Children to have Paternal Power, p. 12. as
all other Fathers to have Paternal Power over their Children, O. 156. From
whence one of these two things will necessarily follow, that, either Adams
Children even in his life time, had, and so all other Fathers have, as he
Phrases it, p. 12. By Right of Fatherhood Royal Authority over their Children,
or else, that Adam by Right of Fatherhood had not Royal Authority: For it must
be that Paternal Power does, or does not, give Royal Authority to them that
have it: If it does not, then Adam could not be Sovereign by this Title, nor
any body else, and then there is an end of all our A's Politics at once; If it
does give Royal Authority, then every one that has Paternal Power has Royal
Authority, and then by our A -- s Patriarchal Government, there will be as many
Kings as there are Fathers.

71. And thus what a Monarchy he has set up, let him and his Disciples
consider, Princes certainly will have great Reason to thank him for these new
Politics, which set up as many Absolute Kings in every Country as there are
Fathers of Children, and yet who can blame our A -- for it, it lying
unavoidably in the way of one discoursing upon our A -- s Principles; For
having placed an Absolute Power in Fathers by Right of Begetting, he could not
easily resolve how much of this Power belonged to a Son over the Children he
had begotten; And so it fell out to be a very hard matter to give all the
Power, as he does, to Adam, and yet allow a part in his Life time to his
Children, when they were Parents, and which he knew not well how to deny them,
this makes him so doubtful in his Expressions, and so uncertain where to place
this Absolute Natural Power, which he calls Fatherhood; sometimes, Adam alone
has it all, as p. 13. O. 244, 245. and pref.

Sometimes Parents have it, which word scarce signifies the Father alone, p.
12, 19.

Sometimes Children during their Fathers life time, as p. 12.

Sometimes Fathers of Families, as p. 78, and 79.

Sometimes Fathers indefinitely, O. 155.

Sometimes the Heir to Adam, O. 253.

Sometimes the Posterity of Adam, 244. 246.

Sometimes prime Fathers, all Sons or Grand Children of Noah, O. 244.

Sometimes the Eldest Parents, p. 12.

Sometimes all Kings, p. 19.

Sometimes all that have Supreme Power, O. 245.

Sometimes Heirs to those first Progenitors, who were at first the natural
Parents of the whole People, p. 19.

Sometimes an Elective King, p. 23.

Sometimes those whether a few or a Multitude that govern the Commonwealth, p.
23.

Sometimes he that can catch it, an Usurper, p. 23. O. 155.

72. Thus this new nothing, that is to carry with it all Power, Authority and
Government; This Fatherhood which is to design the Person and Establish the
Throne of Monarchs, whom the People are to obey, may, according to Sir Robt.
come into any hands, any how, and so by his Politics give to Democracy Royal
Authority, and make an Usurper a lawful Prince. And if it will do all these
fine Feats, much good do our Author and all his Followers with their omnipotent
Fatherhood, which can serve for nothing but to unsettle and destroy all the
lawful Governments in the World, and to Establish in their room Disorder,
Tyranny and U^urpation.

CHAP. VII. Of Fatherhood and Propriety Considered together as Fountains of
Sovereignty.
73. IN the foregoing Chapters we have seen what Adams Monarchy was, in our A
-- s Opinion, and upon what Titles he founded it: And the Foundations which he
lays the chief stress on, as those from which he thinks he may best derive
Monarchical Power to future Princes, are two, viz. Fatherhood and Property, and
therefore the way he proposes to remove the Absurdities and Inconveniences of
the Doctrine of Natural Freedom, is, to maintain the Natural and Private
Dominion of Adam, O. 222. Conformable hereunto he tells us the Grounds and
Principles of Government, necessarily depend upon the Original of Property, O.
108. The S^bjection of Children to their Parents is the Fountain of all Regal
Authority, p. 12. And all Power on Earth is either derived or usurped from the
Fatherly Power, there being no other Original to be found of any Power
whatsoever, O. 158. I will not stand here to examine how it can be said without
a contradiction, that the first Ground and Principles of Government necessarily
depend upon the Original of Property, and yet, that there is no other Original
of any Power whatsoever, but that of the Father: It being hard to understand
how there can be no other Original but Fatherhood, and yet that the Grounds and
Principles of Government depend upon the Original of Property; Property and
Fatherhood being as far different as Lord of a Manor and Father of Children,
nor do I see how they will either of them agree with what our A -- says, O.
244. of Gods Sentence against Eve, Genesis 111. 16. That it is the Original Grant
of Government, so that if that were the Original, Government had not its
Orignal by our A -- s own Confession, either from Property or Fatherhood, and
this Text which he brings as a proof of Adam's Power over Eve necessarily
Contradicts what he says of the Fatherhood, that it is the Sole Fountain of all
Power; for if Adam had any such Regal Power over Eve, as our A -- contends for;
it must be by some other Title then that of begetting.

74. But I leave him to reconcile these Contradictions as well as many others,
which may plentifully be found in him by any one, who will but read him with a
little Attention, and shall come now to consider how these two Originals of
Government, Adam's Natural and Private Dominion will consist and serve to make
out and Establish the Titles of Succeeding Monarchs, who, as our A -- obliges
them, must all derive their Power from these Fountains. Let us then suppose
Adam made by Gods Donation Lord and sole Proprietor of the whole Earth, in as
large and ample a manner, as Sir Robt. could wish, let us suppose him also by
Right of Fatherhood Absolute Ruler over his Children with an unlimited
Supremacy, I ask them upon Adam's Death what becomes of his Natural and Private
Dominion, and I doubt not, 'twill be answered, that they descended to his next
Heir, as our A -- tells us in sever^l places, but that cannot possibly convey
both his Natural and Private Dominion to the same Person; for should we allow
that all the Propriety, all the Estate of the Father ought to descend to the
Eldest Son, which will need some proof to Establish it, and so he have by that
Title all the Private Dominion of the Father, yet the Fathers Natural Dominion,
the paternal Power cannot descend to him by Inheritance; for being a Right that
accrews to a Man only by begetting, no Man can have this natural Dominion over
any one, he does not beget, unless it can be supposed that a Man can have a
Right to any thing, withouT doing that upon which that Right is solely founded.
For if a Father by begetting, and no other Title has Natural Dominion over his
Children, he that does not b^get them cannot have this Natural Dominion over
them, and therefore be it true or false, that our A -- says, O. 156. That every
Man that is born by his very Birth becomes a Subject to him that begets him,
this necessarily follows, viz. That a Man by his Birth cannot become a Subject
to his Brother who did not beget him, unless it can be supposed that a Man by
the very same Title can come to be under the Natural and Absolute Dominion of
two different Men at once, or it be Sense to say, that a Man by Birth is under
the Natural Dominion of his Father only, because he begat him, and a Man by
Birth also is under the Natural Dominion of his Eldest Brother, though he did
not beget him.

75. If then the Private Dominion of Adam, his Property in the Creatures
descended at his Death all entirely to his Eldest Son, his Heir; (for if it did
not there is presently an end of all Sir Robt's. Monarchy and his Natural
Dominion) the Dominion a Father has over his Children by begetting them,
belonged equally to all his Sons who had Children by the same Title their
Father had, it immediately upon Adams Decease; the Sovereignty founded upon
Property, and the Sovereignty founded upon Fatherhood, come to be divided,
since Cain as Heir had that of Property alone, Seth and the other Sons that of
Fatherhood equally with him. This is the best can be made of our A -- s
Doctrine and of the two Titles of Sovereignty he sets up in Adam, one of them
will either signify nothing, or if they both must stand they can serve only to
confound the Rights of Princes, and disorder Government in his Posterity; for
by building upon two Titles to Dominion, which cannot descend together, and
which he allows may be separated, for he yields that Adams Children had their
destinct Territories by Right of Private Dominion, O 210. p. 40. He makes it
perpetually a doubt upon his Principles where the Sovereignty is, or to whom we
owe our Obedience, since Fatherhood and Property are distinct Titles, and began
presently upon Adams Death to be in distinct Persons, And which then was to
give way to the other?

76. Let us take the account of it, as he himself gives it us. He tells us out
of Grotius, that Adams Children by Donation, Assignation or some kind of
Cession before he was dead had their distinct Territories by Right of private
Dominion, Abel had his Flocks and Pastures for them, Cain had his Fields for
Corn and the Land of Nod where he Built him a City, O. 210. Here it is obvious
to demand which of these two after Adams Death was Sovereign, Cain says our A
--, p. 19. By what Title? As Heir for Heirs to Progenitors, who were natural
Parents of their People, are not only Lords of their own Children, but also of
their Brethren, says our A --, p. 19. What was Cain Heir to? not the entire
Possessions, not all that which Adam had Private Dominion in, for our A --
allows that Abel by a Title derived from his Father, had his distinct Territory
for Pasture by Right of Private Dominion, what then Abel had by Private
Dominion, was exempt from Cains Dominion, for he could not have Private
Dominion over that, which was under the Private Dominion of another, and
therefore his Sovereignty over his Brother is gone with this Private Dominion,
and so there are presently two Sovereigns and his imaginary Title of Fatherhood
is out of doors, and Cain is no Prince over his Brother, or else if Cain retain
his Sovereignty over Abel notwithstanding his Private Dominion, it will follow
that the first Grounds and Principles of Government have nothing to do with
Property whatever our A -- says to the contrary; It Is true, Abel did not
outlive his Father Adam, but that makes nothing to the Argument which will
hold good against Sir Robt. in Abels Issue, or in Seth, or any of the Posterity
of Adam, not descended from Cain.

77. The same inconvenience he runs into about the three Sons of Noah, who as
he says, p. 13. had the whole World divided amongst them by their Father, I a^k
then in which of the three shall we find the Establishment of Regal Power after
Noah's Death; If in all three as our A -- there seems to say: Then it will
follow that Regal Power is founded in Property of Land and follows Private
Dominion, and not in paternal Power or natural Dominion, and so there is an end
of paternal Power as the Fountain of Regal Authority, and the so much magnified
Fatherhood quite vanishes. If the Regal Power descended to Shem as Eldest and
Heir to his Father, then Noah's Division of the World by Lot to his Sons or his
10 Years sailing about the mediterranean to appoint each Son his part, which
our A -- tells of, p. 15. was labor lost, his Division of the World to them,
was to ill or to no purpose, for his Grant to Cham and Iaphet was little worth
if Shem notwithstanding this Grant, as soon as Noah was dead, was to be Lord
over them. Or, if this Grant of Private Dominion to them over their assigned
Territories were good, here were set up two distinct sorts of Power, not
Subordinate one to the other with all those inconveniences which he musters up
against the Power of the People. O. 158. and which I shall set down in his own
words only changing Property for People. All Power on Earth is either derived
or us^rped from the Fatherly Power, there being no other Original to be found
of any Power whatsoever, for if there should be granted two sorts of Power
without any Subordination of one to the other, they would be in perpetual
strife, which should be Supreme, for two Supreams cannot agree: If the Fatherly
Power be Supreme, then the Power grounded on Private Dominion must be
subordinate and depend on it, and if the Power grounded on Property be Supreme,
then the Fatherly Power must submit to it, and cannot be exercised without the
License of the Proprietors, which must quite destroy the Frame and Course of
Nature. This is his own arguing against two distinct Independent Powers, which
I have set down in his own words, only putting Power rising from Property, for
Power of the People, and when he has answered what he himself has urged here
against two distinct Powers, we shall be better able to see how with any
tolerable Sense, he can derive all Regal Authority from the natural and Private
Dominion of Adam, from Fatherhood and Property together, which are distinct
Titles that do not always meet in the same Person, and it is plain by his own
Confession, presently separated as soon both as Adams and Noah's Death made way
for Succession; Though our A -- frequently in his Writings jumbles them
together, and omits not to make use of either, where he thinks it will sound
best to his purpose, but the Absurdities of this will more fully appear in the
next Chapter, where we shall examine the ways of conveyance of the Soveriegnty
of Adam, to Princes that were to Reign after him.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Conveyance of Adams Sovereign Monarchical Power.
78. SR. Rob. having not been very happy in any Proofs, he brings for the
Sovereignty of Adam, is not much more fortunate in conveying it to future
Princes, who if his Politics be true, must all derive their Titles from him;
The ways he has assigned, as they lie scattered up and down in his Writings, I
will set down in his own Words; In his Preface he tells us, that Adam being
Monarch of the whole World, none of his Posterity had any right to possess any
thing, but by his Grant or Permission, or by Succession from him, here he makes
two ways of conveyance of any thing, Adam stood possessed of, and those are
Grant or Succession. All Kings either are, or are to be, reputed the next Heirs
to those first Proginetors, who were at first the natural Parents of the whole
People, p. 19. There cannot be any multitude of Men whatsoever, but that in it,
considered by it self, there is one Man amongst them, that in nature has a
right to be the King of all the rest, as being the next Heir to Adam, O. 253.
Here in these places Inheritance is the only way he allows of, conveying
Monarchical Power to Princes, O. 155. All Power on Earth is either derived or
usurped from the Fatherly Power, O. 158. All Kings that now are, or ever were,
are or were either Fathers of their People, or the Heirs of such Fathers or
Usurpers of the right of such Fathers, O. 253. And here he makes Inheritance or
Usurpation, the only ways whereby Kings come by this Original Power; But yet he
tells us, this Fatherly Empire, as it was of its self Hereditary, so it was
alienable by Patent, and seizable by an Usurper, O. 190. So then here
Inheritance, Grant or Usurpation will convey it; And last of all, which is most
admirable he he tells us, p. 100. It skils not which way Kings come by their
Power, whether by Election, Donation, Succession, or by any other means, for it
is still the manner of the Government by S^pream Power, that makes them
properly Kings, and not the means of obtaining their Crowns, which I think is a
full answer to all his whole Hypothesis, and Discourse about Adams Royal
Authority, as the Fountain from which all Princes were to derive theirs; And he
might have spared the trouble of speaking so much, as he does, up and down of
Heirs and Inheritance, if to make any one Properly a King, needs no more but
Governing by Supreme Power, and it matters not by what means he came by it.

79. By this notable way, our A -- may make Oliver as Properly King, as any one
else he could think of; And had he had the Happiness, to live under Massanellos
Government, he could not by this his own Rule, have forborne to have done Homage
to him, with O King live for ever, since the manner of his Government by
Supreme Power, made him Properly King, who was but the day before, Properly a
Fisherman; And if Don Quixot, had taught his Squire to govern with Supreme
Authority, our A -- no doubt could have made a most Loyal Subject, in Sancho
Pancha's Island, and he must have deserved some Preferment in such Governments,
since I think he is the first Politician, who pretending to settle Government
upon its true Basis, and to establish the Thrones of lawful Princes ever told
the World, that he was Properly a King, whose manner of Government was by
Sapream Power, by what means soever he obtained it, which in plain English, is
to say, that Regal and Supreme Power, is properly and truly his, who can by any
means seize upon it, and if this be, to be Properly a King, I wonder how he
came to think of, or where he will find, an Usurper.

80. This is so strange a Doctrine, that the surpize of it, has made me pass
by, without their due reflection, the contradictions he runs into, by making
sometimes Inheritance alone, sometimes only Grant or Inheritance, sometimes
only Inheritance or Usurpation, sometimes all these three, and at last Election
or any other means, added to them, the ways whereby Adams Royal Authority, that
is, his right to Supreme Rule, could be conveyed down to future Kings and
Governors, so as to give them a Title to the Obedience and Subjection of the
People, but these contradictions lie so open, that the very reading of our A --
s own words, will discover them to any ordinary understanding; and though what
I have quoted out of him, with abundance more of the same Strain and Coherence
which might be found in him, might well excuse me from any farther trouble in
this Argument, yet having proposed to my self, to examine the main parts of his
Doctrine, I shall a little more particularly consider how Inheritanee, Grant,
Usurpation, or Ele^tion, can any way make out Government in the World upon his
Principles, or derive any lawful Title to any ones Obedience, from this Regal
Authority of Adam, had it been never so well proved, that he had been Absolute
Monarch, and Lord of the whole World.

CHAP. IX. Of Monarchy, by Inheritance from Adam.
81. THough it be never so plain, that there ought to be Government in the
World, nay should all Men be of our A -- s mind, that divine appointment had
ordained it to be Monarchical, yet since Men cannot obey any thing, that cannot
command, and Ideas of Government in the Phansy, though never so perfect, never
so right, cannot give Laws, nor prescribe Rules to the Actions of Men; It would
be of no behoof for the settling of Order, and Establishment of Government in
its Exercise and Use amongst Men, unless there were a way also taught how to
know the Person, to whom it belonged to have this Power, and Exercise this
Dominion over others. It Is in vain then to talk of Subjection and Obedience,
without telling us whom we are to obey; For were I never so fully persuaded,
that there ought to be Magistracy and Rule in the World, yet I am never the
less at Liberty still, till it appears who is the Person, that has Right to my
Obedience, since if there be no marks to know him by, and distinguish him, that
has Right to Rule from other Men, it may be my self, as well as any other; And
therefore though Submission to Government be every ones duty, yet since that
signifies nothing, but submitting to the Direction and Laws of such Men, as
have Authority to command, it is not enough to make a Man a Subject, to convince
him that there is Regal Power in the World, but there must be ways of
designing, and knowing the Person to whom this Regal Power of Right belongs,
and a Man can never be obliged in conscience to submit to any Power, unless he
can be satisfied who is the Person, who has a Right to Exercise that Power over
him. If this were not so, there would be no distinction between Pirates and
Lawful Princes, he that has Force is without any more ado to be obeyed, and
Crowns and Scepters would become the Inheritance only of Violence and Rapin,
Men too might as often and as innocently change their Governors, as they do
their Physicians, if the Person cannot be known, who has a right to direct me,
and whose Prescriptions, I am bound to follow; To settle therefore Men's
Consciences under an Obligation to Obedience, it is necessary that they know not
only that there is a Power somewhere in the World, but the Person who by Right
is vested with this Power over them.

82. How Successful our A -- has been in his attempts, to set up a Monarchical
Absolute Power in Adam, the Reader may Judge by what has been already said, but
were that Absolute Monarchy as clear as our A -- would desire it, as I presume
it is the contrary, yet it could be of no use to the Govrenment of Mankind now
in the World, unless he also make out these two things.

First, That this Power of Adam was not to end with him, but was upon his
Decease conveyed entire to some other Person, and so on to Posterity.

Secondly, That the Princes and Rulers now on Earth, are possessed of this
Power of Adam, by a right way of conveyance derived to them.

83. If the first of these fail, the Power of Adam, were it never so great,
never so certain, will signify nothing to the present Government and Societies
in the World, but we must seek out some other Original of Power for the
Government of Polity's then this of Adam, or else there will be none at all in
the World. If the latter fail, it will destroy the Authority of the present
Governors, and absolve the People from Subjection to them, since they having no
better a Claim then others to that Power, which is alone the Fountain of all
Authority, can have no Title to Rule over them.

84. Our A -- having Phansied an Absolute Sovereignty in Adam, mentions several
ways of its conveyance to Princes, that were to be his Successors, but that
which he chiefly insists on, is, that of Inheritance, which occurs so often in
his several Discourses, and I having in the foregoing Chapter quoted several of
these passages, I shall not need here again to repeat them, this Sovereignty he
erects, as had been said upon a double Foundation, viz. that of Property, and
that of Fatherhood, one was the right he was supposed to have in all Creatures,
a right to possess the Earth with the Beasts, and other inferior Ranks of
things in it for his Private use, exclusive of all other Men. The other was the
Right he was supposed to have, to Rule and Govern Men, all the rest of Mankind.

85. In both these Rights, there being supposed an exclusion of all other Men,
it must be upon some reason peculiar to Adam, that they must both be founded.

That of his Property our A -- supposes, to arise from Gods immediate Donation,
Genesis 1. 28. and that of Fatherhood, from the Act of Begetting now in all
Inheritance, if the Heir succeed not to the reason, upon which his Fathers
Right was founded, he cannot succeed to the Right which followed from it; For
Example, Adam had a Right of Property in the Creatures, upon the Donation and
Grant of God Almighty, who was Lord and Proprietor of them all, let this be so
as our A -- tells us, yet upon his death, his Heir can have no Title to them,
no such right of Property in them, unless the same reason, viz. Gods Donation,
vested a right in the Heir too; for if Adam could have had no Property in, nor
use of, the Creatures without this positive Donation from God, and this
Donation, were only Personally to Adam, his Heir could have no right by it, but
upon his death, it must revert to God the Lord and Owner again; for positive
Grants give no Title farther then the express words convey it, and by which
only it is held, and thus, if as our A -- himself contends, that Donation, Genesis
1. 28. were made only to Adam, personally his Heir could not succeed to his
Property in the Creatures, and if it were a Donation to any but Adam, let it be
shown, that it was to his Heir in our A -- s Sense, i.e. to one of his Children
exclusive of all the rest.

86. But not to follow our A -- too far out of the way, the plain of the Case
is this, God having made Man, and Planted in him, as in all other Animals, a
strong desire of self Preservation, and furnished the World with things fit for
Food and Raiment, and other necessaries of Life, Subservient to his design,
that Man should live and abide for some time upon the the Face of the Earth,
and not that so curious and wonderful a piece of Workmanship by its own
negligence, or want of necessaries, should perish again, presently after a few
moments continuance: God, I say, having made Man and the World, thus spoke to
him, (that is) directed him by his Senses and Reason, as he did the inferior
Animals by their Sense, and Instinct which he had placed in them to that
purpose, to the use of those things, which were serviceable for his
subsistence, and gave him the means of his Preservation, and therefore I doubt
not, but before these words were pronounced, 1 Genesis 28. 29. If they must be
understood Literally to have been spoken, or without any such Verbal Donation,
Man had a right to a Use of the Creatures, by the Will and Grant of God, for
the desire, strong desire of Preserving his Life and Being, having been Planted
in him, as a Principle of Action by God himself, Reason, which was the voice of
God in him, could not but teach him and assure him, that pursuing that natural
Inclination he had to preserve his Being, he followed the Will of his Maker,
and therefore had a right to make use of those Creatures, which by his Reason
or Senses he could discover, would be serviceable thereunto, and thus Man's
Property in the Creatures, was founded upon the right he had, to make use of
those things that were necessary, or useful to his being.

87. This being the Reason and Foundation of Adams Property, gave the same
Title, on the same Ground, to all his Children, not only after his death, but
in his life time, so that here was no Privilege of his Heir above his other
Children, which could exclude them from an equal right, to the use of the
inferior Creatures, for the comfortable Preservation of their Beings. Which is
all the Property Man has in them, and so Adams Sovereignty built on Property,
or as our A -- calls it, Private Dominion comes to nothing. Every Man had a
right to the Creatures, by the same Title Adam had, viz. by the right every one
had to take care of, and provide for, their Subsistence, and thus Men had a
right in common, Adams Children in common with him. But if any one had began,
and made himself a Property in any particular thing, (which how he, or any one
else, could do, shall be shown in another place) that thing, that possession,
if he disposed not otherwise of it by his positive Grant, desc^nded Naturally
to his Children, and they had a right to succeed to it, and possess it.

88. It might reasonably be asked here, how come Children by this right of
possessing, before any other, the Properties of their Parents upon their
Decease, for it being Personally the Parents, when they dye, without actually
Transferring their Right to another, why does it not return again to the
commmon Stock of Mankind? 'Twill perhaps be answered, that common consent has
disposed of it to the Children Common Practice, we see indeed does so dispose
of it, but we cannot say, that it is the common consent of Mankind; for that
has never been asked, nor Actually given, and if common tacit Consent had
Established it, it would make but a positive and not natural Right of Children,
to Inherit the Goods of their Parents: But where the Practice is Universal,
it is reasonable to think the Cause is natural. The ground then I think to be
this; The first and strongest desire God Planted in Men, and wrought into the
very Principle of their nature, being that of self Preservation, is the
Foundation of a right to the Creatures for their particular support, and use of
each individual Person himself. But next to this, God Planted in Men a strong
desire also of Propagating their Kind, and continuing themselves in their
posterity, and this gives Children a Title, to share in the Property of their
Parents, and a Right to Inherit their Possessions, Men are not Proprietors of
what they have merely for themselves, their Children have a Title to part of
it, and have their Kind of Right joined with their Parent's, in the Possession
which comes to be wholly theirs, when death having put an end to their Parents
use of it, has taken them from their Possessions, and this we call
Inheritance: Men being by a like Obligation, bound to preserve what they have
begotten, as to preserve themselves, their issue come to have a Right in the
Goods they are possessed of. And that Children have such a Right is plain from
the Laws of God, and that Men are convinced, that Children have such a Right,
is Evident from the Law of the Land, both which Laws require Parents to provide
for their Children.

89. For Children being by the course of nature, born weak, and unable to
provide for themselves, they have by the appointment of God himself, who has
thus ordered the course of nature, a right to be nourished and maintained by
their Parents, nay a right not only to a bare Subsistence, but to the
conveniences and comforts of Life, as far as the conditions of their Parents
can afford it; And hence it comes, that when their Parents leave the World, and
so the care due to their Children ceases, the effects of it are to extend as
far as possibly they can, and the Provisions they have made in their Life time,
are understood to be intended as nature requires they should, for their
Children, whom after themselves, they are bound to provide for, though the
dying Parents, by express Words, declare nothing about them, nature appoints
the the descent of their Property to their Children, who thus come to have a
Title, and natural Right of ^nheritance to their Fathers Goods, which the rest
of Mankind cannot pretend to.

90. Were it not for this right of being nourished, and maintained by their
Parents, which God and nature has given to Children and obliged Parents to, as
a duty, it would, be reasonable, that the Father should Inherit the Estate of
his Son, and be preferred in the Inheritance before his Grand Child, for to the
Grand Father, there is due a long Score of care and expenses laid out upon the
Breeding and Education of his Son, which one would think in Justice ought to be
paid, but that having been done in Obedience to the same Law, whereby he
received Nourishment and Education from his own Parents, this Score of
Education received from a Man's Father, is paid by taking care and providing for
his own Children (is paid I say, as much as is required of payment by
alteration of Property, unless present necessity of the Parents require a
return of Goods for their necessary Support and Subsistence, for we are not now
speaking of that reverence, acknowledgment, respect and honor that is always
due from Children to their Parents, but of possessions and commodities of Life
valuable by Money;) But yet this debt to the Children, does not quite cancel
the Score due to the Father, but only is made by nature preferable to it; For
the debt a Man owes his Father, takes place and gives the Father a Right to
Inherit the Sons Goods, where for want of Issue, the Right of Children does not
exclude that ^itle. And therefore a Man having a Right to be maintained by his
Children where he needs it, and to enjoy also the comforts of Life from them,
when the necessary provision due to them and their Children will afford it, if
his Son dye without Issue, the Father has a right in nature to possess his
Goods, and Inherit his Estate (whatever the Municipal Laws of some Countries
may absurdly direct otherwise,) and so again his Children and their Issue from
him, or for want of such his Father and his Issue; But where no such are to be
found, i. e. no Kindred there we see the possessions of a Private Man, revert
to the community, and so in Politic Societies come into the hands of the public
Magistrate, but in the State of nature become again perfectly common, no body
having a right to Inherit them, nor can any one have a Property in them,
otherwise then in other things common by nature, of which I shall speak in its
due place.

91. I have been the larger, in showing upon what ground Children have a Right
to succeed to the Possession of their Fathers Properties, not only because by
it, it will appear, that if Adam had a Property (a Titular insignificant
useless Property; for it could be no better, for he was bound to nourish and
maintain his Children and Posterity out of it) in the whole Earth and its
Product, yet all his Children coming to have by the Law of nature and Right of
Inheritance a joint Title, and Right of Property in it after his death, it
could convey no right of Sovereignty to any one of his Posterity over the rest,
since every one having a right of Inheritance to his portion, they might enjoy
their Inheritance, or any part of it in common, or share it, or some parts of
it, by Division, as it best liked them, but no one could pretend to the whole
Inheritance, or any Sovereignty supposed to accompany it, since a right of
Inheritance gave every one of the rest, as well as any one, a Title to share in
the Goods of his Father. Not only upon this account, I say, have I been so
particular in examining the reason of Childrens Inheriting the Property of
their Fathers, but also because it will give us farther Light in the
Inheritance of Rule and Power, which in Countries where their particular
Municipal Laws give the whole Possession of Land entirely to the first Born,
and Descent of Power has gone so to Men by this Custom, some have been apt to
be deceived into an Opinion, that there was a Natural or Divine Right of
Primogeniture to both Estate and Power, and that the Inheritance of both Rule
over Men and Property in things, sprang from the same Original, and were to
descend by the same Rules.

92. Property, whose Original is from the Right a Man has to use any of the
inferior Creatures, for the subsistence and comfort of his Life, is for the
benefit and sole advantage of the Proprietor, so that he may even destroy the
thing, that he has Property in by his use of it, where need requires; But
Government being for the Preservation of every Man's Right and Property, by
Preserving him from the Violence or Injury of others, is for the good of the
Governed; For the Magistrate Sword, being for a Terror to evil Doers, and by
that Terror to enforce Men to observe the positive Laws of the Society, made
conformable to the Laws of Nature, for the Public good, i. e. the good of every
particular Member of that Society, as far as by common Rules, it can be
provided for; the Sword is not given the Magistrate for his own good alone.

93. Children therefore, as has been showed, by the dependence they have on
their Parents for Subsistence, have a Right of Inheritance to their Fathers
Property, as that which belongs to them for their Proper good and behoof, and
therefore are fitly termed Goods, wherein the first Born has not a sole or
peculiar Right by any Law of God and Nature. His, and his Brethrens, being
equally founded on that Right they had to maintenance, support and comfort from
their Parents, and on nothing else; But Government being for the benefit of the
Governed, and not the sole advantage of the Governors (but only for theirs with
the rest, as they make a part of that Politic Body, each of whose Parts and
Members are taken care of, and directed in their peculiar Function for the good
of the whole, by the Laws of the Society,) cannot be Inherited by the same
Title, that Children have to the Goods of their Fathers. The Right a Son has to
be maintained and provided with the necessaries and conveniences of Life out of
his Fathers Stock, gives him a Right to succeed to his Fathers Property for his
own good, but this can give him no Right to succeed also to the Rule, which his
Father had over other Men; all that a Child has Right to claim from his Fathers
is Nourishment and Education, and the things nature furnishes for the support
of Life, but he has no Right to demand Rule or Dominion from him: He can
subsist and receive from him the Portion of good things, and advantages of
Education naturally due to him, without Empire and Dominion; That (if his
Father has any) was vested in him, for the good and behoof of others, and
therefore the Son cannot Claim or Inherit it by a Title, which is founded wholly
on his own private good and advantage.

94. We must know how the first Ruler, from whom any one claims came by his
Authority, upon what ground any one has Empire, what his Title is to it, before
we can know who has a right to succeed him in it, and inherit it from him; If
the Agreement and Consent of Men first gave a Scepter into any ones hand, or
put a Crown on his Head, that also must direct its descent and conveyance; for
the same Authority, that made the first a Lawful Ruler, must make the Second
too, and so give Right of Succession; And in this Case Inheritance or
Primogeniture, can in its self have no Right, no pretense, to it, any farther
then that Consent, which Established the Form of the Government, has so
settled the Succession; and thus we see the Succession of Crowns, in several
Countries places it on different Heads, and he comes by right of Succession, to
be a Prince in one place, who would be a Subject in another.

95. If God, by his positive Grant and revealed Declaration, first gave Rule
and Dominion to any Man, he that will Claim by that Title, must have the same
positive Grant of God for his Succession; for if that has not directed the
Course of its descent and conveyance down to others, no body can succeed to
this Title of the first Ruler, and hereto Children have no right of
Inheritance; and Primogeniture can lay no Claim, unless God the Author of this
Constitution has so ordained it. Thus we see the pretensions of Saul's Family,
who received his Crown from the immediate Appointment of God, ended with his
Reign; And David by the same Title that Saul Reignd, viz. Gods appointment,
succeeded in his Throne, to the exclusion of Jonathan, and all pretensions of
Paternal Inheritance. And if Solomon had a right to succ^ed his Father, it must
be by some other Title, then that of Primogeniture. A Cadet or Sisters Son,
must have the Preference in Succession, if he has the same Title the first
Lawful Prince had. And in Dominion that has its Foundation only in the positive
appointment of God himself, Benjamin the youngest, must have the Inheritance of
the Crown, if God so direct as well as one of that Tribe had the first
Possession.

96. If Paternal Right, the Act of Begetting, give a Man Rule and Dominion,
Inheritance or Primogeniture can give no Title; for he that cannot succeed to
his Fathers Title, which was Begetting, cannot succeed to that Power over his
Brethren, which his Father had by Paternal Right over them, but I shall have
more to say on this by and by. This is plain in the mean time, that any
Government whether supposed to be, at first founded in Paternal Right, Consent
of the People, or the Positive Appointment of God himself, which can supersede
either of the other, and so begin a new Government upon a new Foundation, I
say, any Government began upon either of these, can by Right of Succession come
to those only, who have the Title of him, they succeed to. Power founded on
Contract, can descend only to him, who has Right by that Contract, Power
founded on Begetting, he only can have that Begets, and Power founded on the
positive Grant or Donation of God, he only can have by Right of Succession, to
whom that Grant directs it.

97. From what I have said, I think this is clear, that a Right to the use of
the Creatures, being founded Originally in the Right a Man has to subsist and
enjoy the conveniences of Life, and the natural Right Children have to Inherit
the goods of their Parents, being founded in the Right they have to the same
Subsistence and Commodities of Life, out of the Stock of their Parents, who are
therefore taught by natural Love and Tenderness to provide for them, as a part
of themselves, and all this being only for the good of the Proprietor or Heir;
It can be no reason for Childrens Inheriting of Rule and Dominion, which has
another Original and a different end, nor can Primogeniture have any Pretense
to a Right of solely Inheriting either Property or Power, as we shall in, its
due place, see more fully, it is enough to have showed here, that Adams Property
or Private Dominion, could not convey any Sovereignty or Rule to his Heir, who
not having a Right to Inherit all his Fathers Possessions, could not thereby
come to have any Sovereignty over his Brethren, and therefore if any
Sovereignty, on account of his Property, had been vested in Adam, which in
Truth there was not; yet it would have died with him.

98. As Adam's Sovereignty, if he had by virtue of being Proprietor of the
whole World, had any Authority over Men, could not have been Inherited by any
of his Children over the rest, because they had all Title to divide the
Inheritance, and every one had a Right to a Portion of his Fathers Possessions,
so neither could Adam's Sovereignty by Right of Fatherhood, if any such he had,
descend to any one of his Children; for it being, in our A -- s account, a
Right acquired by Begetting to Rule over those he had begotten, it was not a
Power possible to be Inherited, because the Right being consequent to, and
built on, an Act perfectly Personal, made that Power so too, and impossible to
be Inherited for Paternal Power, being a natural Right, arising only from the
relation of Father and Son, is as impossible to be Inherited as the relation it
self, and a Man may pretend as well to Inherit the conjugal Power, the Husband,
whose Heir he is, had over his Wife, as he can to Inherit the Paternal Power of
a Father over his Children; For the Power of the Husband being founded on
Contract, and the Power of the Father on Begetting, he may as well Inherit the
Power obtained by the conjugal Contract, which was only Personal, as he may the
Power obtained by Begetting, which could reach no farther then the Person of
the Begetter, unless begetting can be a Title to Power in him, that does not
beget.

99. Which makes it a reasonable question to ask, whether Adam dying before Eve
his Heir, suppose Cain or Seth should have had by Right of Inheriting Adam's
Fatherhood, Sovereign Power over Eve his Mother; for Adams Fatherhood, being
nothing but a Right he had to Govern his Children, because he begot them, he
that Inherits Adam's Fatherhood, inherits nothing even in our A -- s sense, but
the the Right Adam had to Govern his Children, because he begot them, so that
the Monarchy of the Heir would not have taken in Eve, or if it did, it being
nothing but the Fatherhood of Adam, descended by Inheritance, the Heir must
have Right to Govern Eve, because Adam begot her; For Fatherhood is nothing
else.

100. Perhaps it will be said with our A --, that a Man can alien his Power
over his Child, and what may be transferred by compact, may be possessed by
Inheritance, I answer, a Father cannot Alien the Power he has over his Child,
he may perhaps to some degrees forfeit it, but cannot transfer it, and if any
other Man acquire it, it is not by the Fathers Grant, but some Act of his own;
For example, a Father, unnaturally careless of his Child, sells or gives him to
another Man; and he again exposes him; a third Man finding him, breeds up
cherishes and provides for him as his own: I think in this Case, no body will
doubt but that the greatest part of filial Duty and Subjection was here owing,
and to be paid to, this Foster Father, and if any thing could be demanded from
him, by either of the other, it could be only due to his natural Father, who
perhaps might have forfeited his Right to much of that Duty comprehended in the
command, Honor your Parents, but could transfer none of it to another, he that
purchased, and neglected the Child got by his Purchase and Grant of the Father,
no Title to Duty or Honor from the Child, but only he acquired it, who by his
own Authority, performing the Office and Care of a Father, to the Forlorn and
Perishing Infant, made himself by Paternal Care, a Title to proportionable
Degrees of Paternal Power. This will be more easily admitted upon consideration
of the nature of Paternal Power, for which I refer my Reader to the 2 d Book.

101. To return to the Argument in hand, this is evident; That Paternal Power
arising only from Begetting, for in that our A -- places it alone, can neither
be transferred, nor inherited; And he that does not beget, can no more have
Paternal Power which arises from thence, then he can have a Right to any thing
who performs not the condition, to which only it is annexed; If one should ask
by what Law, has a Father Power over his Children, it will be answered no doubt
by the Law of nature, which gives such a Power over them, to him that begets
them; If one should ask likewise by what Law does our A -- s Heir come by a
Right to Inherit, I think it would be answered by the Law of nature too, for I
find not that our A -- brings one word of Scripture to prove the Right of such
an Heir he speaks of, why then the Law of nature, gives Fathers Paternal Power
over their Children, because they did beget them, and the same Law of nature
gives the same Paternal Power to the Heir over his Brethren, who did not beget
them whence it follows, that either the Father has not his Paternal Power by
begetting, or else that the Heir has it not at all; For it is hard to understand
how the Law of nature which is the Law of reason, can give the Paternal Power
to the Father over his Children, for the only reason of Begetting, and to the
first born over his Brethren without this only reason, i. e. for no reason at
all, and if the Eldest by the Law of nature can inherit thi^ Paternal Power,
without the only reason that gives a Title to it, so may the Youngest as well
as he, and a stranger as well as either, for where there is no reason for any
one, as there is not, but for him that begets, all have an equal Title am sure
our A -- offers no reason, and when any body does, we shall see whether it will
hold or no.

102. In the mean time it is as good Sense to say, that by the Law of nature, a
Man has Right to inherit the Property of another, because he is of Kin to him,
and is known to be of his Blood, and therefore by the same Law of nature, an
utter Stranger to his Blood, has Right to inherit his Estate; As to say that by
the Law of nature he that begets them, has P^ternal Power over his Children,
and therefore by the Law of nature, the H^^r that begets them not, has this
Paternal Power over them; or supposing the Law of the Land gave Absolute Power
over their Children, to such only who nursed them, and fed their Children
themselves, could any body pretend, that this Law gave any one who did no such
thing, Absolute Power over those, who were not his Children.

103. When therefore it can be showed, that conjugal Power can belong to him
that is not an Husband, it will also I believe be proved, that our A -- s
Paternal Power acquired by begetting, may be inherited by a Son, and that a
Brother as Heir to his Fathers Power, may have Paternal Power over his
Brethren, and by the same Rule conjugal Power to, but till then, I think we may
rest satisfied, that the Paternal Power of Adam, this Sovereign Authority of
Fatherhood, were there any such, could not descend to, nor be inherited by, his
next Heir. Fatherly Power I easily grant our A -- if it will do him any good,
can never be lost, because it will be as long in the World as there are
Fathers, but none of them will have Adams Paternal Power, or derive theirs from
him, but every one will have his own, by the same Title Adam had his, viz. by
Begetting, but not by Inheritance or Succession, no more then Husbands have
their conjugal Power by Inheritance from Adam; And thus we see as Adam had no
such Property, no such Paternal Power as gave him Sovereign Jurisdiction over
Mankind; so likewise his Sovereignty built upon either of these Titles, if he
had any such, could not have descended to his Heir, but must have ended with
him, Adam therefore, as has been proved, being neither Monarch, nor his
imaginary Monarchy, hereditable, the Power which is now in the World, is not
that which was Adams, since all that Adam could have upon our A -- s grounds,
either of Property or Fatherhood, necessarily dyed with him, and could not be
conveyed to Posterity by Inheritance; In the next place, we will consider
whether Adam had any such Heir, to inherit his Power as our A -- talks of.

CHAP. X. Of the Heir to Monarchical Power of Adam.
104. OUR A -- tells us, O. 253. That it is a truth undeniable, that there
cannot be any multitude of Men whatsoever, either great or small, though
gathered together from the several corners and remotest Regions of the World,
but that in the same Multitude considered by its self, there is one Man amongst
them, that in nature has a Right to be King of all the rest, as being the next
Heir to Adam and all the other Subject to him, every Man by nature is a King or
a Subject, and again, p. 20. If Adam himself were still living, and now ready
to dye, it is certain that there is one Man, and but one in the World who is
next Heir, let this Multitude of Men be, if our A -- pleases, all the Princes
upon the Earth, there will then be by our A -- s Rule, one amongst them, that
in nature has a Right to be King of all the rest, as being the right Heir to
Adam; An excellent way to Establish the Titles of Princes, and settle the
Obedience of their Subjects, by setting up an Hundred or perhaps, a Thousand
Titles, if there be so many Princes in the World, against any King now Reigning
upon our A -- s grounds, as good as his own. If this Right of Heir carry any
weight with it, if it be the Ordinance of God as our A -- seems to tell us, O.
244. must not all be Subject to it, from the highest to the lowest, can those
who wear the name of Princes, without having the Right of being Heirs to Adam,
demand Obedience from their Subjects by this Title, and not be bound to pay it
by the same Law? either Governments in the World are not to be claimed and held
by this Title of Adams Heir, and then the starting of it is to no purpose, the
being or not being Adams. Heir signifies nothing as to the Title of Dominion;
Or if it really be, as our A -- says, the true Title to Government and
Sovereignty, the first thing to be done, is to find out this true Heir of Adam,
seat him in his ^hrone, and then all the Kings and Princes of the World come
and resign up their Crowns and Scepters to him, as things that belong no more
to them, then to any of their Subjects.

105. For either this Right in nature, of Adams Heir, to be King over all the
Race of Men, (for altogether they make one Multitude) is a right not necessary
to the making of a Lawful King, and so there may be Lawful Kings without it,
and then Kings Titles and Power depend not on it, or else all the Kings in the
World but one are not Lawful Kings, and so have no Right to Obedience, either
this Title of Heir to Adam is that whereby Kings hold their Crown, and have a
Right to Subjection from their Subjects, and then one only can have it, and the
rest being Subjects can require no Obedience from other Men, who are but their
fellow Subjects, or else it is not the Title whereby Kings Rule, and have a
Right to Obedience from their Subjects, and then Kings are Kings without it.
And this Dream of the natural Sovereignty of Adams Heir is of no use to
Obedience and Government; For if Kings have a Right to Dominion, and the
Obedience of their Subjects who are not, nor can possibly be, Heirs to Adam,
what use is there of such a Title, when we are obliged to obey without it? If
they have not, we are discharged of our Obedience to them, for he that has no
Right to command, I am under no Obligation to ob^y, and we are all free till
our A -- or any body for him, will show us Adams right Heir; If there be but
on^ Heir of Adam, there can be but one Lawful King in the World, and no body in
conscience can be obliged to Obedience, till it be resolved who that is; for it
may be any one who is not known to be of a Younger House, and all others have
equal Titles. If there be more then one Heir of Adam, every one is his Heir,
and so every one has Regal Power; for if two Sons can be Heirs together, then
all the Sons are equally Heirs, and so all are Heirs, being all Sons, or Sons
Sons of Adam, betwixt these two the Right of Heir cannot stand; for by it
either but one only Man, or all Men are Kings, and take which you please, it
dissolves the Bonds of Government and Obedience, since if all Men are Heirs,
they can owe Obedience to no body; if only one, no body can be obliged to pay
Obedience to him, till he be known and his Title made out.

CHAP. XI. Who Heir?
106. THE great question which in all Ages has disturbed Mankind, and brought
on them the greatest part of those Mischiefs which have ruined Cities,
depopulated Countries, and disordered the Peace of the World, has been not
whether there be Power in the World, nor whence it came, but who should have
it; The se^tling of this therefore being of no smaller moment then the security
of Princes, and the peace and welfare of their Estates and Kingdoms, a writer
of Politics, one would think, should take great care in settling this point, and
be very clear in it; For if this remain disputable, all the rest will be to
very little purpose. And by dressing up Power with all the Splendour and
Temptation Absoluteness can add to it, without showing who has a right to have
it, is only to give a greater edg to Man's natural Ambition, which of it self,
is but too apt to be intemperate, and to set Men on the more eagerly to
Scramble, and so lay a sure and lasting Foundation of endless contention and
disorder instead of that Peace and Tranquillity, which is the business of
Government, and the end of Human Society.

107. This our A -- is more then ordinarily obliged to do, because he affirming
that the Assignment of Civil Power, is by Divine institution, has made the
conveyance as well as the Power it self Sacred, so that no Power, no
consideration can divert it from that Person, to whom by this Divine Right, it
is assigned, no necessity or contrivance can substitute another Person in his
room. For if the Assignment of Civil Power be by Divine Institution and Adams
Heir, he to whom it is thus Assigned, as we see in the foregoing Chapter, our A
-- tells us, it would be as much Sacrilege for any one to be King, who was not
Adams Heir, as it would have been amongst the Jews, for any one to have been
Priest, who had not been of Aarons posterity; For not only the Priesthood in
general being by Divine Institution, but the Assignment of it to the Sole Line
and Posterity of Aaron, made it impossible to be enjoyed or exercised by any
one, but those Persons who are the Offspring of Aaron, whose succession
therefore was carefully observed, and by that the Persons who had a Right to
the Priesthood certainly known.

108. Let us see then what care our A -- has taken, to make us know who is this
Heir, who by Divine Institution, has a Right to be King over all Men. The first
account of him we meet with is, p. 12. in these words; This Subjection of
Children, being the Fountain of all Regal Authority, by the Ordination of God
himself; it follows, that Civil Power not only in general, is by Divine
Institution, but even the Assignment of it specifically to the Eldest Parents:
Matters of such consequence as this is, should be in plain words, as little
liable as might be, to Doubt or Equivocation, and I think if Language be
capable of expressing any thing destinctly and clearly, that of Kindred, and
the several Degrees of nearness of Blood, is one; It were therefore to be
wished, that our A -- had used a little more intelligible expressions here,
that we might have better known who it is, to whom the Assignment of Civil
Power, is made by Divine Institution, or at least would have told us what he
meant by Eldest Parent; for I believe if Land had been Assigned or Granted to
him, and the Eldest Parents of his Family, he would have thought it had needed
an Interpreter, and 'twould scarce have been known to whom next it belonged.

109. In Propriety of Speech, and certainly Propriety of Speech is necessary in
a discourse of this nature, Eldest Parents signifies either the Eldest Men and
Women that have had Children, or those who have longest had Issue, and then our
A -- s assertion will be, that those Fathers and Mothers who have been longest
in the World, or longest Fruitful, have by Divine Institution, a Right to Civil
Power; If there be any absurdity in this, our A -- must answer for it, and if
hi^ meaning be different from my explication be is to be blamed. that he would
not speak it plainly; This I am sure, Parents cannot signify Heirs Male nor
Eld^st Parents, an Infant Child, who yet may sometimes be the true Heir; if
there can be but one. And we are hereby still as much at a loss, who Civil
Power belongs to, notwithstanding this Assignment by Divine Institution, as if
there had been no such Assignment at all, or our A -- had said nothing of it.
This of Eldest Parents leaving us more in the dark, who by Divine Institution,
has a Right to Civil Power, then those who never heard any thing at all of
Heir, or descent, of which our A -- is so full, and though the chief matter of
his Writings be to teach Obedience to those who have a Right to it, which he
tells us is conveyed by descent, yet who those are to whom this Right by
descent belongs, he leaves like the Philosophers Stone in Politics, out of the
reach of any one to discover from his Writings.

110. This obscurity cannot be imputed to want of Language in so great a Master
of Style as Sr. Robt. is, when he is resolved with himself what he would say,
and therefore I fear finding how hard it would be to settle Rules of descent by
divine Institution, and how little it would be to his purpose, or conduce to
the clearing and establishing the Tit^es of Princes, if such Rules of descent
were settled, he chose rather to content himself with doubtful and general
terms, which might make no ill sound in Men's Ears, who were willing to be
pleased with them, rather then offer any clear Rules of descent of this
Fatherhood of Adam, by which Men's Consciences might be satisfied to whom it
descended and know the Persons who had a Right to Regal Power and with it to
their Obedience.

111. How else is it possible that laying so much stress as he does upon
descent, and Adams Heir, next Heir, true Heir, he should never tell us what
Heir means, nor the way to know who the next or true Heir is: This I do not
remember he does any where expressly handle, but where it comes in his way very
warily and doubtfully touch, though it be so necessary that without it all
discourses of Government and Obedience upon his Principles would be to no
purpose, and Fatherly Power, never so well made out, will be of no use to any
body; hence, he tells us, O. 244. That not only the Constitution of Power in
general, but the limitation of it to one kind (i. e.) Monarchy and the
determination of it to the individual Person and Line of Adam are all three
Ordinances of God, neither Eve, nor her Children could either limit Adams Power
or join others with him, and what was given unto Adam was given in his Person
to his Posterity; Here again our A -- informs us, that the Divine Ordinance
has limited the descent of Adams Monarchical Power, to whom? To Adams Line and
Posterity, says our A --, a notable Limitation, a Limitation to all Mankind;
for if our A -- can find any one amongst Mankind that is not of the Line and
Posterity of Adam, he may perhaps tell him who this next Heir of Adam is, but
for us I despair, how this Limitation of Adams Empire to his Line and Posterity
will help us to sind out one Heir; This Limitation indeed of our A -- will save
those the labor who would look for him amongst the Race of Bruits, if any such
there were: but will very little contribute to the discovery of one next Heir
amongst Men, though it make a short and easy determination of the question
about the descent of Adams Regal Power, by telling us, that the Line and
Posterity of Adam is to have it, that is in plain English, any one may have it,
since there is no Person living that has not the Title of being of the Line
and Posterity of Adam, and while it keeps there, it keeps within our A -- s
limitation by Gods Ordinance. Indeed, p. 19. he tells us that such Heirs are
not only Lords of their own Children, but of their Brethren, whereby, and by
the words following, which we shall consider anon, he seems to insinuate that
the Eldest Son is Heir, but he no where, that I know, says it in direct words,
but by the instances of Cain and Jacob that there follow, we may allow this to
be so far his Opinion concerning Heirs, that where there are diverse Children,
the Eldest Son has the Right to be Heir; That Primogeniture cannot give any
Title to Paternal Power we have already showed; That a Father may have a
natural Right to some kind of Power over his Children, is easily granted, but
that an Elder Brother has so over his Brethren remains to be proved, God or
Nature has not any where, that; I know, placed such jurisdiction in the first
Born, nor can Reason find any such natural Superiority amongst Brethren. The
Law of Moses gave a double Portion of the Goods and Poss^ssions to the Eldest,
but we find not any where that naturally, or by Gods Institution, Superiority
or Dominion belonged to him, and the instances there brought by our A --, are
but slender Proofs of a Right to Civil Power and Dominion in the first born,
and do rather show the contrary.

112. His words are in the forecited place: And therefore we find God told Cain
of his Brother Abel; His desire shall be Subject unto thee, and thou shall Rule
over him. To which I answer 1o These words of God to Cain, are by many
Interpreters with great Reason understood in a quite different Sense then what
our A -- uses them in; 2o, Whatever was meant by them it could not be, that
Cain, as Elder, had a natural Dominion over Abel; for the words are
conditional: If thou do well and so personal to Cain, and whatever was
signified by them, did depend on his Carriage and not follow his Birthright,
and therefore could by no means be an Establishment of Dominion in the first
born in general; for before this Abel had his distinct Territories by Right of
Private Dominion, as our A -- himself confesses, O. 210. which he could not
have had to the prejudice of the Heirs Title, if by divine Institution, Cain as
Heir were to inherit all his Fathers Dominion. 3o If this were intended by God
as the Charter of Primogeniture, and the Grant of Dominion to Elder Brothers in
general, as such by Right of Inheritance, we might expect it should have
included all his Brethren; for we may well suppose, Adam from whom the World
was to be peopled by this time, that these were grown up to be Men, had more
Sons, then these two, whereas Abel himself is not so much as named, and the
words in the Original, can scarce with any good construction, be applied to
him; 4o, It is too much to build a Doctrine of so mighty consequence upon so
doubtful and obscure a place of Scripture, which may be well, nay better,
understood in a quite different Sense, and so can be but an ill Proof, being as
doubtful as the thing to be proved by it, especially when there is nothing else
in Scripture or Reason, to be found that favors or supports it.

113. It follows, p. 19. Accordingly when Jacob bought his Brothers
Birthright, Isaac Blessed him thus; be Lord over thy Brethren, and let the
Sons of thy Mother bow before thee, another instance I take it, brought by our.
A -- to evince Dominion due to Birthright, and an admirable one it is; for it
must be no ordinary way of reasoning in a Man, that is pleading for the natural
Power of Kings, and against all compact to bring for Proof of it, an example
where his own account of it, founds all the right upon compact, and settles
Empire in the Younger Brother, unless buying and selling be no compact; for he
tells us, when Jacob bought his Brothers Birthright; But passing by that, let
us consider the History it self, with what ufe our A -- makes of it, and we
shall find these following mistakes about it.

1o. That our A -- reports this, as if Isaac had given Jacob this Blessing,
immediately upon his Purchasing the Birthright; for he says, when Jacob
bought, Isaac Blessed him, which is plainly otherwise in the Scripture, for it
appears there was a distance of time between, and if we will take the Story in
the order it lies, it must be no small distance; All Isaacs Sojourning in
Gerar, and Transactions with Abimelech, Genesis 26. coming between, Rebeka being
then Beautiful and consequently young, but Isaac when he Blessed Jacob, was old
and decrepit; And Esau also complains of Jacob, Genesis 27. 36. that two times he
had Supplanted him, he took away my Birthright, says he, and behold now he
has taken away my Blessing; words, that I think, signifies distance of time,
and difference of Action.

2o. Another mistake of our A -- s, is, that he supposes Isaac gave Jacob the
Blessing, and bid him be Lord over his Brethren, because he had the Birth
right, for our A -- brings this example to prove, that he that has the
Birthright, has thereby a right to be Lord over his Brethren; But it is also
manifest by the Text, that Isaac had no consideration of Jacobs having bought
the Birth right, for when he Blessed him, he considered him not as Jacob, but
took him for Esau, nor did Esau understand any such connection between
Birthright and the Blessing, for he says, he has Supplanted me these two
times, he took away my Birthright, and behold now he has taken away my
Blessing, whereas had the Blessing, which was to be Lord over his Brethren,
belonged to the Birthright, Esau could not have complained of this second as a
Cheat, Jacob having got nothing but what Esau had sold him, when he sold him
his Birthright, so that it is plain, Dominion if these words signify it, was
not understood to belong to the Birthright.

114. And that in those days of the Patriarchs Dominion was not understood to
be the Right of the Heir, but only a greater Portion of goods, is plain from
Genesis 21. 10. for Sarah taking Isaac to be Heir, says, cast out this Bondwoman
and her Son, for the Son of this Bondwoman, shall not be Heir with my Son,
whereby could be meant nothing, but that he should not have a pretense to an
equal share of his Fathers Estate after his death, but should have his Portion
presently, and be gone. Accordingly, we read, Genesis 25. 5, 6. That Abraham gave
all that he had unto Isaac, but unto the Sons of the Concubines which Abraham
had, Abraham gave Gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his Son, while he yet
lived; That is, Abraham having given Portions to all his other Sons and sent
them away, that which he had reserved, being the greatest part of his
substance, Isaac as Heir Possessed after his death, but by being Heir, he had
no Right to be Lord over his Brethren; For if he had, why should Sarah desire
to rob him of one of his Subjects, his Slaves, by desiring to have him sent
away.

115. Thus as under the Law, the Privilege of Birthright, was nothing but a
double Portion, so we see that before Moses in the Patriarchs time, from whence
our A -- pretends to take his model, there was no knowledge, no thought that
Birthright gave Rule or Empire, Paternal or Kingly Authority, to any one over
his Brethren, which if it be not plain enough in the Story of Isaac and
Ishmael, let them look into 1 Chronicles. 5. 12. and there he may read these words,
Ruben was the first Born, but for as much as he desiled his Fathers Bed, his
Birthright was given unto the Sons of Joseph, the Son of Israeel, and the
Geneology is not to be reckoned after the Birthright; For Judah, prevailed
above his Brethren, and of him came the chief Ruler, but the Birthright was
Joseph's, and what this Birthright was, Jacob Blessing Joseph, Genesis 58. 22.
tells us in these words, Moreover I have given thee one Portion above thy
Brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite, with my Sword and with
my Bow, whereby it is not only plain, that the Birthright was nothing but a
double Portion, but the Text in Chron. is express against our A -- s Doctrine,
shows that Dominion was no part of the Birthright; for it tells us that Joseph
had the Birthright, but Judah the Dominion; But one would think our A -- were
very fond of the very name of Birthright, when he brings this instance of
Jacob and Esau, to prove that Dominion belongs to the Heir over his Brethren.

116. 1o. Because it will be but an ill example to prove, that Dominion by Gods
Ordination, belonged to the Eldest Son, because Jacob the Youngest here had it,
let him come by it how he would; For if it prove any thing, it can only prove
against our A --, that the Assignment of Dominion to the Eldest, is not by
Divine Institution, which would then be unalterable; For if by the Law of God,
or Nature, Absolute Power and Empire belongs to the Eldest Son and his Heirs,
so that they are Supreme Monarchs, and all the rest of their Brethren Slaves,
our A -- gives us reason to doubt, whether the Eldest Son has a Power to part
with it, to the prejudice of his Posterity, since he tells us, O. 158. that in
Grants and Gifts that have their Original from God or nature, no inferior Power
of Man can limit, or make any Law of Prescription against them.

117. 2o. Because this place, Genesis 27. 29. brought by our A -- concerns not at
all, the Dominion of one Brother over the other, nor the Subjection of Esau to
Jacob; for it is plain in the History, that Esau was never Subject to Jacob, but
lived a part in Mount Seir, where he founded a distinct People and Government,
and was himself Prince over them, as much as Jacob was in his own Family. The
words if one consider thy Brethren, and thy Mothers Sons in them, can never be
understood literally of Esau, or the Personal Dominion of Jacob over him; for
the words, Sons and Brethren, could not be used literally by Isaac, who knew
Jacob had only one Brother; And these words are so far from being true in a
litteral Sense, or Establishing any Dominion in Jacob over Esau, that in the
Story we find the quite contrary, for Genesis 32. Jacob several times calls Esau
Lord, and himself his Servant, and Genesis 33. he bowed himself seven times to the
ground to Esau, whether Esau then were a Subject and Vassal, (nay as our A --
tells us, all Subjects are Slaves) to Jacob, and Jacob his Sovereign Prince by
Birth right; I leave the Reader to judge and believe if he can, that these
words of Isaac be Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers Sons bow down to
thee, confirmed Jacob in a Sovereignty over Esau, upon the account of the
Birthright he had got from him.

118. He that reads the Story of Jacob and Esau, will find there was never any
Jurisdicton or Authority, that either of them had over the other after their
Fathers death, they lived with the Friendship and Equallity of Brethren,
neither Lord, neither Slave to his Brother, but Independent each of other, were
both heads of their distinct Families, where they received no Laws from one
another, but lived seperately, and were the Roots out of which sprang two
distinct People, under two distinct Governments. This Blessing then of Isaac,
whereon our A -- would build the Dominion of the Elder Brother, signifies no
more but what Rebeca had been told from God, Genesis 25. 23. Two Nations are in
thy Womb, and two manner of People, shall be separated from thy Bowels, and the
one People shall be stronger then the other People, and the Elder shall serve
the Younger; And so Jacob Blessed Judah, Genesis 49. and gave him the Scepter and
Dominion, from whence our A -- might have argued as well, that Jurisdiction and
Dominion belongs to the third Son over his Brethren, as well as from this
Blessing of Isaac, that it belonged to Jacob; They being both Predictions of
what should long after happen to their Posterities, and not the declaring the
Right of Inheritance to Dominion in either; And thus we have our A -- s two
great and only Arguments to prove, that Heirs are Lords of their Brethren, 1o.
Because God tells Cain, Genesis 4. That however sin might set upon him, he ought
or might be master of it; For the most Learned interpreters understand the
words of sin, and not of Abel, and give so strong reasons for it, that nothing
can convincingly be inferred from so doubtful a Text to our A -- s purpose, 2o.
Because in this of Genesis 27. Isaac foretells that the Israelites, the Posterity
of Jacob, should have Dominion over the Edomites, the Posterity of Esau;
therefore says our A -- Heirs are Lords of their Brethren, I leave any one to
judge of the conclusion.

119. And now we see how our A -- has provided for the descending, and
conveyance down of Adams Monarchical Power, or Paternal Dominion to Posterity,
by the Inheritance of his Heir, Succeeding to all his Fathers Authority, and
becoming upon his death as much Lord as his Father was, not only over his own
Children, but over his Brethren, and all descended from his Father, and so in
infinitum; But yet who this Heir is, he does not once tell us, and all the
light we have from him in this so Fundamental a Point, is only that in his
instance of Jacob, by using the word Birthright, as that which passed from
Esau to Jacob, he leaves us to guess that by Heir, he means the Eldest Son,
though I do not remember he any where mentions expressly the Title of the first
Born, but all along keeps himself under the shelter of the indefinite Term
Heir; But taking it to be his meaning, that the Eldest Son is Heir (for if the
Eldest be not, there will be no pretense, why the Sons should not be all Heirs
alike) and so by Right of Pimogeniture has Dominion over his Brethren, this is
but one step toward the Settelment of Succession, and the difficulties remain
still as much as ever, till he can show us who is meant by Right Heir, in all
those cases which may happen where the present Possessor has no Son; But this
he silently passes over, and perhaps wisely too; For what can be wiser after
one has affirmed, that the Person having that Power, as well as the Power and
Form of Government is the Ordinance of God, and by Divine Institution, vid. O.
254. p. 12. then to be careful, not to start any question concerning the
Person, the resolution whereof will certainly lead him into a a confession,
that God and Nature has determined nothing about him; And if our A -- cannot
show who by Right of nature, or a clear positive Law of God, has the next right
to inherit the Dominion of this natural Monarch, he has been at such pains
about, when he dyed without a Son, he might have spared his pains in all the
rest, it being more necessary to settle Men's consciences, and determine their
Subjection and Allegiance, to show them who by Original Right, Superior and
Antecedent to the Will, or any Act of Men, has a Title to this Paternal
Jurisdiction, than it is to show that by Nature, there was such a Jurisdiction;
It being to no purpose for me to know, there is such a Paternal Power, which I
ought, and am, disposed to obey, unless where there are many pretenders, I also
know the Person that is rightfully invested and endowed with it.

120. For the main matter in question being concerning the Duty of my
Obedience, and the Obligation of Conscience I am under to pay it to him that is
of Right, my Lord and Ruler, I must know the Person, that this Right of
Paternal Power resides in, and so impowers him to claim Obedience from me; For
let it be true, what he says, p. 12. That Civil Power not only in general is
by^ divine Institution, but even the Assignment of it specifically to the
Eldest Parents, O. 254. That not only the Power or Right of Government, but the
Form of the Power of governing, and the Person having that Power, are all the
Ordinance of God, yet unless he shows us in all Cases who is this Person,
Ordained by God, who is this Eldest Parent, all his abstract Notions of
Monarchical Power will signify just nothing, when they are to be reduced to
Practice, and Men are conscientiously to pay their Obedience; For Paternal
Jurisdiction being not the thing to be obeyed, because it cannot command, but
is only that which gives one Man a Right, which another has not, and if it
come by Inheritance, another Man cannot have, to command and be obeyed: It is
ridiculous to say, I pay Obedience to the paternal Power, when I obey him, to
whom paternal Power gives no Right to my Obedience; For he can have no Divine
Right to my Obedience, who cannot show his Divine Right to the Power of ruling
over me, as well as that by Divine Right, there is such a Power in the World.

121. And hence not being able to make out any Princes Title to Government, as
Heir to Adam, which therefore is of no use, and had been better let alone, he
is fain to resolve all into present Possession, and makes Civil Obedience as
due to an Usurper as to a lawful King, and thereby the Usurpers Title as good;
His words are, O. 253. And they deserve to be remembered: If an Usurper
dispossess the true Heir, the Subjects Obedience to the Fatherly Power must go
along and wait upon Gods Providence. But I shall leave his Title of Usurpers to
be examined in its due place, and desire my sober Reader to consider what
thanks Princes owe such Politics as this, which can suppose Paternal Power ( i.
e.) a Right to Government into the hands of a Cade, or a Cromwell, and so all
Obedience being due to paternal Power, the Obedience of Subjects will be due to
them by the same Right, and upon as good Grounds as it is to lawful Princes,
and yet this, as dangerous a Doctrine as it is, must necessarily follow from
making all Political Power to be nothing else but Adams Paternal Power by Right
and Divine Institution, descending from him without being able to show to whom
it descended, or who is Heir to it.

122. For, I say, to settle Government in the World, and to lay Obligations to
Obedience on any Man's Conscience, it is as necessary (supposing with our A --
that all Power be nothing but the being possessed of Adams Fatherhood) to
satisfy him who has a Right to this Power, this Fatherhood when the possessor
dies without Sons to succeed immediately to it, as it was to tell him that upon
the death of the Father, the Eldest Son had a right to it; For it is still to
be remembr'd, that the great question is, and that which our A -- would be
thought to contend for, if he did not sometimes forget it, what Persons have a
Right to be obeyed, and not whether there be a Power in the World, which is to
be called Paternal, without knowing in whom it resides, for so it be a Power,
i. e. Right to govern, it matters not whether it be called Paternal, Regal,
Natural or acquired Supreme Fatherhood, or Supreme Brotherhood, provided we
know who has it.

123. I go on then to ask whether in the inheriting of this Paternal Power,
this Supreme Fatherhood; The Grandson by a Daughter, has a Right before a
Nephew by a Brother? whether the Grandson by the Eldest Son, being an Infant
before the Younger Son a Man and able? whether the Daughter before the Uncle?
or any other Man, descended by a Male Line? whether a Grandson by a Younger
Daughter, before a Granddaughter by an Elder Daughter? whether the Elder Son
by a Concubine, before a Younger Son by a Wife? from whence also will arise
many questions of Legitimation, and what in nature is the difference betwixt a
Wife and a Concubine? for as to the municipal or positive Laws of Men, they can
signify nothing here. It may farther be asked, whether the Eldest Son being a
Fool, shall inherit this Paternal Power, before the Younger a wise Man? and
what Degree of Folly it must be that shall exclude him? and who shall be judge
of it? whether the Son of a Fool excluded for his Folly, before the Son of his
wise Brother who Reigned? who has the Paternal Power, whilst the Widow Queen
is with Child by the deceased King, and no body knows whether it will be a Son
or a Daughter? which shall be Heir of two Male twins, who by the dissection of
the Mother, were laid open to the World? whether a Sister by the half Blood,
before a Brothers Daughter by the whole Blood?

124. These, and many more such doubts, might be proposed about the Titles of
Succession, and the Right of Inheritance, and that not as idle Speculations,
but such as in History we shall find, have concerned the Inheritance of Crowns
and Kingdoms, and if ours want them, we need not go farther for Famous Examples
of it, then the other Kingdom in this very Island, which having been fully
related by the ingenious and Learned Author of Patriarchanon Monarcha, I need
say no more of; And till our A -- has resolved all the doubts, that may arise
about the next Heir, and showed that they are plainly determined by the Law of
nature, or the revealed Law of God, all his Suppositions of a Monarchical,
Absolute, Supreme, Paternal Power in Adam, and the descent of that Power to his
Heir, and so on; If I say, all these his suppositions were as much
demonstrations, as they are the contrary, yet they would not be of the least
use to Establish the Authority, or make out the Title of any one Prince now on
earth, but would rather unsettle and b^ing all into question; For let our A --
tell us as long as he please, and let all Men believe it too, that Adam had a
Paternal, and thereby a Monarchical Power, That this (the only Power in the
World) descended to his Heirs, and that there is no other Power in the World
but this; yet, if it be not past doubt, to whom this Paternal Power descends,
and whose now it is, no body can be under any Obligation of Obedience, unless
any one will say, that I am bound to pay Obedience to Paternal Power in a Man,
who has no more Paternal Power then I my self, which is all one as to say, I
obey a Man, because he has a Right to govern, and if I be asked how I know, he
has a Right to govern, I should answer it cannot be known, that he has any at
all; for that cannot be the reason of my Obedience, which I know not to be, so
much less can that be a reason of my Obedience, which no body at all can know.

125. And therefore all this ado about Adams Fatherhood, the Greatness of its
Power, and the necessity of its supposal, helps nothing to the Establishing the
Power of those that govern, or determine the Obedience of Subjects, who are to
obey, if they cannot tell whom they are to obey, or it cannot be known who are
to govern, and who to obey; And this Fatherhood, this Monarchical Power of Adam
descending to his Heirs, would be of no more Use to the Government of Mankind,
then it would be to the quieting of Men's Consciences^ or securing their
Healths, if our A -- had assured them, that Adam had a Power to forgive Sins or
cure! Diseases, which by Divine Institution descended to his Heir, whilst ^his
Heir is impossible to be known. And should not be do as rationally, who upon
this assurance of our A --, went and confessed his Sins, and expected a good
Absolution, or took Physic with expectation of Health from any one who had
taken on himself the Name of Priest or Physician, or thrist himself into those
employments, saying, I acquiess in the Absolving Power descending from Adam, or
I shall be cured by the Medicinal Power descending from Adam, as he who says, I
submit to, and obey the Paternal Power descending from Adam, when it is
confessed all these Powers descend only to his single Hei^, and that Heir is
unknown.

126. It Is true, the Civil Lawyers have pretended to determine some of these
Cases concerning the succession of Princes, but by our A -- s, Principles, they
have meddled in a matter that belongs not to them; For if all Political Power he
derived only from Adam, and be (...) only to his Successive Heirs, by the
Ordinenee of God and Divine Institution, this is a Right Antecede^t and
Paramount to all Government, and therefore the positive Laws of Men, cannot
determine that which is it self, the Foundation of all Law and Government, and
is to receive its Rule only from the Law of God and Nature. And that being
silent in the Case, I am apt to think there is no such Right to be conveyed
this way, I am fure it would be to no purpose if there were, and Men would be
more at a loss concerning Government and Obedience to Governors, then if there
were no such Right, since by positive Laws and compact, which Divine
Institution (if there be any) shuts out, all these endless inextricable doubts,
can be safely provided against, but it can never be understood, how a Divine
natural Right, and that of such moment as is all Order and Peace in the World,
should be conveyed down to Posterity, without any plain Natural or Divine Rule
concerning it. And these would be an end of all Civil Government, if the
Assignment of Civil Power were by Divine Institution to the Heir, and yet by
that Divine Institution, the Person of the Heir, could not be known. This
Paternal Regal Power, being by Divine Right only his, it leaves no room for
human prudence, or confent to place it any where else; for if only one Man has
a Divine Right to the Obedience of Mankind, no body can claim that Obedience,
but he that can show that Right; nor can Men's Consciences by any other pretense
be obliged to it; And thus this Doctrine cuts up all Government by the Roots.

127. Thus we see how our A -- laying it for a sure Foundation, that the very
Person that is to Rule, is the Ordinance of God, and by Divine Institution,
tells us at large, only that this Person is the Heir, but who this Heir is, he
leaves us to guess; and so this Divine Institution which Assigns it to a
Person, whom we have no Rule to know, is just as good as an Assignment to no
body at all. But whatever our A -- does, Divine Institution makes no such
ridiculous Assignments, nor can God be supposed to make it a Sacred Law, that
one certain Person should have a Right to something, and yet not give Rules to
mark out, and know that Person by, or give an Heir a Divine Right to Power, and
yet not point out who that Heir is. It Is rather to be thought, that an Heir had
no such Right by Divine Institution, then that God should give such a Right to
the Heir, but yet leave it doubtful, and undeterminable who such Heir is.

128. If God had given the Land of Canaan to Abraham, and in general Terms to
some body after him, without naming his Seed, whereby it might be known, who
that somebody was, it would have been as good and useful an Assignment, to
determine the Right to the Land of Canaan, as it would to the determining the
Right of Crowns, to give Empire to Adam and his Successive Heirs after him,
without telling who his Heir is; For the word Heir, without a Rule to know who
it is, signifies no more then somebody, I know not whom. God making it a Divine
Institution, that Men should not marry those who were near of Kin, thinks it
not enough to say, none of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to
him, to uncover their Nakedness; But Moreover, gives Rules to know who are
those near of Kin, forbiden by Divine Institution, or else that Law would have
been of no use, it being to no purpose to lay restraint, or give Privileges to
Men, in such general Terms, as the Particular Person concerned cannot be known
by; But God not having any where said, the next Heir shall Inherit all his
Fathers Estate or Dominion, we are not to wonder that he has no where
appointed who that Heir should be, for never having intended any such thing,
never designed any Heir in that Sense, we cannot expect he should any where
nominate, or appoint any Person to it, as we might, had it been otherwise, and
therefore in Scripture, though the word Heir occur, yet there is no such thing
as Heir in our A -- s Sense, one that was by Right of Nature to inherit all
that his Father had, exclusive of his Brethren, hence Sarah suppose, that if
Ishmael staid in the House, to share in Abraham's Estate after his death, this
Son of a Bondwoman, might be Heir with Isaac and therefore say, she cast out
this Bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of this Bondwoman shall not be Heir
with my Son; But this cannot excuse our A --, who telling us there is in every
Number of Men, one who is Right and next Heir to Adam, ought to have told us
what the Laws of descent are, but h^ving been so sparing to instruct us by
Rules, how to know who is Heir, let us see in the next place, what his History
out of Scripture, on which he pretends wholly to build his Government, gives us
in this necessary and Fundamental point.

129. Our A -- to make good the Title of his Book, p. 13. begins his History of
the descent of Adams Regal Power, p. 13. In these words: This Lordship, which
Adam by Command had over the whole World, and by Right descending from him, the
Patriarchs did enjoy was as large, etc. How does he prove that the Patriarchs
by descent did enjoy it? for Dominion of Life and Death, says he, we find Judah
the Father pronounced Sentence of Death against Thamer his Daughter-in Law for
playing the Harlot, p. 13. How does this prove that Judah had Absolute and
Sovereign Authority, He pronounced Sentence of Death? The pronouncing of
Sentence of Death is not a certain mark of Sovereignty, but usually the Office
of Inferior Magistrates. The Power of making Laws of Life and Death is indeed a
mark of Sovereignty, but pronouncing the Sentence according to those Laws may
be done by others, and therefore this will but ill prove that he had Sovereign
Authority, as if one should say, Judge Iefferies, pronounced Sentence of Death
in the late Times, therefore Judge Iefferies, had Sovereign Authority: But it
will be said, Judah did it not by Commission from another, and therefore did it
in his own Right. Who knows whether he had any Right at all, heat of Passion
might carry him to do that which he had no Authority to do. Judah had Dominion
of Life and Death, how does that appear? he exercised it, he pronounced
Sentence of Death against Thamer, our A -- thinks it very good Proof, that
because he did it, therefore he had a Right to do-it; He lay with her also: By
the same way of Proof, he had a Right to do that too, if the consequence be
good from doing to a Right of doing, Absalon too may be reckoned amongst our A
-s Sovereigns, for he pronounced such a Sentence of Death against his Brother
Amnon, and much upon a like occasion, and had it executed too; if that be
sufficient to prove a Dominion of Life and Death.

But allowing this all to be clear Demonstration of Sovereign Power, who was it
that had this Lordship by Right descending to him from Adam, as large and ample
as the absolutest Dominion of any Monarch? Judah, says our A --, Judah a
younger Son of Jacob, his Father and Elder Brethren living, so that if our A --
s own Proof be to be taken, a younger Brother may in the Life of his Father and
Elder Brothers, by Right of descent, enjoy Adams Monarchical Power, and if one
so qualified may be Monarch by descent, I know not why every Man may not, and
if Judah, his Father and Elder Brother living were one of Adams Heirs, I know
not who can be excluded from this Inheritance, all Men by Inheritance may be
Monarchs as well as Judah.

130. Touching War, we see that Abraham Commanded an Army of 318. Soldiers of
his own Family, and Esau met his Brother Jacob with 400 Men at Arms; For
matter of Peace; Abraham made a League with Abineelech, etc. p. 13. Is it not
possible for a Man to have 318. Men in his Family, without being Heir to Adam?
A Planter in the West Indies has more and might if he pleased (who doubts)
Muster them up and lead them out against the Indians, to seek Reparation upon
any Injury received from them, and all this without the Absolute Dominion of a
Monarch, descending to him from Adam. Would it not be an admirable Argument to
prove, that all Power by Gods Institution descended from Adam by Inheritance,
and that the very Person and Power of this Planter were the Ordinance of God,
because he had Power in his Family over Servants, born in his House, and bought
with his Money; For this was Just Abraham's Case: Those who were Rich in the
Patriarchs Days, as in the West Indies now, bought Men and Maid Servants, and
by their increase as well as purchasing of new, came to have large and numerous
Families, which though they made use of in War or Peace, can it be thought the
Power they had over them was an Inheritance descended from Adam, when 'twas the
Purchase of their Money? A Man's Riding in an expedition against an Enemy, his
Horse bought in a Fair would be as good a Proof that the owner enjoyed the
Lordship which Adam by Command had over the whole World, by Right des^ending to
him, as Abraham's leading out the Servants of his Family, is that the Patriarchs
enjoyed this Lordship by descent from Adam since the Title to the Power, the
Master had in both Cases, whether over Slaves or Horses, was only from his
purchase; and the getting a Dominion over any thing by Bargain, and Money is a
new way of proving one had it by Descent and Inheritance.

131. But making War and Peace are marks of Sovereignty; Let it be so in
Politic Societies, may not therefore a Man in the West Indies who has with him
Sons of his own Friends, or Companions, Soldiers under Pay, or Slaves bought
with Money, or perhaps a Band made up of all these, make War and Peace, if
there should be occasion, and ratify the ^rticles too with an Oath, without
being a Sovereign, an Absolute King over those who went with him; he that says
he cannot, must then allow many Masters of Ships, many Private Planters to be
Absolute Monarchs, for as much as this they have done, War and Peace cannot be
made for Politic Societies, but by the Supreme Power of such Societies, because
War or Peace, giving a different Motion to the force of such a Politic Body,
none can make War or Peace, but that which has the direction of the force of
the whole body, and that in Politic Societies is only the Supreme Power. In
voluntary Societies for the time, he that has such a Power by consent, may make
War and Peace, and so may a single Man for himself, the State of War not
consisting in the number of Partysans, but the enmity of the Parties where they
have no Superior to Appeal to.

132. The actual making of War or Peace is no Proof of any other Power, but
only of disposing those to exercise or cease Acts of enmity for whom he makes
it, and this Power in many Cases any one may have without any Politic
Supremacy; And therefore the making of War or Peace will not prove that every
one that does so is a Politic Ruler, much less a King, for then Commonwealths
must be Kings too, for they do as certainly make War and Peace as Monarchical
Governments.

133. But grant this a mark of Sovereignty in Abraham, Is it a Proof of the
descent to him, of Adams Sovereignty over the whole World? If it be, it will
surely be as good a Proof of the descent of Adams Lordship to others too. And
then Commonwealths, as well as Abraham will be Heirs to Adam, for they make
War and Peace, as well as he; If you say that the Lordship of Adam, does not by
Right descend to Commonwealths, though they make War and Peace, the same say I
of Abraham, and then there is an end of your Argument; if you stand to your
Argument, and say those that do make War and Peace, as Commonwealths do
without doubt, do inherit Adams Lordship, there is an end of your Monarchy,
unless you will say, that Commonwealths by descent enjoying Adams Lordship are
Monarchies, and that indeed would be a new way, of making all the Government in
the World Monarchical.

134. To give our A -- the Honor of this new invention, for I confess it is
not I have first found it out by tracing his Principles, and so charged it on
him, it is fit my Readers know that (as absurd as it may seem) he teaches it
himself, p. 23. where he ingeniously says, In all Kingdoms and Commonwealths
in the World, whether the Prince be the Supreme Father of the People, or but
the true Heir to such a Father, or come to the Crown by Usurpation or Election,
or whether some few or a Multitude Govern the Commonwealth, yet still the
Authority that is in any one, or in many or i^ all these is the only Right, and
nat^r^l Authority of Supreme Father, which Right of Fatherhood he often tells
us, is Regal and Royal Authority; as particularly, p. 12. the page immediately
preceding this Instance of Abraham. This Regal Authority, he says, those that
govern Commonwealths have, and if it be true, that Regal and Royal Authority
be in those that govern Commonwealths it is as true, that Commonwealths are
governed by Kings, for if Regal Authority be in him that Governs, he that
Governs must needs be a King, and so all Commonwealths are nothing but down
right Monarchies, and then what need any more ado about the matter, the
Governments of the World, are as they should be, there is nothing but Monarchy
in it. This without doubt, was the surest way our A -- could have found, to
turn all other Governments, but Monarchical out of the World.

135. But all this scarce proves Abraham, to have been a King as Heir to Adam;
If by Inheritance he had been King, Lot, who was of the same Family, must needs
have been his Subject, by that Title before the Servants in his Family, but we
see they lived as Friends and Equals, and when their Herd^ Men could not agree,
there was no pretense of Jurisdiction or Superiority between them, but they
parted by consent, Genesis 13. hence he is called both by Abraham, and by the Text
Abraham's Brother, the Name of Friendship and Equality, and not of Jurisdiction
and Authority, though he were really but his Nephew. And if our A -- knows that
Abraham was Adams Heir, and a King, 'twas more it seems then Abraham himself,
knew, or his Servant whom he sent a woing for his Son, for when he sets out the
advantages of the Match, 24. Genesis 35. thereby to prevail with the Young-woman
and her Friends. He says, I am Abraham's Servant, and the Lord has Blessed my
Master greatly, and he is become great, and he has given him Flocks and Herds
and Silver and Gold, and Menservants and Maidservants, and Camels and Asses,
and Sarah my Masters Wife, bare a Son to my Master all he has. Can one think
that a discreet Servant, that was thus particular to set out his Masters
Greatness, would have omitted the Crown Isaac was to have, if he had known of
any such? Can it be imagined he should have neglected to have told them on
such an occasion as this, that Abraham was a King, a Name well known at that
time, for he had nine of them his Neighbors, if he or his Master had thought
any such thing, the likeliest matter of all the rest, to make his Errand
Successful?

136. But this discovery it seems was reserved for our A -- to make 2 or 3000
Years after, and let him enjoy the Credit of it, only he should have taken care
that some of Adams Land should have descended to this his Heir, as well as all
Adams Lordship, for though this Lordship which Abraham, if we may believe our A
as well as the other Patriarchs, by Right descending to him did enjoy, was as
large and ample as the Absolutest Dominion of any Monarch which has been since
the Creation. Yet his Estate, his Territories, his Dominions were very narrow
and scanty, for he had not the Possession of a Foot of Land, till he bought a
Field and a Cave of the Sons of Heth to bury Sarah in.

137. The instance of Esau joined with this of Abraham, to prove that the
Lordship which Adam had over the whole World by Right descending from him the
Patriarchs did enjoy, is yet more pleasant then the former: Esau met his
Brother Jacob with 400 Men at Arms; He therefore was a King by Right of Heir to
Adam, 400 Armed Men then however got together are enough to prove him that
leads them to be a King and Adams Heir. There have been Tories in Ireland,
(whatever there are other in Countries) who would have thankt our A^ for so
honorable an Opinion of them, especially if there had been no body near with a
better Title of 500 Armed Men, to question their Royal Authority of 400: It Is a
shame for Men to trifle so, to say no worse of it, in so serious an Argument:
Here Esau is brought as a Proof that Adams Lordship, Adams Absolute Dominion,
as large as that of any Monarch descended by Right to the Patriarchs, and in
this very Chap. p. 19. Jacob is brought as an instance of one, that by
Birthright was Lord over his Brethren; so we have here two Brothers Absolute
Monarchs by the same Title, and at the same time Heirs to Adam; The Eldest Heir
to Adam, because he met his Brother with 400 Men, and the youngest Heir to Adam
by Birthright, Esau enjoyed the Lordship which Adam had over the whole World by
Right descending to him, in as large and ample manner, as the absolutest
Dominion of any Monarch, and at the same time, Jacob Lord over him, by the
Right Heirs have to be Lords over their Brethren. Rifum teneatis, I never, I
confess, met with any Man of Parts so Dexterous as Sir Robt. at this way of
arguing; But 'twas his Misfortune to light upon Principles that could not be
accommodated to the Nature of things and Human Affairs, nor could be made to
agree with that Constitution and Order which God had settled in the World, and
therefore must needs often clash with common Sense and Experience.

138. In the next Section, he tells us: This Patriarchal Power continued not
only till the Flood, but after it as the name Patriarch does in part prove. The
word Patriarch does more then in part prove, that^ Patriarchal Power continued
in the World as long as there were Patriarchs, for it is necessary that
Patriarchal Power should be whilst there are Patriarchs, as it is necessary
there should be Paternal or Conjugal Power whilst there are Fathers or
Husbands; but this is but playing with Names. That which he would fallaciously
insinuate is the thing in question to be proved, and that is that the Lordship
which Adam had over the World, the supposed Absolute Universal Dominion of Adam
by Right deseending from him, the Patriarchs did enjoy: If he affirms such an
Absolute Monarchy continued to the Flood, in the World, I would be glad to know
what Records he has it from; for I confess I cannot find a word of it in my
Bible; If by Patriarchal Power, he means any thing else, it is nothing to the
matter in hand: And how the name Patriarch in some part proves, that those who
are called by that name, had Absolute Monarchical Power, I confess, I do not
see, and therefore I think needs no answer, till the Argument from it be made
out a little clearer.

139. The three Sons of Noah had the World, says our A --, divided amongst them
by their Father, for of them was the whole World overspread, p. 14. The World
might be overspread by the Off spring of Noah's Sons, though he never divided
the World amongst them; For the Earth might be Replenished without being
divided, all our As Argument here, therefore, proves no such Division. However
I allow it to him, and then ask, the World being divided amongst them, which of
the three was Adams Heir? If Adams Lordship, Adams Monarchy, by Right descended
only to the Eldest, then the other two could be but his Subjects, his Slaves;
If by Ri^ht it descended to all three Brothers, by the same Right, it will
descend to all Mankind, and then it will be impossible what he says, p. 19.
that Heirs are Lords of their Brethren should be true, but all Brothers, and
consequently all Men will be equal and independent, all Heirs to Adams
Monarchy, and consequently all Monarchs too, one as much as another. But 'twill
be said Noah their Father divided the World amongst them, so that our A -- will
allow more to Noah, then he will to God Almighty, for O. 211. he thought it
hard, that God himself should give the World to Noah and his Sons, to the
prejudice of Noah's Birthright, his words are, Noah was left Sole Heir to the
World, why should it be thought that God would disinherit, him of his
Birthright, and make him of all Men in the World, the only Tenant in Common
with his Children, and yet here he thinks it fit, that Noah should disinherit
Shem of his Birthright, and divide the World betwixt him and his Brethren, so
that this Birthright, when our A -- pleases, must, and when he pleases must
not, be sacred and inviolable.

140. If Noah did divide the World between his Sons, and his Assignment of
Dominions to them were good, there is an end of Divine Institution, and all our
A -- s discourse of Adams Heir, with whatsoever he builds on it, is quite out
of doors. The natural Power of Kings falls to the ground; and then the form of
the Power governing, and the Person having that Power, will be all Ordinances
of Man and not of God, as our A -- says, O. 254 For if the Right of the Heir be
the Ordinance of God, a Divine Right, no Man, Father, or not Father, can alter
it: If it be not a Divine Right, it is only Humane depending on the Will of
Man, and so where Humane Institution gives it not, the first Born has no Right
at all above his Brethren; and Men may put Government into what hands, and
under what form, they please.

141. He goes on most of the civillest Nations of the Earth, labor to fetch
their Original from some of the Sons or Nephews of Noah, p. 14. How many do
most of the civillest Nations amount to, and who are they, I fear the Chinese,
a very great and civil People, as well as several other People of the East,
West, North and South, trouble not themselves much about this matter. All that
believe the Bible, which I believe are our A -- s most of the civillest Nation,
must necessarily derive themselves from Noah, but for the rest of the World,
they think little of his Sons or Nephews. But if the Heralds and Antiquaries of
all Nations; for it is these Men generally that Labor to find out the Originals
of Nations, or all the Nations themselves should Labor to fetch their Original
from some of the Sons or Nephews of Noah, what would this be to prove, that the
Lordship which Adam had over the whole World, by right descended to the
Patriarchs, who ever, Nations, or Races of Men, labor to fetch their Original
from, may be concluded to be thought by them, Men of renown, famous to
Posterity, for the greatness of their Virtues and Actions; but beyond these
they look not, nor consider who they were Heirs to, but look on them as such as
raised themselves by their own Virtue to a Degree, that would give a Luster to
those, who in future Ages, could pretend to derive themselves from them. But if
it were Ogygis, Hercules, Brama, Tamberlain, Pharamond, nay Jupiter and Saturn
be Names, from whence diverse Races of Men, both ancient and modern, have
labored to derive their Original, will that prove, that those Men enjoyed the
Lordship of Adam, by right descending to them; If not, this is but a Flourish
of our A -- s to mislead his Reader that in it self signifies nothing.

142. And therefore to as much purpose, is, what he tells us, p. 15. concerning
this Division of the World, that some say it was by Lot, and others that Noah
sailed round the Mediterranean in ten years, and divided the World into Asia,
Africa and Europe, Portions for his three Sons. America then, it seems, was
left to be his that could catch it, why our A -- takes such pains to prove the
Division of the World by Noah to his Sons, and will not leave out an
imagination, though no better then a Dream, that he can find any where to
favor it, is hard to guess, since such a Division, if it prove any thing, must
necessarily take away the Title of Adams Heir, unless three Brothers can
altogether be Heirs of Adam; And therefore the following words. Howsoever the
manner of this Division be uncertain, yet it is most certain the Division it
self, was by Families from Noah and his Children, over which the Parents were
Heads and Princes, p. 15. If allowed him to be true, and of any force to prove,
that all the Power in the World is nothing but the Lordship of Adams,
descending by Right, they will only prove, that the Fathers of the Children,
are all Heirs to this Lordship of Adam; for if in those days Cham and Iaphet,
and other Parents besides the Eldest Son were Heads and Princes over their
Families, and had a right to divide the Earth by Families, what hinders Younger
Brothers, being Fath^rs of Families from having the same Right, how Cham or
Iaphet were Princes by Right descending to him, notwithstanding any Title of
Heir in his Eldest Brother, Younger Brothers by the same Right descending to
them are Princes now, and so all our A -- s natural Power of Kings will reach
no farther then their own Children, and no Kingdom by this natural right, can
be bigger then a Family; For either this Lordship of Adam over the whole World,
by right descends only to the Eldest Son, and then there can be but one Heir,
as our A -- says, p. 19. or else; it by right descends to all the Sons equally,
and then every Father of a Family will have it, as well as the three Sons of
Noah, take which you will, it destroys the present Governments and Kingdoms
that are now in the World, since whoever ha^ this natural Power of a King, by
right descending to him, must have it either, as our A -- tells us, Cain had
it, and be Lord over his Brethren, and so be alone King of the whole World, or
else as he tells us here, Shem, Cham and Iaphet had it, three Brothers, and so
be only Prince of his own Family, and all Families independent one of another;
All the World must be only one Empire by the Right of the next Heir, or else
every Family be a distinct Government of it self, by the Lordship of Adams
descending to Parents of Families. And to this only tends all the Proofs, he
here gives us of the descent of Adams Lordship; For continuing his Story of
this descent he says;

143. In the dispersion of Babel, we must certainly find the Establishment of
Royal Power, throughout the Kingdoms of the World, p. 14. If you must find it,
pray do, and you will help us to a new piece of History; But you must show it
us before we shall be bound to believe, that Regal Power was Established in the
World upon your Principles; for, that Regal Power was Established in the
Kingdoms of the World, I think no body will dispute, but that there should be
Kingdoms in the World, whose several Kings enjoyed their Crowns, by right
descending to them from Adam, that we think not only Apocrypha, but also
utterly impossible, and if our A - has no better Foundation, for his Monarchy
then a supposition of what was done at the dispersion of Babel: The Monarchy he
erects thereon, whose top is to reach to Heaven to unite Mankind, will serve
only to divide and scatter them as that Tower did, will produce nothing but
confusion.

144. For he tells us, the Nations they were divided into, were distinct
Families, which had Fathers for Rulers over them, whereby it appears that even
in the confusion, God was careful to preserve the Fatherly Authority, by
distributing the Diversity of Languages, according to the Diversity of
Families, p. 14. it would have been a hard matter, for any one but our A - to
have found out so plainly in the Text, he here brings, that all the Nations in
that dispersion were governed by Fathers, and that God was careful to preserve
the Fatherly Authority. The words of the Text are: These are the Sons of Shem
after their Families after their Tongues in their Lands, after their Nations,
and the same thing is said of Cham and Iaphet after an Enumeration of their
Posterities, in all which there is not one word said of their Governors, or
Forms of Government^ of Fathers, or Fatherly Authority. But our A -- ^ who is
very quick sighted, to spy out Fatherhood, where no body else could see any
the least glimpses of it, tells us positiv^ly their Ruler were Fathers, and God
was car^f^l to preserve the Fatherly Authority, and why? because those of the
same Family spoke the same Language, and so of necessity in the division kept
together, just as if one should argue thus, Hanibal in his Army, consisting of
diverse Nations, kept those of the same Language togegether, therefore Fathers
were Captains of each Band, and Hanibal was careful of the Fatherly Authority,
or in Peopling of Carolina, the English, French, Scotch and Wel^h that are
there, Plant themselves together, and by them, the Country is divided in their
Lands after their Tongues, after their Families, after their Nations, that
therefore care was taken of the Fatherly Authority, or because in many parts of
America, every little Tribe, was a distinct People, with a different Language,
one should infer, that therefore God was careful to preserve the Fatherly
Authority, or that therefore their Rulers enjoyed Adams Lordship by right
descending to them, though we know not who were their Governors, nor what their
Form of Government, but only that they were divided into little Independent
Societies, speaking different Languages.

145. The Scripture says not a word of their Rulers or Forms of Government, but
only gives an account, how Mankind came to be divided into distinct Languages
and Nations; and therefore it is not to argue from the Authority of Scripture,
to tell us positively, Fathers were their Rulers, when the Scripture says no
such thing, but to set up Phansies of ones own Brain, when we confidently aver
Matter of Fact, where records are utterly silent: and therefore the same ground
has the rest that he says, that they were not confused Multitudes without Heads
and Governors, and at liberty to choose what Governors or Governments they
pleased.

146. For I demand when Mankind were all yet of one Language, all congregated
in the plain of Shinar, were they then all under one Monarch, who enjoyed the
Lordship of Adam by right descending to him? If they were not, there was then
no thoughts, it is plain, of Adams Heir, no right to Government known then upon
that Title, no care taken by God or Man, of Adams Fatherly Authority: If when
Mankind were but one People, dwelt altogether, and were of one Language, and
were upon Building a City together, and when 'twas plain, they could not but
know the Right Heir, for Shem lived till Isaacs time, a long while after the
Division at Babel; If then, I say, they were not under the Monarchical
Government of Adams Fatherhood, by right descending to the Heir, it is plain
there was no regard had to the Fatherhood, no Monarchy acknowledged due to
Adams Heir, no Empire of Shems in Asia, and consequently no such Division of
the World by Noah, as our A -- has talked of. And as far as we can conclude any
thing from Scripture in this matter, it seems from this place, that if they had
any Government, it was rather a Common wealth, then an Absolute Monarchy; For
the Scripture tells us, Genesis 11. they said, 'twas not a Prince commanded, the
Building of this City and Tower 'twas not by the command of one Monarch, but by
the consultation of many, a Free People, let us build us a City; They built it
for themselves as Freemen, not as Slaves for their Lord and Master, that we be
not scattered abroad, and for having a City once built, fixed Habitations to
settle their Bodies and Families. This was the consultation and design of a
People, that were at liberty to part asunder, but desired to keep in one Body,
and could not have been either necessary or likely in Men tied together under
the Government of one Monarch, who if they had been, as our A -- tells us, all
Slaves under the Absolute Dominion of a Monarch, needed not have taken such
care to hinder themselves, from wandering out of the reach of his Dominion, I
demand whether this be not plainer in Scripture then any thing of Adams Heir or
Fatherly Authority.

147. But if being, as God says, Genesis 11. 6. one People, they had one Ruler,
one King by natural Right, Absolute and Supreme over them, what care had God to
preserve the Paternal Authority of the Supreme Fatherhood, if on a sudden, he
suffers 72 (for so many, our A -- talks of,) distinct Nations, to be erected
out of it, under distinct Governors, and at once to withdraw themselves, from
the Obedidience of their Soveriegn. This is to entitle Gods care, how, and to
what, we please, can it be Sense to say, that God was careful to preserve
Fatherly Authority in those who had it not? For if these were Subjects under a
Supreme Prince, what Authority had they, when at the same time he takes away
the true Supreme Fatherhood of the natural Monarch? can it be reason to say,
that God for the Preservation of Fatherly Authority, lets several new
Goverments with their Governors start up, who could not all have Fatherly
Authority, and is it not as much reason to say, that God is careful to destroy
Fatherly Authority when he suffers one who is in Possession of it, to have his
Government torn in pieces, and shared by several of his Subjects? And would it
not be an Argument just like this, for Monarchical Government to say, when any
Monarchy was shattered to pieces, and divided amongst revolted Subjects, that
God was careful to preserve Monarchical Power, by rending a settled Empire into
a multitude of little Governments? If any one will say that what happens in
providence to be preserved God is careful to preserve as a thing, therefore to
be esteemed by Men as necessary or ufeful, it is a peculiar Propriety of Speech,
which every one will not think fit to imitate; but this I am sure is impossible
to be either proper, or true speaking, that Shem for example (for he was then
alive,) should have Fatherly Authority, or Sovereignty by right of Fatherhood
over that one People at Babel, and that the next moment Shem yet living, 72
others should have Fatherly Authority, or Sovereignty by right of Fatherhood
over the same People, divided into so many distinct Governments; either these
72 Fathers actually were Rulers, just before the confusion, and then they were
not one People, but that God himself says, they were a Commonwealth, and then
where was Monarchy? or else these 72 Fathers, had Fatherly Authority but knew
it not. Strange! that Fatherly Authority should be the only Original of
Government amongst Men, and yet all Mankind not know it, and Stranger yet, that
the confusion of Tongues should reveal it to them all of a sudden, that in an
instant these 72 should know, that they had Fatherly Power, and all others know
that they were to obey it in them, and every one know that particular Fatherly
Authority to which he was a Subject, he that can think this Arguing from
Scripture, may from thence make out what Model of an Eutopia will best suit
with his Phansy or Interest, and this Fatherhood thus disposed of, will
justify both a Prince who claims an Universal Monarchy, and his Subjects, who
being Fathers of Families, shall quit all Subjection to him and Canton his
Empire into less Governments for themselves; for it will always remain a doubt
in which of these, the Fatherly Authority resided, till our A - r^solv^s us,
whether Shem, who was then alive, or these 72 new Princes, beginning so many
new Empires in his Dominions, and over his Subject, had right to govern, since
our A -- tells us, that both one an the other had Fatherly, which is Supreme,
Authority, and are brought in by him as Instances of those, who did enjoy the
Lordships of Adam by right descending to them, which was as large and ample as
the Absolutest Dominion of any Monarch. This at least is unavoidable, that if
God was careful to preserve the Fatherly Authority, in the 72 new erected
Nations, it necessarily follows, that he was as careful to destroy all
pretenses of Adams Heir, since he took care, and therefore did preserve the
Fatherly Authority in so many, at least 71, that could not possibly be Adams
Heirs, when the right Heir (if God had ever ordained any such Inheritance)
could not but be known, Shem then living, and they being all one People.

148. Nimrod is his next instance of enjoying this Patriarchal Power, p. 16.
but I know not for what Reason our A -- seems a little unkind to him, and says,
that he against Right enlarged his Empire, by seizing violently on the Rights
of other Lords of Families; These Lords of Families here were called Fathers of
Families, in his account of the dispersion at Babel, but it matters not how
they are called, so we know who they are; for this Fatherly Authority must be
in them, either as Heirs to Adam, and so there could not be 72, nor above one
at once, or else as natural Parents over their Children, and so every Father
will have Paternal Authority over his Children by the same Right, and in as
large extent as those 72 had, and so be Independent Princes over their own
Offspring, and his Lords of Families, thus understood; he gives us a very
pretty account of the Original of Monarchy, in the following words; And in this
Sense he may be said to be the Author and Founder of Monarchy, viz. As against
Right seizing violently on the Rights of Fathers over their Children, which
Paternal Authority, if it be in them, by Right of Nature; (for else how could
those 72 come by it) no body can take from them without their own consents, and
then I desire our A -- and his Friends to consider how far this will concern
other Princes, and whether it will not according to his conclusion of that
Paragraph, resolve all Regal Power of those, whose Dominions extend beyond
their Families, either into Tyranny and Usurpation, or Election and Consent of
Fathers of Families, which will differ very little from Consent of the People.

149. All his Instances, in the next Section, p. 17. Of the 12 Dukes of Edom,
the 9 Kings in a little corner of Asia in Abraham's days, the 31 Kings in Canaan
destroyed by Joshua, and the care he takes to prove that these were all
Sovereign Princes, and that every Town in those days had a King, are so many
direct Proofs against him, that it was not the Lordship of Adam by Right
descending to them that made Kings; for if they had held their Royalties by
that Title, either there must have been but one Sovereign over them all, or
else every Father of a Family had been as good a Prince, and had as good a
claim to Royalty as these; for if all the Sons of Esau, had each of them, the
Younger as well as the Eldest, the right of Fatherhood, and so were Sovereign
Princes after their Fathers Death, the same Right had their Sons after them,
and so on to all Posterity, which will limit all the natural Power of
Fatherhood, only to be over the Issue of their own bodies, and their
descendants which Power of Fatherhood dies with the head of each Family, and
makes way for the like Power of Fatherhood to take place, in each of his Sons
over their respective Posterities, whereby the Power of Fatherhood will be
preserved indeed, and is intelligible, but will not be at all to our A -- s
purpose, nor are any of the instances he brings Proofs of any Power they had by
Title of Fatherhood as Heirs of Adam's Paternal Authority, nor by Virtue of
their own: For Adams Fatherhood being over all Mankind, it could descend but to
one at once, and from him to his right Heir only, and so there could by that
Title be but one King in the World at a time; And by Right of Fatherhood, not
descending from Adam, it must be only as they themselves were Fathers, and so
could be over none but their own Posterity; so that if those 12 Dukes of Edom,
of Abraham; and 9 Kings his Neighbors: if Jacob and Esau and 31 Kings in
Canaan, the 72 Kings mutilated by Adonibeseck, the 32 Kings that came to
Benaded, the 70 Kings of Greece making War at Troy, were as our A -- contends
all of them Sovereign Princes. '^is evident that Kings derived their Power from
some other Original then Fatherhood, since some of these had Power over more
then their own Posterity, and it is Demonstration, they could not be all Heirs
to Adam: For I challenge any Man to make any pretense to Power by Right of
Fatherhood, either intelligible or possible in any one, otherwise, then either
as Adams Heir, or as Prog^nitor over his own descendants, naturally sprung from
him. And if our A -- could show that any one of these Princes, of which he
gives us here so large a Catalogue, had his Authority by either of these
Titles, I think I might yield him the Cause, though it is manif^st they are all
impertinent and directly contrary to what he brings them to prove, viz. That
the Lordship which Adam had over the World by Right descended to the Patriarchs.

150. Having told us, p. 16. That the Patriarchal Government continued in
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, until the Egyptian Bondage, p. 17. he tells us, By
manifest Footsteps we may trace this Paternal Government unto the Israelites
coming into Egypt, where the exercise of Supreme Patriarchal Government was
intermitted, because they were in Subjection to a stronger Prince, what these
Footsteps are of paternal Government, in our A -- Sense, i. e. of Absolute
Monarchical Power descending from Adam, and exercised by Right of Fatherhood we
have seen, that is for 2290 Years no Footsteps at all, since in all that time
he cannot produce any one Example of any Person who Claimed or Exercised Regal
Authority by Right of Fatherhood, or show any one who being a King was Adams
Heir; All that his Proofs amount to, is only this, that there were Fathers,
Patriarchs and Kings in that Age of the World, but that the Fathers and
Patriarchs had any Asolute Arbitrary Power, or by what Titles those Kings had
theirs, and of what extent it was, the Scripture is wholly silent; it is
manifest by Right of Fatherhood they neither did, nor could claim any Title to
Dominion and Empire.

151. To say, that the Exercise of Supreme Patriarchal Government was
intermitted, because they were in Subjection to a stronger Prince, proves
nothing but what I before suspected, viz. That Patriarchal Jurisdiction or
Government was a fallacious expression, and does not in our A -- signify what
he would yet insinuate by it, Paternal and Regal Power, such an Absolute
Sovereignty as he supposes was in Adam.

152. For how can he say that Patriarchical Jurisdiction was intermitted in
Egypt, where there was a King, under whose Regal Government the Israelites
were? If Patriarchal were Absolute Monarchical Jurisdiction, and if it were
not, but something else, why does he make such a do about a Power not in
question, and nothing to the purpose? The Exercise of Patriarchal Jurisdiction,
if Patriarchal be Regal, was not intermitted whilst the Israelites were in
Egypt. It Is true, the Exercise of Regal Power was not then in the hands of any
of the promised Seed of Abraham, nor before neither that I know, but what is
that to the intermission of Regal Authority, as descending from Adam, unless
our A -- will have it, that this chosen Line of Abraham, had the Right of
Inheritance to Adams Lordship, and then to what purpose are his instances of
the 72 Rulers, in whom the Fatherly Authority was preserved in the confusion at
Babel of Esau, and the 12 Dukes of Edom, why are these brought as examples, of
the exercise of true Patriarchal Government, and joined with those of Abraham
and Judah? If the exercise of Patriarchical Jurisdiction were intermitted in
the World, when ever the Posterity of of Jacob had not Supreme Power. I
imagined Monarchical Government, would have served his turn in the hands of
Pharoh or any body. But one cannot easily discover in all places what his
discourse tends to, as particularly in this place, it is not obvious to guess
what he drives at, when he says, the exercise of Supreme Patriarchal
Jurisdiction in Egypt, or how this serves to make out the descent of Adams
Lordship to the Patriarchs or any body else.

153. For I thought he had been giving us out of Scripture, Proofs and Examples
of Monarchical Government, founded on Paternal Authority, descending from Adam,
and not an History of the Jew, amongst whom yet we find no Kings, till many
Years after they were a People, and no mention of their being Heir to Adam, or
Kings by Paternal Authority when they had them; I expected, talking so much as
he does of Scripture, that he would have produced thence a Series of Monarchs,
whose Titles were clear to Adams Fatherhood, and who, as Heirs to him, owned
and exercised Paternal Jurisdiction over their Subjects, and that this was the
true Patriarchical Government, whereas he neither proves that the Patriarchs
were Kings, nor that either Kings or Patriarchs were Heirs to Adam, or so much
as pretended to it; And one may as well prove, that the Patriarchs were all
Absolute Monarchs, that the Power both of Patriarchs, and Kings was only
Paternal, and that this Power descended to them from Adam, I say all these
Propositions may be as well proved by a confused account of a multitude of
little Kings in the West Indies, out of Ferdinando Soto, or any of our late
Histories of the Northern America, or by our A -- s 70 Kings of Greece, out of
Homer, as by any thing he brings out of Scripture, in that Multitude of Kings
he has reckoned up.

154. And methinks he should have let Homer and his Wars of Troy alone, since
his great Zeal to Truth or Monarchy carried him, to such a pitch of transport
against Philosophers and Poets, that he tells us in his Preface, that there are
too many in these days, who please themselves in running after the Opinions of
Philosophers and Poets, to find out such an Original of Government, as might
promise them some Title to Liberty, to the great Scandal of Christianity, and
bringing in of Atheism. And yet these Heathen Philosophers, Aristotle and Poet
Homer, are not rejected by our zealous Christian Politician when ever they
offer any thing, that seems to serve his turn.

But to return to his Scripture History, our A -- farther tells us, p. 18. that
after the return of the Israelites out of Bondage, God out of a special care of
them, chose Moses and Joshua Successively to Govern as Princes in the place and
stead of the S^pream Fathers. If it be true, that they returned out of Bondage,
it must be into a State of Freedom and must imply, that both before and after
this Bondage they were Free, unless our A -- will say, that changing of
Masters, is returning out of Bondage, or that a Slave returns out of Bondage,
when he is removed from one Gally to another: If then they returned out of
Bondage, it is plain that in those days, whatever our A -- in his Preface says
to the contrary, there was difference between a Son, a Subject and a Slave, and
that neither the Patriarchs before, nor their Rulers after this Egyptian
Bondage, numbered their Sons or Subjects amongst their P^ssessions, and
disposed of them with as Absolute a Dominion, as they did their other Goods.

155. This is evident in Jacob, to whom Reuben offered his two Sons as Pledges,
and Judah was at last surety for Benjamins safe return out of Egypt, which all
had been vain, superfluous, and but a sort of mockery; If Jacob had had the
same Power over every one of his Family as he had over his Ox or his Ass, as an
Owner over his Substance, and the offers that Reuben or Judah made, had been
such a Security for returning of Benjamin, as if a Man should take two Lambs
out of his Lords flock, and offer one as security, that he will safely restore
the other.

156. When they were out of this Bondage, what then, God out of a Special care
of them, the Israelites. It Is well that once in his Book, he will allow God to
have any care of the People, for in other places he speaks of Mankind, as if
God had no care of any part of them, but only of their Monarchs, and that the
rest of the People, the Societies of Men, were made as so many Herds of Cattle,
only for the Service, Use and Pleasure of their Princes.

157. Chose Moses and Ioshuah Successively to Govern as Princes, a shreud
Argument our A -- has found out to prove Gods care of the Fatherly Authority,
and Adams Heirs, that here as an expression of his care of his own People, he
chooses those for Princes over them, that had not the least pret^nce to either
Moses of the Tribe of Levy, and Ioshuah of the Tribe of Ephraim, neither of
which had any Title of Fatherhood: But says our A -- they were in the place and
stead of the Supreme Fathers: If God had any where, as plainly declared his
choice of such Fathers to be Rulers, as he did of Moses and Ioshuah, we might
believe Moses and Ioshuah were in their place and stead, but that being the
question in debate, till that be better proved, Moses being chosen by God to be
Ruler of his People, will no more prove that Government belonged to Adams Heir
or to the Fatherhood, then Gods choosing Aaron of the ^ribe of Levy to be
Priest, will prove that the Priesthood belonged to Adams Heir or the
Prime-fathers, since God could choose Aaron to be Priest, and Moses Ruler in
Israel, though neither of those Offices, were settled on Adams Heir or the
Fatherhood.

158. Our A -- goes on, and after them likewise for a time he raised up Judges,
to desend his People in time, of peril, p. 18. This proves Fatherly Authority
to be the Original of Government, and that it descended from Adam to his Heirs,
just as w^ll as what went before, only here our A -- seems to confess that
these Judges, who were all the Governors they then had, were only Men of
valor, whom they made their Generals to defend them in time of peril, and
cannot God raise up such Men, unless Fatherhood have a Title to Government?

159. But says our A --, when God gave the Israelites Kings, he re-established
the ancient and prime Right of Lineal Succession to Paternal Government, p. 18.

160. How did God re-establish it by a Law, a positive command? we find no such
thing. Our A means then, that when God gave them a King, in giving them a King,
he re-established the Right, etc. To re-establish de facto the Right of Lineal
Succession to Paternal Government, is to put a Man in Possession of that
Government which his Fathers did enjoy, and he by Lineal Succession had a Right
to; for first, if it were another Government then what his Ancestors had, it
was not succeeding to an Ancient Right, but beginning a new one; for if a
Prince should give a Man, besides his Ancient Patrimony, which for some Ages
his Family had been dis-seized o^, an additional Estate, never before in the
Possession of his Ancestors, he could not be said to re-establish the Right of
Lineal Succession, to any more then what had been formerly enjoyed by his
Ancestors; if therefore the Power the Kings of Israel had, were any thing more
th^n Isaac or Jacob had^ it was not the re-establishing in them the Right of
Succession to a Power, but giving them a new Power, however you please to call
it Paternal or not, and whether Isaac and Jacob had the ^ame Power, that the
Kings of Israel had; I desire any one, by what has been above said, to
consider, and I do not think they will find that either Abraham, Isaac or
Jacob, had any Regal Power at all.

161. Next, there can be no Re-establishment of the Prime and Ancient Right of
Lineal Succession to any thing, unless he that is put in Possession of it, has
the right to succeed, and be the true and next Heir to him he succeeds to; can
that be a Re-establishment, which begins in a new Family, or that the
Re-establishment of an Ancient Right of Lienal Succession, when a Crown is
given to one, who has no Right of Succession to it, and who if the Lineal
Succession had gone on, had been out of all possibility of pretense to it? Saul
the first King, God gave the Israelites, was of the Tribe of Benjamin, was the
Ancient and Prime Right of Lineal Succession Re-established in him? the next
was David the Youngest Son of Iesse, of the Posterity of Judah, Jacobs 3 d Son,
was the Ancient and Prime Right of Lineal Succession to Paternal Government
Reestablished in him? or in Solomon his Younger Son and Successor in the
Throne? or in Ieroboham over the ten ^ribes? or in Athaliah? who Reigned six
Years an utter Stranger to the Royal Blood. If the Ancient and Prime Right of
Lineal Succession to Paternal Government, were Reestablished in any of these
or their Posterity. The Ancient and Prime Right of Lineal Succession to
Paternal Government, belongs to Younger Brothers, as well as Elder, and may be
Reestablished in any Man living, for whatever Younger Brothers by Ancient and
Prime Right of Lineal Succession, may have as well as the Elder, that every Man
living may have a Right to, by Lineal Succession, and Sr. Robt. as well as any
other. And so what a brave Right of Lineal Succession to his Paternal or Regal
Government, our A -- has Reestablished, for the securing the Rights and
Inheritance of Crowns, where every one may have it, let the World consider.

162. But says our A -- however, p. 19. whenever God made choice of any
special Person to be King, he intended that the issue also should have benefit
thereof, as being comprehended sufficiently in the Person of the Father,
although the Father was only named in the Grant. This yet will not help out
Succession, for if as our A -- says, the benefit of the Grant be intended to
the Issue of the Grantee, this will not direct the Succession, since, if God
give any thing to a Man and his Issue in general, the Claim cannot be to any
one of that Issue in particular, every one that is of his race, will have an
equal Right; If it be said our A -- meant Heir, I believe our A -- was as
willing as any Body to have used that word, if it would have served his turn,
but Solomon who succeeded David in the Throne, being no more his Heir then
Jeroboam, who succeeded him in the Government of the ten Tribes was his issue,
our A -- had reason to avoid saying, that God intended it to the Heirs, when
that would not hold in a Succession, which our A -- could not except against,
and so he has left his Succession as undetermined, as if he had said nothing
about it, for if the Regal Power be given by God to a Man and his Issue, as the
Land of Canaan was to Abraham and his Seed, must they not all have a Title to
it, all share in it? And one may as well say, that by Gods Grant to Abr^ham and
his Seed, the Land of Canaan was to belong only to one of his Se^d exclusive of
all others, as by Gods Grant of Do^inion to a Man and his Iss^e, this Dominion
was to belong all to one of his Issue exclusive of all others.

163. But how will our A -- prove that whenever God made choice of any
special Person to be a King, he intended that the (I suppose he means his)
Issue, also should have benefit thereof: Has he so soon forgot Moses and Joshua
whom in this very Section, he says, God out of a special care chose to govern
as Princes, and the Judges that God raised up. Had not these Princes, having
the Authority of the Supreme Fatherhood, the same Power that the Kings had, and
being specially chosen by God himself, should not their Issue have the benefit
of that choice as well as David or Solomon? If these had the Paternal Authority
put into their hands immediately by God, why had not their Issue the ben^fit of
this Grant in a Succession to this Power? Or if they had it as Adams Heirs, why
did not their Heirs enjoy it after them by Right descending to them, for they
could not be Heirs to one another? was the Power the same, and from the same
Original in Moses, Joshua and the Judges, as it was in David and the Kings, and
was it inheritable in one and not in the other? If it was not Paternal
Authority, then Gods own People were governed by those that had not Paternal
Authority, and those Governors did well enough without it: If it were Paternal
Authority and God chose the Persons that were to exercise it, our A -- s Rule
fails, that whenever God makes choice of any Person to be Supreme Ruler (for
I suppose the name King has no Spell in it it is not the Title, but the Power
makes the difference) he intends that the Issue also should have the benefit of
it, since from their coming out of Egypt to David's time 400 Years, the Issue
was never so sufficiently comprended in the Person of the Father, as that any
Son after the Death of his Father, succeeded to the Government amongst all
those Judges that judged Israel; If to avoid this, it be said, God always chose
the Person of the Successor, and so transferring the Fatherly Authority to him,
excluded his Issue from succeeding to it, that is manifestly, not so in the
Story of Iephtha, where he Articled with the People, and they made him judge
over them, as is plain. Judge. 11.

164. It Is in vain then to say, that whenever God chooses any special Person
to have the exercise of Paternal Authority (for if that be not to be King, I
desire to know the difference between a King and one having the exercise of
Paternal Authority) he intends the Issue also should have the benefit of it,
since we find the Authority, the Judges had, ended with them, and descended not
to their Issue, and if the Judges had not Paternal Authority, I fear it will
trouble our A --, or any of the Friends to his Principles, to tell who had then
the Paternal Authority, that is, the Government and Supreme Power amongst the
Israelites, and I suspect they must confess that the chosen People of God
continued a People several hundreds of Years, without any Knowledge or Thought
of this Paternal Authority, or any appearance of Monarchical Government at all.

165. To be satisfied of this, he need but read the Story of the Levit^, and
the War thereupon with the Benjami^es, in the 3. last Chap. of Iud. and when he
finds that the Levite appeals to the People for Justice, that it was the Tribes
and the Congregation that debated, resolved and directed all that was done on
that occasion: he must conclude either that God was not careful to preserve the
Fatherly Authority amongst his own chosen People, or else that the Fatherly
Authority may be preserved where there is no Monarchical Government; If the
latter, then it will follow that though Fatherly Authority be never so well
proved, yet it will not infer a necessity of Monarchical Government; If the
former, it will seem very strange and improbable that God should ordain
Fatherly Authority to be so Sacred amongst the Sons of Men, that there could be
no Power nor Government without it, and yet that amongst his own People, even
whilst he is providing a Government for them, and therein prescribes Rules to
the several States and Relations of Men, this Great and Fundamental one, this
most material and necessary of all the rest should be concealed, and lie
neglected for 400 Years after.

166. Before I leave this, I must ask how our A -- knows that whenever God
makes choice of any special Person to be King, he intends that the Issue should
have the benefit thereof, does God by the Law of Nature or Revelation say so?
By the same Law also he must say, which of his Issue must enjoy the Crown in
Succession, and so point out the Heir, or else leave his Issue to divide or
scramble for the Government: both alike absurd, and such as will destroy the
benefit of such Grant to the Issue. When any such Declaration of Gods Intention
is produced, it will be our Duty to believe God intends it so, but till that be
done, our A -- must show us some better Warrant before we shall be obliged to
receive him as the Authentic Reveler of Gods Intentions.

167. The Issue, says our A --, is comprehended sufficiently in the Person of
the Father, although the Father only was named in the Grant: And yet God when
he gave the Land of Canaan to Abraham, Genesis 13. 15. thought fit to put his Seed
into the Grant too, so the Priesthood was given to Aaron and his Seed; And the
Crown God gave not only to David, but his Seed also: And however our A --
assures us that God intends, that the Issue should have the benefit of it, when
he chooses any Person to be King, yet we see that the Kingdom he gave to Saul,
without mentioning his Seed after him never came to any of his Issue, and why
when God chose a Person to be King, he should intend that his Issue should have
the benefit of it, more then when he chose one to be Judge in Israel; I would
fain know a reason; or why does a Grant of Fatherly Authority to a King more
comprehend the Issue, then when a like Grant is made to a Judge? Is Paternal
Authority by Right to descend to the Issue of one and not of the other? there
will need some Reason to be shown of this difference, more then the name, when
the thing given is the same Fatherly Authority, and the manner of giving it
Gods choice of the Person, for I suppose our A -- when he says, God raised up
Judges, will by no means allow they were chosen by the People.

168. But since our A -- has so confidently assured us of the care of God to
preserve the Fatherhood, and pretends to build all, he says, upon the Authority
of the Scripture, we may well expect that that People whose Law, Constitution
and History is chiefly contained in the Scripture, should furnish him with the
clearest Instances of Gods care of preserving of the Fatherly Authority, in
that People who it is agreed he had a most peculiar care of, let us see then
what State this Paternal Authority or Government was in amongst the Jews, from
their beginning to be a People. It was omitted by our A: s confession, from
their coming into Egypt, till their return out of that Bondage: above 200
Years. From thence till God gave the Israelites a King about 400 Years more,
our A -- gives but a very slender account of it, nor indeed all that time are
there the least Footsteps of Paternal or Regal Government amongst them. But
then says our A --, God Reestablished the Ancient and Prime Right of lineal
Succession to Paternal Government.

169. What a Lineal Succession to Paternal Government was then Established, we
have already seen. I only now consider how long this lasted, and that was to
their Captivity about 500 Years: From whence to their Destruction by the
Romans, above 650 Years after, the Ancient and Prime Right of lineal Succession
to Paternal Government was again lost, and they continued a People in the
promised Land without it; so that of 1750 Years that they were Gods peculiar
People, they had Hereditary Kingly Government amongst them, not one third of
the time, and of that time there is not the leaft Footsteps of one moment of
Paternal Government, nor the Re-establishment of the Ancient and Prime Right of
lineal Succession to it, whether we suppose it to be derived as from its
Fountain, from David, Saul, Abraham, or which upon our A -- s Principles is the
only true; From Adam. ****

AN ESSAY Concerning the True Oringinal, Extent and End OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.
BOOK. II.
CHAP. I.
1. IT having been shown in the foregoing Discourse.

1o. That Adam had not either by natural Right of Fatherhood, or by positive
Donation from God, any such Authority over his Children, nor Dominion over the
World as is pretended. 2o. That if he had his Heirs, yet, had no Right to it.
3o. That if his Heirs had, there being no Law of Nature nor positive Law of God
that determins, which is the Right Heir in all Cases that may arise, the Right
of Succession, and consequently of bearing Rule, could not have been certainly
determined. 4o. That if even that had been determined, yet the knowledge of
which is the Eldest Line of Adams Posterity, being so long since utterly lost
that in the Races of Mankind and Families of the World, there remains not to
one above another, the least pretense to be the Eldest House, and to have the
Right of Inheritance.
All these premises having, as I think, been clearly made out, it is impossible
that the Rulers now on Earth, should make any benefit, or derive any the least
shadow of Authority from that, which is held to be the Fountain of all Power,
Adams Private Dominion and Paternal Jurisdiction, so that, he that will not
give just occasion, to think that all Government in the World, is the product
only of Force and Violence, and that Men live together by no other Rules but
that of Beasts, where the strongest carries it, and so lay a Foundation for
perpetual Disorder and Mischief, Tumult, Sedition and Rebellion, (things that
the followers of that Hipothesis so loudly cry out against) must of necessity
find out another rise of Government, another Original of Political Power, and
another way of designing and knowing the Persons that have it, then what Sr.
Robt. E. has taught us.

2. To this purpose, I think it may not be amiss, to set down what I take to be
Political Power. That the Power of a Magistrate over a Subject, may be
distinguished from that of a Father over his Children, a Master over his
Servant, a Husband over his Wife, and a Lord over his Slave. All which distinct
Powers happening sometimes together in the same Man, if he be considered under
these different Relations, it may help us to distinguish these Powers one from
another, and show the difference betwixt a Ruler of a Commonwealth, a Father
of a Family, and a Captain of a Gally.

3. Political Power, then I take to be a Right of making Laws with Penalties of
death, and consequently all less Penalties, for the Regulating and Preserving
of Property, and of employing the force of the Community, in the Execution of
such Laws, and in the defense of the Commonwealth from Foreign Injury, and all
this only for the Public Good.

CHAP. II. Of the State of Nature.
4. TO understand Political Power a right, and derive it from its Original, we
must consider what Estate all Men are naturally in, and that is, a State of
perfect Freedom to order their Actions, and dispose of their Possessions, and
Persons as they think fit, within the bounds of the Law of Nature, without
asking leave, or depending upon the Will of any other Man.

A State also of Equality, wherein all the Power and Jurisdiction is
reciprocal, no one having more then another, there being nothing more evident,
then that Creatures of the same species and rank promiscuously born to all the
same advantages of Nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be
equal one amongst another without Subordination or Subjection, unless the Lord
and Master of them all, should by any manifest Declaration of his Will set one
above another, and confer on him by an evident and clear appointment an
undoubted Right to Dominion and Sovereignty.

5. This equality of Men by Nature, the Judicious Hooker looks upon as so
evident in it self, and beyond all question, that he makes it the Foundation of
that Obligation to mutual Love amongst Men, on which he Builds the Duties they
owe one another, and from whence he derives the great Maxims of Justice and
Charity. His words are; The like natural inducement, has brought Men to know
that it is no less their Duty, to Love others then themselves, for seeing those
things which are equal, must needs all have one measure; If I cannot but wish
to receive good, even as much at every Man's hands, as any Man can wish unto his
own Soul, how should I look to have any part of my desire herein satisfied,
unless my self be careful to satisfy the like desire, which is undoubtedly in
other Men weak, being of one and the same nature; to have any thing offered
them repugnant to this desire, must needs in all respects grieve them as much
as me, so that if I do harm, I must look to suffer, there being no reason that
others should show greater measure of love to me, then they have, by me, showed
unto them; my desire therefore to be loved of my equals in nature, as much as
possible may be, imposes upon me a natural Duty of bearing to themward, fully
the like affection; From which relation of equality between our selves and
them, that are as our selves, what several Rules and Canons, natural reason
has drawn for direction of life, no Man is Ignorant. Eccl. Pol. Li. 1.

6. But though this be a State of Liberty, yet it is not a State of License,
though Man in that State have an uncontroleable Liberty, to dispose of his
Person or Possessions, yet he has not Liberty to destroy himself, or so much as
any Creature in his Possession, but where some nobler use, then its bare
Preservation calls for it. The State of Nature, has a Law of Nature to govern
it, which obliges every one, and reason, which is that Law, teaches all
Mankind, who will but consult it; That being all equal and independent, no one
ought to harm another in his Life, Health, Liberty or Possessions; for Men
being all the Workmanship of one Omnipotent, and infinitely wise maker: All the
Servants of one Sovereign Master, sent into the World by his order and about
his business. They are his Property, whose Workmanship they are made to last
during his, not one another Pleasure. And being Furnished with like Faculties,
sharing all in one Community of Nature, there cannot be supposed any such
Subordination among us, that may Authorize us to destroy one another, as if we
were made for one another uses, as the inferior ranks of Creatures are for
ours, every one as he is bound to preserve himself, and not to quit his Station
wilfully, so by the like reason when his own Preservation comes not in
competition, ought he as much as he can to preserve the rest of Mankind, and
not unless it be to do Justice on an offender, take a way, or impair the the
life, or what tends to the Preservation of the Life, the Liberty, Health, Limb
or Goods of another.

7. And that all Men may be restrained from invading others Rights, and from
doing hurt to one another, and the Law of Nature be observed, which wills the
Peace and Preservation of all Mankind, the Execution of the Law of Nature is in
that State, put into every Man's hands, whereby every one has a Right to punish
the transgressors of that Law to such a Degree, as may hinder its Violation.
For the Law of Nature would, as all other Laws that concern Men in this World,
be in vain, if there were no body that in the State of Nature, had a Power to
Execute that Law, and thereby preserve the innocent and restrain offenders, and
if any one in the State of Nature may punish another, for any evil he has done,
every one may do so. For in that State of perfect Equality, where naturally
there is no superiority or jurisdiction of one over another, what any may do in
Prosecution of that Law, every one must needs have a Right to do.

8. And thus in the State of Nature, one Man comes by a Power over another; but
yet no Absolute or Arbitrary Power, to use a Criminal when he has got him in
his hands, according to the passionate heats, or boundless extravagancy of his
own Will, but only to retribute to him, so far as calm reason and conscience
dictates, what is proportionate to his Transgression, which is so much as may
serve for Reparation and Restraint. For these two are the only reasons, why one
Man may lawfully do harm to another, which is that we call punishment. In
trangressing the Law of Nature, the Offender declares himself to live by
another Rule, then that of reason and common equity, which is that measure God
has set to the actions of Men, for their mutual security, and so he becomes
dangerous to Mankind, the tie, which is to secure them from injury and
violence, being slighted and broken by him, which being a trespass against the
whole Species, and the Peace and Safety of it, provided for by the Law of
Nature, every Man upon this score, by the Right he has to preserve Mankind in
general, may restrain, or where it is necessary, destroy things noxious to
them, and so may bring such evil on any one, who has transgressed that Law, as
may make him repent the doing of it, and thereby deter him, and by his Example
others, from doing the like mischief. And in this case, and upon this ground,
every Man has a Right to punish the Offender, and be Executioner of the Law of
Nature.

9. I doubt not but this will seem a very strange Doctrine to some Men, but
before they condemn it, I desire them to resolve me by what Right any Prince or
State can put to death, or punish an Alien, for any Crime he commits in their
Country. It Is certain their Laws by virtue of any Sanction, they receive from
the promulgated Will of the Legislative, reach not a Stranger. They speak not
to him, nor if they did, is he bound to hearken to them. The Legislative
Authority, by which they are in Force over the Subjects of that Commonwealth,
has no Power over him. Those who have the Supreme Power of making Laws in
England, France or Holland, are to an Indian, but like the rest of the World,
Men without Authority: And therefore if by the Law of Nature, every Man has
not a Power to punish Offenses against it, as he soberly Judges the Case to
require, I see not how the Magistrates of any Community, can punish an Alien of
another Country, since in reference to him, they can have no more Power, then
what every Man naturally may have over another.

10. Besides the Crime which consists in violating the Laws, and varying from
the right Rule of reason, whereby a Man so far becomes degenerate, and declares
himself to quit the Principles of Human Nature, and to be a noxious Creature,
there is commonly injury done, and some Person or other, some other Man,
receives damage by his transgression, in which Case he who has received any
damage, has besides the Right of punishment common to him, with other Men, a
particular Right, to seek Reparation from him that has done it. And any other
Person who finds it just, may also join with him that is injured, and assist
him in recovering from the Offender, so much as may make satisfaction for the
harm he has suffered.

11. From these two distinct Rights, the one of Punishing the Crime for
restraint, and preventing the like Offense, which right of punishing is in
every body; the other of taking reparation, which belongs only to the injured
party, comes it to pass that the Magistrate, who by being Magistrate, has the
common right of punishing put into his hands, can often where the public good
demands not the Execution of the Law, remit the punishment of Criminal Offenses
by his own Authority, but yet cannot remit the satisfaction due to any Private
Man, for the damage he has received. That, he who has suffered the damage has a
Right to demand in his own name, and he alone can remit; The damnified Person
has this Power of appropriating to himself, the Goods or Service of the
Offender, by Right of self Preservation, as every Man has a Power to punish the
Crime, to prevent its being committed again, by the Right he has of Preserving
all Mankind, and doing all reasonable things, he can in order to that end: And
thus it is, that every Man in the State of Nature, has a Power to kill a
muderer, both to deter others from doing the like injury, which no reparation
can compensate, by the Example of the punishment that attends it from every
body, and also to secure Men from the attempts of a Criminal, who having
renounced reason, the common Rule and Measure God has given to Mankind, has
by the unjust violence and slaughter, he has committed upon one, declared War
against all Mankind, and therefore may be destroyed as a Lion or a Tiger, one
of those wild Savage Beasts, with whom Men can have no Society nor Security:
And upon this is grounded that great Law of Nature, who so sheddeth Man's Blood,
by Man shall his Blood be shed. And Cain was so fully convinced, that every one
had a Right to destroy such a Criminal, that after the Murder of his Brother,
he cries out, every one that finds me, shall slay me, so plain was it writ in
the Hearts of all Mankind.

12. By the same reason, may a Man in the State of Nature punish the lesser
breaches of that Law; It will perhaps be demanded with death? I answer each
transgression, may be punished to that Degree, and with so much Severity as
will suffice to make it an ill bargain to the Offender, give him Cause to
repent, and terrify others from doing the like: Every Offense that can be
committed in the State of Nature, may in the State of Nature, be also punished,
equally, and as far forth, as it may, in a Commonwealth; for though it would
be besides my present purpose, to enter here into the particulars of the Law of
Nature, or its measures of punishment^; yet, it is certain there is such a Law
and that too, as intelligible and plain to a rational Creature, and a Studier
of that Law, as the positive Laws of Commonwealths, nay possibly plainer; As
much as reason is easier to be understood, then the Phansies and intricate
Contrivances of Men, following contrary and hidden interests put into Words;
For truly, so are a great part of the municipal Laws of Countries, which are
only so far Right, as they are founded on the Law of Nature, by which they are
to be regulated and interpreted.

13. To this strange Doctrine, viz. That in the State of Nature, every one has
the Executive Power of the Law of Nature, I doubt not but it will be objected;
That it is unreasonable for Men to be Judges in their own Cases, that self love
will make Men partial to themselves and their Friends. And on the other side
ill Nature, Passion and Revenge will carry them too far in punishing others.
And hence nothing but confusion and disorder will follow, and that therefore
God has certainly appointed Government to restrain the partiality and violence
of Men, I easily Grant, that Civil Government is the proper Remedy for the
Inconveniences of the State of Nature, which must certainly be Great, where Men
may be Judges in their own Case, since it is easiy to be imagined, that he who
was so unjust as to do his Brother an Injury, will scarce be so just as to
condemn himself for it: But I shall desire those who make this Objection, to
remember that Absolute Monarchs are but Men, and if Government is to be the
Remedy of those Evils, which necessarily follow from Men's being Judges in their
own Cases, and the State of Nature is therefore not to be endured, I desire to
know what kind of Government that is, and how much better it is then the State
of Nature, where one Man commanding a multitude, has the Liberty to be Judge in
his own Case, and may do to all his Subjects whatever he pleases, without the
least question or control of those, who Execute his Pleasure? And in
whatsoever he does, whether lead by reason, mistake or passion, must be
submitted to? Which Men in the State of Nature are not bound to do one to
another. And if he that Judges, Judges amiss in his own, or any other Case, he
is answerable for it, to the rest of Mankind.

14. It Is often asked as a mighty Objection, where are, or ever were, there any
Men in such a State of Nature? To which it may suffice as an answer at present;
That since all Princes and Rulers of Independent Governments all through the
World, are in a State of Nature, it is plain the World never was, nor never will
be, without numbers of Men in that State, I have named all Governors of
Independent Communities whether they are, or are not, in League with others;
For it is not every compact, that puts an end to the State of Nature between
Men, but only this one of agreeing together mutually to enter into one
Community, and make one body Politic, other promises and compacts, Men may make
one with another, and yet still be in the State of Nature. The promises and
bargains for Truck, etc. Between the two Men, in Soldania, in or between, a
Swiss and an Indian, in the Woods of America are binding to them, though they
are perfectly in a State of Nature, in reference to one another for Truth, and
keeping of Faith belongs to Men, as Men, and not as Members of Society.

15. To those that say, there were never any Men in the State of Nature, I will
not only oppose the Authority of the Judicious Hooker, Eccl. Pol. Li. 1 Sect.
10. where he says; The Laws which have been hitherto mentioned, i. e. the Laws
of Nature, do bind Men Absolutely, even as they are Men, although they have
never any settled fellowship, never any Solemn Agreement amongst themselves
what to do or not to do, but for as much as we are not by our selves sufficient
to furnish our selves with competent store of things, needful for such a Life,
as our Nature does desire; a Life, fit for the dignity of Man, therefore to
supply those defects and imperfections which are in us, as living single and
solely by our selves, we are naturally induced to seek Communion and Fellowship
with others, this was the Cause of Men's uniting themselves, at first in Politic
Societies. But I Moreover affirm, that all Men are naturally in that State, and
remain so till by their own consents, they make themselves Members of some
Politic Society, and I doubt not in the Sequel of this Discourse, to make it
very clear.

CHAP. III. Of the State of War.
16. THE State of War is a State of Enmity and Destruction; And therefore
declaring by Word or Action, not a passionate and hasty, but sedate settled
Design, upon another Man's Life, puts him in a State of War with him against
whom he has declared such an Intention, and so has exposed his Life to the
others Power to be taken away by him, or any one that joins with him in his
Defense, and espouses his Quarrel, it being reasonable and just I should have a
Right to destroy that which threatens me with Destruction; For by the
Fundamental Law of Nature, Man being to be preserved, as much as possible, when
all cannot be preserved, the safety of the Innocent is to be preferred: And one
may destroy a Man who makes War upon him, or has discovered an Enmity to his
being for the same Reason, that he may kill a Wolf or a Lion, because they are
not under the ties of the Common Law of Reason, have no other Rule, but that of
Force and Violence, and so may be treated as a Beast of Prey, those dangerous
and noxious Creatures that will be sure to destroy him, whenever he falls into
their Power.

17. And hence it is that he who attempts to get an other Man into his Absolute
Power, does thereby put himself into a State of War with him; It being to be
understood as a Declaration of a Design upon his Life. For I have reason to
conclude, that he who would get me into his Power without my Consent, would use
me as he pleased when he had got me there, and destroy me too when he had a
phansy to it; for no body can desire to have me in his Absolute Power, unless
it be to compel me by force to that which is against the Right of my Freedom,
i. e. make me a Slave. To be free from such force, is the only security of my
Preservation, and reason bids me look on him, as an Enemy to my Preservation,
who would take away that Freedom, which is the Fence to it, so that he who
makes an attempt to enslave me, thereby puts himself into a State of War with
me. He that in the State of Nature, would take away the Freedom that belongs to
any one in that State, must necessarily be supposed to have a design to take
away every thing else, that Freedom being the Foundation of all the rest: As he
that in the State of Society, would take away the Freedom belonging to those of
that Society or Commonwealth, must be supposed to design to take away from
them every thing else, and so be looked on as in a State of War.

18. This makes it Lawful for a Man to kill a Theif, who has not in the least
hurt him, nor declared any design upon his Life, any farther then by the use of
Force, so to get him in his Power, as to take away his Money, or what he
pleases from him, because using force, where he has no Right to get me into his
Power, let his pretense be what it will, I have no reason to suppose, that he,
who would take away my Liberty, would not when he had me in his Power, take
away every thing else. And therefore it is Lawful for me to treat him, as one
who has put himself into a State of War with me, i. e. kill him if I can; For
to that hazard does he justly expose himself, whoever introduces a State of
War, and is aggresser in it.

19. And here we have the plain difference between the State of Nature, and the
State of War, which however some Men have confounded, are as far distant as a
State of Peace, Goodwill, mutual Assistance, and Preservation; and a State of
Enmity, Malice, Violence and Mutual Destruction are one from another. Men
living together according to reason without a common Superior on Earth, with
Authority to judge between them, is properly the State of Nature. But force, or
a declared design of force upon the Person of another, where there is no common
Superior on Earth to appeal to for relief, is the State of War: And it is the
want of such an appeal gives a Man the Right of War even against an aggressor,
though he be in Society and a fellow Subject. Thus a Theif whom I cannot harm,
but by appeal to the Law, for having stolen all that I am worth, I may kill
when he sets on me to rob me, but of my Horse or Coat, because the Law which
was made for my Preservation, where it cannot interpose to secure my Life from
present force, which if lost, is capeable of no reparation, permits me my own
Defense, and the Right of War, a liberty to kill the aggressor, because the
aggressor allows not time to appeal to our common Judge, nor the decision of
the Law, for remedy in a Case where the mischief may be irreparable. Want of a
common Judge with Authority, puts all Men in a State of Nature; Force without
Right, upon a Man's Person, makes a State of War both where there is, and is
not, a common Judge.

20. But when the actual force is over, the State of War ceases between those
that are in Society, and are equally on both sides Subject to the Judge: And
therefore in such controversies, where the question is put, who shall be Judge?
It cannot be meant, who shall decide the controversy: every one knows what
Iephtha here tells us, that the Lord the Judge, shall Judge. Where there is no
Judge on Earth, the Appeal lies to God in Heaven. That question then cannot
mean who shall Judge, whether another has put himself in a State of War with
me, and whether I may as Iephtha did appeal to Heaven in it? Of that I my self
can only be Judge in my own Conscience, as I will answer it at the great day,
to the Supreme Judge of all Men.

CHAP. IV. Of SLAVERY.
22. THE natural Liberty of Man is to be free from any Superior Power on
Earth, and not to be under the Will or Legislative Authority of Man, but to
have only the Law of Nature for his Rule. The Liberty of Man, in Society, is to
be under no other Legislative Power, but that established, by consent, in the
Commonwealth; nor under the Dominion of any Will, or Restraint of any Law, but
what that Legislative shall enact, according to the Trust put in it. Freedom
then is not what Sr. R. F. tells us, O. A. 55. A Liberty for every one to do
what he lists, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any Laws: but
Freedom of Men, under Government, is, to have a standing Rule to live by,
common to every one of that Society, and made by the Legislative Power erected
in it. A Liberty to follow my own Will in all things, where that Rule
prescribes not; not to be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown,
Arbitrary Will of another Man. As Freedom of Nature is to be under no other
restraint but the Law of Nature.

23. This Freedom from Absolute, Arbitrary Power, is so necessary to, and
closely joined with a Man's Preservation, that he cannot part with it, but by
what forfeits his Preservation and Life together. For a Man, not having the
Power of his own Life, cannot, by Compact, or his own Consent, enslave himself
to any one, nor put himself under the Absolute, Arbitrary Power of another, to
take away his Life, when he pleases. No body can give more Power than he has
himself; and he that cannot take away his own Life, cannot give another Power
over it. Indeed having, by his fault, forfeited his own Life, by some Act that
deserves Death; he, to whom he has forfeited it, may (when he has him in his
Power) delay to take it, and make use of him to his own service; and he does
him no injury by it. For, whenever he finds the hardship of his Slavery
outweigh the value of his Life, it is in his Power, by resisting the Will of
his Master, to draw on himself the Death he desires.

24. This is the perfect condition of Slavery, which is nothing else, but the
State of War continued, between a lawful Conqueror, and a Captive. For, if
once Compact enter between them, and make an agreement for a limited Power on
the one side, and Obedience, on the other; the State of War and Slavery ceases,
as long as the Compact endures. For, as has been said, no Man can, by
agreement, pass over to another that which he has not in himself, a Power over
his own Life.

I confess, we find among the Jews, as well as other Nations, that Men did sell
themselves; but, it is plain, this was only to Drudgery, not to Slavery. For, it
is evident, the Person sold was not under an Absolute, Arbitrary, Despotical
Power. For the Master could not have Power to kill him, at any time, whom, at a
certain time, he was obliged to let go free out of his service: And the Master
of such a Servant was so far from having an Arbitrary Power over his Life, that
he could not, at pleasure, so much as maim him, but the Loss of an Eye, or
Tooth, set him free, Exodus XXI.

CHAP. V. Of PROPERTY.
25. WHether we consider natural Reason, which tells us, that Men, being once
born, have a right to their Preservation, and consequently to Meat and Drink,
and such other things, as Nature affords for their Subsistence: Or Revelation,
which gives us an account of those Grants God made of the World to Adam, and to
Noah, and his Sons; it is very clear, that God, as K. David says, Psalm. CXV.
xvj. has given the earth to the Children of men, given it to Mankind in common.
But this being supposed, it seems to some a very great difficulty how any one
should ever come to have a Property in any thing; I will not content my self to
answer, That if it be difficult to make out Property, upon a supposition, That
God gave the World to Adam and his Posterity in common; it is impossible that
any Man, but one universal Monarch, should have any Property upon a
supposition, That God gave the World to Adam, and his Heirs in Succession,
exclusive of all the rest of his Posterity. But I shall endeavor to show, how
Men might come to have a Property in several parts of that which God gave to
Mankind in common, and that without any express Compact of all the Commoners.

26. God, who has given the World to Men in common, has also given them
reason to make use of it to the best advantage of life, and convenience. The
Earth, and all that is therein, is given to Men for the Support and Comfort of
their being. And though all the Fruits it naturally produces, and Beasts it
feeds, belong to Mankind in common, as they are produced by the spontaneous
hand of Nature: and no body has originally a private Dominion, exclusive of the
rest of Mankind, in any of them, as they are thus in their natural state: yet
being given for the use of Men, there must, of necessity, be a means to
appropriate them some way or other before they can be of any use, or at all
beneficial to any particular Men. The Fruit, or Venison which nourishes the
wild Indian, who knows no Enclosure, and is still a Tenant in common, must be
his, and so his, i.e. a part of him, that another can no longer have any right
to it, before it can do him any good for the support of his Life.

27. Though the Earth, and all inferior Creatures be common to all Men, yet
every Man has a Property in his own Person. This no Body has any Right to but
himself. The Labor of his Body, and the Work of his Hands, we may say, are
properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the State that Nature has
provided, and left it in, he has mixed his Labor with it, and joined to it
something that is his own, and thereby makes it his Property. It being by him
removed from the common state Nature placed it in, it has by this labor
something annexed to it, that excludes the common right of other Men. For this
labor being the unquestionable Property of the Labourer, no Man but he can
have a right to what that is once joined to, at least where there is enough,
and as good left in common for others.

28. He that is nourished by the Acorns he picked up under an Oak, or the Apples
he gathered from the Trees in the Wood; has certainly appropriated them to
himself. No Body can deny but the nourishment is his. I ask then, when did they
begin to be his? When he digested? or when he eat? Or when he boiled? Or when
he brought them home? Or when he picked them up? And it is plain, if the first
gathering made them not his, nothing else could. That labor put a distinction
between them and common. That added something to them more than Nature, the
common Mother of all, had done; and so they became his private right. And will
any one say he had no right to those Acorns or Apples he thus appropriated,
because he had not the consent of all Mankind to make them his? Was it a
Robbery thus to assume to himself what belonged to all in Common? If such a
consent as that was necessary, Man had starved, notwithstanding the Plenty God
had given him. We see in Commons, which remain so by Compact, that it is the
taking any part of what is common, and removing it out of the state Nature
leaves it in, which begins the Property; without which the Common is of no use.
And the taking of this or that part, does not depend on the express consent of
all the Commoners. Thus the Grass my Horse has bit; the Turfs my Servant has
cut; and the Ore I have dig'd in any place where I have a right to them in
common with others, become my Property, without the assignation or consent of
any body. The labor that was mine, removing them out of that common state they
were in, has fixed my Property in them.

29. By making an explicit consent of every Commoner, necessary to any ones
appropriating to himself any part of what is given in common. Children or
Servants could not cut the Meat which their Father or Master had provided for
them in common, without assigning to every one his peculiar part. Though the
Water running in the Fountain be every ones; yet who can doubt but that in the
Pitcher is his only who drew it out? His labor has taken it out of the hands
of Nature where it was common, and belonged equally to all her Children, and
has thereby appropriated it to himself.

30. Thus this Law of reason makes the Deer, that Indian's who has killed it;
it is allowed to be his goods who has bestowed his labor upon it, though
before, it was the common right of every one. And amongst those who are counted
the Civilized part of Mankind, who have made and multiplied positive Laws to
determine Property, this original Law of Nature for the beginning of Property,
in what was before common, still takes places; and by virtue thereof, what Fish
any one catches in the Ocean, that great and still remaining Common of Mankind;
or what Ambergriese any one takes up here, is by the labor that removes it out
of that common state Nature left it in, made his Property who takes that pains
about it. And even amongst us the Hare that any one is Hunting, is thought his
who pursues her during the Chase. For being a Beast that is still looked upon
as common, and no Man's private Possession; who-ever has employed so much
labor about any of that kind, as to find and pursue her, has thereby removed
her from the state of Nature wherein she was common, and has began a Property.

31. It will perhaps be objected to this, That if gathering the Acorns, or
other Fruits of the Earth, etc. makes a right to them, then any one may ingross
as much as he will. To which I Answer, Not so. The same Law of Nature that does
by this means give us Property, does also bound that Property too. God has
given us all things richly, 1 Timothy vi. 12. Is the Voice of Reason confirmed by
Inspiration. But how far has he given it us, to enjoy? As much as any one can
make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils; so much he may by his
labor fix a Property in. Whatever is beyond this, is more than his share, and
belongs to others. Nothing was made by God for Man to spoil or destroy. And
thus considering the plenty of natural Provisions there was a long time in the
World, and the few spenders, and to how small a part of that provision the
industry of one Man could extend it self, and ingross it to the prejudice of
others; especially keeping within the bounds set by reason of what might serve
for his use; there could be then little room for quarrels or contentions about
Property so established.

32. But the chief matter of Property being now not the Fruits of the Earth,
and the Beasts that subsist on it, but the Earth it self; as that which takes
in and carries with it all the rest: I think it is plain, that Property in that
too is acquired as the former. As much Land as a Man Tills, Plants, Improves,
Cultivates, and can use the Product of; so much is his Property. He by his
labor does as it were enclose it from the Common. Nor will it invalidate his
right to say, Every body else has an equal title to it; and therefore he cannot
appropriate, he cannot enclose, without the consent of all his
Fellow-Commoners, all Mankind. God when he gave the World in common to all
Mankind, commanded Man also to labor, and the penury of his Condition required
it of him. God and his Reason commanded him to subdue the Earth, i. e^ improve
it for the benefit of Life, and therein lay out something upon it that was his
own, his labor. He that in obedience to this Command of God, subdued, tilled
and sowed any part of it, thereby annexed to it something that was his
Property, which another had no Title to, nor could without injury take from him.

33. Nor was this appropriation of any parcel of Land, by improving it, any
prejudice to any other Man, since there was still enough, and as good left; and
more than the yet unprovided could use. So that in effect, there was never the
less left for others because of his enclosure for himself. For he that leaves
as much as another can make use of, does as good as take nothing at all. No
Body could think himself injured by the drinking of another Man, though he took
a good draught, who had a whole River of the same Water left him to quench his
thirst. And the Case of Land and Water, where there is enough of both, is
perfectly the same.

34. God gave the World to Men in Common, but since he gave it them for their
benefit, and the greatest Conveniences of Life they were capable to draw from
it; it cannot be supposed he meant it should always remain common and
uncultivated. He gave it to the use of the industrious and rational, (and
labor was to be his title to it;) not to the fancy or covetousness of the
quarrelsome and contentious. He that had as good left for his improvement, as
was already taken up, needed not complain, ought not to meddle with what was
already improved by another's labor: if he did, it is plain he desired the
benefit of another pains which he had no right to, and not the ground which
God had given him in common with others to labor on, and whereof there was as
good left as that already possessed; and more than he knew what to do with, or
his industry could reach to.

35. It Is true, in Land that is common in England, or any other Country, where
there is plenty of people under Government, who have Money and commerce, no one
can enclose or appropriate any part, without the consent of all his
Fellow-Commoners: Because this is left common by Compact, i. e. by the Law of
the Land, which is not to be violated. And though it be Common, in respect of
some Men, it is not so to all Mankind; but is the joint propriety of this
Country, or this Parish. Besides, the remainder, after such enclosure, would
not be as good to the rest of the Commoners as the whole was, when they could
all make use of the whole; whereas in the beginning and first peopling of the
great Common of the World, it was quite otherwise. The Law Man was under was
rather for appropriating. God Commanded, and his wants forced him to labor.
That was his Property which could not be taken from him wherever he had fixed
it. And hence subduing or cultivating the Earth, and having Dominion, we see,
are joined together. The one gave Title to the other. So that God, by
commanding to subdue, gave Authority so far to appropriate. And the Condition
of humane Life, which requires labor and materials to work on, necessarily
introduce private Possessions.

36. The measure of Property, Nature well set, by the Extent of Men's Labor,
and the Convenience of Life: no Man's Labor could subdue, or appropriate all;
nor could his Enjoyment consume more than a small part; so that it was
impossible for any Man, this way, to entrench upon the Right of another, or
acquire, to himself, a Property, to the Prejudice of his Neighbor, who would
still have room, for as good, and as large a Possession (after the other had
taken out his) as before it was appropriated; which measure did confine every
Man's Possession, to a very moderate Proportion, and such as he might
appropriate to himself, without Injury to any Body, in the first Ages of the
World, when Men were more in danger to be lost, by wandering from their
Company, in the then vast Wilderness of the Earth, than to be striatned for
want of room to plant in. And the same measure may be allowed still, without
prejudice to any Body, as full as the World seems. For supposing a Man, or
Family, in the state they were at first, peopling of the World by the Children
of Adam, or Noah; let him plant in some inland, vacant places of America, we
shall find that the Possessions, he could make himself, upon the measures we
have given, would not be very large, nor, even to this day, prejudice the rest
of Mankind, or give them reason to complain, or think themselves injured by
this Man's Incroachment, though the Race of Men have now spread themselves to
all the corners of the World, and do infinitely exceed the small number was at
the beginning. Nay the extent of Ground is of so little value, without Labor,
that I have heard it affirmed, that, in Spain it self, a Man may be permitted
to plough, sow, and reap, without being disturbed, upon Land he has no other
Title to, but only his making use of it. But, on the contrary, the Inhabitants
think themselves beholden to him, who, by his Industry, on neglected, and
consequently waste Land, has increased the stock of Corn, which they wanted.
But be this as it will, which I lay no stress on; this I dare boldly affirm,
That the same Rule of Propriety, ( viz.) that every Man should have as much as
he could make use of, would hold still in the World, without straitning any
body, since there is Land enough in the World, to suffice double the
Inhabitants, had not the Invention of Money, and the tacit Agreement of Men, to
put a value on it, introduced (by Consent) larger Possessions, and a Right to
them; which, how it has done, I shall, by and by, show more at large.

37. This is certain, That in the beginning, before the desire of having more
than Men needed, had altered the intrinsic value of things, which depends only
on their usefulness to the Life of Man; or had agreed, that a little piece of
yellow Metal, which would keep without wasting or decay, should be worth a
great piece of Flesh, or a whole heap of Corn; though Men had a Right to
appropriate, by their Labor, each one to himself, as much of the things of
Nature, as he could use: yet this could not be much, nor to the Prejudice of
others, where the same plenty was still left, to those who would use the same
Industry.

Before the Appropriation of Land, he who gathered as much of the wild Fruit,
killed, caught, or tamed as many of the Beasts as he could; he that so employed
his Pains about any of the spontaneous Products of Nature, as any way to alter
them, from the state Nature put them in, by placing any of his Labor on them,
did thereby acquire a Propriety in them: but if they perished, in his
Possession, without their due use; if the Fruits rotted, or the Venison
putrified, before he could spend it, he offended against the common Law of
Nature, and was liable to be punished; he invaded his Neighbor's share, for he
had no Right, farther than his Use called for any of them, and they might serve
to afford him Conveniences of Life.

38. The same measures governed the Possession of Land too: Whatsoever he
tilled and reaped, laid up and made use of, before it spoiled, that was his
peculiar Right; whatsoever he enclosed, and could feed, and make use of, the
Cattle and Product was also his. But if either the Grass of his Enclosure
rotted on the Ground, or the Fruit of his planting perished without gathering,
and laying up, this part of the Earth, notwithstanding his Enclosure, was still
to be looked on as Waste, and might be the Possession of any other. Thus, at
the beginning, Cain might take as much Ground as he could till, and make it his
own Land, and yet leave enough to Abel's Sheep to feed on; a few Acres would
serve for both their Possessions. But as Families increased, and industry
enlarged their stocks, their Possessions enlarged with the need of them; but
yet it was commonly without any fixed property in the ground they made use of,
till they incorporated, settled themselves together, and built Cities, and then,
by consent, they came in time, so set out the bounds of their distinct
Territories, and agree on limits between them and their Neighbors; and by Laws
within themselves, settled the Properties of those of the same Society. For we
see, that in that part of the World which was first inhabited, and therefore
like to be best peopled, even as low down as Abraham's time, they wandered with
their Flocks, and their Herds, which was their substance, freely up and down;
and this Abraham did, in a Country where he was a stranger. Whence it is plain,
that, at least, a great part of the Land lay in Common. That the Inhabitants
valued it not, nor claimed Property in any more than they made use of. But when
there was not room enough in the same place, for their Herds to feed together,
they, by consent, as Abraham and Lot did, Genesis xiii. 5. separated and enlarged
their Pasture, where it best liked them. And for the same Reason Esau went from
his Father, and his Brother, and planted in Mount Seir, Genesis xxxvi. 6.

39. And thus, without supposing any private Dominion, and property in Adam,
over all the World, exclusive of all other Men, which can no way be proved, nor
any ones Property be made out from it; but supposing the World given as it was
to the Children of Men in common, we see how labor could make Men distinct
titles to several parcels of it, for their private uses; wherein there could be
no doubt of right, no room for quarrel.

40. Nor is it so strange as perhaps before consideration it may appear, that
the Property of labor should be able to overballance the Community of Land.
For it is labor indeed that puts the difference of value on every thing; and
let any one consider, what the difference is between an Acre of Land planted
with Tabaco, ^r Sugar, sown with Wheat or Barley; and an Acre of the same Land
lying in common, without any Husbandry upon it; and he will find, that the
improvement of labor makes the far greater part of the value. I think it will
be but a very modest Computation to say, that of the Products of the Earth
useful to the Life of Man 9/10 are the eff^cts of labor: nay, if we will
rightly estimate things as they come to our use, and cast up the several
expenses about them, what in them is purely owing to Nature, and what to
labor, we shall find, that in most of them 99/100 are wholly to be put on the
account of labor.

41. There cannot be a clearer demonstration of any thing, than several Nations
of the Americans are of this, who are rich in Land, and poor in all the
Comforts of Life; whom Nature having furnished as liberally as any other
people, with the materials of Plenty, i. e. a fruitful Soil, apt to produce in
abundance, what might serve for food, raiment, and delight; yet for want of
improving it by labor, have not 1/100 part of the Conveniences we enjoy. And
a King of a large and fruitful Territory there, feeds, lodges, and is clad
worse than a day Labourer in England.

42. To make this a little clearer, let us but trace some of the ordinary
provisions of Life, through their several progresses, before they come to our
use, and see how much they receive of their value from human industry. Bread,
Wine and Cloth are things of daily use and great plenty, yet notwithstanding
Acorns, Water, and Leaves, or Skins, must be our Bread, Drink and Clothing,
did not labor furnish us with these more useful Commodities. For whatever
Bread is more worth than Acorns, Wine than Water, and Cloth or Silk than
Leaves, Skins or Moss, that is wholly owing to labor and industry. The one of
these being the food and raiment which unassisted Nature furnishes us with; the
other Provisions which our industry and pains prepare for us, which how much
they exceed the other in value, when any one has computed, he will then see
how much labor makes the far greatest part of the value of things we enjoy in
this World: and the ground which produces the materials, is scarce to be
reckoned in as any, or at most, but a very small part of it: so little, that
even amongst us, Land that is left wholly to Nature, that has no improvement
of Pasturage, Tillage, or Planting, is called, as indeed it is, wast; and we
shall find the benefit of it amount to little more than nothing.

43. An Acre of Land that bears here Twenty Bushels of Wheat, and another in
America, which, with the same Husbandry, would do the like, are, without doubt,
of the same natural, intrinsic Value. But yet the Benefit Mankind receives
from one in a Year is worth 5 l. and the other possibly not worth a Penny; if
all the Profit an Indian received from it were to be valued, and sold here; at
least, I may truly say, not 1/^000. It Is Labor then which puts the greatest
part of Value upon Land, without which it would scarcely be worth any thing;
it is to that we owe the greatest part of all its useful Products; for all that
the Straw, Bran, Bread, of that Acre of Wheat, is more worth than the Product
of an Acre of as good Land, which lies waste, is all the Effect of Labor. For
it is not barely the Plough-man's Pains, the Reaper's and Thresher's Toil, and
the Baker's Sweat, is to be counted into the Bread we eat; the Labor of those
who broke the Oxen, who dug and wrought the Iron and Stones, who felled and
framed the Timber employed about the Plough, Mill, Oven, or any other Utensils,
which are a vast Number, requisite to this Corn, from its sowing to its being
made Bread, must all be charged on the account of Labor, and received as an
effect of that: Nature and the Earth furnished only the almost worthless
Materials, as in themselves. 'Twould be a strange Catalogue of things, that
Industry provided and made use of, about every Loaf of Bread before it came to
our use, if we could trace them; Iron, Wood, Leather, Bark, Timber, Stone,
Bricks, Coals, Lime, Cloth, Dying^ Drugs, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Ropes, and all the
Materials made use of in the Ship, that brought any of the Commodities, made
use of by any of the Workmen, to any part of the Work, all which, 'twould be
almost impossible, at least too long, to reckon up.

44. From all which it is evident, that though the things of Nature are given in
common: Man (by being Master of himself, and Proprietor of his own Person, and
the Actions or Labor of it) had still in himself the great Foundation of
Property: and that which made up the great part of what he applied to the
Support or Comfort of his being, when Invention and Arts had improved the
conveniences of Life, was perfectly his own, and did not belong in common to
others.

45. Thus Labor, in the beginning, gave a Right of Property, where ever any
one was pleased to employ it, upon what was common, which remained, a long
while, the far greater part, and is yet more than Mankind makes use of. Men, at
first, for the most part, contented themselves with what un-assisted Nature
offered to their Necessities; and though afterward, in some parts of the
World, where the Increase of People and Stock, with the Use of Money, had made
Land scarce, and so of some Value, the several Communities settled the Bounds of
their distinct Territories, and, by Laws, within themselves, regulated the
Properties of the private Men of their Society, and so, by Compact and
Agreement, settled the Property which Labor and Industry began. And the
Leagues, that have been made between several States and Kingdoms, either
expressly or tacitly dis-owning all Claim and Right to the Land in the others
Possession, have, by common Consent, given up their Pretenses to their natural
common Right, which originally they had to those Countries: and so have, by
positive Agreement, settled a Property amongst themselves, in distinct Parts of
the World; yet there are still great Tracts of Ground to be found, which the
Inhabitants thereof, not having joined with the rest of Mankind, in the consent
of the Use of their common Money, lie waste, and are more than the People, who
dwell on it, do, or can make use of, and so still lie in common. Though this
can scarce happen amongst that part of Mankind that have consented to the Use
of Money.

46. The greatest part of things really useful to the Life of Man, and such as
the necessity of subsisting made the first Commoners of the World look after,
as it does the Americans now, are generally things of short duration, such as,
if they are not consumed by use, will decay and perish of themselves. Gold,
Silver, and Diamonds, are things, that Fancy, or Agreement has put the Value
on, more than real Use, and the necessary Support of Life: Now of those good
things which Nature has provided in common, every one has a Right (as has
been said) to as much as he could use, and had a Property in all he could
effect with his Labor: all that his Industry could extend to, to alter from
the State Nature had put it in, was his. He that gathered a Hundred Bushels of
Acorns or Apples, had thereby a Property in them; they were his Goods, as soon
as gathered. He was only to look that he used them before they spoiled; else he
took more than his share, and robbed others. And indeed it was a foolish thing,
as well as dishonest, to hoard up more than he could make use of. If he gave
away a part to any body else, so that it perished not uselesly in his
Possession, these he also made use of. And if he also bartered away Plumbs,
that would have rotted in a Week', for Nuts that would last good for his eating
a whole Year, he did no injury; he wasted not the common Stock; destroyed no
part of the portion of Goods that belonged to others, so long as nothing
perished uselesly in his hands. Again, If he would give his Nuts for a piece of
Metal, pleased with its color; or exchange his Sheep for Shells, or Wool for
a sparkling Pebble or a Diamond, and keep those by him all his Life, he invaded
not the Right of others; he might heap up as much of these durable things as he
pleased: the exceeding of the bounds of his just Property not lying in the
largeness of his Possession, but the perishing of any thing uselesly in it.

47. And thus came in the use of Money, some lasting thing that Men might keep
without spoiling, and that, by mutual consent, Men would take in exchange for
the truly useful, but perishable Supports of Life.

48. And as different degrees of Industry were apt to give Men Possessions in
different Proportions, so this Invention of Money gave them the opportunity to
continue and enlarge them. For supposing an Island, separate from all possible
Commerce with the rest of the World, wherein there were but a Hundred Families,
but there were Sheep, Horses and Cowes, with other useful Animals, wholesome
Fruits, and Land enough for Corn, for a Hundred thousand times as many, but
nothing in the Island, either because of its Commonness, or perishableness, fit
to supply the Place of Money: What reason could any one have there to enlarge
his Possessions, beyond the use of his Family, and a plentiful supply to its
Consumption, either in what their own Industry produced, or they could barter
for like perishable, useful Commodities, with others? Where there is not
something both lasting and scarce, and so valuable to be hoarded up, there Men
will not be apt to enlarge their Possessions of Land, were it never so rich,
never so free for them to take. For I ask, What would a Man value Ten thousand,
or an Hundred thousand Acres of excellent Land, ready cultivated, and well
stocked too with Cattle, in the middle of the inland Parts of America, where
he had no hopes of Commerce with other parts of the World, to draw Money to
him, by the Sale of the Product. It would not be worth the enclosing, and we
should see him give up again to the wild Common of Nature whatever was more
than would supply the Conveniences of Life, to be had there, for him and his
Family.

49. Thus in the beginning all the World was America, and more so than that is
now; for no such thing as Money was any where known. Find out something that
has the Use and Value of Money amongst his Neighbors, you shall see the same
Man will begin presently to enlarge his Possessions.

50. But since Gold and Silver, being little useful to the Life of Man, in
proportion to Food, Raiment, and Carriage, has its value only from the consent
of Men, whereof labor yet makes in great part the measure, It is plain, that
the consent of Men have agreed to a disproportionate and unequal Possession of
the Earth; I mean out of the bounds of Society and Compact: for in Governments
the Laws regulate it, they having by consent, found out and agreed in a way how
a Man may rightfully, and without injury, possess more than he himself can make
use of by receiving Gold and Silver, which may continue long in a Man's
Possession, without decaying for the overplus, and agreeing those Metals should
have a value.

51. And thus, I think, it is very easy to conceive, without any difficulty,
how labor could at first begin a title of Property in the common things of
nature, and how the spending it upon our uses bounded it. So that there could
then be no reason of quarrelling about title, nor any doubt about the largeness
of Possession it gave. Right and Convenience went together. For as a Man had a
right to all he could employ his labor upon, so he had no temptation to labor
for more than he could make use of. This left no room for Controversy about
the title, nor for incroachment on the right of others; what Portion a Man
carved to himself, was easily seen; and it was useless as well as dishonest, to
carve himself too much, or take more than he needed.

CHAP. VI. Of Paternal Power.
52. IT may perhaps be censured an impertinent Criticism in a discourse of this
nature, to find fault with words and names that have obtained in the World: And
yet possibly it may not be amiss to offer new ones when the old are apt to lead
Men into mistakes, as this of Paternal Power probably has done, which seems so
to place the Power of Parents over their Children wholly in the Father, as if
the Mother had no share in it; whereas if we consult Reason or Revelation, we
shall find she has an equal title; which may give one reason to ask, Whether
this might not be more properly called Parental Power? For whatever obligation
Nature and the right of Generation lays on Children; it must certainly bind
them equal to both the concurrent Causes of it. And accordingly we see the
Positive Law of God every where joins them together, without distinction, when
it commands the Obedience of Children, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus
20. 12. Whosoever curses his Father or his Mother, Lev. 20. 9. Ye shall fear
every Man his Mother and his Father, Lev. 19. 3. Children obey your Parents,
etc. Ephesians. 6. 1. is the style of the Old and New Testament.

53. Had but this one thing been well considered, without looking any deeper
into the matter, it might perhaps have kept men from running into those gross
mistakes they have made about this Power of Parents, which however it might,
without any great harshness, bear the name of Absolute Dominion, and Regal
Authority, when under the title of Paternal Power, it seemed appropriated to
the Father; would yet have sounded but odly, and in the very name shown the
absurdity, if this supposed Absolute Power over Children had been called
Parental, and thereby discovered that it belonged to the Mother too: For it
will but very ill serve the turn of those Men who contend so much for the
Absolute Power and Authority of the Fatherhood, as they call it, that the
Mother should have any share in it. And it would have but ill supported the
Monarchy they contend for, when by the very name it appeared, that that
Fundamental Authority from whence they would derive their Government of a
single Person only, was not placed in one, but two Persons jointly. But to let
this of names pass.

54. Though I have said above (2.) That all Men by Nature are equal; I cannot
be supposed to understand all sorts of Equality: Age or Virtue may give Men a
just Precedence: Excellency of Parts and Merit may place others above the
Common Level: Birth may subject some, and Alliance or Benefits others to pay an
Observance to those, to whom Nature, Gratitude or other Respects may have made
it due; and yet all this consists with the Equality which all Men are in, in
respect of Jurisdiction or Dominion one over another: which was the Equality I
there spoke of, as proper to the Business in hand, being that equal Right that
every Man has to his Natural Freedom, without being subjected to the Will or
Authority of any other Man.

55. Children, I confess, are not born in this full state of Equality, though
they are born to it. Their Parents have a sort of Rule and Jurisdiction over
them when they come into the World, and for some time after, but it is but a
temporary one. The Bonds of this Subjection are like the Swaddling Cloths they
are wrapped up in, and supported by, in the weakness of their Infancy. Age and
Reason as they grow up, loosen them till atlength they drop quite off, and
leave a Man at his own free Disposal.

56. Adam was created a perfect Man, his Body and Mind in full possession of
their Strength and Reason, and so was capable, from the first Instance of his
being, to provide for his own Support and Preservation, and govern his Actions
according to the Dictates of the Law of Reason God had implanted in him. From
him the World is peopled with his Descendants, who are all born Infants, weak
and helpless, without Knowledge or Understanding. But to supply the Defects of
this imperfect State, till the improvement of Growth and Age had removed them,
Adam and Eve, and after them all Parents were, by the Law of Nature, under an
Obligation to preserve, nourish, and educate the Children they had begotten,
not as their own Workmanship, but the Workmanship of their own Maker, the
Almighty, to whom they were to be accountable for them.

57. The Law that was to govern Adam, was the same that was to govern all his
Posterity, the Law of Reason. But his Offspring having another way of entrance
into the World, different from him, by a natural Birth, that produced them
ignorant, and without the Use of Reason, they were not presently under that
Law: For no Body can be under a Law that is not promulgated to him; and this
Law being promulgated or made known by Reason only, he that is not come to the
Use of his Reason, cannot be said to be under this Law: and Adam's Children
being not presently as soon as born, under this Law of Reason, were not
presently free. For Law, in its true Notion, is not so much the Limitation as
the direction of a free and intelligent Agent to his proper Interest, and
prescribes no farther, than is for the general Good of those under that Law.
Could they be happier without it, the Law, as an useless thing, would of it
self vanish; and that ill deserves the Name of Confinement, which hedges us in
only from Bogs and Precipices. So that however it may be mistaken, the end of
Law, is not to abolish or restrain, but to preserve and enlarge Freedom. For in
all the states of created Beings, capable of Laws, where there is no Law there
is no Freedom. For, Liberty is, to be free from Restraint and Violence from
others, which cannot be where there is no Law, and is not, as we are told, A
Liberty for every Man to do what he lists: For who could be free, when every
other Man's Humor might domineer over him? But a Liberty to dispose and order
freely as he lists his Person, Actions, Possessions, and his whole Property
within the Allowance of those Laws, under which he is, and therein not to be
subject to the the arbitrary Will of another; but freely follow his own.

58. The Power, then, that Parents have over their Children, arises from that
Duty which is incumbent on them, to take care of their Offspring, during the
imperfect state of Childhood. To inform the Mind, and govern the Actions of
their yet ignorant Nonage, till Reason shall take its place, and ease them of
that Trouble, is what the Children want, and the Parents are bound to. For God
haing given Man an Understanding to direct his Actions, has allowed him a
freedom of Will, and liberty of Acting, as properly belonging thereunto, within
the bounds of that Law he is under. But whilst he is in an Estate, wherein he
has no Understanding of his own to direct his Will, he is not to have any Will
of his own to follow: He that understands for him, must will for him too; he
must prescribe to his Will, and regulate his Actions; but when he comes to the
estate that made his Father a Freeman, the Son is a Freeman too.

59. This holds in all the Laws a Man is under, whether natural or civil. Is a
man under the Law of Nature? what made him free of that Law? what gave him a
free disposing of his Property, according to his own Will, within the compass
of that Law? I answer, an Estate wherein he might be supposed capable to know
that Law, that so he might keep his Actions within the Bounds of it. When he
has acquired that state, he is presumed to know how far that Law is to be his
Guide, and how far he may make use of his Freedom, and so comes to have it;
till then, some body else must guide him, who is presumed to know how far the
Law allows a Liberty. If such a state of Reason, such an Age of Discretion made
him free, the same shall make his Son free too. Is a Man under the Law of
England? what made him free of that Law? that is, to have the Liberty to
dispose of his Actions and Possessions, according to his own Will, within the
Permission of that Law? A capacity of knowing that Law. Which is supposed, by
that Law, at the Age of Twenty one, and in some cases sooner. If this made the
Father free, it shall make the Son free too. Till then, we see, the Law allows
the Son to have no Will, but he is to be guided by the Will of his Father or
Guardian, who is to understand for him. And if the Father die, and fail to
substitute a Deputy in this Trust, if he has not provided a Tutor to govern
his Son, during his Minority, during his Want of Understanding, the Law takes
care to do it; some other must govern him, and be a Will to him, till he has
attained to a state of Freedom, and his Understanding be fit to take the
Government of his Will. But after that, the Father and Son are equally free, as
much as Tutor and Pupil, after Nonage; equally Subjects of the same Law
together, without any Dominion left in the Father, over the Life, Liberty, or
Estate of his Son, whether they be only in the State, and under the Law of
Nature, or under the positive Laws of an Established Government.

60. But if, through defects, that may happen, out of the ordinary Course of
Nature, any one comes not to such a degree of Reason, wherein he might be
supposed capable of knowing the Law, and so living within the Rules of it, he
is never capable of being a Free Man; he is never let loose to the disposure of
his own Will, because he knows no bounds to it, has not Understanding, its
proper Guide; but is continued under the Tuition and Government of others, all
the time his own Understanding is incapable of that Charge. And so Lunaticks
and Idiots are never set free from the Government of their Parents; Children,
who are not as yet come unto those years whereat they may have; and Innocents,
which are excluded, by a natural defect, from ever having. Thirdly, Madmen,
which, for the present, cannot possibly have the use of right Reason to guide
themselves, have, for their Guide, the Reason that guides other Men, which are
Tutors over them, to seek and procure their good for them, says Hooker Eccl.
Pol. lib. 1.. 7. All which seems no more than that Duty which God and Nature
has laid on Man, as well as other Creatures, to preserve their Offspring till
they can be able to shift for themselves, and will scarce amount to an instance
or proof of Parents Regal Authority.

61. Thus we are born free, as we are born rational; not that we have actually
the Exercise of either: Age that brings one, brings with it the other too. And
thus we see how natural Freedom and Subjection to Parents may consist together,
and are both founded on the same Principle. A Child is free by his Father's
Title, by his Father's Understanding, which is to govern him, till he has it
of his own. The Freedom of a man, at years of discretion, and the Subjection of
a Child to his Parents, whilst yet short of it, are so consistent, and so
distinguishable, that the most blinded Contenders for Monarchy, by Right of
Fatherhood, cannot miss of it; the most obstinate cannot but allow of it. For
were their Doctrine all true, were the right Heir of Adam now known, and, by
that Title, settled a Monarch in his Throne; invested with all the Absolute,
Unlimited Power Sr. R. F. talks of; If he should dye as soon as his Heir were
born, must not the Child, notwithstanding he were never so free, never so much
sovereign, be in subjection to his Mother and Nurse, to Tutors and Gonours,
till Age and Education brought him Reason and Ability to govern himself, and
others? The Necessities of his Life, the Health of his Body, and the
Information of his Mind would require him to be directed by the Will of others
and not his own: and yet will any one think, that this Restraint and Subjection
were inconsistent with, or spoiled him of that Liberty or Sovereignty he had a
Right to: or gave away his Empire to those who had the Government of his
Nonage? This Government over him only prepared him the better, and sooner for
it. If any body should ask me, When my Son is of Age to be free; I shall
answer, Just when his Monarch is of Age to govern. But at what time, says the
judicious Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 6. a man may be said to have attained so
far forth the use of Reason, as suffices to make him capable of those Laws
whereby he is then bound to guide his Actions: this is a great deal more easy
for sense to discern, than for any one, by Skill and Learning, to determine.

62. Commonwealths themselves take notice of, and allow, that there is a time
when Men are to begin to act like Free Men, and therefore, till that time,
require not Oaths of Fealty or Allegiance, or other public owning of, or
Submission to the Government of their Countries.

63. The Freedom then of Man, and Liberty of acting, according to his own Will,
is grounded on his having Reason, which is able to instruct him in that Law he
is to govern himself by, and make him know how far he is left to the freedom of
his own will. To turn him loose to an unrestrained Liberty, before he has
Reason to guide him, is not the allowing him the privilege of his Nature, to
be free; but to thrust him out amongst Brutes, and abandon him to a state as
wretched, and as much beneath that of a Man, as theirs. This is that which puts
the Authority into the Parents hands to govern the Minority of their Children.
God has made it their business to employ this Care on their Offspring, and
has placed in them suitable Inclinations of Tenderness and Concern to temper
this power, to apply it as his Wisdom designed it, to the Childrens good, as
long as they should need to be under it.

64. But what reason can hence advance this Care, of the Parents, due to their
Offspring, into an Absolute, Arbitrary Dominion of the Father, whose power
reaches no farther, than by such a Discipline, as he finds most effectual, to
give such strength and health to their Bodies, such vigor and rectitude to
their Minds, as may best fit his Children to be most useful to themselves and
others; and, if it be necessary to his Condition, to make them work, when they
are able, for their own Subsistence. But, in this power, the Mother too has her
share with the Father.

65. Nay this power so little belongs to the Father, by any peculiar right of
Nature, but only as he is Guardian of his Children, that when he quits his Care
of them, he loses his power over them, which goes along with their Nourishment
and Education, to which it is inseparably annexed, and belongs as much to the
Foster-Father of an exposed Child, as to the Natural Father of another. So
little power does the bare act of begetting give a Man over his Issue: if all
his Care ends there, and this be all the Title he has to the Name and
Authority of a Father: and what will become of this Paternal Power in that part
of the World where one Woman has more than one Husband at a time? Or in those
parts of America, where, when the Husband and Wife part, which happens
frequently, the Children are all left to the Mother, follow her, and are wholly
under her Care and Provision? And if the Father die whilst the Children are
young, do they not naturally every where owe the same Obedience to their
Mother, during their Minority, as to their Father, were he alive? And will any
one say, that the Mother has a legislative Power over her Children; that she
can make standing Rules, which shall be of perpetual Obligation, by which they
ought to regulate all the Concerns of their Property, and bound their Liberty
all the course of their Lives, and enforce the observation of them with Capital
Punishments? For this is the proper power of the Magistrate, of which the
Father has not so much as the shadow. His Command over his Children, is but
temporary, and reaches not their Life or Property. It is but a help to the
weakness and imperfection of their Nonage; a Discipline necessary to their
Education: and though a Father may dispose of his own Possessions, as he
pleases, when his Children are out of danger of perishing for want; yet his
power extends not to the lives or goods, which either their own industry, or
another bounty, has made theirs; nor to their liberty neither, when they are
once arrived to the infranchisement of the years of discretion. The Father's
Empire then ceases, and he can from thence forwards no more dispose of the
liberty of his Son than that of any other Man. And it must be far from an
absolute, or perpetual Jurisdiction, from which a Man may withdraw himself,
having License from Divine Authority, to leave Father and Mother, and cleave to
his Wife.

66. But though there be a time when a Child comes to be as free from
subjection to the will and Command of his Father, as he himself is free from
subjection to the will of any body else, and they are both under no other
restraint, but that which is common to them both, whether it be the Law of
Nature, or municipal Law of their Country; yet this freedom exempts not a Son
from that honor which he ought, by the Law of God and Nature, to pay his
Parents. God having made the Parents Instruments in his great design of
continuing the Race of Mankind, and the occasions of Life to their Children, as
he has laid on them an obligation to nourish, preserve, and bring up their
Offspring: so he has laid on the Children a perpetual obligation of honoring
their Parents, which containing in it an inward esteem and reverence to be
shown by all outward expressions, ties up the Child from any thing that may
ever injure or affront, disturb, or endanger the happiness, or life of those
from whom he received his: and engages him in all actions of defense, relief,
assistance and comfort of those by whose means he entered into being, and has
been made capable of any enjoyments of life. From this obligation no State, no
freedom, can absolve Children. But this is very far from giving Parents a power
of command over their Children, or an Authority to make Laws, and dispose as
they please of their Lives or Liberties. It Is one thing to owe honor, respect,
gratitude and assistance; another to require an absolute obedience and
submission. The honor due to Parents, a Monarch in his Throne owes his Mother,
and yet this lessens not his Authority, nor subjects him to her Government.

67. The subjection of a minor places in the Father a temporary Government,
which terminates with the minority of the Child. And the honor due from a
Child, places in the Parents a perpetual right to respect, reverence, support
and compliance to more, or less, as the Father's care, cost and kindness, in
his Education, has been more or less. And this ends not with minority, but
holds in all parts and conditions of a Man's Life. The want of distinguishing
these two powers which the Father has in the right of tuition, during
minority, and the right of honor all his Life, may perhaps have caused a great
part of the mistakes about this matter. For to speak properly of them, the
first of these is rather the privilege of Children, and duty of Parents, than
any Prerogative of Paternal Power. The nourishment and Education of their
Children, is a Charge so incumbent on Parents for their Childrens good, that
nothing can absolve them from taking care of it. And though the power of
commanding and chastising them go along with it, yet God has woven into the
principles of humane nature, such a tenderness for their Offspring, that there
is little fear that Parents should use their power with too much rigor; the
excess is seldom on the severe side, the strong biass of nature drawing the
other way. And therefore God Almighty, when he would express his gentle dealing
with the Israelites, he tells them, that though he chasten'd them, he chasten'd
them as a man chastens his Son, Deuteronomy. 8. 5. i. e. with tenderness and
affection, and kept them under no severer discipline than what was absolutely
best for them; and had been less kindness to have slackened. This is that power
to which Children are commanded obedience, that the pains and care of their
Parents may not be increased, or ill rewarded.

68. On the other side, honor and support all that which gratitude requires to
return; for the benefits received by and from them is the indispensible duty of
the Child, and the proper privilege of the Parents. This is intended for the
Parents advantage, as the other is for the Child's; though Education, the
Parents duty, seems to have most power, because the ignorance and infirmities
of Childhood, stand in need of restraint and correction; which is a visible
exercise of Rule, and a kind of Dominion. And that duty which is comprehended
in the word honor, requires less obedience, though the obligation be stronger
on grown than younger Children. For who can think the Command, Children obey
your Parents, requires in a Man that has Children of his own, the same
submission to his Father, as it does in his yet young Children to him; and that
by this Precept, he were bound to obey all his Father's Commands, if out of a
conceit of authority he should have the indiscretion to treat him still as a
Boy.

69. The first part then of Paternal Power, or rather Duty, which is Education,
belongs so to the Father, that it terminates at a certain season; when the
business of Education is over it ceases of it self; and is also alienable
before. For a Man may put the tuition of his Son in other hands; and he that
has made his Son an Apprentice to another, has discharged him, during that
time, of a great part of his Obedience, both to himself and to his Mother. But
all the duty of honor, the other part, remains never the less entire to them;
nothing can cancel that. It is so inseparable from them both, that the Father's
Authority cannot dispossess the Mother of this right, nor can any Man discharge
his Son from honoring her that bore him. But both these are very far from a
power to make Laws, and inforceing them with Penalties, that may reach Estate,
Liberty, Limbs and Life. The power of Commanding ends with Nonage; and though
after that, honor and respect, support and defense, and whatsoever gratitude
can oblige a Man to, for the highest benefits he is naturally capable of, be
always due from a Son to his Parents; yet all this puts no Scepter into the
Father's hand, no Sovereign Power of Commanding. He has no Dominion over his
Sons property or actions, nor any right that his Will should prescribe to his
Sons in all things; however it may become his Son in many things, not very
inconvenient to him and his Family, to pay a Deference to it.

70. A Man may owe honor and respect to an ancient or wise Man; defense to his
Child or Friend; relief and support to the distressed; and gratitude to a
Benefactor; to such a degree, that all he has, all he can do, cannot
sufficiently pay it. But all these give no Authority, no right of making Laws
to any one over him from whom they are owing. And it is plain, all this is due,
not to the bare title of Father; not only because, as has been said, it is
owing to the Mother too: but because these obligations to Parents, and the
degrees of what is required of Children, may be varied by the different care
and kindness, trouble and expense, is often employed upon one Child more than
another.

71. This shows the reason how it comes to pass, that Parents in Societies,
where they themselves are Subjects, retain a power over their Children, and
have as much right to their Subjection, as those who are in the state of
Nature, which could not possibly be, if all political Power were only paternal,
and that, in truth, they were one and the same thing: for then, all paternal
Power being in the Prince, the Subject could naturally have none of it; but
these two Powers, political and paternal, are so perfectly distinct and
separate, and built upon so different Foundations, and given to so different
Ends, that every Subject, that is a Father, has as much a paternal Power over
his Children, as the Prince has over his. And every Prince that has Parents,
owes them as much filial Duty and Obedience, as the meanest of his Subjects do
to theirs; and can therefore contain, not any part or degree of that kind of
Dominion, which a Prince, or Magistrate has over his Subject.

72. Though the Obligation on the Parents to bring up their Children, and the
Obligation on Children to honor their Parents, contain all the Power on the
one hand, and Submission on the other, which are proper to this Relation; yet
there is another Power, ordinarily, in the Father, whereby he has a tie on the
Obedience of his Children, which, though it be common to him with other men,
yet the Occasions of showing it, almost constantly happening to Fathers in
their private Families, and in Instances of it elsewhere being rare, and less
taken notice of, it passes in the World for a part of paternal Jurisdiction.
And this is the Power Men generally have, to bestow their Estates on those who
please them best. The Possession of the Father, being the Expectation and
Inheritance of the Children ordinarily, in certain proportions, according to
the Law and Custom of each Country; yet it is commonly in the Father's Power to
bestow it with a more sparing or liberal hand, according as the Behavior of
this or that Child has comported with his Will and Humor.

73. This is no small Tie to the Obedience of Children: and there being always
annexed to the Enjoyment of Land, a Submission to the Government of the
Country, of which that Land is a part. It has been commonly supposed, That, a
Father could oblige his Posterity to that Government, of which he himself was a
Subject, that his Compact held them, whereas, it being only a necessary
Condition annexed to the Land, which is under that Government, reaches only
those who will take it on that Condition, and so is no natural Tie or
Engagement, but a voluntary Submission. For every Man's Children being, by
Nature, as free as himself, or any of his Ancestors ever were, may, whilst
they are in that Freedom, choose what Society they will join themselves to,
what Commonwealth they will put themselves under. But if they will enjoy the
Inheritance of their Ancestors, they must take it on the same terms their
Ancestors had it, and submit to all the Conditions, annexed to such a
Possession. By this Power indeed, Fathers oblige their Children to Obedience to
themselves, even when they are past Minority, and most commonly too, subject
them to this or that political Power. But neither of these by any peculiar
right of Father-hood, but by the Reward they have in their hands to enforce and
recompense such a Compliance; and is no more Power than what a Frenchman has
over an Englishman, who by the hopes of an Estate he will leave him, will
certainly have a strong tie on his Obedience: and if when it is left him, he
will enjoy it, he must certainly take it upon the Conditions annexed to the
Possession of Land, in that Country where it lies, whether it be France or
England.

74. To conclude then, though the Father's Power of commanding, extends no
farther than the Minority of his Children, and to a degree only fit for the
Discipline, and Government of that Age. And though that Honor and Respect, and
all that which the Latins called Piety, which they indispensibly owe to their
Parents all their Life times, and in all estates, with all that Support and
Defense, is due to them, gives the Father no Power of governing, i. e. making
Laws and exacting Penalties on his Children. Though by this he has no Dominion
over the Property or Actions of his Son; yet it is obvious to conceive, how
easy it was, in the first Ages of the World, and in places still where the
thinness of People gives Families leave to separate into unpossessed Quarters,
and they have room to remove and plant themselves in yet vacant habitations, It
is no improbable Opinion, therefore, which the Arch-Philosopher was of, That
the chief Person in every Household, was always, as it were, a King; so when
Numbers of Households joined themselves in civil Societies together, Kings were
the first kind of Governors amongst them, which is also, as it seems, the
reason why the name of Fathers continued still in them, who of Fathers, were
made Rulers; as also the ancient Custom of Governors to do as Melchizedec, and
being Kings, to exercise the Office of Priests, which Fathers did, at the first
grew, perhaps, by the same Occasion. Howbeit, this is not the only kind of
Regiment that has been received in the World. The Inconveniences of one kind
have caused sundry other to be devised, so that, in a word, all public
Regiment, of what kind soever, seems evidently to have risen from the
deliberate Advice, Consultation and Composition between Men, judging it
convenient, and behovefull, there being no impossibility in Nature, considered
by it self, but that Man might have lived without any public Regiment.
Hooker's Eccl. l. 1.. 10.
for the Father of the Family to become the Prince of it; he had been a Ruler
from the Beginning of the infancy of his Children, and when they were grown up:
since without some Government it would be hard for them to live together, it
was likelyest it should, by the express or tacit Consent of the Children, be in
the Father, where it seemed, without any change, barely to continue. And when
indeed nothing more was required to it, than the permitting the Father to
exercise alone, in his Family, that executive Power of the Law of Nature, which
every Freeman naturally has, and by that Permission resigning up to him a
Monarchical Power, whilst they remained in it. But that this was not by any
paternal Right, but only by the Consent of his Children, is evident from hence,
That no Body doubts but if a Stranger, whom Chance or Business had brought to
his Family, had there killed any of his Children, or committed any other Fact,
he might condemn and put him to Death, or otherwise have punished him as well
as any of his Children, which was impossible he should do by virtue of any
paternal Authority, over one who was not his Child; but by virtue of that
executive Power of the Law of Nature, which, as a Man, he had a right to: and
he alone could punish him in his Family, where the Respect of his Children had
laid by the Exercise of such a Power, to give way to the Dignity and Authority
they were willing should remain in him above the rest of his Family.

75. Thus 'twas easy and almost natural for Children by a tacit and almost
natural consent, to make way for the Father's Authority and Government. They
had been accustomed in their Childhood, to follow his Direction, and to refer
their little differences to him, and when they were Men, who fitter to rule
them? Their little Properties, and less Covetousness, seldom afforded greater
Controversies; and when any should arise, where could they have a fitter
Umpire, than he, by whose Care they had every one been sustained and brought
up, and who had a tenderness for them all? It Is no wonder that they made no
distinction betwixt Minority and full Age, nor looked after one and Twenty, or
any other Age, that might make them the free Disposers of themselves and
Fortunes, when they could have no desire to be out of their Pupilage. The
Government they had been under, during it, continued still to be more their
Protection than Restraint: and they could no where find a greater security to
their Peace, Liberties, and Fortunes, than in the Rule of a Father.

76. Thus the natural Fathers of Families, by an insensible change, became the
politic Monarchs of them too; and as they chanced to live long, and leave able
and worthy Heirs, for several Successions, or otherwise: so they laid the
Foundations of Hereditary, or Elective Kingdoms under several Constitutions,
and Manors, according as Chance, Contrivance, or Occasions happened to mould
them. But if Princes have their Titles in the Fathers Right, and it be a
sufficient proof of the natural Right of Fathers to political Authority;
because, they commonly were those, in whose hands, we find, de facto, the
Exercise of Government: I say, if this Argument be good, it will as strongly
prove that all Princes, nay Princes only, ought to be Priests, since it is as
certain that in the Beginning, The Father of the Family was Priest, as that he
was Ruler in his own Household.

CHAP. VII. Of Political or Civil Society.
77. GOD having made Man such a creature, that, in his own Judgment, it was not
good for him to be alone, put him under strong Obligations of Necessity,
Convenience, and Inclination, to drive him into Society, as well as fitted him
with Understanding and Language to continue and enjoy it. The first Society was
between Man and Wife, which gave beginning to that between Parents and Children;
to which, in time, that between Master and Servant came to be added: and though
all these might, and commonly did meet together, and make up but one Family,
wherein, the Master or Mistress of it had some sort of Rule, proper to a
Family; each of these, or all together came short of Political Society, as we
shall see if we consider the different Ends, Ties, and Bounds of each of these.

78. Conjugal Society is made by a voluntary compact between Man and Woman, and
though it consist chiefly in such a Communion and Right in one another Bodies,
as is necessary to its chief End, Procreation; yet it draws with it mutual
Support and Assistance; and a Communion of Interests too, as necessary, not
only to unite their Care and Affection, but also necessary to their common
Offspring, who have a Right to be nourished and maintained by them, till they
are able to provide for themselves.

79. For the end of conjunction between Male and Female, being not barely
Procreation, but the continuation of the Species. This conjunction betwixt Male
and Female ought to last, even after Procreation, so long as is necessary to
the nourishment and support of the young Ones, who are to be sustained by those
that got them, till they are able to shift and provide for themselves. This
Rule, which the Infinite wise Maker has set to the Works of his hands, we
find, the inferior Creatures steadily obey. In those viviparous Animals, which
feed on Grass, the conjunction between Male and Female lasts no longer than the
very Act of Copulation; because the Teat of the Dam being sufficient to nourish
the Young, till it be able to feed on Grass: the Male only begets, but concerns
not himself for the Female or Young, to whose Sustenance he can contribute
nothing. But in Beasts of Prey the conjunction lasts longer; because the Dam
not being able well to subsist her self, and nourish her numerous Offspring,
by her own Prey alone, a more laborious, as well as more dangerous way of
living, than by feeding on Grass: the Assistance of the Male is necessary to
the Maintenance of their common Family, which cannot subsist, till they are
able to prey for themselves, but by the joint Care of Male and Female. The same
is to be observed in all Birds (except some domestic ones, where plenty of
food excuses the Cock from feeding, and taking care of the young Brood) whose
Young needing Food in the Nest, the Cock and Hen continue Mates till the Young
are able to use their wing, and provide for themselves.

80. And herein, I think, lies the chief, if not the only reason, why the Male
and Female, in Mankind, are tied to a longer conjunction, than other Creatures;
viz. because the Female is capable of conceiving, and de facto is commonly with
Child again, and brings forth too a new Birth, long before the former is out of
a dependency for support on his Parents help, and able to shift for himself,
and has all the assistance is due to him from his Parents, whereby the Father,
who is bound to take care for those he has begot, is under an obligation to
continue in Conjugal Society, with the same Woman, longer than other Creatures,
whose Young being able to subsist of themselves, before the time of Procreation
returns again, the Conjugal Bond dissolves of it self, and they are at liberty;
till Hymen, at his usual anniversary Season, summons them again to choose new
Mates. Wherein one cannot but admire the Wisdom of the great Creator, who,
having given to Man an Ability, to lay up for the future, as well as supply the
present necessity, has made it necessary, that Society of Man and Wife should
be more lasting, than of Male and Female amongst other Creatures: that so their
Industry might be encouraged, and their Interest better united, to make
provision, and lay up Goods for their common Issue; which uncertain mixture, or
easy, and frequent solutions of Conjugal Society would mightily disturb.

81. But though these are Ties upon Mankind, which make the Conjugal Bonds more
firm and lasting, in a Man, than the other species of Animals; yet it would
give one reason to enquire, why this compact, where Procreation and Education
are secured, and Inheritance taken care for, may not be made determinable,
either by consent, or at a certain time, or upon certain conditions, as well as
any other voluntary compacts; there being no necessity, in the nature of the
thing, nor to the ends of it, that it should always be for life; I mean, to
such as are under no Restraint of any positive Law, which ordains all such
contracts to be perpetual.

82. But the Husband and Wife, though they have but one common Concern, yet
having different Understandings, will, unavoidably sometimes, have different
wills too: it therefore being necessary, that the last Determination, i. e. the
Rule, should be placed somewhere; it naturally falls to the Man's share, as the
abler and the stronger. But this, reaching but to the things of their common
Interest and Property, leaves the Wife in the full and true possession of what,
by contract, is her peculiar Right; and at least gives the Husband no more
Power over her than she has over his Life. The Power of the Husband being so
far from that of an absolute Monarch, that the Wife has, in many cases, a
liberty to separate from him; where natural Right, or their Contract allows it;
whether that Contract be made by themselves, in the state of Nature, or by the
Customs or Laws of the country they live in, and the Children, upon such
Separation, fall to the Father or Mother's Lot, as such Contract does determine.

83. For all the ends of Marriage being to be obtained, under politic
Government, as well as in the state of Nature, the civil Magistrate does not
abridge the Right or Power of either, naturally necessary to those ends, viz.
Procreation, and mutual Support, and Assistance, whilst they are together; but
only decides any Controversy that may arise, between Man and Wife, about them.
If it were otherwise, and that absolute Sovereignty and Power of life and death
naturally belonged to the Husband, and were necessary to the Society between
Man and Wife, there could be no Matrimony in any of these Countries, where the
Husband is allowed no such absolute Authority; but the ends of Matrimony
requiring no such Power in the Husband, it was not at all necessary to it: the
condition of Conjugal Society put it not in him, but whatsoever might consist
with Procreation and Support of the Children, till they could shift for
themselves: mutual Assistance, Comfort, and Maintenance might be varied, and
regulated, by that contract which first united them in that Society; nothing
being necessary to any Society, that is not necessary to the ends for which it
is made.

84. The Society betwixt Parents and Children, and the distinct Rights and
Powers, belonging respectively to them, I have treated of so largely, in the
foregoing Chapter, that I shall not here need to say any thing of it. And I
think it is plain, that it is far different from a politic Society.

85. Master and Servant are Names as old as History, but given to those of far
different condition; for a Freeman makes himself a Servant to another, by
selling him, for a certain time, the Service, he undertakes to do, in exchange,
for Wages he is to receive: and though this commonly puts him into the Family
of his Master, and under the ordinary discipline thereof; yet it gives the
Master but a Temporary Power over him, and no greater than what is contained in
the Contract between them. But there is another sort of Servants, which, by a
peculiar Name, we call Slaves, who, being Captives, taken in a just War, are,
by the Right of Nature, subjected to the Absolute Dominion, and Arbitrary Power
of their Masters. These Men having, as I say, forfeited their Lives, and, with
it, their Liberties, and lost their Estates; and being in the state of Slavery,
not capable of any Property, cannot, in that state, be considered as any part
of civil Society; the chief end whereof is the preservation of Property.

86. Let us therefore consider a Master of a Family with all these subordinate
Relations of Wife, Children, Servants and Slaves, united under the domestic
rule of a Family; which what resemblance soever it may have in its order,
offices, and number too, with a little Commonwealth; yet is very far from it,
both in its constitution, power and end: or if it must be thought a Monarchy,
and the Paterfamilias, the absolute Monarch in it, absolute Monarchy will have
but a very shattered and short Power, when it is plain, by what has been said
before, That the Master of the Family has a very distinct and differently
limited Power, both as to time and extent, over those several persons that are
in it; for excepting the Slave (and the Family is as much a Family, and his
Power as Paterfamilias as great, whether there be any Slaves in his Family or
no) he has no Legislative power of Life and Death over any of them, and none
too but what a Mistress of a Family may have as well as he. And he certainly
can have no absolute power over the whole Family, who has but a very limited
one over every individual in it. But how a Family, or any other Society of Men
differ from that which is properly political Society, we shall best see, by
considering wherein political Society it self consists.

87. Man being born, as has been proved, with a title to perfect freedom, and
an uncontrouled enjoyment of all the Rights and Privileges of the Law of
Nature, equally with any other Man, or number of Men in the World, has by
nature a power, not only to preserve his Property, that is, his Life, Liberty
and Estate, against the injuries and attempts of other men; but to judge of and
punish the breaches of that Law in others, as he is persuaded the offense
deserves, even with death it self, in Crimes where the heinousness of the fact,
in his opinion, requires it. But because no political Society can be, nor
subsist without having in it self the power to preserve the property, and in
order thereunto, punish the offenses of all those of that Society; There, and
there only is political Society, where every one of the Members has quitted
this natural Power, refign'd it up into the hands of the Community in all cases
that exclude him not from appealing for protection to the law established by
it. And thus all private judgment of every particular Member being excluded,
the Community comes to be Umpire; and by understanding indiff^^ent rules and
men authorized by the community for their execution, decides all the
differences that may happen between any Members of that Society, concerning any
matter of right, and punishes those offenses which any member has committed
against the Society with such penalties as the law has established; whereby it
is easy to discern who are, and are not, in political Society together. Those
who are united into one Body, and have a common established Law and Judicature
to appeal to, with Authority to decide Controversies between them, and punish
Offenders, are in civil Society one with another; but those who have no such
common Appeal, I mean on Earth, are still in the state of Nature, each being
where there is no other, Judge for himself, and Executioner; which is, as I
have before showed it, the perfect state of Nature.

88. And thus the Commonwealth comes by a power to set down what punishment
shall belong to the several transgressions they think worthy of it, committed
amongst the Members of that Society (which is the power of making Laws) as well
as it has the power to punish any injury done unto any of its Members, by any
one that is not of it, (which is the power of War and Peace;) and all this for
the preservation of the property of all the Members of that Society, as far as
is possible. But though every Man entered into Society, has quitted his power
to punish offenses against the Law of Nature, in prosecution of his own private
Judgment; yet with the Judgment of offenses which he has given up to the
Legislative, in all Cases where he can appeal to the Magistrate, he has given
up a right to the Commonwealth, to employ his Force for the Execution of the
Judgments of the Commonwealth, whenever he shall be called to it, which indeed
are his own Judgments, they being made by himself or his representative. And
herein we have the original of the Legislative and Executive Power of Civil
Society, which is to judge by standing Laws how far offenses are to be punished
when committed within the Commonwealth; and also by occasional Judgments
founded on the present circumstances of the fact, how far injuries from without
are to be vindicated, and in both these to employ all the force of all the
Members when there shall be need.

89. Wherever therefore any number of Men so unite into one Society, as to
quit every one his Executive Power of the Law of Nature, and to resign it to
the public, there and there only is a political, or civil Society. And this is
done wherever any number of Men, in the State of Nature, enter into Society to
make one People, one Body Politic under one Supreme Government; or else when
any one joins himself to, and incorporates with any Government already made.
For hereby he authorizes the Society, or which is all one, the Legislative
thereof to make Laws for him as the public good of the Society shall require;
to the Execution whereof, his own assistance (as to his own decrees) is due.
And this puts men out of a state of nature into that of a Commonwealth, by
setting up a Judge on Earth, with Authority to determine all the Controversies,
and redress the injuries that may happen to any Member of the Commonwealth;
which Judge is the Legislative or Magistrates appointed by it. And wherever
there are any number of Men, however associated, that have no such decisive
power to appeal to, there they are still in the state of Nature.

90. And hence it is evident, that Absolute Monarchy which by some Men is
counted for the only Government in the World, is indeed inconsistent with civil
Society, and so can be no Form of civil Government at all: For the end of civil
Society, being to avoid and remedy those inconveniences of the state of Nature
which necessarily follow from every Man's being Judge in his own Case, by
setting up a known Authority, to which every one of that Society may appeal
upon any injury received, or Controversy that may arise, and which every one of
the Society ought to obey. Wherever any persons are who have not such an
authority to appeal to, The public Power of all Society is above every Soul
contained in the same Society; and the principal use of that power is to give
Laws unto all that are under it, which Laws in such Cases we must obey, unless
there be reason showed which may necessarily enforce, that the Law of Reason,
or of God, does injoin the contrary, Hook. Eccl. Pol. 1.. 16.
and decide any difference between them there, those persons are still in the
state of nature. And so is every absolute Prince in respect of those who are
under his Dominion.

91. For he being supposed to have all, both Legislative and Executive Power in
himself alone, there is no Judge to be found, no appeal lies open to any one,
who may fairly and indifferently, and with authority decide, and from whence
relief and redress may be expected of any injury or inconveniency that may be
suffered from him, or by his order. So that such a Man, however entitled Czar,
or Grand Signior, or how you please, is as much in the state of nature, with
all under his Dominion, as he is with the rest of Mankind. For wherever any two
Men are, who have no standing Rule, and common Judge to appeal to on Earth, for
the determination of Controversies of Right, betwixt them, there they are still
in the state of Nature, To take away all such mutual Grievances, Injuries and
Wrongs, i. e. such as attend Men in the state of Nature. There was no way but
only by growing into Composition and Agreement amongst themselves by ordaining
some kind of Government public, and by yielding themselves subject thereunto,
that unto whom they granted Authority to rule and govern: by them the Peace,
Tranquillity, and happy Estate of the rest might be procured. Men always knew
that where Force and Injury was offered, they might be Defenders of themselves;
they knew that however Men may seek their own Commodity; yet if this were done
with Injury unto others, it was not to be suffered, but by all Men, and all
good means to be withstood. Finally, they knew that no Man might, in reason,
take upon him to determine his own Right, and according to his own
Determination proceed in maintenance thereof, in as much as every man is
toward himself, and them whom he greatly affects, partial; and therefore, that
Strifes and Troubles would be endless, except they gave their common Consent,
all to be ordered by some, whom they should agree upon, without which Consent,
there would ^e no reason that one man should take upon him to be Lord or Judge
over another. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10.
and under all the inconveniences of it, with only this woeful difference to
the Subject, or rather Slave of an absolute Prince; That whereas, in the
ordinary state of Nature, he has a liberty to judge of his Right, and according
to the best of his power, to maintain it: but whenever his Property is invaded
by the Will and Order of his Monarch; he has not only no Appeal, as those in
Society ought to have, but, as if he were degraded from the common state of
rational Creatures, is denied a liberty to judge of, or defend his Right, and
so is exposed to all the Misery and Inconveniences that a Man can fear from
one, who being in the unrestrained state of Nature, is yet corrupted with
Flattery, and armed with Power.

92. For he that thinks absolute Power purifies Men's Bloods, and corrects the
baseness of humane Nature, need read but the History of this, or any other Age,
to be convinced of the contrary. He that would have been insolent and injurious
in the Woods of America, would not probably be much better in a Throne, where
perhaps Learning and Religion shall be found out to justify all that he shall
do to his Subjects; and the Sword presently silence all those that dare
question it. For what the Protection of Absolute Monarchy is; what kind of
Fathers of their Countries it makes Princes to be; and to what a degree of
Happiness, and Security it carries civil Society, where this sort of Government
is grown to perfection, he that will look into the late Relation of Ceylon may
easily see.

93. In Absolute Monarchies indeed, as well as other Governments of the World,
the Subjects have an Appeal to the Law, and Judges to decide any Controversies,
and restrain any violence that may happen betwixt the Subjects themselves, one
amongst another. This every one thinks necessary, and believes, he deserves to
be thought a declared Enemy to Society and Mankind, who should go about to take
it away. But whether this be from a true Love of Mankind and Society, and such
a Charity as we owe all one to another, there is reason to doubt. For this is
no more than what every Man, who loves his own Power, Profit, or Greatness,
may, and naturally must do; keep those Animals from hurting, or destroying one
another, who labor and drudge only for his Pleasure and Advantage; and so are
taken care of, not out of any Love the Master has for them, but Love of
himself, and the Profit they bring him. For if it be asked what Security, what
Fence is there, in such a State, against the Violence and Oppression of this
Absolute Ruler? The very Question can scarce be born. They are ready to tell
you, that it deserves Death only to ask after Safety. Betwixt Subject and
Subject, they will grant, there must be Measures, Laws, and Judges for their
mutual Peace and Security. But as for the Ruler, he ought to be Absolute, and
is above all such Circumstances; because he has a Power to do more hurt and
wrong, it is right when he does it. To ask how you may be guarded from harm, or
injury, on that side, where the strongest hand is to do it, is presently the
Voice of Faction and Rebellion. As if when Men, quitting the state of Nature,
entered into Society, they agreed that all of them, but one, should be under
the restraint of Laws; but that he should still retain all the Liberty of the
state of Nature, increased with Power, and made licentious by Impunity. This is
to think that Men are so foolish, that they take care to avoid what Mischiefs
may be done them by Pole-Cats, or Foxes, but are content, nay think it Safety,
to be devoured by Lions.

94. But, whatever Flatterers may talk, to amuze Peoples Understandings, it
never hinders Men from feeling; and when they perceive that any Man, in what
Station soever, is out of the Bounds of the civil Society they are of, and that
they have no Appeal, on Earth, against any harm they may receive from him, they
are apt to think themselves in the state of Nature, in respect of him, whom
they find to be so; and to take care, as soon as they can, to have that Safety
and Security, in civil Society, for which it was first instituted, and for
which only they entered into it. And therefore, though perhaps at first, as
shall be showed more at large hereafter, in the following part of this
Discourse, some one good and excellent Man having got a Preheminency, amongst
the rest, had this Deference paid to his Goodness and Virtue, as to a kind of
Natural Authority, that the chief Rule, with Arbitration of their differences,
by a tacit Consent, devolved into his hands, without any other caution, but the
assurance they had of his Uprightness and Wisdom; yet when time giving
Authority, and, as some Men would persuade us, Sacredness to Customs, which the
negligent, and unforeseeing Innocence of the first Ages began, had brought in
Successors of another stamp, the People finding their Properties not secure
under the Government as then it was. At the first; when some certain kind of
Regiment was once appointed, it may be that nothing was then farther thought
upon for the manner of governing, but all permitted unto their Wisdom and
Discretion, which were to Rule, till, by experience, they found this for all
parts very inconvenient, so as the thing, which they had devised for a Remedy,
did indeed but increase the Sore, which it should have cured. They saw, that to
live by one Man's Will, became the cause of all Men's misery. This constrained
them to come unto Laws wherein all Men might see their Duty beforehand, and
know the Penalties of transgressing them. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10.
(Whereas Government has no other end but the preservation of Property) could
never be safe, nor at rest, nor think themselves in civil Society, till the
Legislative was so placed in collective Bodies of Men, call them Senate,
Parliament, or what you please, by which means every single person became
subject equally, with other the meanest Men, to those Laws, which he himself,
as part of the Legislative, had established; nor could any one, by his own
Authority, avoid the force of the Law, when once made, nor by any pretense of
Superiority plead exemption, thereby to license his own, or the Miscarriages of
any of his Dependants: No Man in civil Society can be exempted from the Laws of
it. For if any Man may do what he thinks fit, Civil Law, being the Act of the
whole Body Politic, does therefore overruled each several part of the same
Body. Hooker ibid.
and there be no appeal on Earth, for Redress or Security against any harm he
shall do; I ask, whether he be not perfectly still in the state of Nature, and
so can be no Part or Member of that civil Society, unless any one will say, the
state of Nature and civil Society, are one and the same thing, which I have
never yet found any one so great a Patron of Anarchy as to affirm.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Beginning of Political Societies.
95. MEN being, as has been said, by Nature, all free, equal and independent;
no one can be put out of this Estate, and subjected to the Political Power of
another, without his own Consent, which is done by agreeing, with other Men, to
join and unite into a Community, for their comfortable, safe, and peaceable
living, one amongst another, in a secure Enjoyment of their Properties, and a
greater Security against any that are not of it. This any number of Men may do,
because it injures not the Freedom of the rest; they are left, as they were, in
the Liberty of the state of Nature. When any number of Men have so consented to
make one Community or Government, they are thereby presently incorporated, and
make one Body Politic, wherein the Majority have a Right, to act and conclude
the rest.

96. For when any number of Men, have by the consent of every individual, made
a Community, they have thereby made that Community one Body, with a power to
act as one Body, which is only by the will and determination of the majority.
For that which acts any Community, being only the consent of the individuals of
it, and it being one Body must move one way; it is necessary the Body should
move that way whither the greater force carries it, which is the consent of the
majority: or else it is impossible it should act or continue one Body, one
Community, which the consent of every individual that united into it, agreed
that it should; and so every one is bound by that consent to be concluded by
the majority. And therefore we see, that in Assemblies empowered to act by
positive Laws where no number is set, by that positive Law which impowers them,
the act of the majority passes for the act of the whole, and of course
determines, as having by the Law of Nature and Reason, the power of the whole.

97. And thus every Man by consenting with others to make one Body Politic,
under one Government, puts himself under an obligation to every one of that
Society, to submit to the determination of the majority, and to be concluded by
it; or else this original Compact, whereby he with others incorporates into one
Society, would signify nothing, and be no Compact if he be left free, and
under no other ties than he was in before in the state of Nature. For what
appearance would there be of any Compact? What new engagement, if he were no
farther tied by any Decrees of the Society, than he himself thought fit, and
did actually consent to? This would be still as great a liberty as he himself
had before his Compact, or any one else in the state of Nature, who may submit
himself and consent to any acts of it if he thinks fit.

98. For if the consent of the majority shall not in reason be received as the
act of the whole, and conclude every individual; nothing but the consent of
every individual can make any thing to be the act of the whole, which,
considering the infirmities of health, and avocations of business, which in a
number, though much less than that of a Commonwealth, will necessarily keep
many away from the public Assembly; and the variety of Opinions and
contrariety of interests which unavoidably happen in all Collections of Men,
it is next impossible ever to be had. And therefore if coming into Society be
upon such terms, it will be only like Cato's coming into the Theater, tantum at
exiret. Such a Constitution as this would make the mighty Leviathan of a
shorter duration than the feeblest Creatures; and not let it outlast the day it
was born in, which cannot be supposed till we can think that rational Creatures
should desire and constitute Societies only to be dissolved. For where the
majority cannot conclude the rest, there they cannot act as one Body; and
consequently, will be immediately dissolved again.

99. Whosoever therefore, out of a state of Nature, unite into a Community,
must be understood to give up all the power necessary to the ends for which
they unite into Society, to the majority of the Community, unless they expressly
agreed in any number greater than the majority. And this is done by barely
agreeing to unite into one political Society, which is all the Compact that is,
or needs be, between the individuals that enter into or make up a Commonwealth.
And thus that which begins and actually constitutes any Political Society, is
nothing but the consent of any number of Freemen capable of majority, to unite
and incorporate into such a Society. And this is that, and that only, which did
or could give beginning to any lawful Government in the World.

100. To this I find two Objections made. 1. That there are no instances to be
found in story, of a Company of Men independent and equal one amongst another,
that met together, and in this way began and set up a Government. 2. It Is
impossible of right that Men should do so; because all Men being born under
Government, they are to submit to that, and are not at liberty to begin a new
one.

101. To the first, there is this to Answer, That it is not at all to be
wondered that History gives us but a very little account of Men that lived
together in the state of Nature. The inconveniences of that condition, and the
love and want of Society, no sooner brought any number of them together, but
they presently united and incorporated, if they designed to continue together.
And if we may not suppose Men ever to have been in the state of Nature, because
we hear not much of them in such a state; we may as well suppose the Armies of
Salmanasser, or Xerxes, were never Children, because we hear little of them
till they were Men, and imbodied in Armies. Government is every where
antecedent to Records, and Letters seldom come in amongst a People till a long
continuation of Civil Society, has by other more necessary arts, provided for
their Safety, Ease and Plenty. And then they begin to look after the History of
their Founders, and search into their original when they have outlived the
memory of it. For it is with Commonwealths as with particular Persons, they are
commonly ignorant of their own Births and Infancies: and if they know any thing
of it, they are beholding for it to the accidental Records that others have
kept of it. And those that we have of the beginning of any Polities in the
World, excepting that of the Jews, where God himself immediately interposed,
and which favors not at all Paternal Dominion; are all either plain instances
of such a beginning as I have mentioned, or at least have manifest footsteps of
it.

102. He must show a strange inclination to deny evident matter of fact when it
agrees not with his Hypothesis; who will not allow, that the beginning of Rome
and Venice were by the uniting together of several Men free and independent one
of another, amongst whom there was no natural Superiority or Subjection. And if
Josephus Acosta's word may be taken, he tells us, that in many parts of America
there was no Government at all. There are great and apparent Conjectures, says
he, that these men, speaking of those of Peru, for a long time had neither
Kings nor Commonwealths, but lived in Troops, as they do this day in Florida,
the Cheriquanas, those of Bresil, and many other Nations, which have no certain
Kings, but as occasion is offered in Peace or War, they choose their Captains
as they please. l. 1. c. 25. If it be said, that every Man there was born
subject to his Father, or the head of his Family. That the subjection due from
a Child to a Father, took not away his freedom of uniting into what political
Society he thought fit, has been already proved. But be that as it will, these
Men, it is evident, were actually free; and whatever superiority some
Politicians now would place in any of them, they themselves claimed it not; but
by consent were all equal, till by the same consent they set Rulers over
themselves. So that their politic Societies all began from a voluntary Union,
and the mutual agreement of Men freely acting in the choice of their
Governors, and forms of Government.

103. And I hope those who went away from Sparta, with Palantus, mentioned by
Justin l. will be allowed to have been Freemen independent one of another, and
to have set up a Government over themselves, by their own consent. Thus I have
given several Examples out of History, of people free and in the state of
Nature, that being met together incorporated and began a Commonwealth. And if
the want of such instances be an argument to prove, that Government were not,
nor could not be so begun, I suppose the Contenders for Paternal Empire were
better let it alone, than urge it against natural Liberty. For if they can give
so many instances out of History, of Governments began upon paternal Right, I
think (though at least an Argument from what has been, to what should of right,
be of no great force) one might, without any great danger, yield them the
cause. But if I might advise them in the Case, they would do well not to search
too much into the original of Governments, as they have begun de facto, lest
they should find at the foundation of most of them, something very little
favorable to the design they promote, and such a power as they contend for.

104. But, to conclude, Reason being plain on our side, that Men are naturally
free; and the Examples of History showing that the Governments of the World,
that were begun in Peace, had their beginning laid on that foundation, and were
made by the Consent of the People: There can be little room for doubt, either
where the Right is, or what has been the Opinion, or Practice of Mankind about
the first erecting of Governments.

105. I will not deny, that if we look back, as far as History will direct us,
toward the Original of Commonwealths, we shall generally find them under the
Government and Administration of one Man. And I am also apt to believe, that
where a Family was numerous enough to subsist by it self, and continued entire
together, without mixing with others, as it often happens; where there is much
Land, and few People, the Government commonly began in the Father. For the
Father having, by the Law of Nature, the same Power, with every Man else, to
punish, as he thought fit, any Offenses against that Law, might thereby punish
his transgressing Children, even when they were Men, and out of their Pupilage;
and they were very likely to submit to his punishment, and all join with him
against the Offender in their turns, giving him thereby power to Execute his
Sentence against any transgression, and so in effect make him the Lawmakers and
Governor over all that remained in Conjunction with his Family. He was fittest
to be trusted; Paternal affection secured their Property and Interest under his
Care, and the Custom of obeying him in their Childhood, made it easier to
submit to him rather than any other. If therefore they must have one to rule
them, as Government is hardly to be avoided amongst Men that live together; who
so likely to be the Man as he that was their common Father, unless Negligence,
Cruelty, or any other defect of Mind or Body, made him unfit for it. But when
either the Father died, and left his next Heir for want of Age, Wisdom,
Courage, or any other qualities less fit for Rule, or where several Families
met and consented to continue together: There, it is not to be doubted, but they
used their natural freedom to set up him whom they judged the ablest and most
likely to Rule well over them. Conformable hereunto we find the People of
America, who living out of the reach of the Conquering Swords and spreading
domination of the two great Empires of Peru and Mexico, enjoyed their own
natural freedom; though, caeteris paribus, they commonly prefer the Heir of
their deceased King; yet if they find him any way weak or incapable, they pass
him by, and set up the stoutest and bravest Man for their Ruler.

106. Thus, though looking back as far as Records give us any account of
Peopling the World, and the History of Nations, we commonly find the Government
to be in one hand, yet it destroys not that which I affirm ( viz.) That the
beginning of Politic Society depends upon the consent of the Individuals to
join into and make one Society; who when they are thus incorporated, might set
up what form of Government they thought fit. But this having given occasion to
Men to mistake and think, that by Nature Government was Monarchical, and
belonged to the Father, it may not be amiss, here to consider, why People, in
the beginning, generally pitched upon this form, which though perhaps the
Father's Preheminency might, in the first institution of some Commonwealths,
give a rise to, and place in the beginning, the Power in one hand: yet it is
plain that the reason that continued the Form of Government in a single Person,
was not any Regard or Respect to Paternal Authority; since all petty
Monarchies, that is, almost all Monarchies, near their Original, have been
commonly, at least upon occasion, elective.

107. First then, in the beginning of things, the Father's Government of the
Childhood of those sprung from him, having accustomed them to the Rule of one
Man, and taught them, that where it was exercised with Care and Skill, with
Affection and Love to those under it, it was sufficient to procure and preserve
Men (all the political Happiness they sought for, in Society.) It was no wonder
that they should pitch upon, and naturally run into that Form of Government,
which, from their Infancy, they had been all accustomed to; and which, by
experience, they had found both easy and safe. To which, if we add, that
Monarchy being simple, and most obvious to Men, whom neither experience had
instructed in Forms of Government, nor the Ambition or Insolence of Empire had
taught to beware of the Encroachments of Prerogative, or the Inconveniences of
Absolute Power; which Monarchy, in Succession, was apt to lay claim to, and
bring upon them. It was not at all strange, that they should not much trouble
themselves to think of methods of restraining any Exorbitances of those, to
whom they had given the Authority over them; and of ballancing the Power of
Government, by placing several parts of it in different hands. They had neither
felt the Oppression of Tyrannical Dominion, nor did the Fashion of the Age, nor
their Possessions, or way of living, which afforded little matter for
Covetousness or Ambition; give them any reason to apprehend or provide against
it; and therefore it is no wonder they put themselves into such a Frame of
Government, as was, not only, as I said, most obvious and simple, but also best
suited to their present State and Condition; which stood more in need of
defense against foreign Invasions and Injuries, than of multiplicity of Laws,
where there was but very little Property: and wanted not variety of Rulers and
abundance of Officers to direct and look after their Execution, where there
were but few Trespasses, and few Offenders. Since then, those who liked one
another so well as to join into Society, cannot but be supposed to have some
Acquaintance and Friendship together, and some Trust one in another. They could
not but have greater Apprehensions of others, than of one another; and
therefore their first care and thought cannot but be supposed to be how to
secure themselves against foreign Force. 'Twas natural for them to put
themselves under a Frame of Government, which might best serve to that end; and
choose the wisest and bravest Man to conduct them in their Wars, and lead them
out against their Enemies, and in this chiefly be their Ruler.

108. Thus we see that the Kings of the Indians, in America, which is still a
Pattern of the first Ages in Asia and Europe, whilst the Inhabitants were too
few for the Country, and want of People and Money gave Men no temptation to
enlarge their Possessions of Land, or contest for wider extent of Ground; are
little more than Generals of their Armies: and though they command absolutely
in War, yet at home, and in time of Peace, they exercise very little Dominion,
and have but a very moderate Sovereignty; the Resolutions of Peace and War,
being ordinarily either in the People, or in a Council. Though the War it self,
which admits not of Pluralities of Governors, naturally devolves the Command
into the King's sole Authority.

109. And thus in Israel it self, the chief Business of their Judges, and first
Kings, seems to have been to be Captains in War, and Leaders of their Armies;
which, (besides what is signified by, going out and in before the People, which
was, to march forth to War, and home again in the Heads of their Forces)
appears plainly in the story of Iephtha. The Ammonites making War upon Israel,
the Gileadites, in fear, send to Iephtha, a Bastard of their Family, whom they
had cast off, and article with him, if he will assist them against the
Ammonites, to make him their Ruler; which they do in these Words, And the
People made him head and captain over them, Judge. 11. 11. which was, as it
seems, all one as to be Judge. And he judged Israel, Judge. 12. 7. that is, was
their Captain General, six Years. So when Iotham upbraids the Shechemites with
the Obligation they had to Gideon, who had been their Judge and Ruler, he tells
them, He fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of
the hands of Midian, Judge. 9.17. Nothing mentioned of him, but what he did as a
General, and indeed, that is all is found in his History, or in any of the rest
of the Judges. And Abimelech particularly is called King, though at most he was
but their General. And when, being weary of the ill Conduct of Samuel's Sons,
the Children of Israel desired a King, like all the nations to judge them, and
to go out before them, and to fight their battles, 1 Samuel 8. 20. God granting
their Desire, says to Samuel, I will send thee a man, and thou shall anoint him
to be captain over my people Israel that he may save my peole out of the hands
of the Philistines, c. 9. v. 16. As if the only business of a King had been to
lead out their Armies, and fight in their Defense; and, accordingly, at his
Inauguration, pouring a Vial of Oil upon him, declares to Saul, that, the Lord
had anointed him to be Captain over his inheritance, c. 10. v. 1. And therefore
those, who after Readiness being solemnly chosen, and saluted King by the Tribes,
at Mispah, were unwilling to have him their King, make no other Objection but
this, How shall this man save us? v. 27. as if they should have said, This Man
is unfit to be our King, not having Skill and Conduct enough in War, to be able
to defend us. And when God resolved to transfer the Government to David, it is
in these Words, But now thy Kingdom shall not continue: the Lord has sought
him a man after his own heart, and the Lord has commanded him to be captain
over his people, c. 13. v. 14. As if the whole Kingly Authority were nothing
else but to be their General: and therefore the Tribes who had stuck to Readiness
Family, and opposed David's Reign, when they came to Hebron with terms of
Submission to him, they tell him, amongst other Arguments they had to submit to
him as to their King, That he was, in effect, their King in Readiness time, and
therefore, they had no reason but to receive him as their King now. Also (say
they) in time past, when Saul was King over us, thou wast he that leddest out
and broughtest in Israel, and the Lord said unto thee, thou shall feed my
People Israel, and thou shall be a Captain over Israel.

110. Thus, whether a Family, by degrees, grew up into a Commonwealth, and the
Fatherly Authority being continued on to the elder Son, every one in his turn
growing up under it, tacitly submitted to it, and the easiness and equality of
it not offending any one, every one acquiesced, till time seemed to have
confirmed it, and settled a right of Succession, by Prescription: or whether
several Families, or the Descendants of several Families, whom Chance,
Neighborhood, or Business brought together, united into Society; the need of a
General, whose Conduct might defend them against their Enemies in War, and the
great confidence the Innocence and Sincerity of that poor but virtuous Age,
such as are almost all those which begin Governments that ever come to last in
the World, gave Men one of another, made the first Beginners of Commonwealths
generally put the Rule into one Man's hand, without any other express
Limitation or Restraint, but what the Nature of the thing, and the End of
Government required. It was given them for the public Good and Safety, and to
those Ends in the Infancies of Commonwealths, they commonly used it, and unless
they had done so, young Societies could not have subsisted; without such
nursing Fathers: without this care of the Governors, all Governments would
have sunk under the Weakness and Infirmities of their Infancy, the Prince and
the People had soon perished together.

111. But the golden Age (though before vain Ambition, and amor sceleratus
habendi, evil Concupiscence had corrupted Men's minds into a Mistake of true
Power and Honor) had more Virtue, and consequently, better Governors, as well
as less vicious Subjects; and there was then no stretching Prerogative on the
one side to oppress the People; nor, consequently, on the other, any Dispute
about Privilege, to lessen or restrain the Power of the Magistrate: and so no
contest betwixt Rulers and People, about Governors or Government. Yet, when
Ambition, and Luxury, At first, when some certain kind of Regiment was once
approved, it may be, nothing was then further thought upon, for the manner of
governing, but all permitted unto their Wisdom, and Discretion, which were to
Rule, till, by experience, they found this for all parts very inconvenient, so
as the thing, which they had devised for a Remedy, did indeed but increase the
Sore, which it should have cured. They saw, that to live by one Man's Will,
became the cause of all Men's misery. This constrained them to come unto Laws
wherein all Men might see their Duty beforehand, and know the Penalties of
transgressing them. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. l. 1.. 10.
in future Ages, would retain, and increase the Power, without doing the
Business, for which it was given, and aided by Flattery, taught Princes to have
distinct and separate Interests, from their People; Men found it necessary to
examine, more carefully, the Original and Rights of Government; and to find out
ways to restrain the Exorbitances, and prevent the Abuses of that Power, which
they having entrusted in another's hands, only for their own good, they found,
was made use of to hurt them.

112. Thus we may see how probable it is, that People, that were naturally
free, and, by their own consent, either submitted to the Government of their
Father, or united together, out of different Families, to make a Government;
should generally put the Rule into one Man's hands, and choose to be under the
Conduct of a single Person; without so much, as by express Conditions, limiting
or regulating his Power, which they thought safe enough in his Honesty and
Prudence. Though they never dreamed of Monarchy being Iure Divino, which we
never heard of among Mankind, till it was revealed to us by the Divinity of
this last Age; nor ever allowed Paternal Power to have a right to Dominion, or
to be the Foundation of all Government. And thus much may suffice to show,
that, as far as we have any light from History, we have reason to conclude,
that all peaceful beginnings of Government have been laid in the Consent of the
People. I say peaceful, because I shall have occasion, in another place, to
speak of Conquest, which some esteem a way of beginning of Governments.

The other Objection, I find, urged against the beginning of Polities, in the
way I have mentioned, is this, viz.

113. That all Men being born under Government, some or other, it is impossible
any of them should ever be free, and at liberty, to unite together, and begin a
new one, or ever be able to erect a lawful Government. If this Argument be
good; I ask, how came so many lawful Monarchies into the World? For if any
body, upon this supposition, can show me any one Man, in any Age of the World,
free to begin a lawful Monarchy; I will be bound to show him Ten other free Men
at liberty, at the same time, to unite and begin a new Government under a
Regal, or any other Form. It being demonstration, that if any one, born under
the Dominion of another, may be so free, as to have a right to command others,
in a new and distinct Empire; every one that is born under the Dominion of
another may be so free too, and may become a Ruler, or Subject, of a distinct
separate Government. And so by this their own Principle, either all Men however
born are free, or else there is but one lawful Prince, one lawful Government in
the World. And then they have nothing to do but barely to show us which that
is. Which when they have done, I doubt not but all Mankind will easily agree to
pay obedience to him.

114. Though it be a sufficient Answer to their Objection to show, that it
involves them in the same difficulties that it does those they use it against;
yet I shall endeavor to discover the weakness of this Argument a little
farther.

All men, say they, are born under Government, and therefore they cannot be at
liberty to begin a new one. Every one is born a Subject to his Father, or his
Prince, and is therefore under the perpetual tie of Subjection and Allegiance.
It Is plain, Mankind never owned nor considered any such natural subjection that
they were born in, to one or to the other, that tied them, without their own
consents, to a subjection to them and their Heirs.

115. For there are no Examples so frequent in History, both sacred and
profane, as those of Men withdrawing themselves, and their Obedience, from the
Jurisdiction they were born under, and the Family or Community they were bred
up in, and setting up new Governments in other places, from whence sprang all
that number of petty Commonwealths in the beginning of Ages, and which always
multiplied as long as there was room enough, till the stronger, or more
fortunate swallowed the weaker; and those great ones again breaking to pieces,
dissolved into lesser Dominions. All which are so many testimonies against
paternal Sovereignty, and plainly prove, That it was not the natural right of
the Father descending to his Heirs, that made Governments in the beginning;
since it was impossible, upon that ground, there should have been so many
little Kingdoms, but only one universal Monarchy, if Men had not been at
liberty to separate themselves from their Families and their Government, be it
what it will that was set up in it, and go and make distinct Commonwealths and
other Governments as they thought fit.

116. This has been the practice of the World from its first beginning to this
day: nor is it now any more hindrance to the freedom of Mankind, that they are
born under constituted and ancient Polities, that have established Laws and set
Forms of Government, than if they were born in the Woods, amongst the
unconfined Inhabitants that run loose in them. For those who would persuade us,
that by being born under any Government, we are naturally Subjects to it, and
have no more any title or pretense to the freedom of the state of Nature, have
no other reason (bating that of Paternal Power, which we have already answered)
to produce for it, but only because our Fathers or Progenitors passed away
their natural Liberty, and thereby bound up themselves and their Posterity to a
perpetual subjection to the Government, which they themselves submitted to.
It Is true, that whatever Engagements or Promises any one made for himself, he
is under the obligation of them, but cannot by any Compact whatsoever, bind his
Children or Posterity. For his Son, when a Man, being altogether as free as the
Father, any act of the Father can no more give away the liberty of the Son,
than it can of any body else. He may indeed annex such Conditions to the Land
he enjoyed, as a Subject of any Commonwealth, as may oblige his Son to be of
that Community, if he will enjoy those Possessions which were his Fathers;
because that Estate being his Fathers Property, he may dispose or settle it as
he pleases.

117. And this has generally given the occasion to the mistake in this matter;
because Commonwealths not permitting any part of their Dominions to be
dismembered, nor to be enjoyed by any but those of their Community, the Son
cannot ordinarily enjoy the Possessions of his Father, but under the same Terms
his Father did; by becoming a Member of the Society; whereby he puts himself
presently under the Government, he finds there established, as much as any
other Subject of that Commonweal. And thus the Consent of Freemen, born under
Government, which only makes them Members of it, being given separately in
their turns, as each comes to be of Age, and not in a multitude together;
People take no notice of it, and thinking it not done at all, or not necessary,
conclude they are naturally Subjects as they are Men.

118. But, it is plain, Governments themselves understand it otherwise; they
claim no Power over the Son, because of that they had over the Father; nor look
on Children as being their Subjects, by their Fathers being so. If a Subject of
England have a Child, by an English Woman, in France, whose Subject is he? Not
the King of England's; for he must have leave to be admitted to the Privileges
of it. Nor the King of France's; for how then has his Father a liberty to bring
him away, and breed him as he pleases: and who ever was judged as a Traitor or
Deserter, if he left, or warred against a Country, for being barely born in it
of Parents that were Aliens there? It Is plain then, by the Practice of
Governments themselves, as well as by the Law of right Reason, that a Child is
born a Subject of no Country nor Government. He is under his Father's Tuition
and Authority, till he come to Age of Discretion; and then he is a Freeman, at
liberty what Government he will put himself under; what Body Politic he will
unite himself to. For if an English-Man's Son, born in France, be at liberty,
and may do so, it is evident there is no Tie upon him, by his Father's being a
Subject of that Kingdom; nor is he bound up, by any Compact of his Ancestors:
and why then has not his Son, by the same reason, the same liberty, though he
be born any where else! Since the Power that a Father has naturally, over his
Children, is the same, wherever they be born; and the Ties of natural
Obligations, are not bounded by the positive Limits of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.

119. Every Man being, as has been showed, naturally free, and nothing being
able to put him into subjection to any earthly Power, but only his own Consent:
It is to be considered, what shall be understood to be a sufficient Declaration
of a Man's Consent, to make him subject to the Laws of any Government. There is
a common distinction of an express, and a tacit Consent; which will concern our
present Case. No body doubts but an express Consent, of any Man, entering into
any Society, makes him a perfect Member of that Society, a Subject of that
Government. The difficulty is, what ought to be looked upon as a tacit Consent,
and how far it binds, i. e. how far any one shall be looked on to have
consented, and thereby submitted to any Government, where he has made no
Expressions of it at all. And to this I say, that every Man, that has any
Possession, or Enjoyment, of any part of the Dominions of any Government, does
thereby give his tacit Consent, and is as far forth obliged to Obedience to the
Laws of that Government, during such Enjoyment, as any one under it; whether
this his Possession be of Land, to him and his Heirs for ever, or a Lodging
only for a Week; or whether it be barely traveling freely on the Highway; and,
in Effect, it reaches as far as the very being of any one within the
Territories of that Government.

120. To understand this the better, it is fit to consider, that every Man,
when he, at first, incorporates himself into any Commonwealth, he, by his
uniting himself thereunto, annexed also, and submits to the Community those
Possessions, which he has, or shall acquire, that do not already belong to any
other Government. For it would be a direct Contradiction, for any one, to enter
into Society with others for the securing and regulating of Property: and yet
to suppose his Land, whose Property is to be regulated by the Laws of the
Society, should be exempt from the Jurisdiction of that Government, to which he
himself, and the Property of the Land, is a Subject. By the same Act therefore,
whereby any one unites his Person, which was before free, to any Commonwealth;
by the same he unites his Possessions, which were before free, to it also; and
they become, both of them, Person and Possession, subject to the Government and
Dominion of that Commonwealth, as long as it has a being. Who-ever therefore,
from thenceforth, by Inheritance, purchases Permission, or otherwise enjoys any
part of the Land, so annexed to, and under the Government of that Commonweal,
must take it with the Condition it is under; that is, of submitting to the
Government of the Commonwealth, under whose Jurisdiction it is, as far forth,
as any Subject of it.

121. But since the Government has a direct Jurisdiction only over the Land,
and reaches the Possessor of it, (before he has actually incorporated himself
in the Society) only as he dwells upon, and enjoys that: the Obligation any one
is under, by Virtue of such Enjoyment, to submit to the Government, begins and
ends with the Enjoyment; so that whenever the Owner, who has given nothing but
such a tacit Consent, to the Government, will, by Donation, Sale, or otherwise,
quit the said Possession: He is at liberty to go and incorporate himself into
any other Commonwealth, or agree with others to begin a new one, in vacuis
locis, in any part of the World they can find free and unpossessed: whereas he
that has once, by actual Agreement, and any express Declaration, given his
Consent to be of any Commonweal, is perpetually and indispensably obliged to
be, and remain unalterably a Subject to it, and can never be again in the
liberty of the state of Nature; unless, by any Calamity, the Government, he was
under, comes to be dissolved.

122. But submitting to the Laws of any Country; living quietly, and enjoying
Privileges and Protection under them, makes not a Man a Member of that
Society; it is only a local Protection and Homage due to, and from all those,
who, not being in a state of War, come within the Territories belonging to any
Government, to all parts whereof the force of its Law extends. But this no more
makes a Man a Member of that Society, a perpetual Subject of that Commonwealth;
than it would make a Man a Subject to another in whose Family he found it
convenient to abide for some time; though, whilst he continued in it, he were
obliged to comply with the Laws, and submit to the Government he found there.
And thus we see, that Foreigners, by living all their Lives under another
Government, and enjoying the Privileges and Protection of it, though they are
bound, even in Conscience, to submit to its Administration, as far forth as any
Denison; yet do not thereby come to be Subjects or Members of that
Commonwealth. Nothing can make any Man so, but his actually entering into it by
positive Engagement, and express Promise and Compact. This is that, which I
think, concerning the beginning of Political Societies, and that Consent which
makes any one a Member of any Commonwealth.

CHAP. IX. Of the Ends of Political Society and Government.
123. IF Man in the state of Nature be so free as has been said; If he be
absolute Lord of his own Person and Possessions, equal to the greatest, and
subject to no Body, why will he part with his Freedom, this Empire, and subject
himself to the Dominion and Control of any other Power? To which it is obvious
to Answer, that though in the state of Nature he has such a right, yet the
Enjoyment of it is very uncertain, and constantly exposed to the Invasion of
others; for all being Kings as much as he, every Man his Equal, and the greater
part no strict Observers of Equity and Justice; the enjoyment of the property
he has in this state is very unsafe, very unsecure. This makes him willing to
quit this Condition, which however free, is full of fears and continual
dangers: and it is not without reason, that he seeks out, and is willing to join
in Society with others who are already united, or have a mind to unite for the
mutual preservation of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, which I call by the
general name, Property.

124. The great and chief end therefore, of Men's uniting into Commonwealths,
and putting themselves under Government, is the preservation of their Property.
To which in the state of Nature there are many things wanting.

First, There wants an established, settled, known Law, received and allowed by
common consent to be the Standard of Right and Wrong, and the common measure to
decide all Controversies between them. For though the Law of Nature be plain
and intelligible to all rational Creatures; yet Men being biassed by their
interest, as well as ignorant for want of study of it, are not apt to allow of
it as a Law binding to them in the application of it to their particular Cases.

125. Secondly, In the State of Nature there wants a known and indifferent
Judge, with Authority to determine all differences according to the established
Law. For every one in that state being both Judge and Executioner of the Law of
Nature, Men being partial to themselves, Passion and Revenge is very apt to
carry them too far, and with too much heat in their own Cases, as well as
negligence and unconcernedness, make them too remiss in other Men's.

126. Thirdly, In the state of Nature there often wants Power to back and
support the Sentence when right, and to give it due Execution. They who by any
Injustice offended, will seldom fail, where they are able, by force to make
good their Injustice; such resistance many times makes the punishment
dangerous, and frequently destructive to those who attempt it.

127. Thus Mankind, notwithstanding all the Privileges of the state of Nature,
being but in an ill condition while they remain in it, are quickly driven into
Society. Hence it comes to pass, that we seldom find any number of Men live any
time together in this State. The inconveniences that they are therein exposed
to, by the irregular and uncertain exercise of the Power every Man has of
punishing the transgressions of others, make them take Sanctuary under the
established Laws of Government, and therein seek the preservation of their
Property. It Is this makes them so willingly give up every one his single power
of punishing to be exercised by such alone as shall be appointed to it amongst
them; and by such Rules as the Community, or those authorized by them, to that
purpose shall agree on. And in this we have the original right and rise of both
the Legislative and Executive Power, as well as of the Governments and
Societies themselves.

128. For in the state of Nature, to omit the liberty he has of innocent
delights, a Man has two Powers. The first is to do whatsoever he thinks fit for
the preservation of himself and others within the permission of the Law of
Nature; by which Law, common to them all, he and all the rest of Mankind, are
one Community, make up one Society distinct from all other Creatures, and were
it not for the corruption and vitiousness of degenerate Men, there would be no
need of any other, no necessity that Men should separate from this great and
natural Community, and associate into lesser Combinations. The other power a
Man has in the state of Nature, is the power to punish the Crimes committed
against that Law. Both these he gives up when he joins in a private, if I may
so call it, or particular Political Society, and incorporates into any
Commonwealth, separate from the rest of Mankind.

129. The first power, viz. of doing whatsoever he thought fit for the
preservation of himself, and the rest of Mankind, he gives up to be regulated
by Laws made by the Society, so far forth as the preservation of himself and
the rest of that Society shall require; which Laws of the Society in many
things confine the liberty he had by the Law of Nature.

130. Secondly, The power of punishing he wholly gives up, and engages his
natural force, which he might before employ in the Execution of the Law of
Nature, by his own single Authority, as he thought fit, to assist the Executive
Power of the Society, as the Law thereof shall require. For being now in a new
State, wherein he is to enjoy many Conveniences from the labor, assistance
and society of others in the same Community, as well as protection from its
whole strength; he is to part also with as much of his natural liberty, in
providing for himself, as the good, prosperity and safety of the Society shall
require; which is not only necessary but just, since the other Members of the
Society do the like.

131. But though Men when they enter into Society, give up the Equality,
Liberty, and Executive Power they had in the state of Nature, into the hands of
the Society, to be so far disposed of by the Legislative, as the good of the
Society shall require; yet it being only with an intention in every one, the
better to preserve himself, his Liberty and Property. (For no rational Creature
can be supposed to change his condition with an intention to be worse) the
power of the Society, or Legislative, constituted by them, can never be
supposed to extend farther than the common good; but is obliged to secure every
ones Property by providing against those three defects abovementioned, that
made the state of Nature so unsafe and uneasy. And so whoever has the
Legislative or supreme Power of any Commonwealth, is bound to govern by
established standing Laws, promulgated and known to the People, and not by
Extemporary Decrees; By indifferent and upright Judges, who are to decide
Controversies by those Laws. And to employ the force of the Community at home,
only in the Execution of such Laws, or abroad to prevent or redress Foreign
Injuries, and secure the Community from Inroads and Invasion. And all this to
be directed to no other end, but the Peace, Safety, and public good of the
People.

CHAP. X. Of the Forms of a Commonwealth.
132. THE Majority having, as has been showed, upon Men's first uniting into
Society, the whole power of the Community, naturally in them, may employ all
that power in making Laws for the Community from time to time, and Executing
those Laws by Officers of their own appointing; and then the Form of the
Government is a perfect Democracy: Or else may put the power of making Laws
into the hands of a few select Men, and their Heirs or Successors; and then it
is an Oligarchy: Or else into the hands of one Man, and then it is a Monarchy:
If to him and his Heirs, it is an Hereditary Monarchy: If to him only for Life,
but upon his Death the Power only of nominating a Successor, to return to them;
an Elective Monarchy. And so accordingly of these make compounded and mixed
Forms of Government, as they think good. And if the Legislative Power be at
first given by the Majority to one or more Persons only for their Lives, or any
limited time, and then the Supreme Power to revert to them again; when it is so
reverted, the Community may dispose of it again anew into what hands they
please, and so constitute a new Form of Government. For the Form of Government
depending upon the placing the Supreme Power, which is the Legislative, it
being impossible to conceive, that an inferior Power should prescribe to a
Superior, or any but the Supreme make Laws, According as the Power of making
Laws is placed, such is the Form of the Commonwealth.

133. By Commonwealth, I must be understood all along to mean, not a Democracy,
or any Form of Government, but any Independent Community which the Latins
signified by the word Civitas, to which the word which best answers in our
Language, is Commonwealth, and most properly expresses such a Society of Men,
which Community does not, For there may be subordinate Communities in a
Government; and City much less; and therefore to avoid ambiguity, I crave leave
to use the word Commonwealth in that sense; in which sense I find the word used
by K. James himself, which I think to be its genuine signification; which if
any Body dislike, I consent with him to change it for a better.

CHAP. XI. Of the Extent of the Legislative Power.
134. THE great end of Men's entering into Society, being the enjoyment of their
Properties in Peace and Safety, and the great instrument and means of that
being the Laws established in that Society: The first and fundamental positive
Law of all Commonwealths, is the establishing of the Legislative Power, as the
first and fundamental natural Law which is to govern even the Legislative: It
self is the preservation of the Society, and (as far as will consist with the
public good) of every person in it. This Legislative is not only the supreme
power of the Commonwealth, but sacred and unalterable in the hands where the
Community have once placed it; nor can any Edict of any Body else, in what form
soever conceived, or by what Power soever backed, have the force and obligation
of a Law, which has not its Sanction from that Legislative which the public
has chosen and appointed: for without this the Law could not have that which is
absolutely necessary to its being a Law, the consent of the Society, over whom
no Body can have a power to make Laws but by their own consent, The lawful
Power of making Laws to Command whole Politic Societies of Men, belonging so
properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate of
what kind soever upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not by
express Commission, immediately and personally received from God, or else by
authority derived at the first from their consent, upon whose persons they
impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny. Laws they are not therefore
which public approbation has not made so. Hooker's Eccl Pol. l. 1.. 10. Of
this point therefore we are to note, that since Men naturally have no full and
perfect Power to Command whole politic multitudes of Men, therefore utterly
without our Consent, we could in such sort be at no Man's Commandment living.
And to be commanded we do consent when that Society, whereof we be a part, has
at any time before consented, without revoking the same after by the like
universal agreement.

Laws therefore human, of what kind soever, are available by consent. Ibid.


and by Authority received from them; and therefore-all the Obedience, which by
the most solemn ties any one can be obliged to pay, ultimately, terminates in
this Supreme Power, and is directed by those Laws which it enacts; nor can any
Oaths to any Foreign Power whatsoever, or any Domestic subordinate Power,
discharge any Member of the Society from his Obedience to the Legislative,
acting pursuant to their trust, nor oblige him to any Obedience contrary to the
Laws so enacted, or farther than they do allow; it being ridiculous to imagine
one can be tied ultimately to obey any Power in the Society which is not the
Supreme.

135. Though the Legislative, whether placed in one or more, whether it be
always in being, or only by intervals, though it be the Supreme Power in every
Commonwealth; yet, First, it is not, nor can possibly be absolutely Arbitrary,
over the Lives and Fortunes of the People. For it being but the joint power of
every Member of the Society given up to that person, or Assembly, which is
Legislator; it can be no more than those persons had in a state of Nature
before they entered into Society, and gave it up to the Community. For no Body
can transfer to another more power than he has in himself; and no Body has an
absolute Arbitrary Power over himself, or over any other, to destroy his own
Life, or take away the Life or Property of another. A Man, as has been proved,
cannot subject himself to the Arbitrary Power of another; and having in the
state of Nature no Arbitrary Power over the Life, Liberty, or Possession of
another, but only so much as the Law of Nature gave him for the preservation of
himself, and the rest of Mankind; this is all he does, or can give up to the
Commonwealth, and by it to the Legislative Power, so that the Legislative can
have no more than this. Their Power in the utmost bounds of it, is limited to
the public good of the Society. It is a Power that has no other end but
preservation, and therefore can never have a right to destroy, Two Foundations
there are which bear up public Societies; the one a natural inclination,
whereby all Men desire sociable Life and Fellowship; the other an Order,
expressly or secretly agreed upon, touching the manner of their union in living
together; the latter is that which we call the Law of a Commonweal, the very
Soul of a politic Body, the parts whereof are by Law animated, held together,
and set on work in such actions as the common good requires. Law^ politic,
ordained for external order and regiment amongst Men, are never framed as they
should be, unless presuming the will of Man to be inwardly obstinate,
^rebellious, and averse from all obedience to the sacred Laws of his nature; in
a word, unless presuming Man to be in regard of his depraved Mind, little
better than a wild Beast, they do accordingly provide notwithstanding, so to
frame his outward actions, that they be no hindrance unto the common good, for
which Societies are instituted. Unless they do this they are not perfect.
Hooker's Ec. Pol. l. 1.. 10.
enslave, or designedly to impoverish the Subjects; the obligations of the Law
of Nature cease not in Society, but only in many Cases are drawn closer, and
have by human Laws, known Penalties annexed to them, to enforce their
observation. Thus the Law of Nature stands as an Eternal Rule to all Men,
Legislators as well as others. The Rules that they make for other Men's actions,
must as well as their own, and other Men's actions, be conformable to the Law of
Nature, i. e. to the will of God, of which that is a Declaration, and the
fundamental Law of Nature being the preservation of Mankind, no humane Sanction
can be good or valid against it.

136. Secondly, The Legislative, or Supreme Authority, cannot assume to its
self a power to Rule by extemporary Arbitrary Decrees, Humane Laws are measures
in respect of Men whose actions they must direct, howbeit such measures they
are as have also their higher Rules to be measured by, which Rules are two, the
Law of God, and the Law of Nature; so that Laws humane must be made according
to the general Laws of Nature, and without contradiction to any positive Law of
Scripture, otherwise they are ill made. Ibid. l. 3. 9.

To constrain Men to any thing inconvenient does seem unreasonable. Ibid. l.
1.. 10.


but is bound to dispense Justice, and decide the Rights of the Subject by
promulgated standing Laws, and known Authorized Judges. For the Law of Nature
being unwritten, and so no where to be found but in the minds of Men, they who
through Passion or Interest, shall mis-cite, or misapply it, cannot so easily
be convinced of their mistake where there is no established Judge: and so it
serves not as it ought, to determine the Rights, and fence the Properties of
those that live under it, especially where every one is Judge, Interpreter, and
Executioner of it too, and that in his own Case: and he that has right on his
side, having ordinarily but his own single strength, has not force enough to
defend himself from Injuries, or punish Delinquents. To avoid these
Inconveniences which disorder Men's Properties in the state of Nature, Men
unite into Societies, that they may have the united strength of the whole
Society to secure and defend their Properties, and may have standing Rules to
bound it, by which every one may know what is his. To this end it is that Men
give up all their natural power to the Society they enter into, and the
Community put the Legislative Power into such hands as they think fit, with
this trust, that they shall be governed by declared Laws, or else their Peace,
Quiet and Property, will still be at the same uncertainty as it was in the
state of Nature.

137. Absolute Arbitrary Power, or Governing without settled standing Laws, can
neither of them consist with the ends of Society and Government, which Men
would not quit the freedom of the state of Nature for, and tie themselves up
under, were it not to preserve their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes; and by
stated Rules of Right and Property to secure their Peace and Quiet. It cannot
be supposed, that they should intend, had they a power so to do, to give any
one or more an absolute Arbitrary Power over their Persons and Estates, and put
a force into the Magistrates hand to execute his unlimited Will arbitrarily
upon them: this were to put themselves into a worse condition than the state of
Nature, wherein they had a Liberty to defend their Right against the Injuries
of others, and were upon equal terms of force to maintain it, whether invaded
by a single Man, or many in Combination. Whereas by supposing they have given
up themselves to the absolute Arbitrary Power and Will of a Legislator, they
have disarmed themselves, and armed him to make a prey of them when he pleases.
He being in a much worse condition, that is exposed to the Arbitrary Power of
one Man who has the Command of 100000. than he that is exposed to the Arbitrary
Power of 100000. single Men, no Body being secure, that his Will, who has such
a Command, is better than that of other Men, though his Force be 100000. times
stronger. And therefore whatever Form the Commonwealth is under, the Ruling
Power ought to govern by declared and received Laws, and not by extempory
dictates and undetermined Resolutions. For then Mankind will be in a far worse
condition than in the state of Nature, if they shall have armed one or a few
Men with the joint power of a multitude, to force them to obey at pleasure the
exorbitant and unlimited decrees of their sudden thoughts, or unrestrained, and
till that moment unknown Wills without having any measures set down which may
guide and justify their actions. For all the power the Government has, being
only for the good of the Society, as it ought not to be Arbitrary and at
Pleasure: so it ought to be exercised by established and promulgated Laws; that
both the People may know their Duty, and be safe and secure within the limits
of the Law, and the Rulers too kept within their due bounds, and not be tempted
by the power they have in their hands to employ it to purposes, and by such
measures as they would not have known, and own not willingly.

138. Thirdly, The Supreme Power cannot take from any Man any part of his
Property without his own consent. For the preservation of Property being the
end of Government, and that for which Men enter into Society, it necessarily
supposes and requires, that the People should have Property, without which they
must be supposed to lose that by entering into Society, which was the end for
which they entered into it. Too gross an absurdity for any Man to own. Men
therefore in Society having Property, they have such a right to the goods,
which by the Law of the Community are theirs, that no Body has a right to take
them, or any part of them, from them, without their own consent; without this
they have no Property at all. For I have truly no Property in that which
another can by right take from me when he pleases, against my consent. Hence it
is a mistake to think, that the Supreme or Legislative Power of any
Commonwealth, can do what it will, and dispose of the Estates of the Subject
arbitrarily, or take any part of them at pleasure. This is not much to be
feared in Governments where the Legislative consists wholly or in part in
Assemblies which are variable, whose Members upon the dissolution of the
Assembly, are Subjects under the common Laws of their Country, equally with the
rest. But in Governments, where the Legislative is in one lasting Assembly,
always in being, or in one Man, as in absolute Monarchies, there is danger
still, that they will think themselves to have a distinct interest from the
rest of the Community, and so will be apt to increase their own Riches and
Power by taking what they think fit from the People. For a Man's Property is not
at all secure, though there be good and equitable Laws to set the bounds of it
between him and his Fellow Subjects, if he who commands those Subjects, have
power to take from any private Man what part he pleases of his Property, and
use and dispose of it as he thinks good.

139. But Government into whosesoever hands it is put, being as I have before
showed, entrusted with this condition, and for this end, that Men might have
and secure their Properties, the Prince or Senate, however it may have power to
make Laws for the regulating of Property between the Subjects one amongst
another, yet can never have a Power to take to themselves the whole, or any
part of the Subjects Property, without their own consent. For this would be in
effect to leave them no Property at all. And to let us see, that even absolute
Power, where it is necessary, is not arbitrary by being absolute, but is still
limited by that reason, and confined to those ends which required it in some
Cases to be absolute, we need look no farther than the common practice of
Martial Discipline. For the preservation of the Army, and in it of the whole
Commonwealth, requires an absolute Obedience to the Command of every superior
Officer, and it is justly Death to disobey or dispute the most dangerous or
unreasonable of them; but yet we see, that neither the Sergeant that could
command a Soldier to march up to the mouth of a Cannon, or stand in a Breach
where he is almost sure to perish; can command that Soldier to give him one
penny of his money: nor the General that can condemn him to Death for deserting
his Post, or not obeying the most desperate Orders, cannot yet with all his
absolute Power of Life and Death, dispose of one Farthing of that Soldiers
Estate, or seize one jot of his Goods; whom yet he can command any thing, and
hang for the least disobedience. Because such a blind Obedience is necessary to
that end for which the Commander has his Power, viz. the preservation of the
rest, but the disposing of his goods has nothing to do with it.

140. It Is true, Governments cannot be supported without great Charge, and it is
fit every one who enjoys his share of the Protection, should pay, out of his
Estate, his proportion for the maintenance of it. But still it must be with his
own Consent, i. e. the Consent of the Majority, giving it either by themselves,
or their Representatives chosen by them; for if any one shall claim a Power to
lay and levy Taxes on the People, by his own Authority, and without such
consent of the People, he thereby invades the Fundamental Law of Property, and
subverts the end of Government. For what property have I in that which another
may by right take when he pleases to himself.

141. Fourthly, The Legislative cannot transfer the Power of making Laws to any
other hands, for it being but a delegated Power from the People, they who have
it cannot pass it over to others. The People alone can appoint the Form of the
Commonwealth, which is by Constituting the Legislative, and appointing in whose
hands that shall be. And when the People have said, We will submit, and be
governed by Laws made by such Men, and in such Forms; no Body else can say
other Men shall make Laws for them: nor can they be bound by any Laws but such
as are Enacted by those whom they have Chosen, and Authorized to make Laws for
them.

142. These are the Bounds which the trust that is put in them by the Society,
and the Law of God and Nature, have set to the Legislative Power of every
Commonwealth, in all Forms of Government: First, They are to govern by
promulgated established Laws, not to be varied in particular Cases, but to have
one Rule for Rich and Poor, for the Favorite at Court, and the Country Man at
Plough. Secondly, These Laws also ought to be designed for no other end
ultimately but the good of the People. Thirdly, They must not raise Taxes on
the Property of the People, without the Consent of the People, given by
themselves, or their Deputies. And this properly concerns only such Governments
where the Legislative is always in being, or at least where the People have not
reserved any part of the Legislative to Deputies, to be from time to time
chosen by themselves. Fourthly, Legislative neither must nor can transfer the
Power of making Laws to any Body else, or place it any where but where the
People have.

CHAP. XII. Of the Legislative, Executive, and Federative Power of the
Commonwealth.
143. THE Legislative Power is that which has a right to direct how the Force
of the Commonwealth shall be employed for preserving the Community and the
Members of it. Because those Laws which are constantly to be Executed, and
whose Force is always to continue, may be made in a little time; therefore
there is no need that the Legislative should be always in being, not having
always business to do. And because it may be too great temptation to humane
frailty, apt to grasp at Power, for the same Persons who have the Power of
making Laws, to have also in their hands the power to execute them, whereby
they may exempt themselves from Obedience to the Laws they make, and suit the
Law, both in its making and execution, to their own private advantage, and
thereby come to have a distinct interest from the rest of the Community,
contrary to the end of Society and Government. Therefore in well ordered
Commonwealths, where the good of the whole is so considered as it ought, the
Legislative Power is put into the hands of diverse Persons, who duly Assembled,
have by themselves, or jointly with others, a Power to make Laws, which when
they have done, being separated again, they are themselves subject to the Laws
they have made; which is a new and near tie upon them to take care that they
make them for the public good.

144. But because the Laws that are at once, and in a short time made, have a
constant and lasting force, and need a perpetual Execution, or an attendance
thereunto: Therefore it is necessary there should be a Power always in being,
which should see to the Execution of the Laws that are made, and remain in
force. And thus the Legislative and Executive Power come often to be separated.

145. There is another Power in every Commonwealth, which one may call natural,
because it is that which answers to the Power every Man naturally had before he
entered into Society. For though in a Commonwealth the Members of it are
distinct Persons still in reference to one another, and as such are governed by
the Laws of the Society; yet in reference to the rest of Mankind, they make one
Body, which is, as every Member of it before was, still in the state of Nature
with the rest of Mankind: so that the Controversies that happen between any Man
of the Society with those that are out of it, are managed by the public; and
an injury done to a Member of their Body, engages the whole in the reparation
of it. So that under this consideration, the whole Community is one Body in the
state of Nature, in respect of all other States or Persons out of its Community.

146. This therefore contains the Power of War and Peace, Leagues and
Alliances, and all the Transactions, with all Persons and Communities without
the Commonwealth, and may be called Federative, if any one pleases. So the
thing be understood, I am indifferent as to the name.

147. These two Powers, Executive and Federative, though they be really
distinct in themselves, yet one comprehending the Execution of the Municipal
Laws of the Society within its self, upon all that are parts of it; the other
the management of the security and interest of the public without, with all
those, that it may receive benefit or damage from, yet they are always almost
united. And though this Federative Power in the well or ill management of it be
of great moment to the Commonwealth, yet it is much less capable to be directed
by antecedent, standing, positive Laws, than the Executive; and so must
necessarily be left to the Prudence and Wisdom of those whose hands it is in,
to be managed for the public good. For the Laws that concern Subjects one
amongst another, being to direct their actions, may well enough precede them.
But what is to be done in reference to Foreigners, depending much upon their
actions, and the variation of designs and interests must be left in great part
to the Prudence of those who have this Power committed to them, to be managed
by the best of their Skill for the advantage of the Commonwealth.

148. Though, as I said, the Executive and Federative Power of every Community
be really distinct in themselves, yet they are hardly to be separated and
placed at the same time in the hands of distinct Persons. For both of them
requiring the force of the Society for their exercise, it is almost
impracticable to place the Force of the Commonwealth in distinct, and not
subordinate hands; or that the Executive and Federative Power should be placed
in Persons that might act separately, whereby the Force of the public would be
under different Commands, which would be apt sometime or other to cause
disorder and ruin.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Subordination of the Powers of the Commonwealth.
149. THough in a Constituted Commonwealth, standing upon its own Basis, and
acting according to its own nature, that is, acting for the preservation of the
Community, there can be but one Supreme Power, which is the Legislative, to
which all the rest are and must be subordinate, yet the Legislative being only
a Fiduciary Power to act for certain ends, there remains still in the People a
Supreme Power to remove or alter the Legislative, when they find the
Legislative act contrary to the trust reposed in them. For all Power given with
trust for the attaining an end, being limited by that end, when ever that end
is manifestly neglected, or opposed, the trust must necessarily be forfeited,
and the Power devolve into the hands of those that gave it, who may place it
anew where they shall think best for their safety and security. And thus the
Community perpetually retains a Supreme Power of saving themselves from the
attempts and designs of any Body, even of their Legislators, whenever they
shall be so foolish, or so wicked, as to lay and carry on designs against the
Liberties and Properties of the Subject. For no Man or Society of Men, having a
Power to deliver up their Preservation, or consequently the means of it, to the
absolute Will, and arbitrary Dominion of another; when ever any one shall go
about to bring them into such a Slavish Condition, they will always have a
right to preserve what they have not a Power to part with; and to rid
themselves of those who invade this Fundamental, Sacred, and unalterable Law of
Self-Preservation, for which they entered into Society. And thus the Community
may be said in this respect, to be always the Supreme Power, but not as
considered under any Form of Government, because this Power of the People can
never take place till the Government be dissolved.

150. In all Cases, whilst the Government subsists, the Legislative is the
supreme Power. For what can give Laws to another must needs be superior to
him; and since the Legislative is no otherwise Legislative of the Society, but
by the right it has to make Laws for all the parts, and every Member of the
Society prescribing Rules to their actions, and giving power of Execution where
they are transgressed, the Legislative must needs be the Supreme, and all other
Powers in any Members or parts of the Society, derived from and subordinate to
it.

151. In some Commonwealths where the Legislative is not always in being, and
the Executive is vested in a single Person, who has also a share in the
Legislative; there that single Person in a very tolerable sense may also be
called Supreme; not that he has in himself all the Supreme Power, which is that
of Law-making: but because he has in him the supreme Execution, from whom all
inferior Magistrates derive all their several subordinate Powers, or at least
the greatest part of them; having also no Legislative superior to him, there
being no Law to be made without his consent, which cannot be expected should
ever subject him to the other part of the Legislative, he is properly enough in
this sense Supreme. But yet it is to be observed, that though Oaths of
Allegiance and Fealty are taken to him, it is not to him as Supreme Legislator,
but as Supreme Executor of the Law, made by a joint Power of him with others;
Allegiance being nothing but an Obedience according to Law, which when he
violates, he has no right to Obedience, nor can claim it otherwise than as the
public Person vested with the Power of the Law, and so is to be considered as
the Image, Phantom, or Representative of the Commonwealth, acted by the will of
the Society, declared in its Laws; and thus he has no Will, no Power, but that
of the Law. But when he quits this Representation, this public Will, and acts
by his own private Will, he degrades himself and is but a single private Person
without Power, and without Will. The Members owing no Obedience but to the
public Will of the Society.

152. The Executive Power placed any where but in a Person that has also a
share in the Legislative, is visibly subordinate and accountable to it, and may
be at pleasure changed and displaced; so that it is not the Supreme Executive
Power that is exempt from Subordination, but the Supreme Executive Power vested
in one, who having a share in the Legislative, has no distinct superior
Legislative to be subordinate and accountable to, father than he himself shall
join and consent, so that he is no more subordinate than he himself shall think
fit, which one may certainly conclude will be but very little. Of other
Ministerial and subordinate Powers in a Commonwealth, we need not speak, they
being so multiplied with infinite variety in the different Customs and
Constitutions of distinct Commonwealths, that it is impossible to give a
particular account of them all. Only thus much which is necessary to our
present purpose we may take notice of concerning them, that they have no manner
of Authority any of them, beyond what is by positive Grant and Commission
delegated to them, and are all of them accountable to some other Power in the
Commonwealth.

153. It is not necessary, no nor so much as convenient, that the Legislative
should be always in being. But absolutely necessary, that the Executive Power
should, because there is not always need of new Laws to be made, but always
need of Execution of the Laws that are made. When the Legislative has put the
Execution of the Laws they make into other hands, they have a power still to
resume it out of those hands when they find cause, and to punish for any
mall-administration against the Laws. The same holds also in regard of the
Federative Power, that and the Executive being both Ministerial and subordinate
to the Legislative, which as has been showed in a Constituted Commonwealth, is
the Supreme. The Legislative also in this Case being supposed to consist of
several Persons; for if it be a single Person, it cannot but be always in
being, and so will as Supreme, naturally have the Supreme Executive Power,
together with the Legislative, may assemble and exercise their Legislative, at
the times that either their original Constitution, or their own Adjournment
appoints, or when they please; if neither of these has appointed any time, or
there be no other way prescribed to convoke them. For the Supreme Power being
placed in them by the People, it is always in them, and they may exercise it
when they please, unless by their original Constitution, they are limited to
certain Seasons, or by an Act of their Supreme Power, they have Adjourned to a
certain time, and when that time comes, they have a right to Assemble and act
again.

154. If the Legislative, or any part of it be of Representatives, chosen for
that time by the People, which afterward return into the ordinary state of
Subjects, and have no share in the Legislature but upon a new choice, this
power of chuseing must also be exercised by the People, either at certain
appointed Seasons, or else when they are summoned to it; and in this latter
Case, the power of convokeing the Legislative, is ordinarily placed in the
Executive, and has one of these two limitations in respect of time: That either
the Original Constitution requires their Assembling and acting at certain
intervals, and then the Executive Power does nothing but Ministerially issue
directions for their Electing and Assembling, according to due Forms: Or else
it is left to his Prudence to call them by new Elections, when the occasions or
exigencies of the public require the amendment of old, or making of new Laws,
or the redress or prevention of any inconveniences that lie on, or threaten
the People.

155. It may be demanded here, what if the Executive Power, being possessed of
the force of the Commonwealth, shall make use of that force to hinder the
meeting and acting of the Legislative, when the original Constitution, or the
public Exigencies require it? I say using Force upon the People, without
Authority, and contrary to the Trust put in him that does so, is a state of War
with the People, who have a right to reinstate their Legislative in the
Exercise of their Power. For having erected a Legislative with an intent they
should exercise the Power of making Laws, either at certain set times, or when
there is need of it; when they are hindered by any force from what is so
necessary to the Society, and wherein the safety and preservation of the People
consists, the People have a right to remove it by force. In all states and
conditions the true remedy of Force without Authority, is to oppose Force to
it. The use of Force without Authority, always puts him that uses it into a
state of War, as the Aggressor, and renders him liable to be treated
accordingly.

156. The Power of Assembling, and dismissing the Legislative, placed in the
Executive, gives not the Executive a superiority over it, but is a Fiduciary
Trust placed in him for the safety of the People, in a Case where the
uncertainty and variableness of humane affairs could not bear a steady fixed
rule. For it not being possible, that the first Framers of the Government,
should by any foresight, be so much Masters of future Events, as to be able to
prefix so just periods of return and duration to the Assemblies of the
Legislative, in all times to come, that might exactly answer all the Exigences
of the Commonwealth; the best remedy could be found for this defect, was to
trust this to the prudence of one who was always to be present, and whose
business it was to watch over the public good. Constant frequent meetings of
the Legislative, and long Continuations of their Assemblies, without necessary
occasion, could not but be burdensome to the People, and must necessarily in
time produce more dangerous inconveniences, and yet the quick turn of affairs,
might be sometimes such as to need their present help: any delay of their
Convening might endanger the public, and sometimes too their business might be
so great, that the limited time of their sitting might be too short for their
work, and rob the public of that benefit which could be had only from their
mature deliberation. What then could be done in this Case to prevent the
Community from being exposed sometime or other to eminent hazard on one side,
or the other, by fixed intervals and periods, set to the meeting and acting of
the Legislative. But to entrust it to the prudence of some, who being present,
and acquainted with the state of public affairs, might make use of this
Prerogative for the public good? And where else could this be so well placed
as in his hands who was entrusted with the Execution of the Laws for the same
end? Thus supposing the regulation of times for the Assembling and Sitting of
the Legislative, not settled by the original Constitution, it naturally fell
into the hands of the Executive; not as an Arbitrary Power depending on his
good pleasure, but with this trust always to have it exercised only for the
public Weal, as the Occurrences of times and change of affairs might require.
Whether settled periods of their Convening, or a liberty left to the Prince for
Convoking the Legislative, or perhaps a mixture of both, has the least
inconvenience attending it, it is not my business here to inquire, but only to
show, that though the Executive Power may have the Prerogative of Convoking and
dissolving such Conventions of the Legislative, yet it is not thereby superior
to it.

157. Things of this World are in so constant a Flux, that nothing remains long
in the same State. Thus People, Riches, Trade, Power, change their Stations;
flourishing mighty Cities come to ruin, and prove in time neglected desolate
Corners, whilst other unfrequented places grow into populous Countries, filled
with Wealth and Inhabitants. But things not always changing equally, and
private interest often keeping up Customs and Privileges when the reasons of
them are ceased, it often comes to pass, that in Governments, where part of the
Legislative consists of Representatives chosen by the People, that in tract of
time, this Representation becomes very unequal and disproportionate to the
reasons it was at first established upon. To what gross absurdities the
following of Custom when Reason has left it may lead, we may be satisfied when
we see the bare name of a Town, of which there remains not so much as the
ruins, where scarce so much Housing as a Sheepcoat, or more Inhabitants than a
Shepherd is to be found, send as many Representatives to the grand Assembly of
Lawmakers, as a whole County numerous in People, and powerful in riches. This
Strangers stand amazed at, and every one must confess needs a remedy. Though
most think it hard to find one, because the Constitution of the Legislative
being the original and supreme act of the Society, antecedent to all positive
Laws in it, and depending wholly on the People, no inferior Power can alter
it. And therefore the People, when the Legislative is once Constituted, having
in such a Government as we have been speaking of, no Power to act as long as
the Government stands; this inconvenience is thought incapable of a remedy.

158. Salus Populi Suprema Lex, is certainly so just and fundamental a Rule,
that he who sincerely follows it cannot dangerously err. If therefore the
Executive, who has the Power of Convoking the Legislative, observing rather the
true proportion than fashion of Representation, regulates not by old custom,
but true reason, the number of Members, in all places, that have a right to be
distinctly represented, which no part of the People, however incorporated, can
pretend to; but in proportion to the assistance which it affords to the
public, it cannot be judged to have set up a new Legislative, but to have
restored the old and true one, and to have rectified the disorders which
succession of time had insensibly as well as inevitably introduced; for it
being the interest as well as intention of the People to have a fair and equal
Representative; whoever brings it nearest to that, is an undoubted Friend to,
and Establisher of the Government, and cannot miss the Consent and Approbation
of the Community. Prerogative being nothing but a Power in the hands of the
Prince to provide for the public good, in such Cases, which depending upon
unforeseen and uncertain Occurrences, certain and unalterable Laws could not
safely direct. Whatsoever shall be done manifestly for the good of the People,
and establishing the Government upon its true Foundations, is, and always will
be, just Prerogative. The Power of Erecting new Corporations, and therewith new
Representatives, carries with it a supposition, that in time, the measures of
representation might vary, and those have a just right to be represented which
before had none; and by the same reason, those cease to have a right, and be
too inconsiderable for such a privilege which before had it. It Is not a Change
from the present State which perhaps Corruption or decay has introduced, that
makes an Inroad upon the Government, but the tendency of it to injure or
oppress the People, and to set up one part or Party with a distinction from,
and an unequal subjection of the rest. Whatsoever cannot but be acknowledged to
be of advantage to the Society and People in general, upon just and lasting
measures, will always, when done, justify it self; and whenever the People
shall choose their Representatives upon just and undeniably equal measures,
suitable to the original Frame of the Government, it cannot be doubted to be
the will and act of the Society, whoever permitted or proposed to them so to do.

CHAP. XIV. Of Prerogative.
159. WHere the Legislative and Executive Power are in distinct hands, as they
are in all moderated Monarchies and well-framed Governments, there the good of
the Society requires, that several things should be left to the discretion of
him that has the Executive Power. For the Legislators not being able to foresee
and provide, by Laws, for all that may be useful to the Community, the Executor
of the Laws having the power in his hands, has by the common Law of Nature, a
right to make use of it for the good of the Society, in many Cases where the
municipal Law has given no direction, till the Legislative can conveniently be
Assembled to provide for it; nay many things there are which the Law can by no
means provide for, and those must necessarily be left to the discretion of him
that has the Executive Power in his hands, to be ordered by him as the public
good and advantage shall require; nay, it is fit that the Laws themselves,
should in some Cases, give way to the Executive Power, or rather to this
Fundamental Law of Nature and Government, viz. That as much as may be, all the
Members of the Society are to be preserved. For since many accidents may happen
wherein a strict and rigid observation of the Laws may do harm, as not to pull
down an innocent Man's House to stop the Fire when the next to it is burning;
and a Man may come sometimes within the reach of the Law, which makes no
distinction of Persons, by an action that may deserve reward and pardon. It Is
fit the Ruler should have a Power in many Cases to mitigate the severity of the
Law, and pardon some Offenders, since the end of Government, being the
preservation of all as much as may be, even the guilty are to be spared where
it can prove no prejudice to the innocent.

160. This Power to act according to discretion for the public good, without
the prescription of the Law, and sometimes even against it, is that which is
called Prerogative; for since in foam Governments the Law-making Power is not
always in being, and is usually too numerous, and so too slow for the dispatch
requisite to Execution; and because also it is impossible to foresee, and so by
Laws to provide for all accidents and necessities that may concern the public,
or make such Laws as will do no harm, if they are Executed with an inflexible
rigor on all occasions, and upon all Persons that may come in their way,
therefore there is a latitude left to the Executive Power, to do many things of
choice which the Laws do not prescribe.

161. This Power whilst employed for the benefit of the Community, and suitably
to the trust and ends of the Government, is undoubted Prerogative, and never is
questioned. For the People are very seldom, or never scrupulous or nice in the
point, or questioning of Prerogative, whilst it is in any tolerable degree
employed for the use it was meant, that is, the good of the People, and not
manifestly against it. But if there comes to be a question between the
Executive Power and the People, about a thing claimed as a Prerogative; the
tendency of the exercise of such Prerogative, to the good or hurt of the
People, will easily decide that question.

162. It is easy to conceive, that in the Infancy of Governments, when
Commonwealths differed little from Families in number of People, they differed
from them too, but little in number of Laws: and the Governors being as the
Fathers of them, watching over them for their good, the Government was almost
all Prerogative. A few established Laws served the turn, and the discretion and
care of the Ruler supplied the rest. But when mistake or flattery prevailed
with weak Princes, to make use of this Power for private ends of their own, and
not for the public good, the people were fain by express Laws, to get
Prerogative determined in those points wherein they found disadvantage from it:
And declared limitations of Prerogative in those Cases which they and their
Ancestors had left in the utmost latitude, to the Wisdom of those Princes who
made no other but a right use of it, that is, for the good of their People.

163. And therefore they have a very wrong notion of Government, who say, that
the People have incroach'd upon the Prerogative when they have got any part of
it to be defined by positive Laws. For in so doing they have not pulled from
the Prince any thing that of right belonged to him, but only declared, that
that Power which they indefinitely left in him, or his Ancestors hands, to be
exercised for their good, was not a thing they intended him, when he used it
otherwise. For the End of Government being the good of the Community,
whatsoever alterations are made in it, tending to that end, cannot be an
incroachment upon any body; since no body, in Government, can have a right
tending to any other end. And those only are encroachments which prejudice or
hinder the public good. Those who say otherwise, speak as if the Prince had a
distinct and separate Interest from the good of the Community, and was not made
for it. The Root and Source from which spring almost all those Evils and
Disorders, which happen in Kingly Governments. And indeed, if that be so, the
People, under his Government, are not a Society of Rational Creatures, entered
into a Community, for their mutual good, such as have set Rulers over
themselves, to guard and promote that good; but are to be looked on as an Herd
of inferior Creatures, under the Dominion of a Master, who keeps them, and
works them, for his own Pleasure or Profit. If Men were so void of Reason, and
brutish, as to enter into Society upon such Terms, Prerogative might indeed be,
what some Men would have it, an Arbitrary Power to do things hurtful to the
People.

164. But since a Rational Creature cannot be supposed, when free, to put
himself into Subjection to another, for his own harm: (though where he finds a
good and a wise Ruler, he may not, perhaps, think it either necessary or useful
to set precise Bounds to his Power in all things) Prerogative can be nothing
but the Peoples permitting their Rulers to do several things of their own free
choice, where the Law was silent, and sometimes too against the direct Letter
of the Law, for the public good, and their acquiescing in it when so done. For
as a good Prince, who is mindful of the trust put into his hands, and careful
of the good of his People, cannot have too much Prerogative, that is, Power to
do good: So a weak and ill Prince, who would claim that Power his Predecessors
exercised, without the direction of the Law, as a Prerogative belonging to him
by Right of his Office, which he may exercise at his pleasure, to make or
promote an Interest distinct from that of the public, gives the People an
occasion to claim their Right, and limit that Power, which, whilst it was
exercised for their good, they were content should be tacitly allowed.

165. And therefore he that will look into the History of England will find
that Prerogative was always largest in the hands of our wisest and best
Princes: Because the People observing the whole tendency of their Actions to be
the public good, or if any humane frailty or mistake (for Princes are but Men,
made as others) appeared in some small declinations from that end; yet 'twas
visible, the main of their Conduct tended to nothing but the care of the
public. The People therefore finding reason to be satisfied with these
Princes, whenever they acted without, or contrary to the Letter of the Law,
acquiesced in what they did, and without the least complaint, let them enlarge
their Prerogative as they pleased, judging rightly that they did nothing herein
to the prejudice of their Laws, since they acted conformable to the Foundation
and End of all Laws, the public good.

166. Such God-like Princes indeed had some Title to Arbitrary Power, by that
Argument that would prove Absolute Monarchy the best Government, as that which
God himself governs the Universe by, because such Kings partake of his Wisdom
and Goodness. Upon this is founded that saying, That the Reigns of good Princes
have been always most dangerous to the Liberties of their People. For when
their Successors, managing the Government with different Thoughts, would draw
the Actions of those good Rulers into Precedent, and make them the Standard of
their Prerogative; as if what had been done only for the good of the People,
was a right in them to do for the harm of the People, if they so pleased: It
has often occasioned Contest, and sometimes public Disorders, before the
People could recover their original Right, and get that to be declared not to
be Prerogative which truly was never so: since it is impossible any body, in
the Society, should ever have a right to do the People harm, though it be very
possible and reasonable that the People should not go about to set any Bounds
to the Prerogative of those Kings or Rulers, who themselves transgressed not
the Bounds of the public good. For Prerogative is nothing but the Power of
doing public good, without a Rule.

167. The Power of calling Parliaments in England, as to precise time, place,
and duration, is certainly a Prerogative of the King, but still with this
trust, that it shall be made use of for the good of the Nation, as the
exigencies of the Times, and variety of Occasion shall require. For it being
impossible to foresee which should always be the fittest place for them to
assemble in, and what the best season: the choice of these was left with the
Executive Power, as might be best subservient to the public good, and best
suit the ends of Parliaments.

168. The old Question will be asked in this matter of Prerogative, But who
shall be Judge when this Power is made a right use of? I answer: Between an
Executive Power in being, with such a Prerogative, and a Legislative, that
depends upon his will for their convening, there can be no Judge on Earth. As
there can be none between the Legislative and the People, should either the
executive, or the Legislative, when they have got the Power in their hands,
design, or go about to enslave or destroy them. The People have no other remedy
in this, as in all other cases, where they have no Judge on earth, but to
appeal to Heaven. For the Rulers, in such attempts, exercising a Power the
people never put into their hands, who can never be supposed to consent that
any body should rule over them for their harm, do that which they have not a
right to do. And where the Body of the People, or any single Man, are deprived
of their Right, or are under the Exercise of a power without right, having no
Appeal on earth, they have a liberty to appeal to Heaven, whenever they judge
the Cause of sufficient moment. And therefore, though the People cannot be
Judge, so as to have, by the Constitution of that Society, any Superior power,
to determine and give effective Sentence in the case; yet they have reserved
that ultimate Determination to themselves, which belongs to all Mankind, where
there lies no Appeal on Earth; by a Law antecedent, and paramount to all
positive Laws of Men, whether they have just Cause to make their Appeal to
Heaven. And this Judgment they cannot part with, it being out of a Man's power
so to submit himself to another, as to give him a liberty to destroy him; God
and Nature never allowing a Man so to abandon himself, as to neglect his own
preservation. And since he cannot take away his own Life, neither can he give
another power to take it. Nor let any one think this lays a perpetual
foundation for Disorder; for this operates not till the Inconvenience is so
great, that the Majority feel it, and are weary of it, and find a necessity to
have it amended. And this the Executive Power, or wise Princes never need come
in the danger of. And it is the thing, of all others, they have most need to
avoid, as, of all others, the most perilous.

CHAP. XV. Of Paternal, Political, and Despotical Power, considered together.
169. THough I have had occasion to speak of these separately before, yet the
great mistakes, of late, about Government, having, as I suppose, arisen from
confounding these distinct Powers one with another, it may not, perhaps, be
amiss, to consider them here together.

170. First then, Paternal or Parental Power, is nothing but that which Parents
have over their Children, to govern them, for the Childrens good, till they
come to the use of Reason, or a state of Knowledge, wherein they may be
supposed capable to understand that Rule, whether it be the Law of Nature, or
the municipal Law of their Country, they are to govern themselves by: Capable,
I say, to know it, as well as several others, who live as Freemen under that
Law. The Affection and Tenderness God has planted in the breasts of Parents,
toward their Children, makes it evident, that this is not intended to be a
severe. Arbitrary Government; but only for the Help, Instruction, and
Preservation of their Offspring. But, happen it as it will, there is, as I
have proved, no reason why it should be thought to extend to Life and Death, at
any time, over their Children, more than over any body else, or keep the Child
in subjection to the Will of his Parents, when grown to a Man, and the perfect
use of Reason, any farther, than as having received Life and Education from his
Parents, obliges him to Respect, Honor, Gratitude, Assistance, and Support,
all his Life, to both Father and Mother. And thus, it is true, the Paternal is a
natural Government; but not at all extending it self to the Ends and
Jurisdictions of that which is Political. The Power of the Father does not
reach at all to the Property of the Child, which is only in his own disposing.

171. Secondly, Political Power is that Power, which every Man, having in the
state of Nature, has given up into the hands of the Society, and therein to the
Governors, whom the Society has set over it self, with this express, or tacit
Trust, That it shall be employed for their good, and the preservation of their
Property: Now this Power, which every Man has in the state of Nature, and which
he parts with to the Society, in all such cases where the Society can secure
him, is to use such means for the preserving of his own Property, as he thinks
good, and Nature allows him; and to punish the Breach of the Law of Nature in
others; so as (according to the best of his Reason) may most conduce to the
preservation of himself, and the rest of Mankind; so that the end and measure
of this Power, when in every Man's hands, in the state of Nature, being the
preservation of all of his Society, that is, all Mankind in general. It can
have no other end or measure, when in the hands of the Magistrate, but to
preserve the Members of that Society, in their Lives, Liberties, and
Possessions; and so cannot be an Absolute, Arbitrary Power over their Lives and
Fortunes, which are as much as possible to be preserved; But a Power to make
Laws, and annex such Penalties to them, as may tend to the preservation of the
whole, by cutting off those Parts, and those only, which are so corrupt, that
they threaten the sound and healthy, without which no severity is lawful. And
this Power has its Original only from Compact and Agreement, and the mutual
Consent of those who make up the Community.

172. Thirdly, Despotical Power is an Absolute, Arbitrary Power, one Man has
over another, to take away his Life whenever he pleases; and this is a Power,
which neither Nature gives, for it has made no such distinction between one Man
and another, nor Compact can convey. For Man, not having such an Arbitrary
Power over his own Life, cannot give another Man such a Power over it, but it
is the effect only of Forfeiture, which the Aggressor makes of his own Life,
when he puts himself into the state of War with another. For having quitted
Reason, which God has given to be the Rule betwixt Man and Man, and the
peaceable ways which that teaches, and made use of Force to compass his unjust
ends upon another, where he has no right, he renders himself liable to be
destroyed by his Adversary, whenever he can, as any other noxious and brutish
Creature that is destructive to his Being. And thus Captives, taken in a just
and lawful War, and such only, are subject to a Despotical Power, which as it
arises not from Compact, so neither is it capable of any, but is the state of
War continued. For what Compact can be made with a Man that is not Master of
his own Life? What Condition can he perform? And if he be once allowed to be
Master of his own Life, the Despotical, Arbitrary Power of his Master ceases.
He that is Master of himself, and his own Life, has a right too to the means of
preserving it; so that as soon as Compact enters, Slavery ceases, and he so far
quits his Absolute Power, and puts an end to the state of War, who enters into
Conditions with his Captive.

173. Nature gives the first of these, viz. Paternal Power, to Parents, for the
Benefit of their Children, during their Minority, to supply their want of
Ability, and understanding how to manage their Property. (By Property I must be
understood here, as in other places, to mean that Property which Men have in
their Persons as well as Goods.) Voluntary Agreement gives the second, viz.
Political Power, to Governors, for the Benefit of their Subjects, to secure
them in the Possession and Use of their Properties. And Forfeiture gives the
third, Despotical Power, to Lords, for their own Benefit over those who are
stripped of all Property.

174. He that shall consider the distinct rise and extent, and the different
ends of these several Powers, will plainly see that Paternal Power comes as far
short of that of the Magistrate, as Despotical exceeds it; and that Absolute
Dominion, however placed, is so far from being one kind of civil Society, that
it is as inconsistent with it as Slavery is with Property. Paternal Power is
only where Minority makes the Child incapable to manage his Property; Political
where Men have Property in their own disposal; and Despotical over such as have
no Property at all.

CHAP. XVI. Of CONQVEST.
175. THough Governments can originally have no other Rise, than that before
mentioned, nor Polities be founded on any thing but the Consent of the People;
yet such has been the Disorders, Ambition has filled the World with, that in
the noise of War, which makes so great a part of the History of Mankind, this
Consent is little taken notice of: and therefore many have mistaken the force
of Arms for the Consent of the People, and reckon Conquest as one of the
Originals of Government. But Conquest is as far from setting up any Government,
as demolishing an House is from building a new one in the place. Indeed it
often makes way for a new Frame of a Commonwealth, by destroying the former;
but, without the Consent of the People, can never erect a new one.

176. That the Aggressor, who puts himself into the state of War with another,
and unjustly invades another Man's right, can, by such an unjust War, never
come to have a right over the Conquered, will be easily agreed by all Men, who
will not think that Robbers and Pirates have a Right of Empire over whomsoever
they have Force enough to master, or that Men are bound by Promises, which
unlawful Force extorts from them. Should a Robber break into my House, and with
a Dagger at my Throat, make me seal Deeds to convey my Estate to him, would
this give him any Title? Just such a Title by his Sword, has an unjust
Conqueror, who forces me into Submission. The Injury and the Crime is equal,
whether committed by the wearer of a Crown, or some petty Villain. The Title of
the Offender, and the Number of his Followers make no difference in the
Offense, unless it be to aggravate it. The only difference is, Great Robbers
punish little ones to keep them in their Obedience; but the great ones are
rewarded with Laurels and Triumphs, because they are too big for the weak hands
of Justice, in this World, and have the Power in their own possession which
should punish Offenders. What is my Remedy against a Robber that so broke into
my House? Appeal to the Law for Justice. But perhaps Justice is denied, or I am
crippled and cannot stir; Robbed and have not the means to do it. If God has
taken away all means of seeking remedy, there is nothing left but Patience. But
my Son, when able, may seek the Relief of the Law, which I am denied: he or his
Son may renew his Appeal, till he recover his Right. But the Conquered, or
their Children, have no Court, no Arbitrator on Earth to appeal to. Then they
may appeal, as Iephtha did, to Heaven, and repeat their Appeal, till they have
recovered the native Right of their Ancestors, which was, to have such a
Legislative over them, as the Majority should approve, and freely acquiesce in.
If it be objected, this would cause endless trouble; I answer, No more than
Justice does, where she lies open to all that appeal to her. He that troubles
his Neighbor, without a Cause, is punished for it, by the Justice of the Court
he appeals to. And he that appeals to Heaven, must be sure he has Right on his
side: and a Right too that is worth the Trouble and Cost of the Appeal, as he
will answer at a Tribunal that cannot be deceived, and will be sure to
retribute to every one according to the Mischiefs he has created to his
Fellow Subjects; that is, any part of Mankind. From whence it is plain, that he
that conquers, in an unjust War, can thereby have no Title to the Subjection
and Obedience of the Conquered.

177. But, supposing Victory favors the right side, let us consider a
Conqueror in a lawful War, and see what Power he gets, and over whom.

First, It Is plain he gets no Power by his Conquest over those that Conquered
with him. They that fought on his side cannot suffer by the Conquest, but must,
at least, be as much Freemen as they were before. And most commonly they serve
upon Terms, and on Condition to share with their Leader, and enjoy a part of
the Spoil, and other Advantages that attend the conquering Sword: Or, at least,
have a part of the subdued Country bestowed upon them. And the conquering
People, are not, I hope, to be Slaves by Conquest, and wear their Laurels only
to show they are Sacrifices to their Leader's Triumph. They that found Absolute
Monarchy upon the Title of the Sword, make their Heroes, who are the Founders
of such Monarchies, arrant Draw-can-Sirs, and forget they had any Officers and
Soldiers that fought on their side, in the Battles they won, or assisted them
in the subduing, or shared in possessing the Countries they Mastered. We are
told by some, that the English Monarchy is founded in the Norman Conquest, and
that our Princes have thereby a Title to absolute Dominion: which if it were
true, (as by the History it appears otherwise) and that William had a right to
make War on this Island; yet his Dominion by Conquest, could reach no farther
than to the Saxons and Britans, that were then Inhabitants of this Country. The
Normans that came with him, and helped to Conquer, and all descended from them
are Freemen, and no Subjects by Conquest; let that give what Dominion it will.
And if I, or any Body else, shall claim freedom, as derived from them, it will
be very hard to prove the contrary: And it is plain, the Law that has made no
distinction between the one and the other, intends not there should be any
difference in their Freedom or Privileges.

178. But supposing, which seldom happens, that the Conquerers and Conquered
never incorporate into one People, under the same Laws and Freedom. Let us see
next, what Power a lawful Conqueror has over the subdued, and that I say is
purely Despotical. He has an Absolute Power over the Lives of those, who, by an
unjust War, have forfeited them; but not over the Lives or Fortunes of those,
who engaged not in the War, nor over the Possessions even of those who were
actually engaged in it.

179. Secondly, I say then the Conqueror gets no Power but only over those who
have actually assisted, concurred, or consented to that unjust force that is
used against him. For the People having given to their Governors no Power to
do an unjust thing, such as is to make an unjust War, (for they never had such
a Power in themselves:) They ought not to be charged, as guilty of the violence
and injustice that is committed in an unjust War, any farther than they
actually abet it, no more than they are to be thought guilty of any Violence or
Oppression their Governors should use upon the People themselves, or any part
of their Fellow Subjects, they having empowered them no more to the one than to
the other. Conquerours, it is true, seldom trouble themselves to make the
distinction, but they willingly permit the confusion of War to sweep all
together; but yet this alters not the Right: for the Conquerour's Power over
the Lives of the Conquered, being only because they have used force to do or
maintain an injustice, he can have that power only over those who have concurred
in that force, all the rest are innocent; and he has no more title over the
people of that Country, who have done him no injury, and so have made no
forfeiture of their Lives, than he has over any other, who without any injuries
or provocations, have lived upon fair terms with him.

180. Thirdly, The Power a Conqueror gets over those he overcomes in a just
War, is perfectly despotical; he has an absolute Power over the Lives of those,
who by putting themselves in a state of War, have forfeited them; but he has
not thereby a right and title to their Possessions. This I doubt not, but at
first sight, will seem a strange Doctrine, it being so quite contrary to the
practice of the World. There being nothing more familiar in speaking of the
dominion of Countries, than to say such an one Conquered it. As if Conquest,
without any more ado, conveyed a right of Possession. But when we consider,
that the practice of the strong and powerful, how universal soever it may be,
is seldom the rule of Right, however it be one part of the subjection of the
Conquered not to argue against the Conditions cut out to them by the Conquering
Swords.

181. Though in all War there be usually a complication of force and damage,
and the Aggressor seldom fails to harm the Estate, when he uses force against
the persons of those he makes War upon; yet it is the use of force only that
puts a Man into the State of War. For whether by force he begins the injury; or
else having quietly, and by fraud, done the injury, he refuses to make
reparation, and by force maintains it, which is the same thing as at first to
have done it by force; it is the unjust use of force that makes the War. For he
that breaks open my House, and violently turns me out of Doors; or having
peaceably got in, by force keeps me out, does in effect the same thing;
supposing we are in such a state, that we have no common Judge on Earth, whom I
may appeal to, and to whom we are both obliged to submit: for of such I am now
speaking. It Is the unjust use of force then that puts a Man into the state of
War with another, and thereby he that is guilty of it makes a forfeiture of his
Life. For quitting reason, which is the rule given between Man and Man, and
using force the way of Beasts, he becomes liable to be destroyed by him he uses
force against, as any savage ravenous Beast, that is dangerous to his being.

182. But because the miscarriages of the Father are no faults of the Children,
and they may be rational and peaceable, notwithstanding the brutishness and
injustice of the Father; the Father, by his miscarriages and violence, can
forfeit but his own Life, but involves not his Childten in his guilt or
destruction. His goods which nature, that wills the preservation of all
Mankind as much as is possible, has made to belong to the Children to keep
them from perishing, do still continue to belong to his Children. For supposing
them not to have joined in the War, either through infancy or choice, they have
done nothing to forfeit them, nor has the Conqueror any right to take them
away, by the bare right of having subdued him that by force attempted his
destruction, though perhaps he may have some right to them to repair the
damages he has sustained by the War, and the defense of his own right, which
how far it reaches to the possessions of the Conquered, we shall see by and by;
so that he that by Conquest has a right over a Man's Person, to destroy him if
he pleases, has not thereby a right over his Estate to possess and enjoy it.
For it is the brutal force the Aggressor has used, that gives his Adversary a
right to take away his Life, and destroy him, if he pleases, as a noxious
Creature; but it is damage sustained that alone gives him title to another Man's
Goods: For though I may kill a Thief that sets on me in the Highway, yet I may
not (which seems less) take away his money, and let him go; this would be
Robbery on my side. His force, and the state of War he put himself in, made him
forfeit his Life, but gave me no title to his Goods. The right then of Conquest
extends only to the Lives of those who joined in the War, but not to their
Estates, but only in order to make reparation for the damages received, and the
Charges of the War, and that too with reservation of the right of the innocent
Wife and Children.

183. Let the Conqueror have as much Justice on his side as could be supposed,
he has no right to seize more than the vanquished could forfeit; his Life is at
the Victors Mercy, and his service and goods he may appropriate to make himself
reparation; but he cannot take the goods of his Wife and Children, they too had
a title to the goods he enjoyed, and their shares in the estate he possessed.
For Example, I in the state of nature (and all Commonwealths are in the state
of nature one with another) have injured another Man, and refusing to give
satisfaction, it is come to a state of War, wherein my defending by force, what
I had gotten unjustly, makes me the Aggressour; I am conquered: my Life, it is
true, as forfeit, is at mercy, but not my Wives and Childrens. They made not
the War, nor assisted in it. I could not forfeit their Lives, they were not
mine to forfeit. My Wife had a share in my Estate, that neither could I
forfeit. And my Children also, being born of me, had a right to be maintained
out of my Labor or Substance. Here then is the Case; The Conqueror has a
Title to Reparation for Damages received, and the Children have a Title to
their Father's Estate for their Subsistence. For as to the Wife's share,
whether her own Labor or Compact gave her a Title to it, it is plain, her
Husband could not forfeit what was hers. What must be done in the case? I
answer; The Fundamental Law of Nature being, that all, as much as may be,
should be preserved, it follows, that if there be not enough fully to satisfy
both, viz. for the Conquerour's Losses, and Childrens Maintenance, he that
has, and to spare, must remit something of his full Satisfaction, and give way
to the pressing and preferible Title of those, who are in danger to perish
without it.

184. But supposing the Charge and Damages of the War are to be made up to the
Conqueror, to the utmost Farthing, and that the Children of the vanquished,
spoiled of all their Father's Goods, are to be left to starve, and perish^ yet
the satisfying of what shall, on this score, be due to the Conqueror, will
scarce give him a Title to any Country he shall conquer. For the Damages of
War can scarce amount to the value of any considerable Tract of Land, in any
part of the World, where all the Land is possessed, and none lies waste. And if
I have not taken away the Conquerour's Land, which, being vanquished, it is
impossible, I should; scarce any other spoil I have done him can amount to the
value of mine, supposing it of an extent any way coming near what I had
overrun of his, and equally cultivated too. The destruction of a Years Product
or two, (for it seldom reaches four or five) is the utmost spoil that usually
can be done. For as to Money, and such Riches and Treasure taken away, these
are none of Natures Goods, they have but a fantastical imaginary value, Nature
has put no such upon them. They are of no more account by her standard, than
the Wampompeke of the Americans to an European Prince, or the Silver Money of
Europe would have been formerly to an American. And five years Product is not
worth the perpetual Inheritance of Land, where all is possessed, and none
remains waste, to be taken up by him that is disseiz'd: which will be easily
granted, if one do but take away the imaginary value of Money, the
disproportion being more than between five, and five thousand. Though, at the
same time, half a years product is more worth than the Inheritance, where there
being more Land than the Inhabitants possess and make use of, any one has
liberty to make use of the waste: But there Conquerours take little care to
possess themselves of the Lands of the vanquished. No damage therefore, that
Men, in the state of Nature (as all Princes and Governments are in reference to
one another) suffer from one another, can give a Conqueror Power to dispossess
the Posterity of the vanquished, and turn them out of that Inheritance which
ought to be the Possession of them, and their Descendants to all Generations.
The Conqueror indeed will be apt to think himself Master. And it is the very
condition of the subdued not to be able to dispute their Right: But, if that be
all, it gives no other Title, than what bare Force gives to the stronger over
the weaker. And, by this reason, he that is strongest will have a right to
whatever he pleases to seize on.

185. Over those then that joined with him in the War, and over those of the
subdued Country that opposed him not, and the Posterity even of those that
did, the Conqueror, even in a just War, has, by his Conquest, no right of
Dominion. They are free from any subjection to him, and if their former
Government be dissolved, they are at liberty to begin and erect another to
themselves.

186. The Conqueror, it is true, usually, by the Force he has over them,
compels them, with a Sword at their Breasts, to stoop to his Conditions, and
submit to such a Government as he pleases to afford them; but the enquiry is,
What right he has to do so? If it be said, they submit by their own consent;
then this allows their own consent to be necessary to give the Conqueror a
Title to rule over them. It remains only to be considered, whether Promises,
extorted by Force, without Right, can be thought Consent, and how far they
bind. To which I shall say, they bind not at all, because whatsoever another
gets from me by force, I still retain the Right of, and he is obliged presently
to restore. He that forces my Horse from me, ought presently to restore him,
and I have still a right to retake him. By the same reason, he that forced a
Promise from me ought presently to restore it, i. e. quit me, of the Obligation
of it; or I may resume it my self, i. e. choose whether I will perform it. For
the Law of Nature laying an obligation on me, only by the Rules she prescribes,
cannot oblige me by the violation of her Rules: such is the extorting any thing
from me by force. Nor does it at all alter the case, to say I gave my Promise,
no more than it excuses the force, and passes the right, when I put my hand in
my Pocket, and deliver my Purse my self to a Thief, who demands it with a
Pistol at my Breast.

187. From all which it follows, that the Government of a Conqueror,
impoposed, by force, on the subdued, against whom he had no right of War, or
who joined not in the War against him, where he had right, has no obligation
upon them.

188. But let us suppose that all the Men of that Community being all Members
of the same Body Politic, may be taken to have joined in that unjust War,
wherein they are subdued, and so their Lives are at the Mercy of the Conqueror.

189. I say, this concerns not their Children, who are in their Minority. For
since a Father has not, in himself, a Power over the Life or Liberty of his
Child; no act of his can possibly forfeit it: so that the Children, whatever
may have happened to the Fathers, are Free men, and the Absolute Power of the
Conqueror reaches no farther than the Persons of the Men, that were subdued by
him, and dies with them; and should he govern them as Slaves, subjected to his
Absolute, Arbitrary Power, he has no such Right of Dominion over their
Children. He can have no Power over them, but by their own consent, whatever he
may drive them to say or do; and he has no lawful Authority, whilst Force, and
not Choice, compels them to submission.

190. Every Man is born with a double Right, First, A Right of Freedom to his
Person, which no other Man has a Power over, but the free Disposal of it lies
in himself. Secondly, A Right, before any other Man, to inherit, with his
Brethren, his Father's Goods.

191. By the first of these, a Man is naturally free from subjection to any
Government, though he be born in a place under its Jurisdiction. But if he
disclaim the lawful Government of the Country he was born in, he must also
quit the Right, that belonged to him, by the Laws of it, and the Possessions
there descending to him, from his Ancestors, if it were a Government made by
their consent.

192. By the second, the Inhabitants of any Country, who are descended, and
derive a Title to their Estates from those who are subdued, and had a
Government forced upon them, against their free consents, retain a Right to the
Possession of their Ancestors, though they consent not freely to the
Government, whose hard Conditions were, by force, imposed on the Possessors of
that Country. For the first Conqueror never having had a Title to the Land of
that Country, the People, who are the Descendants of, or claim under those, who
were forced to submit to the Yoke of a Government by constraint, have always a
Right to shake it off, and free themselves from the Usurpation, or Tyranny the
Sword has brought in upon them; till their Rulers put them under such a Frame
of Government, as they willingly, and of choice consent to (which they can
never be supposed to do, till either they are put in a full state of Liberty to
choose their Government and Governors, or at least till they have such standing
Laws, to which they have, by themselves, or their Representatives, given their
free consent, and also till they are allowed their due Property, which is so to
be Proprietors of what they have, that no body can take away any part of it
without their own consent, without which, Men under any Government are not in
the state of Freemen, but are direct Slaves, under the force of War.) And who
doubts but the Grecian Christians, Descendants of the ancient Possessors of
that Country, may justly cast off the Turkish Yoke they have so long groaned
under, whenever they have a Power to do it?

193. But granting that the Conqueror, in a just War, has a Right to the
Estates, as well as Power over the Persons of the Conquered; which, it is plain,
he has not: nothing of Absolute Power will follow from hence, in the
continuance of the Government. Because the Descendants of these being all
Freemen, if he grants them Estates, and Possessions to inhabit his Country,
without which it would be worth nothing, whatsoever he grants them, they have
so far as it is granted, Property in. The nature whereof is, that, without a
Man's own consent, it cannot be taken from him.

194. Their Persons are free, by a native Right, and their Properties, be they
more or less, are their own, and at their own dispose, and not at his; or else
it is no Property. Supposing the Conqueror gives to one Man a Thousand Acres,
to him and his Heirs for ever; to another he lets a Thousand Acres, for his
Life, under the Rent of 50 l. or 500 l. per An. Has not the one of these a
Right to his Thousand Acres for ever, and the other, during his Life, paying
the said Rent? And has not the Tenant, for Life, a Property in all that he
gets over and above his Rent, by his Labor and Industry, during the said term,
supposing it be double the Rent? Can any one say, the King, or Conqueror,
after his Grant, may, by his Power of Conqueror, take away all, or part of the
Land, from the Heirs of one, or from the other, during his Life, he paying the
Rent? Or can he take away, from either, the Goods or Money they have got upon
the said Land, at his pleasure? If he can, then all free and voluntary
Contracts cease, and are void, in the World; there needs nothing but Power
enough to dissolve them at any time. And all the Grants and Promises of Men, in
Power, are but Mockery and Collusion. For can there be any thing more
ridiculous than to say, I give you and yours this for ever, and that in the
surest and most solemn way of conveyance can be devised: and yet it is to be
understood, that I have Right, if I please, to take it away from you again to
morrow?

195. I will not dispute now whether Princes are exempt from the Laws of their
Country, but this I am sure, they owe subjection to the Laws of God, and
Nature. No Body, no Power can exempt them from the Obligations of that Eternal
Law. Those are so great, and so strong, in the case of Promises, that
Omnipotency it self can be tied by them. Grants, Promises, and Oaths are Bonds
that hold the Almighty: whatever some Flatterres say to Princes of the World,
who, all together, with all their People joined to them, are, in comparison of
the great God, but as a Drop of the Bucket, or a Dust on the Balance,
inconsiderable, nothing!

196. The short of the Case, in Conquest, is this, The Conqueror, if he have a
just Cause, has a Despotical Right over the Persons of all that actually aided,
and concurred in the War against him, and a Right to make up his Damage and
Cost, out of their Labor and Estates, so he injure not the Right of any other.
Over the rest of the People, if there were any that consented not to the War,
and over the Children of the Captives themselves, or the Possessions of either
he has no Power, and so can have, by Virtue of Conquest, no lawful Title
himself to Dominion over them, or derive it to his Posterity; but is an
Aggressour, and puts himself in a state of War against them, and has no better
a Right of Principality, he, nor any of his Successors, than Hingar, or Hubba,
the Danes, had here in England, or Spartacus, had he conquered Italy; which is
to have their Yoke cast off, as soon as God shall give those, under their
subjection, Courage, and Opportunity to do it. Thus, notwithstanding whatever
Title the Kings of Assyria had over Judah, by the Sword, God assisted Hezekiah
to throw off the Dominion of that conquering Empire. And the Lord was with
Hezekiah, and he prospered; wherefore he went forth, and he rebelled against
the King of Assyria, and served him not, 2 Kings XVIII. vij. Whence it is
plain, that shaking off a Power, which Force, and not Right, has set over any
one, though it has the Name of Rebellion; yet is no Offense before God, but
that which he allows and countenances, though even Promises and Covenants, when
obtained by force, have intervened. For it is very probable, to any one that
reads the Story of Ahaz and Hezekiah, attentively, that the Assyrians subdued
Ahaz, and deposed him, and made Hezekiah King in his Father's life time; and
that Hezekiah, by agreement, had done him Homage, and paid him Tribute till
this time.

CHAP. XVII. Of VSVRPATION.
197. AS Conquest may be called a foreign Usurpation; so Usurpation is a kind
of domestic Conquest, with this difference, that an Usurper can never have
Right on his side; it being no Usurpation but where one is got into the
Possession of what another has Right to. This, so far as it is Usurpation, is a
change only of Persons, but not of the Forms and Rules of the Government: for
if the Usurper extend his Power beyond what, of Right, belonged to the lawful
Princes, or Governors of the Commonwealth, it is Tyranny, added to Usurpation.

198. In all lawful Governments the designation of the Persons, who are to bear
Rule, being as natural and necessary a part as the Form of the Government it
self, and that which had its Establishment originally from the People. The
Anarchy being much alike, to have no Form of Government at all, or to agree
that it shall be Monarchical; but to appoint no way, to design the Person that
shall have the Power, and be the Monarch. All Commonwealths therefore, with the
Form of Government established, have Rules also of appointing and conveying the
Right to those, who are to have any share in the public Authority. And
who-ever gets into the exercise of any part of the Power, by other ways, than
what the Laws of the Community have prescribed, has no Right to be obeyed,
though the Form of the Commonwealth be still preserved; since he is not the
Person the Laws have appointed, and consequently not the Person the People have
consented to. Nor can such an Usurper, or any, deriving from him, ever have a
Title, till the People are both at liberty to consent, and have actually
consented to allow, and confirm in him the Power he has, till then, Usurped.

CHAP. XVIII. Of TYRANNY.
199. AS Usurpation is the exercise of Power, which another has a Right to; so
Tyranny is the exercise of Power beyond Right, which no Body can have a Right
to. And this is making use of the Power any one has in his hands; not for the
good of those who are under it, but for his own private, separate Advantage.
When the Governor, however entitled, makes not the Law, but his Will, the
Rule, and his Commands, and Actions are not directed to the preservation of the
Properties of his People, but the satisfaction of his own Ambition, Revenge,
Covetousness, or any other irregular Passion.

200. If one can doubt this to be Truth, or Reason, because it comes from the
obscure hand of a Subject; I hope the Authority of a King will make it pass
with him. King James, in his Speech to the Parliament, 1603. tells them thus; I
will ever prefer the Weal of the public, and of the whole Commonwealth, in
making of good Laws, and Constitutions, to any particular, and private Ends of
mine. Thinking ever the Wealth and Weal of the Commonwealth, to be my greatest
Weal, and worldly Felicity; a Point, wherein a lawful King does directly
differ from a Tyrant. For I do acknowledge that the special and greatest point
of Difference, that is between a rightful King, and an usurping Tyrant, is
this, That whereas the proud and ambitious Tyrant does think, his Kingdom and
People are only ordained for satisfaction of his Desires, and unreasonable
Appetites; the righteous and just King does, by the contrary, acknowledge
himself to be ordained for the procuring of the wealth and Property of his
People. And again, in his Speech to the Parliament, 1609 he has these Words;
The KING binds himself, by a double Oath, to the observation of the fundamental
Laws of his Kingdom. Tacitly, as by being a King, and so bound to protect, as
well the People, as the Laws of his Kingdom; and expressly by his Oath at his
Coronation: so as every just King, in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe
that Paction made to his People, by his Laws, in framing his Government
agreeable thereunto, according to that Paction which God made with Noah, after
the Deluge. Hereafter, Seed-time, and Harvest, and Cold, and Heat, and Summer,
and Winter, and Day, and Night, shall not cease, while the Earth remains. And
therefore a King, governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his
Laws. And a little after: Therefore all Kings, that are not Tyrants, or
perjured, will be glad to bound themselves within the Limits of their Laws. And
they that persuade them the contrary, are Vipers, Pests both against them and
the Commonwealth. Thus that learned King, who well understood the Notions of
things, makes the difference, betwixt a King and a Tyrant, to consist only in
this, That one makes the Laws the Bounds of his Power, and the Good of the
public the End of his Government; The other makes all give way to his own Will
and Appetite.

201. It Is a Mistake, to think this Fault is proper only to Monarchies, other
Forms of Government are liable to it, as well as that: for wherever the
Power, that is put in any hands, for the Government of the People, and the
Preservation of their Properties, is applied to other ends, and made use of to
impoverish, harass, or subdue them to the Arbitrary, and Irregular Commands of
those that have it: There it presently becomes Tyranny, whether those, that
thus use it, are one, or many. Thus we read of the Thirty Tyrants at Athens, as
well as one at Syracuse; and the intolerable Dominion of the Decemviri, at
Rome, was nothing better.

202. Wherever Law ends, Tyranny begins, if the Law be transgressed to
another's harm. And whosoever, in Authority, exceeds the Power given him by the
Law, and makes use of the Force, he has under his Command, to compass that upon
the Subject which the Law allows not; ceases, in that, to be a Magistrate, and
acting without Authority, may be opposed, as any other Man, who by force
invades the Right of another. This is acknowledged in subordinate Magistrates.
He that has Authority to seize my Person in the street, may be opposed as a
Thief, and a Robber, if he endeavors to break into my House to execute a Writ,
notwithstanding that I know he has such a Warrant, and such a legal Authority
as will empower him to arrest me abroad. And why this should not hold in the
highest, as well as in the most inferior Magistrate, I would gladly be
informed. Is it reasonable that the eldest Brother, because he has the greatest
part of his Father's Estate, should thereby have a Right to take away any of
his younger Brothers Portions? Or that a rich Man, who possessed a whole
Country, should from thence have a Right to seize, when he pleased, the
Cottage and Garden of his poor Neighbor? The being rightfully possessed of
great Power and Riches, exceedingly beyond the greatest part of the Son of
Adam, is so far from being an excuse, much less a reason for Rapine and
Oppression, which the endamaging another, without Authority, is; that it is a
great Aggravation of it. For the exceeding the Bounds of Authority, is no more
a Right, in a great, than a petty Officer: no more justifiable in a King, than
a Constable. But so much the worse in him, as that he has more trust put in
him, is supposed, from the advantage of Education, and Counselors to have
better Knowledge, and less reason to do it, having already a greater share than
the rest of his Brethren.

203. May the Commands then of a Prince be opposed? May he be resisted, as
often as any one shall find himself aggrieved, and but imagine he has not Right
done him? This will unhinge and overturn all Politi^s, and, instead of
Government and Order, leave nothing but Anarchy and Confusion.

204. To this I answer: That Force is to be opposed to nothing but to unjust
and unlawful Force; who ever makes any opposition, in any other Case, draws on
himself a just Condemation, both from God and Man; and so no such Danger or
Confusion will follow, as is often suggested. For,

205. First, As, in some Countries, the Person of the Prince, by the Law, is
Sacred, and so, whatever he commands, or does, his Person is still free from
all Question or Violence; not liable to Force, or any judicial Censure or
Condemnation. But yet opposition may be made to the illegal Acts of any
inferior Officer, or other commissioned by him; unless he will, by actually
putting himself into a State of War with his People, dissolve the Government,
and leave them to that defense, which belongs to every one in the state of
Nature. For of such things who can tell what the end will be? And a Neighbor
Kingdom has showed the World an odd Example. In all other Cases the Sacredness
of the Person exempts him from all Inconveniences, whereby he is secure,
whilst the Government stands, from all violence and harm whatsoever. Than
which, there cannot be a wiser Constitution. For the harm he can do, in his own
Person, not being likely to happen often, nor to extend it self far; nor being
able, by his single strength, to subvert the Laws, nor oppress the Body of the
People, should any Prince have so much Weakness, and ill Nature as to be
willing to do it. The Inconveniency of some particular mischiefs that may
happen, sometimes, when a heady Prince comes to the Throne, are well
recompensed by the peace of the Public, and security of the Government, in the
Person of the chief Magistrate, thus set out of the reach of danger. It being
safer for the Body, that some few private Men should be sometimes in danger to
suffer, than that the Head of the Republic should be easily, and upon slight
occasions exposed.

206. Secondly, But this Privilege belonging only to the King's Person,
hinders not but they may be questioned, opposed, and resisted, who use unjust
force, though they pretend a Commission from him, which the Law authorizes not.
As is plain, in the Case of him that has the King's Writ to arrest a Man, which
is a full Commission from the King; and yet he that has it cannot break open a
Man's House to do it, nor execute this Command of the King upon certain days,
nor in certain places, though this Commission have no such exception in it; but
they are the Limitations of the Law, which, if any one transgress, the King's
Commission excuses him not. For the King's Authority being given him only by
the Law, he cannot empower any one to act against the Law, or justify him, by
his Commission, in so doing. The Commission, or Command of any Magistrate,
where he has no Authority, being as void and insignificant as that of any
private Man. The difference, between the one and the other, being, that the
Magistrate has some Authority, so far, and to such ends, and the private Man
has none at all. For it is not the Commission, but the Authority, that gives the
Right of acting; and against the Laws there can be no Authority. But,
notwithstanding such Resistance, the King's Person and Authority are still both
secured, and so no danger to Governor or Government.

207. Thirdly, Supposing a Government, wherein the Person of the chief
Magistrate is not thus Sacred; yet this Doctrine, of the lawfulness of
resisting all unlawful exercises of his Power, will not, upon every slight
occasion, endanger him, or imbroil the Government. For, where the injured Party
may be relieved, and his damages repaired, by Appeal to the Law, there can be
no pretense for Force; which is only to be used, where a Man is intercepted
from appealing to the Law. For nothing is to be accounted Hostile Force, but
where it leaves not the remedy of such an Appeal. And it is such Force alone,
that puts him that uses it, into a state of War, and makes it lawful to resist
him. A Man, with a Sword in his hand, demands my Purse, in the Highway, when,
perhaps, I have not 12 d. in my Pocket; This Man I may lawfully kill. To
another I deliver 100 l. to hold, only whilst I alight, which he refuses to
restore me when I am got up again, but draws his Sword to defend the possession
of it, by force: I endeavor to retake it. The mischief, this Man does me, is a
hundred, or possibly a thousand times more than the other perhaps intended me,
(whom I killed, before he really did me any) and yet I might lawfully kill the
one, and cannot so much as hurt the other lawfully. The Reason whereof is
plain; because the one using force, which threatened my Life, I could not have
time to appeal to the Law to secure it: And when it was gone, 'twas too late to
appeal. The Law could not restore Life to my dead Carcass. The Loss was
irreparable; which, to prevent, the Law of Nature gave me a Right to destroy
him, who had put himself into a state of War with me, and threatened my
destruction. But, in the other case, my Life not being in danger, I might have
the benefit of appealing to the Law, and have Reparation, for my 100 l. that
way.

208. Fourthly, But if the unlawful acts, done by the Magistrate, be
maintained, (by the Power he has got) and the remedy, which is due by Law, be,
by the same Power, obstructed; ye^ the Right of resisting, even in such
manifest Acts of Tyranny, will not suddenly, or on slight occasions, disturb
the Government. For if it reach no farther than some private Men's Cases, though
they have a right to defend themselves, and to recover, by force, what, by
unlawful force, is taken from them; yet the Right to do so, will not easily
engage them in a Contest, wherein they are sure to perish: It being as
impossible, for one or a few oppressed Men, to disturb the Government, where
the Body of the People do not think themselves concerned in it, as for a raving
mad Man, or heady Male content to overturn a well settled State; the People
being as little apt to follow the one, as the other.

209. But if either these illegal Acts, have extended to the Majority of the
People; or if the Mischief and Oppression has light only on some few, but in
such Cases as the Precedent and Consequences seem to threaten all; and they are
persuaded in their Consciences that their Laws, and with them, their Estates,
Liberties, and Lives are in danger, and perhaps their Religion too; how they
will be hindered from resisting illegal Force, used against them, I cannot tell.
This is an Inconvenience, I confess, that attends all Governments whatsoever,
when the Governors have brought it to this pass, to be generally suspected of
their People, the most dangerous state they can possibly put themselves in;
wherein they are the less to be pityed, because it is so easy to be avoided.
It being as impossible, for a Governor, if he really means the good of his
People, and the preservation of them, and their Laws together, not to make them
see and feel it; as it is for the Father of a Family not to let his Children
see he loves, and takes care of them.

210. But if all the World shall observe Pretenses of one kind, and Actions of
another; Arts used to elude the Law, and the Trust of Prerogative (which is an
Arbitrary Power in some things, left in the Prince's hand, to do good, not
harm, to the People) employed contrary to the end, for which it was given, If
the People shall find the Ministers, and subordinate Magistrates chosen,
suitable to such ends, and favored, or laid by proportionably as they promote,
or oppose them: If they see several Experiments made of Arbitrary Power, and
that Religion underhand favored, though publicly proclaimed against, which is
readiest to introduce it, and the Operators in it supported as much as may be;
and when that cannot be done, yet approved still, and liked the better, and a
long Train of Actings show the Councils all tending that way: how can a Man any
more hinder himself from being persuaded in his own Mind, which way things are
going; or from casting about how to save himself, than he could from believing
the Captain of the Ship he was in, was carrying him, and the rest of the
Company, to Algiers, when he found him always stearing that Course, though
cross Winds, Leaks in his Ship, and want of Men, and Provisions, did often
force him to turn his Course another way, for some time, which he steadily
returned to again, as soon as the Wind, Weather, and other Circumstances would
let him?

CHAP. XIX. Of the Dissolution of Governments.
211. HE that will, with any clearness, speak of the Dissolution of Government,
ought, in the first place, to distinguish between the Dissolution of the
Society, and the Dissolution of the Government. That which makes the Community,
and brings Men out of the loose State of Nature, into one Politic Society, is
the Agreement, which every one has, with the rest, to incorporate and act as
one Body, and so be one distinct Commonwealth. The usual, and almost only way,
whereby this Union is dissolved, is the Inroad of foreign Force making a
Conquest upon them. For in that Case, (not being able to maintain and support
themselves, as one entire, and independent Body) the Union belonging to that
Body, which consisted therein, must necessarily cease, and so every one return
to the state he was in before, with a liberty to shift for himself, and provide
for his own Safety, as he thinks fit, in some other Society. Whenever the
Society is dissolved, it is certain, the Government of that Society cannot
remain. Thus Conquerors Swords often cut up Governments by the Roots, and
mangle Societies to pieces, separating the subdued or scattered multitude from
the Protection of, and Dependence on that Society which ought to have preserved
them from violence. The World is too well instructed in, and too forward to
allow of this way of dissolving of Governments, to need any more to be said of
it; and there wants not much Argument to prove, that where the Society is
dissolved, the Government cannot remain: that being as impossible, as for the
Frame of an house to subsist when the Materials of it are scattered and
displaced by a Whirlwind, or jumbled into a confused heap by an Earthquake.

212. Besides this over-turning, from without, Governments are dissolved from
within,

First, When the Legislative is altered, Civil Society being a state of Peace
amongst those who are of it, from whom the state of War is excluded by the
Umpirage, which they have provided in their Legislative, for the ending all
differences, that may arise amongst any of them. It Is in their Legislative,
that the Members of a Commonwealth are united and combined together into one
coherent, living Body. This is the Soul that gives Form, Life, and Unity to the
Commonwealth: from hence the several Members have their mutual Influence,
Sympathy, and Connection: and therefore, when the Legislative is broken, or
dissolved, Dissolution and Death follows. For the Essence, and Union of the
Society consisting in having one Will, the Legislative, when once established
by the Majority, has the declaring, and, as it were, keeping of that Will. The
Constitution of the Legislative is the first and fundamental Act of Society,
whereby provision is made for the Continuation of their Union, under the
Direction of Persons, and Bonds of Laws, made by Persons authorized thereunto,
by the Consent and Appointment of the People, without which no one Man, or
number of Men, amongst them, can have Authority of making Laws that shall be
binding to the rest. When any one, or more, shall take upon them to make Laws,
whom the People have not appointed so to do, they make Laws without Authority,
which the People are not therefore bound to obey; by which means they come
again to be out of subjection, and may constitute to themselves a new
Legislative, as they think best, being in full liberty to resist the force of
those, who, without Authority, would impose any thing upon them. Every one is
at the disposure of his own Will, when those, who had, by the delegation of the
Society, the declaring of the public Will, are excluded from it, and others
usurp the place, who have no such Authority or Delegation.

213. This being usually brought about by such, in the Commonwealth, who
mis-use the Power they have: It is hard to consider it aright, and know at
whose door to lay it, without knowing the Form of Government in which it
happens. Let us suppose then the Legislative placed in the Concurrence of three
distinct Persons. First, A single, hereditary Person having the constant,
supreme, executive Power, and, with it, the Power of convoking, and dissolving
the other two, within certain Periods of Time. Secondly, An Assemby of
hereditary Nobility. Thirdly, An Assembly of Representatives chosen, pro
tempore, by the People: Such a Form of Government supposed, it is evident,

214. First, That when such a single Person, or Prince sets up his own
Arbitrary Will, in place of the Laws, which are the Will of the Society,
declared by the Legislative, then the Legislative is changed. For that being,
in effect, the Legislative whose Rules and Laws are put in execution, and
required to be obeyed, when other Laws are set up, and other Rules pretended
and enforced, than what the Legislative, constituted by the Society, have
enacted, it is plain that the Legislative is changed. Who-ever introduces new
Laws, not being thereunto authorized, by the fundamental Appointment of the
Society, or subverts the old, disowns and overturns the Power, by which they
were made, and so sets up a new Legislative.

215. Secondly, When the Prince hinders the Legislative from assembling in its
due time, or from acting freely, pursuant to those ends for which it was
constituted, the Legislative is altered. For it is not a certain number of Men,
no, nor their meeting, unless they have also Freedom of debating, and Leisure
of perfecting what is for the good of the Society, wherein the Legislative
consists, when these are taken away, or altered, so as to deprive the Society,
of the due exercise of their Power, the Legislative is truly altered. For it is
not Names that constitute Governments, but the use and exercise of those Powers
that were intended to accompany them: so that he who takes away the Freedom, or
hinders the acting of the Legislative in its due seasons, in effect takes away
the Legislative, and puts an end to the Government.

216. Thirdly, When, by the Arbitrary Power of the Prince, the Electours, or
ways of Election are altered, without the Consent, and contrary to the common
Interest of the People, there also the Legislative is altered. For if others,
then those whom the Society has authorized thereunto, do choose, or in another
way than what the Society has prescribed, those chosen are not the Legislative
appointed by the People.

217. Fourthly, The delivery also of the People into the subjection of a
foreign Power, either by the Prince, or by the Legislative, is certainly a
change of the Legislative, and so a Dissolution of the Government. For the end,
why People entered into Society, being to be preserved one entire, free,
independent Society, to be governed by its own Laws; this is lost whenever
they are given up into the Power of another.

218. Why, in such a Constitution as this, the Dissolution of the Government,
in these Cases, is to be imputed to the Prince, is evident, because he having
the Force, Treasure, and Offices of the State, to employ, and often persuading
himself, or being flattered by others, that as supreme Magistrate, he is
incapable of control; he alone is in a Condition to make great Advances toward
such Changes, under pretense of lawful Authority, and has it in his hands to
terrify, or suppress Opposers, as factious, seditious, and Enemies to the
Government: whereas no other part of the Legislative, or People, is capable, by
themselves, to attempt any alteration of the Legislative, without open and
visible Rebellion, apt enough to be taken notice of; which, when it prevails,
produces Effects very little different from foreign Conquest. Besides the
Prince, in such a Form of Government, having the Power of dissolving the other
Parts of the Legislative, and thereby rendering them private Persons, they can
never, in opposition to him, or without his Concurrence, alter the Legislative
by a Law; his Consent being necessary to give any of their Decrees that
Sanction. But yet so far as the other parts of the Legislative any way
contribute to any attempt upon the Government, and do either promote, or not,
what lies in them, hinder such designs, they are guilty, and partake in this,
which is certainly the greatest Crime Men can be guilty of one toward another.

219. There is one way more, whereby such a Government may be dissolved, and
that is; When he, who has the supreme, executive Power, neglects, and abandons
that charge, so that the Laws, already made, can no longer be put in execution.
This is demonstratively to reduce all to Anarchy, and so effectually to
dissolve the Government. For Laws not being made for themselves, but to be, by
their execution, the Bonds of the Society, to keep every part of the Body
Politic in its due place, and function. When that totally ceases, the
Government visibly ceases, and the People become a confused Multitude, without
Order or Connection. Where there is no longer the administration of Justice, for
the securing of Men's Rights; nor any remaining Power within the Community to
direct the Force, or provide for the Necessities of the public; there
certainly is no Government left. Where the Laws cannot be executed it is all
one as if there were no Laws; and a Government without Laws, is, I suppose, a
Mystery in Politics, unconceivable to humane Capacity, and inconsistent with
humane Society.

220. In these, and the like Cases, when the Government is dissolved, the
People are at liberty to provide for themselves, by erecting a new Legislative,
differing from the other, by the change of Persons, or Form, or both, as they
shall find it most for their safety and good. For the Society can never, by the
fault of another, lose the native and original Right it has to preserve it
self; which can only be done by a settled Legislative, and a fair and impartial
execution of the Laws made by it. But the state of Mankind is not so miserable,
that they are not capable of using this Remedy, till it be too late to look for
any. To tell People they may provide for themselves, by erecting a new
Legislative; when, by Oppression, Artitifice, or being delivered over to a
foreign Power, their old one is gone, is only to tell them, they may expect
Relief, when it is too late, and the evil is past Cure. This is, in Effect, no
more, than to bid them, first be Slaves, and then to take care of their
Liberty; and, when their Chains are on, tell them, they may act like Freemen.
This, if barely so, is rather Mockery than Relief, and Men can never be secure
from Tyranny, if there be no means to escape it, till they are perfectly under
it: And therefore it is, that they have not only a Right to get out of it, but
to prevent it.

221. There is therefore Secondly another way, whereby Governments are
dissolved; and that is, when the Legislative, or the Prince, either of them act
contrary to their Trust.

First, The Legislative acts against the Trust reposed in them, when they
^^deavour to invade the Property of the Subject, and to make themselves, or any
part of the Community, Masters, or Arbitrary Disposers of the Lives, Liberties,
or Fortunes of the People.

222. The Reasons why Men enter into Society, is the preservation of their
Property; and the end why they choose, and authorize a Legislative, is, that
there may be Laws made, and Rules set, as Guards and Fences to the Properties
of all the Society, to limit the Power, and moderate the Dominion of every Part
and Member of the Society. For since it can never be supposed to be the Will of
the Society, that the Legislative should have a Power to destroy that which
every one designs to secure, by entering into Society, and for which the People
submitted themselves to Legislators of their own making; whenever the
Legislators endeavor to take away, and destroy the Poperty of the People, or
to reduce them to Slavery, under Arbitrary Power, they put themselves into a
state of War with the People, who are thereupon absolved from any farther
Obedience, and are left to the common Refuge, which God has provided for all
Men, against Force and Violence. Whenever therefore the Legislative shall
transgress this fundamental Rule of Society; and either by Ambition, Fear,
Folly or Corruption, endeavor to grasp themselves, or put into the hands of
any other, an Absosolute Power, over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of the
People: by this breach of Trust they forfeit the Power, the People had put into
their hands, for quite contrary ends, and it devolves to the People; who have a
Right to resume their original Liberty, and, by the Establishment of a new
Legislative (such as they shall think fit) provide for their own Safety and
Security, which is the end for which they are in Society. What I have said
here, concerning the Legislative, in general, holds true also concerning the
supreme Executor, who having a double Trust put in him, both to have a part in
the Legislative; and the supreme Execution of the Law, acts against both, when
he goes about to set up his own Arbitrary Will, as the Law of the Society. He
acts also contrary to his Trust, when he imploys the Force, Treasure, and
Offices of the Society, to corrupt the Representatives, and gain them to his
purposes: when he openly pre-ingages the Electors, and prescribes, to their
choice, such, whom he has, by Solicitation, Threats, Promises, or othewise,
won to his designs; and imploys them to bring in such, who have promised
beforehand what to vote, and what to enact. Thus to regulate Candidates and
Electors, and new model the ways of Election, what is it, but to cut up the
Government by the Roots, and poison the very Fountain of public Security? For
the People having reserved to themselves the Choice of their Representatives,
as the Fence to their Properties, could do it for no other end, but that they
might always be freely chosen, and so chosen, freely act and advise, as the
necessity of the Commonwealth, and the public Good should, upon examination,
and mature debate, be judged to require. This, those who give their Votes
before they hear the Debate, and have weighed the Reasons on all sides, are not
capable of doing. To prepare such an Assembly as this, and endeavor to set up
the declared Abettors of his own Will, for the true Representatives of the
People, and the Lawmakers of the Society, is certainly as great a breach of
trust, and as perfect a Declaration of a design to subvert the Government, as
is possible to be met with. To which, if one shall add rewards and punishments
visibly employed to the same end, and all the arts of perverted Law made use of
to take off and destroy all that stand in the way of such a design, and will
not comply and consent to betray the Liberties of their Country, 'twill be past
doubt what is doing. What Power they ought to have in the Society who thus
employ it contrary to the trust went along with it in its first Institution, is
easy to determine; and one cannot but see, that he who has once attempted any
such thing as this, cannot any longer be trusted.

223. To this perhaps it will be said, that the People being ignorant and
always discontented; to lay the Foundation of Government in the unsteady
opinion and uncertain humor of the People, is to expose it to certain ruin:
and no Government will be able long to subsist, if the People may set up a new
Legislative whenever they take offense at the old one. To this I Answer quite
the contrary. People are not so easily got out of their old Forms as some are
apt to suggest. They are hardly to be prevailed with to amend the acknowledged
Faults in the Frame they have been accustomed to. And if there be any original
defects, or adventitious ones introduced by time or corruption; it is not an
easy thing to get them changed, even when all the World sees there is an
opportunity for it. This slowness and aversion in the People to quit their old
Constitutions, has in the many Revolutions have been seen in this Kingdom, in
this and former Ages, still kept us to, or aftersome interval of fruitless
attempts, still brought us back again to our old Legislative of King, Lords and
Commons: and whatever provocations have made the Crown be taken from some of
our Princes Heads, they never carried the people so far as to place it in
another Line.

224. But 'twill be said, this Hypothesis lays a ferment for frequent
Rebellion. To which I Answer,

First, No more than any other Hypothesis. For when the People are made
miserable, and find themselves exposed to the ill usage of Arbitrary Power; cry
up their Governors as much as you will for Sons of Jupiter, let them be Sacred
and Divine, descended or authorized from Heaven; give them out for whom or what
you please, the same will happen. The People generally ill treated, and
contrary to right, will be ready upon any occasion to ease themselves of a
burden that sits heavy upon them. They will wish and seek for the opportunity,
which in the change, weakness and accidents of human affairs seldom delays long
to offer it self. He must have lived but a little while in the World, who has
not seen Examples of this in his time; and he must have read very little, who
cannot produce Examples of it in all sorts of Governments in the World.

225. Secondly, I Answer, such Revolutions happen not upon every little
mismanagement in public affairs. Great mistakes in the ruling part, many wrong
and inconvenient Laws, and all the slips of human frailty will be born by the
People, without mutiny or murmur. But if a long train of Abuses, Prevarications
and Artifices, all tending the same way, make the design visible to the People,
and they cannot but feel what they lie under, and see whither they are going;
it is not to be wondered that they should then rouse themselves, and endeavor
to put the rule into such hands which may secure to them the ends for which
Government was at first erected; and without which, ancient Names and specious
Forms, are so far from being better, that they are much worse than the state of
Nature, or pure Anarchy; the inconveniences being all as great and as near,
but the remedy farther off and more difficult.

226. Thirdly, I Answer, that this Power in the People of providing for their
safety anew, by a new Legislative, when their Legislators have acted contrary
to their trust, by invading their Property, is the best fence against
Rebellion, and the probablest means to hinder it. For Rebellion being an
Opposition, not to Persons but Authority, which is founded only in the
Constitutions and Laws of the Government; those, whoever they be, who by force
break through, and by force j^stify their violation of them, are truly and
properly Rebels. For when Men by entering into Society and civil Government,
have excluded force, and introduced Laws for the preservation of Property,
Peace and Unity amongst themselves; those who set up force again in opposition
to the Laws, do rebellare, that is, bring back again the state of War, and are
properly Rebels: which they who are in Power, by the pretense they have to
Authority, the temptation of force they have in their hands, and the Flattery
of those about them being likeliest to do; the properest way to prevent the
evil, is to show them the danger and injustice of it, who are under the
greatest temptation to run into it.

227. In both the forementioned Cases, when either the Legislative is changed,
or the Legislators act contrary to the end for which they were constituted;
those who are guilty are guilty of Rebellion. For if any one by force takes
away the established Legislative of any Society, and the Laws by them made,
pursuant to their trust, he thereby takes away the Umpirage which every one had
consented to, for a peaceable decision of all their Controversies, and a bar to
the state of War amongst them. They who remove, or change the Legislative, take
away this decisive power, which no Body can have but by the appointment and
consent of the People; and so destroying the Authority which the People did,
and no Body else can set up, and introducing a Power which the People has not
authorized; actually introduce a state of War, which is, that of Force without
Authority: and thus by removing the Legislative established by the Society, in
whose decisions the People acquiesced and united, as to that of their own will;
they unty the Knot, and expose the People anew to the state of War. And if
those, who by force take away the Legislative, are Rebels, the Legislators
themselves, as has been shown, can be no less esteemed so; when they who were
set up for the protection and preservation of the People, their Liberties and
Properties, shall by force invade and endeavor to take them away; and so they,
putting themselves into a state of War with those who made them the Protectors
and Guardians of their Peace, are properly, and with the greatest aggravation,
Rebellantes Rebels.

228. But if they who say it lays a foundation for Rebellion, mean that it may
occasion civil Wars, or intestine Broils, to tell the People they are absolved
from Obedience, when illegal attempts are made upon their Liberties or
Properties, and may oppose the unlawful violence of those who were their
Magistrates when they invade their Properties, contrary to the trust put in
them; and that therefore this Doctrine is not to be allowed, being so
destructive to the Peace of the World. They may as well say upon the same
ground, that honest Men may not oppose Robbers or Pirars, because this may
occasion disorder or bloodshed. If any mischief come in such Cases, it is not
to be charged upon him who defends his own right, but on him that invades his
Neighbors. If the innocent honest Man, must quietly quit all he has for Peace
sake, to him who will lay violent hands upon it, I desire it may be considered,
what a kind of Peace there will be in the World, which consists only in
Violence and Rapine; and which is to be maintained only for the benefit of
Robbers and Oppressors. Who would not think it an admirable Peace betwixt the
Mighty and the Mean, when the Lamb, without resistance, yielded his Throat to
be torn by the imperious Wolf? Polyphemus's Den gives us a perfect Pattern of
such a Peace. Such a Government wherein Ulysses and his Companions had nothing
to do, but quietly to suffer themselves to be devoured. And no doubt, Ulysses,
who was a prudent Man, preached up Passive Obedience, and exhorted them to a
quiet Submission, by representing to them of what concernment Peace was to
Mankind; and by showing the inconveniences might happen, if they should offer
to resist Polyphemus, who had now the Power over them.

229. The end of Government is the good of Mankind, and which is best for
Mankind, that the People should be always exposed to the boundless will of
Tyranny, or that the Rulers should be sometimes liable to be opposed, when they
grow exorbitant in the use of their Power, and employ it for the destruction,
and not the preservation of the Properties of their People?

230. Nor let any one say, that mischief can arise from hence, as often as it
shall please a busy head or turbulent spirit to desire the alteration of the
Government. It Is true, such Men may stir whenever they please, but it will be
only to their own just ruin and perdition. For till the mischief be grown
general, and the ill designs of the Rulers become visible, or their attempts
sensible to the greater part, the People, who are more disposed to suffer, than
right themselves by Resistance, are not apt to stir. The examples of particular
Injustice, or Oppression of here and there an unfortunate Man, moves them not.
But if they universally have a persuasion grounded upon manifest evidence, that
designs are carrying on against their Liberties, and the general course and
tendency of things cannot but give them strong suspicions of the evil intention
of their Governors, who is to be blamed for it? Who can help it, if they, who
might avoid it, bring themselves into this suspicion? Are the People to be
blamed, if they have the sense of rational Creatures, and can think of things
no otherwise than as they find and feel them? And is it not rather their fault
who put things in such a posture that they would not have them thought as they
are? I grant, that the Pride, Ambition, and Turbulency of private Men have
sometimes caused great Disorders in Commonwealths, and Factions have been fatal
to States and Kingdoms. But whether the mischief has oftener began in the
Peoples Wantonness, and a Desire to cast off the lawful Authority of their
Rulers; or in the Rulers Insolence, and Endeavors to get, and exercise an
Arbitrary Power over their People; whether Oppression, or Disobedience gave the
first rise to the Disorder, I leave it to impartial History to determine. This
I am sure, who-ever, either Ruler or Subject, by force goes about to invade the
Rights of either Prince or People, and lays the foundation for overturning the
Constitution and Frame of any Just Government; he is guilty of the greatest
Crime, I think, a Man is capable of, being to answer for all those mischiefs,
of Blood, Rapine, and Desolation, which the breaking to pieces of Governments
bring on a Country. And he, who does it, is justly to be esteemed the common
Enemy and Pest of Mankind; and is to be treated accordingly.

231. That Subjects or Foreigners attempting by force, on the Properties of any
People, may be resisted with force, is agreed on all hands. But that
Magistrates, doing the same thing, may be resisted, has of late been denied:
As if those who had the greatest Privileges and Advantages by the Law, had
thereby a Power to break those Laws, by which alone they were set in a better
place than their Brethren: whereas their Offense is thereby the greater, both
as being ungrateful for the greater share they have by the Law, and breaking
also that Trust which is put into their hands by their Brethren.

232. Whosoever uses force without Right, as every one does in Society, who
does it without Law; puts himself into a state of War with those, against whom
he so uses it, and in that state all former Ties are cancelled, all other
Rights cease, and every one has a Right to defend himself, and to resist the
Aggressour. This is so evident, that Barclay himself, that great Assertor of
the Power and Sacredness of Kings, is forced to confess, That it is lawful for
the People, in some Cases, to resist their King; and that too in a Chapter,
wherein he pretends to show that the Divine Law shuts up the People from all
manner of Rebellion. Whereby it is evident, even by his own Doctrine, that,
since they may, in some Cases, resist, all resisting of Princes is not
Rebellion. His Words are these. Quod siquis dicat, Ergone populus tyrannicae
crudelitati and furori jugulum semper praebebit? Ergone multitudo civitates
suas fame, ferro, and flamma vastari, seque, conjuges, and liberos fortunae
ludibrio and tyranni libidini exponi, inque omnia vitae pericula omnesque
miserias and molestias a Rege deduci patientur? Number illis quod omni animantium
generi est a natura tributum, denegari debet, ut s^. vim vi repellant, seseque
ab injuria tueantur? Huic breviter responsum sit, Populo universo negari
defensionem, quae juris naturalis est, neque ultionem quae praeter naturam est
adversus Regem concedi debere. Quapropter si Rex non in singulares tantum
personas aliquot privatum odium exerceat, sed corpus etiam Reipublicae, cujus
ipse caput est, i.e. totum populum, vel insignem aliquam ejus partem immani and
intoleranda saevitia seu tyrannide divexet; populo, quidem hoc casu resistendi
ac tuendi se ab injuria potestas competit, sed tuendi se tantum, non enim in
principem invadendi: and restituendae injuriae illatae, non recedendi a debita
reverentia propter acceptam injuriam. Praesentem denique impetum propulsandi
non vim praeteritam ulciscendi jus habet. Horum enim alterum a natura est, ut
vitam scilicet corpusque tueamur. Alterum vero contra naturam, ut inserior de
superiori supplicium sumat. Quod itaque populus malum, antequam factum sit,
impedire potest, ne fiat, id postquam factum est, in Regem authorem sceleris
vindicare non potest: populus igitur hoc amplius quam privatus quispiam habet:
Quod huic, vel ipsis adversariis judicibus, excepto Buchanano, nullum nisi in
patientia remedium superest. Cum ille si intolerabilis tyrannis est (modicum
enim far omnino debet) resistere cum reverentia possit, Barclay contra
Monarchom. l. 3. c. 8. In English thus:

233. But if any one should ask, Must the People then always lay themselves
open to the Cruelty and Rage of Tyranny? Must they see their Cities pillaged,
and laid in ashes, their Wives and Children exposed to the Tyrant's Lust, and
Fury, and themselves and Families reduced, by their King, to Ruin, and all the
Miseries of Want and Oppression, and yet sit still? Must Men alone be debarred
the common Privilege of opposing force with force, which Nature allows so
freely to all other Creatures, for their preservation from Injury? I answer:
Self-defence is a part of the Law of Nature; nor can it be denied the
Community, even against the King himself: but to revenge themselves upon him,
must by no means, be allowed them; it being not agreeable to that Law.
Wherefore if the King shall show an hatred, not only to some particular
Persons, but sets himself against the Body of the Commonwealth, whereof he is
the Head, and shall, with intolerable ill usage, cruelly tyrannize over the
whole, or a considerable part of the People; in this case, the People have a
right to resist and defend themselves from Injury: but it must be with this
Caution, that they only defend themselves, but do not attack their Prince: They
may repair the Damages received, but must not, for any provocation, exceed the
bounds of due Reverence and Respect. They may repulse the present attempt, but
must not revenge past violences. For it is natural for us to defend Life and
Limb, but that an Inferior should punish a Superior is against Nature. The
mischief which is designed them, the People may prevent before it be done, but
when it is done, they must not revenge it on the King, though Author of the
Villainy. This therefore is the Privilege of the People in general, above what
any private Person has; That particular Men are allowed, by our Adversaries
themselves, ( Buchanan only excepted) to have no other Remedy but Patience; but
the Body of the People may, with Respect, resist intolerable Tyranny; for when
it is but moderate, they ought to endure it.

234. Thus far that great Advocate of Monarchical Power allows of Resistance.

235. It Is true, he has annexed two Limitations to it, to no purpose;

First, He says, it must be with Reverence.

Secondly, It must be without Retribution, or Punishment; and the Reason he
gives, is, Because an Inferior cannot punish a Superior.

First, How to resist Force without striking again, or how to strike with
Reverence, will need some Skill to make intelligible. He that shall oppose an
Assault only with a Shield to receive the Blows, or in any more respectful
Posture, without a Sword in his hand, to abate the Confidence and Force of the
Assailant, will quickly be at an end of his Resistance, and will find such a
defense serve only to draw on himself the worse usage. This is as ridiculous a
way of resisting, as Iuvenal thought it of fighting; ubi tu pulsas, ego vapulo
tantum. And the Success of the Combat, will be unavoidably the same he there
describes it: -- Libertas pauperis haec est:
Pulsatus rogat, and pugnis concisus, adorat,
Vt liceat paucis cum dentibus inde reverti.
This will always be the event of such an imaginary Resistance, where Men may
not strike again. He therefore who may resist, must be allowed to strike. And
then let our Author, or any Body else, join a Knock on the Head, or a Cut on
the Face, with as much Reverence, and Respect as he thinks fit. He that can
reconcile Blows and Reverence, may, for ought I know, deserve for his pains, a
Civil, Respectful Cudgelling, wherever he can meet with it.

Secondly, As to his Second, An Inferior cannot punish a Superior; that is
true, generally speaking, whilst he is his Superior. But to resist Force with
Force, being the State of War, that levells the Parties, cancels all former
relation of Reverence, Respect, and Superiority: and then the odds, that
remains, is, That he, who opposes the unjust Aggressour, has this Superiority
over him, that he has a Right, when he prevails, to punish the Offender, both
for the Breach of the Peace, and all the Evils that followed upon it. Barclay
therefore, in another place, more coherently to himself, denies it to be lawful
to resist a King in any Case. But he there assigns Two Cases, whereby a King
may Un-king himself. His Words are, Quid ergo, nulline casus incidere possunt
quibus populo sese erigere atque in Regem impotentius dominantem arma capere
and invadere jure suo suaque authoritate liceat? Nulli certe quamdiu Rex manet.
Semper enim ex divinis id obstat, Regem honorificato; and qui potestati
resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit: Non alias igitur in eum populo potestas est
quam si id committat propter quod ipso jure rex esse desinat. Tunc enim se ipse
principatu exuit atque in privatis constituit liber: hoc modo populus and
superior efficitur, reverso ad eum sc. jure illo quod ante regem inauguratum in
interregno habuit. At sunt paucorum generum commissa ejusmodi quae hunc
effectum pariunt. At ego cum plurima animo perlustrem, duo tantum invenio,
duos, inquam, casus quibus rex ipso facto ex Rege non regem se facit and omni
honor and dignitate regali atque in subditos potestate destituit; quorum etiam
meminit Winzerus. Horum unus est, Si regnum disperdat, quemadmodum de Nerone
fertur, quod is nempe senatum populumque Romanum, atque adeo urbem ipsam ferro
flammaque vastare, ac novas sibi seeds quaerere decrevisset. Et de Caligula,
quod palam denunciarit se neque civem neque principem senatui amplius fore,
inque animo habuerit, interempto utriusque ordinis Electissimo quoque
Alexandriam commigrare, ac ut populum uno ictu interimeret, unam ei cervicem
optavit. Talia cum rex aliquis meditatur and molitur serio, omnem regnandi
curam and animum ilico abjicit, ac proinde imperium in subditos amittit, ut
dominus servi pro derelicto habiti, dominium.

236. Alt^r casus est, Si rex in alicujus olientelam se contulit, ac regnum
quod liberum a majoribus and populo traditum accepit, alienae ditioni
mancipavit. Nam tunc quamvis forte non ea mente id agit populo plane ut
incommodet: tamen quia quod praecipuum est regiae dignitatis amisit, ut summus
scilicet in regno secundum Deum sit, and solo Deo inferior, atque populum etiam
totum ignorantem vel invitum, cujus libertatem sartam and tectam conservare
debuit, in alterius gentis ditionem and potestatem dedidit; hac velut quadam
regni abalienatione effecit, ut nec quod ipse in regno imperium habuit
r^tineat, nec in eum cui collatum voluit, juris quicquam transera^; atque ita
eo facto liberum jam and suae potestatis populum relinquit, cujus rei exemplum
unum annals Scotici suppeditant.

Barclay contra Monarchom. l. 3. c. 16. which may be thus Englished.

237. What then, Can there no Case happen wherein the people may of right, and
by their own Authority, help themselves, take Arms, and set upon their King,
imperiously domineering over them? None at all, whilst he remains a King.
Honor the King, and he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
are divine Oracles that will never permit it. The People therefore can never
come by a Power over him, unless he does something that makes him cease to be a
King. For then he divests himself of his Crown and Dignity, and returns to the
state of a private Man, and the People become free and superior; the Power
which they had in the Interregnum, before they Crowned him King, devolving to
them again. But there are but few miscarriages which bring the matter to this
state. After considering it well on all sides, I can find but two. Two Cases
there are, I say, whereby a King, ipso facto, becomes no King, and loses all
Power and Regal Authority over his People; which are also taken notice of by
Winzerus. The first is, if he endeavor to overturn the Government, that is, if
he have a purpose and design to ruin the Kingdom and Commonwealth, as it is
recorded of Nero, that he resolved to cut off the Senate and People of Rome,
lay the City wast with Fire and Sword, and then remove to some other place. And
of Caligula, that he openly declared, that he would be no longer a head to the
People or Senate, and that he had it in his thoughts to cut off the worthiest
Men of both Ranks, and then retire to Alexandria: and he wished that the People
had but one Neck, that he might dispatch them all at a blow. Such designs as
these, when any King harbors in his thoughts, and seriously promotes, he
immediately gives up all care and thought of the Commonwealth; and consequently
forfeits the Power of Governing his Subjects, as a Master does the dominion
over his Slaves whom he has abandoned.

238. The other Case is, When a King makes himself the dependent of another,
and subjects his Kingdom which his Ancestors left him, and the People put free
into his hands, to the Dominion of another. For however perhaps it may not be
his intention to prejudice the People; yet because he has hereby lost the
principal part of Regal Dignity, viz. to be next and immediately under God,
Supreme in his Kingdom; and also because he betrayed or forced his People,
whose liberty he ought to have carefully preserved, into the Power and Dominion
of a Foreign Nation. By this as it were alienation of his Kingdom, he himself
loses the Power he had in it before, without transferring any the least right
to those on whom he would have bestowed it; and so by this act sets the People
free, and leaves them at their own disposal. One Example of this is to be found
in the Scotch Annals.

239. In these Cases Barclay, the great Champion of Absolute Monarchy, is
forced to allow, That a King may be resisted, and ceases to be a King. That is
in short, not to multiply Cases: In whatsoever he has no Authority, there he is
no King, and may be resisted: For wheresoever the Authority ceases, the King
ceases too, and becomes like other Men who have no Authority. And these two
Cases he instances in, differ little from those above mentioned, to be
destructive to Governments, only that he has omitted the Principle from which
his Doctrine flows; and that is, The breach of trust, in not preserving the
Form of Government agreed on, and in not intending the end of Government it
self; which is the public good and preservation of Property. When a King has
Dethroned himself, and put himself in a state of War with his People, what
shall hinder them from prosecuting him who is no King, as they would any other
Man, who has put himself into a state of War with them. Barclay, and those of
his Opinion, would do well to tell us. Bilson, a Bishop of our Church, and a
great Stickler for the Power and Prerogative of Princes, does, if I mistake
not, in his Treatise of Christian Subjection, acknowledge, That Princes may
forfeit their Power, and their title, to the Obedience of their Subjects; and
if there needed authority in a Case where reason is so plain, I could send my
Reader to Bracton, Fortescue, and the Author of the Mirror, and others,
Writers, that cannot be suspected to be ignorant of our Government, or Enemies
to it. But I thought Hooker alone might be enough to satisfy those Men, who
relying on him for their Ecclesiastical Polity, are by a strange fate carried
to deny those Principles upon which he builds it. Whether they are herein made
the Tools of Cunninger Workmen, to pull down their own Fabric, they were best
look. This I am sure, their civil Policy is so new, so dangerous, and so
destructive to both Rulers and People, that as former Ages never could bear the
broaching of it; so it may be hoped, those to come, redeemed from the
Impositions of these Egyptian Under-Taskmasters, will abhor the Memory of such
servile Platterers, who whilst it seemed to serve their turn, resolved all
Government into absolute Tyranny, and would have all Men born to what their
mean Souls fitted them, Slavery.

240. Here, it is like, the common Question will be made, who shall be Judge
whether the Prince, or Legislative, act contrary to their Trust? This, perhaps,
ill-affected, and factious Men may spread amongst the People, when the Prince
only makes use of his due Prerogative. To this I reply; The People shall be
Judge; for who shall be Judge whether his Trustee or Deputy acts well, and
according to the Trust reposed in him, but he who deputes him, and must, by
having deputed him; have still a Power to discard him, when he fails in his
Trust? If this be reasonable, in particular Cases of private Men, why should it
be otherwise in that of the greatest moment, where the Welfare of Millions is
concerned, and also where the evil, if not prevented, is greater, and the
Redress very difficult, dear, and dangerous?

241. But farther, this Question, (Who shall be Judge?) cannot mean, that there
is no Judge at all. For where there is no Judicature on Earth, to decide
Controversies amongst Men, God in Heaven is Judge. He alone, it is true, is
Judge of the Right. But every Man is Judge for himself, as in all other Cases,
so in this, whether another has put himself into a State of War with him, and
whether he should appeal to the Supreme Judge, as Iephtha did.

242. If a Controversy arise betwixt a Prince, and some of the People, in a
matter where the Law is silent, or doubtful, and the thing be of great
Consequence, I should think, the proper Umpire, in such a Case, should be the
Body of the People. For in Cases, where the Prince has a Trust reposed in him,
and is dispensed from the common, ordinary Rules of the Law; there, if any Men
find themselves aggrieved, and think the Prince acts contrary to, or beyond
that Trust, who so proper to judge, as the Body of the People, (who, at first,
lodged that Trust in him) how far they meant it should extend? But if the
Prince, or who-ever they be in the Administration, decline that way of
Determination, the Appeal then lies no where but to Heaven. Force between
either Persons, who have no known Superior on Earth, or which permits no
Appeal to a Judge on Earth, being properly a State of War, wherein the Appeal
lies only to Heaven, and in that State the injured Party must judge for
himself, when he will think fit to make use of that Appeal, and put himself
upon it.

243. To conclude, The Power that every individual gave the Society, when he
entered into it, can never revert to the Individuals again, as long as the
Society lasts, but will always remain in the Community; because without this,
there can be no Community, no Commonwealth, which is contrary to the original
Agreement: so also when the Society has placed the Legislative in any Assembly
of Men, to continue in them and their Successors, with Direction and Authority
for providing such Successors, the Legislative can never revert to the People
whilst that Government lasts: Because having provided a Legislative with Power,
to continue for ever, they have given up their Political Power to the
Legislative, and cannot resume it. But if they have set Limits to the Duration
of their Legislative, and made this Supreme Power, in any Person, or Assembly,
only temporary: Or else when, by the Miscarriages of those in Authority, it is
forfeited; upon the Forfeiture of their Rulers, or at the Determination of the
Time set, it reverts to the Society, and the People have a Right to act as
Supreme, and continue the Legislative in themselves, or place it in a new Form,
or new hands, as they think good.

FINIS.

