DIGAIAS ADIKIA: OR, The first Marriage OF Katherine Fitzgerald, (Now Lady
Decies) Contracted in Facie Ecclesiae with JOHN POWER, now Lord of Decies,
Asserted,

BY DUDLY LOFTUS, D. LL. and Judge of the Prerogative Court in Ireland.

If a Damsel that is betrothed to an Husband, and a Man find her in the City,
and lie with her: then ye shall bring them both out unto the Gate of that City,
and ye shall stone them with stones, that they die. Deuteronomy. 22.23. LONDON,
Printed in the Year, MDCLXXVII.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR Earl of Anglesey, Lord Keeper of His Majesty's
Privy Seal, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
I Here present to your Lordships View and Patronage the ensuing Argument of
Dr. Loftus on the Case of the Lord of Decies; which, though it be succinct, yet
it is so perfect a Dilucidation of Truth, as may serve to enlighten all
well-disposed Understandings to the perception of what Determination the Law
gives therein; so that I may justly say of him, as Aulus Gellius said of
Salust, Exquisitissimus est brevitatis Artifex, he being as rich in matter, as
frugal of words. And though Arguments of this nature may sometimes seem rather
to kindle an angry flame, than to quench the fire, by reason either of
unfaithfulness of stating the Case, or of petulency of speech in handling the
Matter; yet I am exempt from such fear in the publishing this modest and sober
Treatise, by reason the stating of the Case as here set down, is acknowledged
to be true by both Parties to the Controversy; and for that there is not so
much as a word of offense given in the style of the Author, nor any loose
intemperancy of speech used therein, he speaking nothing else but what falls
directly under the consideration of the Subject, as fit to be determined by the
precise decision of Law.

Nor do I design to present this, as a matter of Curiosity to the Reader,
though the matter of Fact be de raro contingentibus; nor to present unto the
Lady Objects of Terror, to frighten her with guilty Apprehensions, or to tax
her with the polluted mystery of a Matrimonial-Bed, or the stain of Unchaste
Extravagancies; or to convene her before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth,
who is so formidable to the sense of Guilt; or to upbraid her with the
inevitable Consequences of her Ruin, which will ensue her Temerity without
Repentance: but to satisfy all Parties concerned, and even the whole World, in
the Justice and Reason of the Lord Decies his Case, sufficient to enforce the
belief thereof unresistible, even upon the most prevaricated Understandings.
For your Lordship will not find in the Author's discourse an umbrage of
Rhetorical Flourishes, but a breviary of such Arguments and Authorities as are
of force to sway the points in controversy, and to turn the Objections out of
all Laws into Arguments to persuade the contrary; insomuch, that the said
Doctor's Allegations are so luculent, that words of Authors could not, by
Invention it self have been put in order, more for our advantage; nor could
Imagination frame a Conception of words more to the proof and approbation of
our Cause, than are the said Doctor's most authentic Allegations, being
Authorities too clear to be denied or eluded, leaving no place to contrary
Exposition, and giving countenance with Reason to whatsoever he proposes to be
believed.

Furthermore, he clears the Text from the disparagement of vain Cavils, the
misinterpretations of impertinent Glosses, and confutes the Lord Cook, not
only by the incompetency of his Authority, being neither Judge of, nor versed
in Matrimonial Causes, but also by the inevitable Deductions from his mistaken
Positions.

And finally, the said Doctor lays down such Principles, to beat out a path to
the decision of the Cause in behalf of the Lord of Decies, as that Judgment
cannot be given in favor of Mr. Villiers without a manifest decadency from
ancient practice, and deviation from all known Rules of Justice (as is
generally conceived) whereby it is hoped that the Lady upon consideration and
reflection on the many Prejudices of her Seduction hitherto, and the Conviction
of this Argument will be reduced to the modest acknowledgment of her fault;
which is my earnest desire, who upon many Obligations am bound not only to wish
her happiness, (as I do from the bottom of my heart) but by my best Endeavors
to argue the sincerity of my real Respects to her, from whence the Publication
hereof chiefly proceeds, and to remain in the profession I now make to continue
during my Life,

Your Lordships most humble, faithful, and devoted Servant, R. P.

JOHN Lord DECIES of the Age of eight Years, was married by the Archbishop of
Canterbury to Katherine Fitzgerald, (with the consent of her then Guardian)
having completed twelve years and a half of her Age; She about one and twenty
months after the said Marriage, disagreed to the same, and on Easter-Eve last
took to her pretended Husband Edward Villiers, Esquire the said Lord Decies being
yet alive, notwithstanding the Inhibitions of the Court of Arches.
QUAERE.
Whether she could avoid the first Marriage with the said Lord Decies, or make
Reclamation thereof?

ANSWER.
I Conceive the Law to be so clear in the Case above stated, that there cannot
arise any considerable difficulty among the Learned in resolving the Quaere
thereupon propounded; Yet that the Resolution thereof may be the clearer, and
the more satisfactory to the understanding of all those who are or may be
concerned in the same, I shall bring it under the determination of a more
general Question, stated with such Distinctions, Limitations, and
Specifications, as will not only explicitly resolve the same, but also answer
and prevent such Objections as may arise out of some confused Notions and
Allegations that may be produced against the Negative Resolution of the said
Quaere.

The Question therefore is thus generally propounded, Whether and when those
who contract Marriage, may depart therefrom by Reclamation?

Whereunto I answer; That either such Contract has already passed into a
Marriage, or in vim Matrimonii de praesenti; either by present Consent, or by
Carnal Knowledge subsequent: in which case there is no departure therefrom by
way of Reclamation.

Or such Contract has not as yet passed in vim Matrimonii de praesenti, and
then first both Parties are at age of Consent, to wit, the Man has attained
the age of fourteen years; or, secondly, both of them are under those
respective ages; or, thirdly, the one of them has attained that age and not
the other.

In the first Case of this tripartite Subdistinction, where both Parties are at
age of Consent, the one Party cannot lawfully depart from the Contract without
the consent of both.

In the second Case of the said Distinction, to wit, both being under Age at
the time of the Contract; it is to be understood whether both, or one only of
them will reclaim before either of them attain to the competent age of
Marriage: And I conceive they cannot, whether they be equally distant from the
said competent Age; (as for example, He is Twelve years old, and she Ten; or
unequally distant, he being Thirteen and she Ten:) or whether both, or either
of them will reclaim after the arrival of both at competent Age as aforesaid;
And at this time arriving together at competent Age they may reclaim, as when
at the time of the Contract of Marriage they were both equally distant from the
Age competent at a different time, when one arrived at the Age before the
other, having been unequally distant from a competent Age of plenary Consent at
the time of the Contract: or both, or either of them reclaims some time after
the Accomplishment of years competent for Marriage, and then they cannot,
whether both of them arrive thereunto at the same time, or at diverse times; as
when the Man was Thirteen years of age, and the Woman Ten, the Man being by the
revolution of a Year arrived at that competent Age aforesaid, who then may
reclaim, or thank himself for the loss of that benefit; So that when they are
of different ages from the time of plenary Consent, it is in the pleasure of
the Party who first comes to Age, to dissolve the Contract by Reclamation,
which if he shall not then do, this Power is devolved to that Party who shall
be then under Age.

As to the third Case of the Distinction, where one of them has attained the
age of plenary Consent at the time of the Contract, and not the other; the
Party that has so attained that age at the time of the Contract may not
reclaim; but the Party who was then under that age, and now has attained it,
may make Reclamation. So when one of Age contracts with one under Age, the
Contract is immediately good as to both, and each of them bound to expect until
the younger comes of Age, who if he then make Reclamation, the Contract of
Marriage is dissolved; but if he shall not reclaim, they shall be compelled by
the Church to prosecute the Contract.

I having thus set down the first Principles which relate to the Controversy,
and are of greatest importance to the determination thereof, I shall now apply
my self more particularly to the very Case, and in the first place allege out
of the Decretals de Dispon. Impub. Cap. de illis. Mulier autem, where it is
said, Mulier autem quae postquam annos Nubiles attingit, ei qui nondum ad annos
aptos Matrimonio venerat, nupsit, cum in eum semel consenserit, amplius non
poterit dissentire, nisi ipse cui nupsit, in eam suum negaverit praestare
consensum. And though the Gloss may seem to derogate from the Text, seeming
like the Gloss of Orleans, which, as has been said, corrupts the Text; yet I
conceive that the Gloss upon the words, semel consenserit, having set forth
quod multi contractus claudicant, and ex una part possunt tenere, and ex
altera non; and adding afterward a diversity by the word, Secus there
subjoyned, where he says, Secus in Matrimonio, quia illud vinculum non potest
constare nisi ex duobus consensibus, does not prejudice the Lord of Decies his
Case: for he was at the time of the Marriage capable of giving a Consent, being
then of above Seven years of age, which he cannot recall until he come to the
age of Fourteen, and will continue; unless he then, or immediately after
disclaim the same; whence Dominus Abbas says, Si alter pubes, and alter
impubes, and impubes reclamat, non auditur ante aetatem Legitimam, si autem
pubes reclamat, non auditur, ex quo semel consensit, and sic diffiniunt hi.
quicquid dicat Glossa, either derogating from the Authority of the Gloss, or
putting such reasonable Sense thereon, as may reconcile it to the Text, by his
diffiniunt, quicquid dicat Glossa, which is as much as to say, This Gloss does
not hinder, but that Judgment may be given, notwithstanding the same, to reject
the Reclamation of the party who was at age at the time of the Contract. And as
for the words of the Reason given by the Gloss, quia illud vinculum non potest
constare nisi ex duobus consensibus, I conceive that the word Constare bears
the sense of the word Consistere, as it does in Pandects, L. 68. and L. 98. in
fi. de Solut. So that the sense of the whole clause is, That such Marriage
cannot consist or continue, without the consent of the Minor be continued when
he comes of age.

And as to the Authority of the Gloss, it has always been held in great
veneration, in so much that it has been called Juris Idolum. Sallicetus said,
that we ought, adhaerere Authoritati Glossae, sicut Bononienses Carotio, and
sicut ducens navem inhaeret temoni; Nay further, Anthonius Cursetus says, de
Authoritate Glossae, illam omnibus Doctoribus antecellere; yet in limitation of
his words, and explication of what honor has been attributed to the Gloss by
the former Quotations, he subjoyneth these words, Scilicet Glossae Authoritatem
antecellere, hoc est, singulis partitive, non simul sumptis.

Moreover, I confess that in the decisiones Parliamenti Delphin. quaest. 39.
set forth by Guido Papae, termed Excellentissimus Juris utriusque Monarcha, it
is said, Opinio Glossae magnae est Authoritatis; but it is, as there set forth,
Ubi corroborata est communi Doctorum Opinione; for the Gloss never prevails
against the common Opinion, or the express Determination of the Text, though in
causae arbitralis definitione, the Opinion of the Gloss is allowed, as it was
in a Judgment in a Court of Parliament of the Dolphinat 1453, and in the year
1456, in a Cause there depending between Claudius Constanus and one Boccagius:
whence it is, that Johannes Calvinus the Civilian, alias Kahel Wateranus ad
vocabulum; Glossa, says, quotidie, and in Scholis, and in Judiciis, Glossas
impugnari refellique videmus, nisi enim vel jure, vel rationibus funditus
nitatur, and a textu non dissideat, minime sequenda; nam ubi Textus expressi
sunt, ibi nulla est dubitatio, nec ad Glossam respiciendum: But that the Cap.
de illis, is express, plain, and clear, being written from Alexander the third
to the Bishop of Bath, will be hereafter proved by the Testimony of Marchantius
in his Answer to a Question upon the very like Case with Ours. In the mean time
let it be observed, that the Cap. de illis, being written by the said
Alexander, and directed to the Bishop of Bath, must needs be taken to be Law in
England. Baldus delivers the same Doctrine in L. Ancillae, C. de Furt. Nam
Doctrina Glossae nullam nobis necessitatem imponit, cum sit tantum probabilis
ut dic. Bartholus. L. 1. ff. si certe pet. The said Kahel adds further, Quod
autem vulgo jactatur, quod in Judicando a Glossa recedi non debeat, id non esse
verum post Abbatem Zasius inculcat, caeterum ubi textibus destituimur, tum
Glossae authoritas minime contemnenda est, qua de re late disserit Nevizanus in
Sylva Nuptiali. And in this sense Jacobus Butrigarius and Baldus are to be
understood, when they seem to magnify the Gloss.

And it is also to be considered, that the Gloss is many times mistaken as to
the understanding of the Law; as for example, L. 1. in prin. Fi. uti
possidetis, saying, that utile interdictum was therefore granted unto a usu
fructuarii, because there is only considered a quasi possessioni: for the best
Lawyers say, that as a Propriety is separated from a Possession, which indeed
is a part of Dominion, and therefore it was improperly said by the Glossary,
That a usu fructuarii did quasi possidere, viz. L. permisceri, de acq. poss.
and Barth. in L. naturaliter in prin. Feod. and ibi; Jas. Number. 18. Whereby it
appears the remedy of that Interdict is not granted to a usu fructuarii in
respect of a quasi possession, but inspecta vera possessione, wherein the usus
fruit is, if there happen to be any disturbance.

Again, Jacobus Menochius under the title De Retinenda Possessione, says, that
Accursius, as famous a Glossary as Johannes Andreas, is guilty of a very great
error in his Interpretation of L. 1. ff. Utrubi, and of the Rubric of the
Code, uti poss. and that his Gloss is to be exploded, and himself to be
derided, forasmuch as he declares this to be the difference between the
Inscriptions, Uti possidetis, and utrubi, scilicet, that Utrubi should refer to
an improper possession of Movables, and uti possidetis to a proper Possession;
for besides this, that it is the common Opinion, that the Possession of
Movables is a proper Possession; it may manifestly be proved from the said
first Law of the ff. Utrubi, and the Paragraph Retinend. inst. de interdictis,
whilst Ulpian and Justinian call it Possessionem Mobilium: which Appellation in
ambiguis ad sermonis proprietatem referri debet. Besides, a usus fruct. being
pars dominii, it cannot be properly said usum fructum possideri. Wherefore
Menochius de Retinend. poss. remed. 3. n. 245. declares, Nec hic ego probo
sensum Glossae. And the Gloss in many instances is rejected by Baldus,
Bartholus, Salicetus, etc. as you may see further in Menochius de Retinend.
poss. remed. 3. n. 37. and in Mascardus sub tit. Glossae. From whence it is
that Abaspelqueda tit. de Poenitentia did. 6. n. 107. says, that the Gloss is
false, for two Reasons; first, for declaring that to be Law, quod nullo Jure
cavetur: whence I may forcibly infer with more Reason, his Temerity in
declaring himself in this point contradictory to what Jure cavetur, if he be to
be understood, if the Gloss were to be understood of persons of above seven
years of age. Secondly, for concluding against Custom; for Consuetudo est
optima Legum interpres: Cap. cumdilect. de Consuetud. L. minime. ff. de Leg.
For if the Gloss on the aforesaid Cap. de illis, is to be understood against
the Text, and the common Opinion, it is also against Custom: for Martinus
Abaspilqueda de poenitentia did. 6. n. 107. declares, Non est Textus illius
sensus quem Glossa judicat, nec obstat Glossa quia Textu decepta; so that it is
not the Authority of the Gloss that can decry, or bring into credit any Tenet
against the Text, or the opinion of the Doctors. This therefore being the
common Opinion in this Case debated, appears by the Rosella Casuum fo. 404. n.
6. for these are the very words of the Rosella; Nota secundum communem Doctorum
Opinionem in dict. Cap. de illis de dispons. impub. quod Contractis Sponsalibus
inter unum puberem and aliam impuberem, impubes cum per venerit ad pubertatem,
potest contradicere, pubes autem qui consensit, non potest ullo modo
contradicere; for which Reason the Propinquity arising ex Matrimonio hujusmodi
rato, non consummato, is not restrained by the Council of Trent to the first
degree, as is the Justitia Publicae honestatis, but remains an impediment usque
ad quartum gradum equally, as does the Affinity of Marriage consummate
according to the definition of Pius Quintus in the Extravagant ad Romanum;
Contrahitur enim affinitas per Matrimonium per verba de praesenti ante copulam
ratione societatis Conjugalis, as says Cosmus Pistoriensis, cap. 12 de
Impedimentis Consanguinitatis. And if it shall be objected, that the
propinquity arising ex Matrimonio rato, seems rather to belong ad justitiam
publicae honestatis, for that it is not contracted per copulam. I answer, that
a far greater Bond is contracted, and of a far different kind from that of
Sponsalia; for in Matrimonio rato, such as this is, traditur facultas corporum
ad eandem copulam per quam Conjuges dicuntur una caro: for if Affinity be
contracted by a Marriage per verba de praesenti ante copulam, as has been said
before; it follows that they are made una caro ratione societatis conjugalis
ante copulam; for it is neither the copula, nor the present hability ad
copulam, that is always requisite for the continuance of Marriage; nor does the
want of such Copula, or of hability thereunto, set the other party at liberty.
For the Exception of Impotency, which is an impediment to Marriage, requires
three years experiment after Marriage before a Divorce can be sued a vinculo
Matrimonii; for Nuptias non Concubitus, sed Consensus facit. And it is certain
that a temporal Impotency is no diremption of Matrimony; nor does a Disease qui
reddit hominem inhabilem multos annos ad copulam, dirimere Matrimonium. Vid.
Henric. L. 12. Cap. 7. n. 1. Zanches. L. 7. d. 104. n. 10. And to conclude this
Point, Cosmus Philiarchus de Matrimonio, p. 302. In Matrimonio rato traditur
facultas corporum ad eandem copulam, per quam etiam Conjuges dicuntur fieri una
caro. Which Doctrine is allowed by the Casuists, who say, that Sponsalia ab uno
impubere alter aque impubere Contracta, sunt partim rata, partim suspensa;
Rata, quia durante ea minori aetate resilire non possunt: Non Rata autem and
suspensa, quia, quamprimum impubes factus est pubes vel resilire, vel sponsalia
ratificare debet, seu express seu tacit, Pubes autem qui cum impubere
contraxit contractui stare debet, si alter velit. And it is also the opinion of
the Casuists, that the Law of those Countries which grant power unto a Minor
adepta pubertate to make Reclamation, does only free them a compulsione fori
externi, and not from the obligation in foro Conscientiae; for certainly, as
Zanches says, it would be a ridiculous thing in Conscience to think, and
altogether dissonant to Reason to believe, that the Sponsalia of one under Age
should be valid under Age, and yet not oblige at all at the accomplishment of
years fit for consummation of Marriage; nay, the Casuists are so strict in that
case, that even where the Sponsalia are but de futuro, they enjoin Penance to
the Party reclamant, de fide mentita. vid. Panormitan ad Cap. si inter.

But as to Sponsalia per verba de praesenti, they are improperly so called, in
respect of the Bond of Marriage, but in regard of the Execution of Matrimony:
for Panormitan says ibidem, Uterque spondet in futurum respectu executionis,
sed respectu vinculi promittit de praesenti: for which Reason Divus Severus and
Antoninus in their Rescripts have declared, Neque Matrimonium qualecunque nec
spem Matrimonii violari permittitur, and Dispositio, (loquens de Matrimonio)
verificatur in eo quod de praesenti contractu est, licet non sit copula secuta.

It is also worthy of observation, that the Canons which rule this Case are
more favorable to Marriage than to the profession of Religion or Testaments,
insomuch that at Seven years of age Matrimony may be valid quoad Obligationem
Matrimonii, though the Parties who make profession must be complete Sixteen
years of age, and the persons who make a Testament must be Fourteen: and the
Reason is too clear in the Ladies Practice, Quia natura magis and citius
inclinat ad Nuptias quam ad alios actus politicos vel prudentes; and therefore
the Law does expressly make irrit the profession of Religion and Testaments made
before the respective periods of Sixteen and Fourteen years, though in Marriage
the anticipation of Seven years does not invalidate Espousals, or Marriage,
quando malitia supplet aetatem. And agreeable unto this Doctrine is the Case
set down in Aurea Armilla sub vocabulo, Sponsalia, N. 11. Two contracted
Marriage being of unequal Age, the one being Eighteen years old, the other
under the Age of Marriage, were within the degrees of Consanguinity prohibited,
it was therefore unlawful for them to consummate Marriage without a
Dispensation: yet the elder of the two was forced to sue out a Dispensation,
thereby to enable him to keep the faith of his Contract, and afterward was
compelled to consummate the Marriage; nay he was bound, says Panormitan,
facere quid possit ut Dispensationem haberet a Superiore.

I cannot forget to mention in Codice Legum Wysegothorum, Lib. 3. tit. 4. de
Adulteriis, 2. antiq. pa. 71. printed at Paris; Si inter Sponsum et Sponsae
Parents, aut cum ipsa forsitan muliere, quae in suo consistit arbitrio, sicut
consuetudo est, ante testes facto placito de future conjugio aut cum parentibus
ejus quibus Lex potestatem tribuit, facta fuerit definitio and postea puella
vel mulier Adulterium commisisse detegatur, aut alteri fortasse viro se
despondisse, vel in conjugio sociasse probatur una cum Adultero sive injusto
marito vel sponso illicito, quem sibi contra priorem definitionem sociare
presumpsit, in potestate prioris tradantur Sponsi cum rebus suis omnibus
servituri, idest, tam mulier ipsa scelerata quam vir ille, qui illam Adulter
ass vel Sponsasse, vel in conjugio sibi sociasse dignoscitur; in potestate
illius cui primum praedicta mulier pacta fuerat servituri tradantur, vel de his
quod voluerit faciendi habeat potestatem. And to conclude this point of the
Gloss, there is a Censure thereupon, wherein are expressed many hundreds of
Errors, with an intimation of a more accurate and fuller Repurgation thereof
from many pernicious Errors: which Censure was published by Thomas Manricus,
Master of the Apostolical Palace, anno 1575; after which (says he) multa in
Glossis intacta reliquimus non ideo quod ut vitiosa non sint: whereby it is to
be understood how little Authenticity there is in the Gloss, especially where
it is against a clear Text, as we have proved, Caput de illis, to be; or contra
communem Opinionem Doctorum, which impugn the Gloss in this behalf.

The next Objection considerable arises out of the Decisiones Rotae; which is
indeed more in sound of words, than can be justified or upheld by the
Authorities alleged for support thereof: for Opinio Doctorum debet intelligi
secandum jura quae allegant, Johannes Gutierres repet.. sui n. 112. vid.
Bartholum in L. non solum.. si liberationes verba, n. 7. ff. de liberat. legate.
the words of the Decision 450 are the contrary of what is above set forth in
the said Paragraph, Mulier autem, and therefore emphatical enough against us in
sound, though not in weight of Authority: For let us examine the Allegations on
which they ground their Opinion, and we shall find that they make nothing
against us, and do not in the least justify the said Doctors, unless they
restrain the generality of their words according to the distinction I have
above expressed of the Minor being above or under Seven years of age: if they
speak in this their Assertion of a Minor under Seven years, I shall not impugn
their Opinion, for it is out of the Case of the Lord of Decies, he being at the
time of the Marriage above the age of Seven years; but if they speak of a Minor
above Seven years, none of the Authorities which they alleadg will reach to the
maintenance of their Assertion; for they quote but two Authorities, that is to
say the Caput literas, and the Caput accessit de Despons. impub. both which
expressly state the Case of Minors under Seven years, and accordingly resolve
the same: for the Caput literas states the Case of a Minor in Cunabulis thus;
Cum quidam esset perfectae aetatis quandam puellam in cunabulis desponsavit,
procedente vero tempore, matrem puellae cognovit, and eam in uxorem accepit.
And the Resolution there is; Si praefatus vir matrem puellae, antequam Septimum
annum complesset, in uxorem accepit, matrimonium non dissolvas, cum
desponsationes hujusmodi nullae sunt, quae in cunabulis fiunt. This Case
differs in two things from ours, for the Minor was in Cunabulis, and therefore
the first Contract was void; and though the Minor could not in that case,
coming to seven years of age, obtain the Man by reason of Affinity contracted
by the second Marriage, yet the Mother was divorced; which shows that the
second Marriage, not only in case of a Minor, being above seven years of age,
but after, being under seven years, and afterward arriving at Seven, and then
consenting, is invalid; for which Reason the Man was divorced from the second
Wife, though not restored to the Minor, by reason only of the impediment of
Affinity contracted: nay had the second Wife been of a remoter degree to the
first, neither Marriage could have subsisted by the Law of the Church of Rome:
not the first, propter impedimentum Affinitatis; or the second, propter
impedimentum Justitiae publicae honestatis. And as for the Caput accessit, it
states the Case, and resolves it to the same purpose; So that 450 Decision of
the Rota Romana can make nothing against the Lord of Decies in this Case,
unless the said Rota had power to repeal the Rule of Logic, which prohibits
the Inference of a Generality from a Particular. Again, It is in the Case of
Doctors and Judges giving their Opinion, as it is with Witnesses rendering a
Reason for their Deposition, wherein there is dictum, and the ratio dicti: if
the Dictum be inconcludent, and the Reason thereunto annexed be valid, the
Dictum is made valid by the validity of the Reason; but on the contrary, the
Dictum is not valid, if the Reason thereunto subjoyned be not conclusive; as
for example: If the Witness should depose thus: It is true, Titius did lend one
hundred pounds to Seius, because I heard it so reported: Upon this ground his
Testimony would be invalid, by the failer of his Reason in point of Argument;
and it is as easy to determine, that the Allegations of the Rota, being
incompetent to prove their Assertion, the same must fail; for, quod inest
termino referenti, intelligitur inesse termino, ad quem est facta relatio.
Hence it is that Navarrus de Despons. Impub. n. 4. says Nicholas Papa relatus
a Gratiano, ex illa Clausula integra [ubi non est consensus, ibi non est
conjugium] solum infert quod pueri in cunabulis existentes non possunt
contrahere Matrimonium, and ita men's ejus fuit dicere, quod consensus
infantilis non sufficit, quod omnes fatentur; and herewith agrees the Civil
Law, L. in Sponsalibus: ff. de Sponsalibus, where it is said, That Marriage is
validly contracted, si personae non sunt minores septem annis.

There is one Objection more I would obviate, which is this; That Fornicatio
est dissolutio Sponsalium. To which I answer; That true it is that Fornicatio,
is, Solutio Matrimonii, but such a Solution as does not depend upon the will of
the Nocent party, but on the Consent of the Innocent; for (say the Canonists)
Fornicatio ad Solutionem Matrimonii non pendet ex illo cujus est culpa sed ex
alterius consensu.

There rests yet one Objection more which now comes into my mind, which is
taken from the cap. si inter. paragrapho, si vero inter; grounded upon these
words, Matrimonium consummatum fortius vinculum est matrimonio rato, (and that)
inter vincula inaequalia fortius, and si posterius vincit: But these words
being rightly understood, do not reach to our case; for that Paragraph is in
case where the Sponsalia were de futuro, and non per verba de praesenti; and it
is rashness from a special Case there defined, to collect this general Rule,
which is severely reprobated by Bartholus and Ledesma dubio 13 de Matrim. casu
2. for, as we said before, Sponsalia per verba de praesenti, are improperly so
called, respectu vinculi matrimonii, sed respectu executionis matrimonii: for
Panormitan ad dictum, Caput si inter, says, Uterque spondet in futurum
respectu executionis sed respectu vinculi promittit de praesenti: And though it
has been said, that the Marriage of Persons under Age are reputed as Sponsalia
de futuro, yet this is to be understood respectu executionis, non respectu
vinculi; so that in our Case the Vinculum, and the Execution may depend upon
the Consent of the Lord of Decies when he comes to Age; but the Lady is
indissolubly tied ratione vinculi, being above Twelve years when she was
married to the Lord of Decies, and may be compelled to consummate the same
Marriage, and the rather, for that the second pretended Marriage was contrary
to the Inhibition of the Church, and therefore could not be so valid or capable
of the privileges of the first, according to the practice and president of the
Court of Arches in England, viz. Clerks practice, tit. 200. But further, both
parties to the second Marriage are to be punished and corrected, as you may see
in the said Clerks practice, tit. 199. de puniendis personis solemnisantibus
vel contrahentibus matrimonium lite pendente ac contra inhibitionem Judicis; --
And for that the Sponsalia celebrated between her and the Lord Decies could not
have been dissolved but by the Judges Ecclesiastical; Again, we say, that quod
vinculum matrimonii, matrimonium ratum and consummatum, are of equal force; and
that so often as two incompassible bonds of equal force are contracted, the
first prejudiceth the second; and therefore it is, that frangentes Sponsalia
jubentur cogi censura Ecclesiastica ab Alexandro, 3. C. ex libris Sylvani de
Sponsalibus and C. praeterea: eod. tit. That is to say, they who violated such
Espousals, are commanded by Alexander the third by Ecclesiastical Censures to
performance. And where it is said, that Matrimonium consummatum fortius est
vinculum; it is to be understood, as we said before, in the Comparison between
Matrimonium consummatum, and Sponsalia per verba de futuro.

Having thus fully answered the aforesaid Objections, I shall clear a mistake
of some upon the Statute of Henry the eighth concerning Marriages: For tho in
the said Statute it be enacted, that the second Marriage consummate with fruit
of Issue be to be approved of before any Marriage unconsummate, yet the said
Statute was repealed in the time of Edward the sixth, and did not recover
strength by the Statute of 1. Eliz. in England, or 2. Eliz. in Ireland, save
only as to the degrees of Consanguinity, mentioned in the said respective
Statutes of Queen Elizabeth.

I am to clear also another mistake of those who insist so much upon
reciprocation of Contracts in matters of Marriage; as if the inequality of
Conditions in a Contract could not stand with reciprocation thereof; as for
example: Titius sells his Horse to Seius, and delivers the Horse, the other
receives the money; yet, if in the Contract there be a clause of
Retrovendition, there is a reciprocation of Contract, though the Seller may
have the Horse back again by virtue of that clause: Even so, though the Law
implies the condition of Reclamation, yet the Contract is good and reciprocal
until such Reclamation be made.

By what has been premised it clearly follows in the vigor of good
Consequence, how great a difference, and different effects there are between
the pusilage of one contracting Marriage under Seven years, and the minority of
one contracting above Seven years: for in the first Case, the Justice of
public Decency and Honesty (as the Canonists term it) takes no place; but in
the latter Case, there arises impedimentum publicae honestatis sufficient for
Diremption of Marriage; so that upon dissolution of Marriage by dissent at
twelve or fourteen years respectively, the party dissenting cannot lawfully
marry by the Canon Law with the Kindred relating to the other party within the
degrees prohibited. And the Reason is, because that if he be under seven years
he has no consent to bind him, but if he had completed seven years, he had a
consent. And for the same Reason, if a Male under seven years marry with one of
Age, the elder shall not be bound; but if the Male be above seven years of Age,
and the Female twelve, she shall be bound, though the Male has his liberty to
stand to, or depart from the Marriage: And therefore says that celebrated
Doctor, and famous Glossary, Petrus de Anchorano on the sixth Cap. si Infantes
de despons. impub. Nota quod quandoque contrabit sponsalia Infans cum majore
Infant, quo casu, si non oritur ex part Infantis, Justitia publicae
honestatis, non oritur ex altera part, secus si Sponsalia contrahat pubes cum
impubere majore septennio. Observe his Reason, quia pubes efficaciter
obligatur, impubes vero potest per poenitentiam resilire.

Observe a former decision of the Case.
Furthermore, To show that Decisions of this Controversy in favor of my Lord
of Decies are not wanting, hearken to the words of Panormitan, Cap. ex literis
de despons. impub. Deciditur (says he) quod major non potest dissentire, sed
minor factus major: whence he concludes, that Major contrahens cum minore
tenetur expectare minorem donec perveniat ad aetatem legitimam.

Although what has been said is sufficient to establish this Assertion upon an
authentic Foundation, yet out of the Spring-tyde of Legal Proofs I shall at
this time, out of a greater number (which for want of time I cannot now insist
upon) bring in the concurrence of other Authors, as well Casuists as Canonists,
without any unnecessary enlargement, to show further the Consent of Common
Opinion in this behalf;

And first I begin with Dominus Cataneus, vocabulo Sponsalia p. 416. qui
legitima celebravit sponsalia; tenetur sub reatu laethalis criminis procedere
ad solemnizationem Matrimonii in facie Ecclesiae.

Hostiensis de desp. impub. n. 11. Sin autem pubes cum impubere contraxit,
tenetur pubes expectare donec impubes veniat ad legitimos annos, ligatur enim
adeo pubes quod non potest reprobare semel probatum, minor tamen veniens ad
annos legitimos si non consenserit poterit resilire; (and thereafter) cum enim
semel consenserit pubes, scilicet per verba de praesenti. The Reason is this;
Pubes fortius obligatur quam impubes, quia maturioris consilii est, plerunque
enim aetas impuberis quod videat, ignonat, and sciens, fallere non videatur.
Wherefore let no Man wonder at the Reason why the Lady should be more obliged
than the Lord of Decies, whilst he has a power reserved to himself of
dissenting. Summa Armilla sub vocabulo, sponsalia, Impubes cum pervenerit ad
aetatem debitam potest contradicere, pubes autem nunquam.

Boych says thus: Extra, de Despons. and Matr. Cap. perquisivit, quoting
Gofridus in summa tit. eod. Indistincte pubes dissentiens cogi debet ad
celebrandum: Whence it follows, that notwithstanding the pretended second
Marriage, the Lady Decies is compellable to restitution to the Lord Decies.

Arnoldus Corvinus Juris Canonici lib. 2. tit. 12. Contrahere sponsalia possunt
omnes tam puberes, quam impuberes qui septennium excesserunt. C. accessit 5. de
despons. impub. quia voluntas quae in naturali consensu quiescit, in eos, qui
septem annorum complerunt aetatem, cadit; L. si Infanti 18.. ult. and L.
potuit. 5. C. de Jure de lib. Ante si contraxerint post septimum annum legitimo
consensu, C. duo pueri, 12. and ibi Abb. eod. vel cohabitatione. C. literas 4..
fin. C. accessit. 5. versi consensus. C. duo pueri 12. eod. vel nixu ad coitum.
C. juvenis 3. hic. C. fraternitati 7. de eo qui cogn. cons. accedente
convalescunt.

Marchantius de Matrim. respons. ad 2. quaest. Respondeo ad secundum: Dominam
A. B. contrahentem post annos pubertatis cum Domino, C. D. impubere sive ante
pubertatem C. D. sive post permanente consensu C. D. non posse reclamare vel
resilire: Est textus planus and apertus. C. de illis de desp. impub. quod est
Alexandri tertii ad Bathoniensum Episcopum, ubi sic habetur; Mulier autem quae
postquam annos nubiles attingit, ei, qui nondum ad annos aptos Matrimonio
venerat, nupsit, cum in eum semel consenserit, amplius non poterit dissentire,
nisi ipse cui nupsit, postquam ad legitimam aetatem pervenerit, in eam suum
negaverit praestare consensum: sed in proposito casu Domina A. B. postquam
annos nubiles attigisset, nupsit Domino C. D. qui nec dum ad annos aptos
Matrimonio provenerat: ergo non potest amplius dissentire ex part sua, nisi
Dominus C.D. ipse resiliat: Ratio autem cur puberibus potestas resiliendi non
concedatur, sed solum impuberibus est, quia pubes censetur habere plenam
perfectamque aetatem and prudentiam ad deliberandum, non sic vero impubes qui
cum eo tempore quo ducit, non sit aptus Matrimonio and Generationi, ejus
consensus datus ante pubertatem non censetur perfectus, nisi vel ratificetur
post pubertatem adeptam, vel saltem perseverare censetur; Quam rationem
eximpubere Judicat. C. de illis, supra citatum. Corporis sui ad generationem,
censetur quidem modo illam dare, ita tamen ut plena possessio tantum pro
tempore quo erat aptus generationi accipiatur.

Henricus Boych in tertio Casu, scilicet, Quando alter contrahentium Sponsalia
est pubes and alter impubes refert. Aut quaeris utrum ille qui erat pubes
tempore sponsaliorum possit reclamare: and dic quod non, ut hic, in. Mulier
autem, aut ille qui erat impubes: Nunc vero factus pubes: and dic, quod sic:
dummodo in eo tempore quo pubescit vel incontinenti post reclamaverit: ut in
Paragrapho allegant, si vero, unde quando pubes cum impubere contrahit, statim
tenent Sponsalia quoad utrumque, and uterque expectare tenetur quo usque
impubes ad pubertatem perveniat, and tunc si reclamat, solvuntur sponsalia, si
non reclamaverit, ab Ecclesia contrahere compelluntur.

It may now appear out of the aforegoing discourse to the full satisfaction of
all persons, whose Interest will give them leave to comply with Reason and
Authority, the greatest Patron of Belief, that the particulars of the
subsequent Recapitulation of the Premises are most true: Viz.

1. That the Lord of Decies (as represented in the foregoing Case) is so far
obliged by the Marriage had and solemnized in facie Ecclesiae by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, that he cannot make Reclamation thereof before he shall attain
to the age of Fourteen years. 2. That the Lady being above Twelve years of age
at the time of the Marriage so solemnized, as aforesaid, could not either in
Law or Conscience, neither can she hereafter reclaim, or depart from the said
Marriage, until Reclamation be made by the said Lord of Decies at his age of
Fourteen years: wherefore there is no Reason she, being of Age at the time of
the Contract, should be at her own disposal, whilst he is bound not to dispose
of himself. 3. That the Lady Decies in Conscience in bound, and by Law may be
compelled to cohabit with the said Lord of Decies, if he shall think fit to
associate himself at his age of Fourteen. 4. That she ought to have been
sequestered, and still should be sequestered pendente lite, which undoubtedly the
Judges will do upon due requisition. 5. That no Marriage against the particular
Inhibition of the Church ought to be privileged, or to prejudice a former
Marriage lawfully solemnized. 6. That the Consequence of allowing the Lady
Decies to continue in Cohabitation with Mr. Villiers would be extremely
injurious to my Lord of Decies, and a pernicious example and effect to the
Public.
For which Reasons it is hoped, that no Man, who was not a Counselor in the
Design of the second Marriage, will approve of it in the post fact, or will
think that it is to be countenanced under the umbrage of a fieri non debet, sed
factum valet: for that sentence of Law, though in some Cases it might make good
that which was otherwise unlawful, yet it does not hold to the prejudice of a
third person; nor can it make that void, which in it self is indissoluble and
cannot consist therewith, unless priority of Contract should yield to
posteriority; or the Law 1. Eliz. concerning Marriages were Repealed.

Dated the 30th of October. 1676. Dud. Loftus.


