(...) THE REASONABLENESS OF Divine Service: OR Nonconformity TO
Common Prayer, PROVED, Not conformable to Common Reason.

In Answer To the contrary pretensions of H. D. in a late Discourse concerning
the interest of words in Prayer and Liturgies.

By IRENEUS FREEMAN, M. A.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Tho. Basset in St. Dunstans Churchyard
in Fleet Street, 1661.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
THat I deal in matters of this quality, would be interpreted by those who know
me, as a doing violence to my nature; since that these Controversies have still
been very insipid to the Gust of my otherwise disposed Genius. And I have
always pitied those Salamanders that live in the flames of these fiery
quarrels. So that in this undertaking I tread quite counter to my self, and war
with my own particular inclinations. And therefore my thus engaging against my
intellectual Crasis, argues the strength of the Motive, which I must confess to
have such power with we, that it can make me any thing, and change me beyond
the fabled transformations of Magic and Enchantment. I would have no self to
hold me back, when the public interest may receive any thing by my deserting
it. And methinks it is a disgrace to humane Nature to be less generous then
Inanimates, in not quitting the interests of their private natures for the
general advantage. Therefore that which has inspired my resolutions to this
collateral attempt, is a sense that it may prove some way serviceable to the
Public. And in a general combustion it is every ones duty to bring what water
he can to throw upon the Flames. What the Church and Kingdom have suffered from
the Principles I have sat down against, is a theme too sad to be insisted on.
It is part of a misery to recount it. And what the same troublesome and
seditious dogmata are still a doing, is of as easy as lamentable observation.
The disease, which has done such execution, is still raging in our borders,
and therefore there would be no superfluity, if every man were a Physician. The
Fathers danger taught speech to the dumb Organs of the affectionate Son: And
the distresses of our dear Mother the Church should animate the endeavors of
her dutiful children; and where abilities are wanting, even create them. My
experience can vouch the power of this affection; and if in this discourse I
have spoke to purpose, I owe it to this my respectful passion.

The design of this present Essay is to undeceive them, who are not fond of
their own delusion. And could I obtain an impartial perusal from those that are
wedded to a contrary persuasion, I should not despair of disabusing them. But
their strong presumptions that they are in the right, and their irreconcilable
antipathy to the things I am a pleading for, will I doubt only canker them
against the charitable attempter, and occasion those bold censurers to conclude
me in state of damnation, for endeavoring to depretiate and shame their
darling trifles. Therefore I confess, that as to those resolved confidents, I
cannot but expect, that my endeavors should prove frustraneous, since they
will never cast an eye, saving of contempt and scorn, upon any thing which
makes not for their opinions, and tends not to the confirming of them in their
beloved conclusions. But I have conceived better hopes of the judicious and
more indifferent perusers: and if I may hinder any such from being abused, or
disentangle them from any former deceptions, I shall have no reason to complain
of disappointment or defeature in my intentions. Nor yet shall I be quite
succesless upon the former, the stubborn and confirmed Opinionists; since by
this Reply I shall do something in order to the removing of that vaunting
complaint of theirs, That their Books are not answered, but that they must be
beaten down by club-law, as they phrase it. For they cannot reasonably take it
ill, that I have deferred the publication of it till now, since hitherto there
have been great expectations from certain conferences, that the yoke, which
dissatisfies their tender consciences, would be relaxated. But things standing
as they did when they put forth their Discourse of Liturgies, I thought this
publication would be now no more too soon then it is too late. Wherein I am not
conscious to my self of having balkt their strength, with whom I deal in any of
my Replies; and am confident no careful examiner will find cause to charge me
with any wilful subterfuges or evasions. I design not to impose on any man, but
to convince him: nor have I need to shuffle in a cause which may be so easily
and fairly defended. And as I have not sought credit to my cause by impugning
only the weakest grounds that its assailants have against it; so neither have I
thought to help it, by passionate outcries against the contrary opinions, or
scurrilous bitterness against their Patrons. The cause that needs such
assistance, shall, I hope, never gain me its Advocate. If those I deal with,
find my retortions something cutting, they must thank themselves, who put the
knife in my hands, by bringing Arguments against the practice of others, which
naturally recoyl upon their own.

It would be improper and impertinent to trouble the Reader here with much
about my management of the Province I have undertaken: Only I may take leave to
intimate, that I have served up this my Answer in a careless natural style,
only attending to the congruity and fitness of my expressions, instead of
comptness of phrase and language, whence they might have taken occasion to deal
with me, as they did with the learned and florid Bishop of Exeter, viz. shuffle
off the edge of mine arguments and answers with a pretense, that they were but
mere words and Rhetoric. They cannot or will not see a Reason, that is set
forth in any pomp or elegancy, which yet is somewhat strange, that they should
see the less for light and colors, or that illustrations should obscure
things. It were therefore better I should be wanting to the gust^ of nicer
curiosities, then seem to be so to the cause I am defending. If boldness and
presumption be objected to me, for attempting a discourse so highly made of by
the party it comes from, and composed (as I hear from some of their own) by a
Club of some of the ablest Non-conformists, it will not be hard to return an
answer, since they cannot well expect, that their fondness of their own
productions should be a reason why I should revere or admire them. Be the
Authors what they will, I have nothing to do with them under any better titles
then H. D. not dealing properly with them but their Arguments; which I must
confess I was so daring as to think my self well enough provided to enter the
lists with, and therefore thought I might do well to prevent the disturbance of
a more able pen.

And now, Reader, I had eased thee of this trouble, and remitted thy eye from
attendance in the porch into the discourse it self; but that thou may the
better judge concerning the sufficiency of the following Answer, I beg thy
further notice of a few Advertisements.

My design is only to show the weakness of those Reasons, which are pretended
to justify those Ministers who forbear to use the Common Prayer, not that I
may render their persons more odious and obnoxious, but rather that I might
persuade them to walk in the ways of Peace, or at least dissuade others from
following so bad an example upon such unconclusive inducements, as the Book I
oppose presents them with. I say, my only end in this undertaking is Peace, and
the fruits of Peace. For though they say page 69. of that Book, that it poseth
them to prophecy how the reimposing of the Liturgy should bring us to Peace;
yet it needs not an Oedipus to aread, how submission to those impositions
should conduce thereto; which is the only thing I drive at in this discourse.
Indeed they affirm again and again, that the Common Prayer is not established
by Law: and therefore it would be requisite to my purpose to prove such an
establishment, were it not that they have saved me the labor by professing,
that they would never the more conform if it were established. For these are
their words; page 60. If we thought we could use these forms without sin, we
should never dispute the Law in the case. So that the Question betwixt them and
me is to be stated thus, Whether they ought to conform upon supposition that it
were established by Law. For the same reason they have also excused me from
taking pains to disprove, what they allege against the Antiquity of Liturgies,
in these words, page 94 We have no great value for any Arguments they bring us
merely from antiquity, as to matters that concern the worship of God; because
we think the Word of God a perfect and sufficient rule in the case; and we want
Vouchers to prove those pretended pieces of antiquity which they produce, etc.
Lastly, I meddle not with their Reply to the Bishop of Exceters Considerations
concerning the excellency of the Liturgy, because if his Lordship thinks it
worthy an Animadversion, he will doubtless make it with his own or some other
more able hand then mine is. And besides such a presumption in me would not
have helped my cause in the way that I take to maintain it, who hold that a
less excellent Liturgy, when imposed by lawful Authority, is rather to be
used, then a more excellent me when standing in opposition. So that all which I
have to do, agreeably to my scope, is to maintain this Proposition, That there
is no reason to warrant any Ministers forbearance to use the Common Prayer,
upon supposition that it is established by Law. And now, Reader, judge without
prejudice of their Reasons, which are contained without any method in the
eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth Chapters of the forementioned Book,
and scattered up and down in other pages, the same over and over again: and
therefore I deserve pardon, if I am forced to repeat the same Answers, to the
great trial not only of the Readers Patience, but also of my own.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 7. for land r. hand: p. 33. l. 24. for they may not, r. may they
not: p. 36. l. 35. for Periphasis r. Periphrasis: p. 46. l. 11. for thought r.
though: p. 49. l. 36. for his kind r. its kind: p. 58. l. 26. for are not so,
r. are so: p. 81. l 24. for I know what r. I know not what: p. 82. l. 4. for
examination r. exam^^^ ^

The Reasonableness of Divine Service.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
The Ministers are not discharged from conformity, by their dissatisfaction as
to the imposing of any Forms Universally. That may be lawfully used, which is
unlawfully imposed; Proved by diverse instances. That lawful Authority may
impose significative Ceremonies in divine Worship; inferred from their own
Concessions. Yet it will not hence follow, that any but God, may institute
Sacraments. The right notion of Superstition.

THE title of the eighth Chapter begins thus, The first Reason of diverse
Ministers not using the Common Prayer. Their dissatisfaction as to the imposing
of any Forms universally.

Answer 1. Wherein lies the reason of this consequence, yea though the
Antecedent be put in more advantageous terms, for their purpose, then they have
put it? No forms ought to be imposed universally; Ergo, We ought not to use the
Common Prayer. The most that can follow from thence, is but this; That the
Common Prayer ought not to be universally imposed. But they pretend to bring a
Reason wherefore it should not be used. But may be they think it all one to
say, it ought not to be imposed, and it ought not to be used. But how absurd is
such a thought? Since I could instance in hundreds of things, which ought not
to be commanded; and yet ought to be done, when commanded. Suppose the
Magistrate command me to go three miles to Church, when there is as good a
Minister in every respect within a mile: This command hinders the exercise of
my devotion not a little, and therefore it ought not to have been imposed: Yet
for all that, it must be obeyed. If it be replied, that every man is bound to
take the course which tends most to his edification in it self, though it be
forbidden by Authority: and consequently that in such a case I should go to the
nearest Church, and make use of extempore prayers, rather then prescribed ones:
I answer, that by this Rule every houshold-servant should leave all attendance
on his Master on Sundays, and go into his Closet; that way tending most
directly in it self to his edification. But the servant should wisely consider,
If I disobey my Master, that I may have a better opportunity and help for my
devotion now; I shall be outed of his family, and put into a condition attended
with far more distractions at other times. And the wise Christian subject will
argue in like manner. If I disobey the Magistrate in going to the next Church,
or not using the Common Prayer; and many others do as I do: the Laws being
exposed to contempt, wars and confusions will arise in the Kingdom: or, if the
Laws are vindicated, I who break them must be under restraint: and both these
ways I shall have worse advantages of edification afterward, for using those
which I thought absolutely best; against the will of my Rulers. So then, though
it were unlawful to impose the use of the Common Prayer; yet the use is not
for that reason unlawful, but is notwithstanding a necessary duty. And that
similitude they use page 39. runs on four legs on my Errand, as well as theirs.
It is true, the Magistrate should not make a Law, that sound men must use a
staff, because it is needful for lame men: But in case there should be such a
Law, he that remembers [not for wrath, but conscience sake] will carry his
staff, and not content himself with suffering the Mulct which the Statute
determines. And therefore the Author, or Authors, of the book under debate, do
very impertinently (to this subject) urge over and over the pretended ill
consequences of imposing this book, as that it has been the cause of
separations, the loss of many learned and holy men's Ministry, etc. page 91. For
if these things were granted (which no considerate man will grant) to have been
the proper Products of the forementioned cause: Yet it is nothing to the
Question in hand, what have been the effects of imposing the Liturgy; but
rather, what have been the effects of using it. This answer (for ought any
thing that I can Imagine in my most close and anxious thoughts) is sufficient
to satisfy those in this Question, who do remain obstinately unsatisfied about
the lawfulness of imposing the Liturgy universally. But I am not out of hope of
proceeding a little further in my second answer to convince some; even that the
Magistrate (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, I need not dispute here) has a
power to impose a Liturgy; yea this Liturgy under question, if it seems to him
most conducible to the Public Good.

Answer 2. Therefore I shall begin my second answer with those things in the
Liturgy, which usually are most scrupled, and seem to be by those I deal with
page 88. in these words; though I suppose they are false printed, for they
sound oddly. Nor is it true that they have any Authority to appoint
significative Ceremonies, where are sensible signs to affect the understanding.
They tell us what particular Ceremonies they aim at under this notion, page 91.
Sect. 14. The Surpli^, the Cross, and kneeling at Sacrament are (we think) all.
But I shall prove, that lawful Authority have power to appoint such
significative Ceremonies, by alleging other instances of the same kind, [and
bearing the same analogy in point of significancy, and affecting the
understanding] which I suppose themselves allow. Therefore I ask them, whether
the Magistrate has not power to command us to be uncovered at the time of
Prayer to God? This putting on the Hat, is a significative Ceremony, professing
our Reverence, and affects the understanding, as much as those
forementioned. If it be replied, that to pray covered is not decent, and
therefore it may be forbid, because the Magistrate may make constitution^ about
decency: I reply, that it is ^ndecent only because it signifies not ^^e
reverence; and by consequence; the Magistrate may require other significative
Ceremonies, which he thinks necessary to decency, because necessary to signify
due devotion. Whether they are really necessary or no, concerns not the
Question; but whether he really thinks them to be so: For his own conscience
must guide him in his own Acts. If therefore he thinks it necessary to express
the separation and higher order of the Priest from the People, that he should
wear a Surplis; whereby he may be put in mind of his duty both to God and the
People, and they of their respect to God through him, as the Messenger of God;
Or if the Magistrate thinks it necessary to express our humble and thankful
acceptance of our Savior, that we receive the Sacrament on our knees: or if
he thinks it necessary to express our obligation to God by Baptism, that we
should do homage by receiving and suffering some sensible Badge and Sign; it is
not material whether these Ceremonies be indeed as necessary to those ends
(which come under the notion and name of decency) as he thinks them to be.
Nothing can justly deny him this authority obliging the subject, except they be
forbidden by Gods Law, to be used; which whosoever will undertake to prove, I
am ready to answer him. But then the proof must not be (an usually it is) that
the Magistrate has no power to command them; for then we should only run in a
Circle; but that they are unlawful in themselves to be used, as being forbid
by the Law of God. For it is clear from what I have said, that he may as well
command these as to pray bare-headed: if these be no more forbidden by God then
that. If it be replied, that to be uncovered is commanded by the Apostle to the
Corinthians, as a Ceremony which nature teaches: I answer, that we are not to
understand by it the absolute nature of Man universally; but the conditional
nature and Idiopathy of of such Contrymen, the word (...) many times
signifying Birth and Breeding. Otherwise Nature would teach the Turks the same
manners; who yet signify their respects by keeping on their T^^bant. So that
if it should be enacted in England, that men should keep on their Hats before
Courts of Justice, etc. and that the contrary should be accounted an affront to
the dignity of their Superiors: In such case the Magistrate might with the
same equity make a Law, that we should keep on our Hats in Prayer, to express
our Reverence. It may be further replied, that yet still the putting on the
Hat, or keeping it off, signifies no more in Gods worship then it does in civil
commerce: But the Cross and Surplice signify that in Gods worship, which they
do not in civil commerce. To which I answer, though the Materials of these
Ceremonies signify not any where else what they do here; yet they may be apt
signs to signify, what they properly signify here. As the flower de Luce
signifies one thing on a sign Post, and quite another in the Scucheon of
France; and yet both naturally, as the word has been expounded before, that
is, 1 Cor. 11.16. customarily. And in the Kings Coronation, there are many
Ceremonies used, which signify quite another thing there from what they
signify, applied in another case. But this will appear better (ad homines) by
instancing in that high piece of Gods Worship, An Oath. The holding up the hand
sometimes signifies an intention to strike, sometimes other things: But in the
Solemn League and Covenant it signified a calling God to witness. The same may
be said of laying the Hand upon a Bible, and kissing the Book in a corporal
Oath.

From whence, if the scrupulous Ministers are satisfied of the Magistrates
Power to impose those Ceremonies of an Oath; Me thinks it must needs follow,
that he has Power to impose significative Ceremonies, and sensible signs
affecting the understanding in the outward exercise of Divine Worship: And
those Quakers which refuse to take such an Oath, do act more evenly to their
Principles; then those great Divines, whose Scholars they are.

Indeed they bring some show of a Reason in the place last cited page 88. for
their denying, that Rulers have any authority to appoint significative
Ceremonies, and sensible signs to affect the understanding. Their Words are
these: This is to give them Authority to institute Sacraments. God has
appointed us Ordinances, where by sensible signs spiritual Mysteries are
represented to us. These are his Sacraments; we know no Authority men have to
add to them, though they avoid the Popish Rock of conferring Grace, which we
say no true Sacrament does ex opere operato. But the answer is ready, viz. That
this Argument makes as much against the Ceremonies annexed to a solemn Oath, as
against any other significant Ceremonies, quatenus significant: But indeed, it
makes against neither the one, nor the other. For to make a Sacrament (as the
word is properly and strictly taken) it is not enough, that there be a sign
representing spiritual mysteries. I doubt, the Authors scorn to learn out of
the derided Catechism in the Common Prayer Book: else they might see there,
that it must be ordained by Christ himself to be a means and a pledge. How
ever, that may convince them that the imposers of those Ceremonies, against
which they are so querulous, never intended them to be Sacraments: for, they
never say, that they were ordained by Christ himself to be pledges and means.
But I hope they have a better value for Mr. Perkins: and I am sure, when I was
a Schoolboy, I learned of him, that a Sacrament is not only a sign to
represent, but also a seal to confirm, and consequently implies a Divine
institution. Humane Authority may appoint our seals, by which we have our
engagements to God confirmed; as the Cross after Baptism: but they cannot make
Gods seals, by which his promises may be confirmed to us (for that is proper to
him;) and therefore they can make no new Sacraments. But though they can make
no new seals; yet they may make new signs without making a Sacrament; Yea, and
new seals on our part, though not on Gods. It is wont to be objected, What
place can be then left for Superstition, if men may add new Ordinances which
God has not declared to be necessary? To which I answer, that Superstition
consists not in using these things, as helps to Worship; which are only not
commanded by God, but withal not forbidden: But in using them as necessary
pieces of Religion sanctified by divine institution, when they are not. And so
there may be as much Superstition in sitting at the Sacrament, as in kneeling;
in wearing other Garments, as a Surplis.

SECT. II.
The Text Deuteronomy. 12.32. does not forbid all humane inventions in Gods Worship
any more then in Civil Government. It condemns as much the approved practice of
David and Solomon, and our present disuse of the Ceremonial Law. The seal of
the Canon, Rev. 22. considered, as to this matter.

I Have heard many more such exceptions made against these humane inventions,
as they call them: But I remember I am not now writing a Treatise, but
answering a Book; and shall only answer the objection, which the Authors make
from that Scripture which has the greatest appearance of patronage to their
cause, of any I know of in the Bible. It is Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I
command you, observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. This they cite to their purpose in the Question under consideration, with
this Gloss page 100. By this Text certainly all humane inventions in the
worship of God are forbidden. But (...) is an Argument themselves much cry
down: Therefore let us take the Liberty they give us, to examine their
interpretation by the Rule of Right Reason; by which it will easily appear,
that their certain truth is a certain falsehood. For (1.) If this Scripture
forbids all humane inventions in Gods Worship; then all humane inventions in
the Civil Government are forbidden also. The Consequent is false by their own
confession, unless they will deny that the Act of Indemnity is either an
Humane Invention, or a Lawful Act: Ergo, the Antecedent is false also. I prove
the Consequence thus: Those words, which are applied both to the commands of
God about his Worship, and to the commands of God about the Civil Policy; do as
much forbid humane inventions in Civil Policy, as in the worship of God. But
these words [Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it] though in the
twelfth of Deuteronomy they are indeed applied to the commands of God
concerning his own Worship; yet in other places they are applied to all his
commandments in general. Ergo, They do no more forbid humane inventions in the
Worship of God, then in Civil Policy. The Minor is clear from Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. Now
therefore Hearken O Israel unto the Statutes and unto the Judgments, which I
teach you, for to do them You shall not add to the word that I command you,
neither shall you diminish ought, from it. Now the Laws made to regulate Civil
commerce, and Judicial proceedings, were some of those Statutes and Judgments,
to which all additions are forbid: And therefore if such a Prohibition forbids
all humane inventions in the Worship of God; it must needs forbid humane
inventions in the Civil Government, which I hope those I oppose, are not so
wild as to assert. (2.) We find good and holy men (notwithstanding this
Prohibition) setting their own Prudence a work to invent new things in the
Worship of God: which may well serve, as an Argument ad homines, to convince
those, which place so much in Examples as usually the Nonconformists do. But
that it may be the more easily and universally succesful; I shall further
demonstrate, that these examples were approved by God also. We have an
instance, 2 Samuel 7. David purposed to build God an house. The Reason which
grounded this Purpose, was no command of God; but merely Prudential, ver. 2.
The King said to Nathan the Prophet; See now I dwell in an house of Cedar, but
the Ark of the Lord dwells within Curtains. The Prophet Nathan approves the
Motion in the next words, Go do all that is in thy Heart, for the Lord is with
thee. And though afterward God by Nathan stopped the execution; yet it is
evident from the divine Oracle, that he liked the Intention: as he took
pleasure in the readiness of Abraham's mind to offer Isaac, though he would not
have him be actua ly slain. This divine approbation of David's purpose appears
from Gods promise made thereupon, to build David an house, etc. And so does his
Son Solomon comment upon the foresaid Oracle in his prayer at the dedication of
the Temple, 1 Kings 8.18. The Lord said to David my Father, Whereas it was in
thy Heart to build an house to my Name: thou did well that it was in thy
Heart. Nevertheless thou shall not build the House, but thy Son. If it be said,
that David had a particular command for it by divine and extraordinary
Revelation, beyond the Dictates of his sanctified Reason: This is said clearly
without Book: yea, and against Book. For thus God answers David, 1 Chronicles.
17.6. Spoke I a word to any of the Judges of Israel, saying Why have ye not
built me an house of Cedars? And besides, if God commanded David before; why
did he forbid him afterward? For though God did forbid that to Abraham, which
he had first commanded him: Yet the two cases (as to our purpose) are not alike
in many respects; which I could instance, and shall if there be need. It
remains therefore, that there was no Divine direction given to David
concerning this, beside the light of his own Reason, the Candle of the Lord;
the commands of which are the commands of God: But that I insist not on here.
God never commanded any where in the Levitical Law (to my best Remembrance)
that a Temple should be built in future Ages. I confess I read more then once
that when the Israelites should be settled in their inheritance, there should
be a stated place in some of the Tribes, where God would be worshipped, and
where he would place his Name. But that might be by settling the Tabernacle
there, without an house of Wood and Stone. In like manner Solomon, though
indeed God had said he should build the Temple, yet stays not for a command
from God about the form, the measure, the materials, and many other adjuncts of
the same: though all these things were determined by God himself in the
Tabernacle, and not left to Humane Prudence. Neither does Solomon in these and
many other Points keep to the Pattern of the Tabernacle, but follows his own
Wisdom. Accordingly at the Dedication he kept a Feast [and it was an holy
Feast, For it was kept before the Lord God, 1 Kings 8.65.] seven days and
seven days, even fourteen days: a Feast, that was never commanded nor kept
before; and therefore by the reasonings of these men a more monstrous and
abominably anomalous holy day then Christmas it self. Other inductions might
be made; and shall be when there is occasion, if this does not suffice to
evince, that the forecited Prohibition [Thou shall not add thereto] does not
forbid all humane Inventions in the Worship of God. (3.) The Text under
consideration says, Thou shall not add to [it] nor diminish from [it.] The
Pronoun Relative [it] does plainly refer to the Law delivered by Moses in the
Wilderness; whether Moral, Political, or Ceremonial. And if this Prohibition
binds us in the sense which they affix unto it, I see not how we can avoid, but
we must turn Jews. If it be replied, that the Ceremonial Laws are abrogated by
the coming of Christ, and therefore we may do things which are not by them
enjoined, and leave undone things that are; but yet that there remains the same
analogy and Common Reason in respect of the Precepts of the Gospel: I answer,
that the Proportion and Common Reason is not the same in our case, till it be
proved that God has by Revelation determined all things in his Worship in the
sayings of Christ and his Apostles, which are upon Record, as perfectly as he
did in the Law of Moses, wherein not so much as the s^uffers and other such
Punctilio's are pretermitted. It is usually urged, that the same Prohibition,
which now we dispute off, does seal up the whole Canon of Scripture; Revel. 22.
where Saint John concludes, If any man add to these things, God shall add to
him the Plagues, etc. But if these words in the latitude of their meaning are
not to be restrained to the Book of the Revelations (which yet is most
probable) but extended to the whole Body of Scripture; Yet they are not to be
interpreted as forbidding those actions in Gods Worship, that are not
prescribed in the Bible. For there are other precepts in the Bible, beside
those which are Directive of Gods Worship; as about Good husbandry and Good
huswifry in the Proverbs. And therefore these Words in the end of the
Apocalypse, prohibiting with an equal peremptoriness any additions to any Parts
of the Bible; they must needs condemn humane inventions in good Husbandry, as
much as in the Worship of God: and Mr. Hartlib will be found Popishly affected
at the Tribunal of these Expositors.

SECT. III.
By the Ministers sense of the Text we are obliged to the observation of the
Political Laws of Moses. The Answer [ that we are so to the Reason of them]
retorted. The things meant in that Text are such, as were an abomination to God
antecedently. Their sense of the words not only absurd, but exotic.

(4.) IT was as much unlawful to add to the Political Laws of the Jewish
State, as to the Ceremonial and Moral; or to diminish from them. And yet [as
these men understand the Words, add, and diminish] we do continually add to
them, and diminish from them; and they blame us not. For when a Thief is
hanged, instead of making the assigned restitution, here is an addition: and
when the Dam is taken with her Young ones, or an house made without
Battlements, or a Rebellious Son not stoned to Death, here is a diminution. The
Fifth Monarcy men do more exactly live up (or rather down) to their Principles,
then they who taught them. I cannot see, but according to the forementioned
reasons we are bound by the Judicial Laws of Moses. If it be said, so we are so
far as the Reason of the command remains; I answer, that in such cases it is
clear that the command does not oblige us, but the Reason of the command; and
the same Reason would oblige as much when there is no command: which is all I
contend for, that human Reason may invent new constitutions about the commerce
of Men; and consequently about the Worship of God with a non-obstante to the
Text alleged. By these four Reasons it appears to any unprejudiced and
considerate Reader, that these Words [Thou shall not add to it] do not signify
[There shall be no humane Inventions in the Worship of God;] Yea, although this
should be the most literal and obvious sense of the words. The Reason is,
because of those many plain contradictions and gross absurdities, that would
necessarily be consequent thereupon; as I have already instanced. I might add,
that there were new and difficult cases sometimes contingent, in which the
Judges could not proceed by the stated Rules of Law; but were to make their
address to Persons appointed by God, and to stand to their sentence. Moreover
if [Thou shall not add to it] did signify in the place quoted [Thou shall not
do, what is not commanded]; yet the context makes it appear, that those things
were meant that were an abomination to God antecedently to the giving of his
Law, or at least by their contrariety to his Law. It does not appear that those
things were at all meant, which are an abomination only because they are not
commanded by his Law (if there be any such things, as those I deal with
suppose.) To speak more clearly, if it may be; The Text forbids the adding of
such things that are an abomination to the Lord, not because they were not
prescribed in the Law, but because they were condemned by the Law, or were
condemnable before the giving of the Law. This will be evident, if we consider
the words immediately preceding, Deuteronomy. 12.30 31. Enquire not saying, How did
these Nations serve their Gods? Even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not do
so to the Lord thy God: For every abomination to the Lord, which he hates,
have they done to their Gods, And then it follows, Whatsoever thing I command,
observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Now it is
granted, that such things are not to be added in Gods Worship (no nor any where
else) by humane Invention, which are an abomination to the Lord in their own
nature, or by being contrary to some Divine positive Law, and not merely by
being not prescribed in the Law; Such as burning of the Children in the fire,
the instance of the Text: For that is the Reason given, wherefore the Hebrews
should not do as the Gentiles did without Gods command; because the Gentiles
did such abominations. I confess the words also do implicitly and by the
mediation of a Rational Inference forbid the doing of such things as are not an
abomination, out of any emulation or mimical desire to be like the Gentiles:
Because the doing of such things, as are no abomination, out of such a
disposition, would naturally tempt and easily lead the Israelites to imitate
the Heathens in such things also which are an abomination. But to do those
things which the Gentiles did in the Worship of God, not out of any value and
authority given to their example, whose Modes they be; but because of any
goodness or usefulness apprehended by Reason in the things themselves: This I
deny to be absolutely forbidden to the Hebrews by virtue of this Text, as has
been made to appear by the Example of David in building a Temple after the
manner of the Heathens, much less are we Englishmen under any such prohibition.
But so far as this Scripture touches the doing of such things in Gods Worship,
as the Idolaters did, it shall be considered afterward with others of the like
nature, which the Authors cite in their appendix to their Second Reason. The
result of what has been said is this: that if the sense which they give of the
Words were the most literal, unconstrained, and next at I and; Yet being so
absurd [as I have proved it to be] it ought to be rejected. But now I go a step
higher. (5.) This sense, which they fasten to them [Thou shall not add to it,
i. e. There shall be no humane Inventions in Gods Worship] is very exotic and
far fetched. The Master bids his servant to be at home at one a clock: The
servant is at home both at one, and at six: being not otherwise forbid to be at
home at six. Does the servant add to his Masters words, because he does
something more then his Master bade him? No, except he either says or thinks,
that his Master bade him to be at home at both those hours; Then indeed he adds
to his Words. To apply this analogous instance to one of the Points under
debate, being applicable to them all: Christ has commanded us to baptize in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Minister does so: as also he
does afterward sign the Party with the sign of the Cross, in token that he
shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to
fight under his banner, etc. does the Minister here add to the Words of Christ?
No, except he either says or thinks that Christ has bid him do both (I mean
by a Particular command; for in general he has as the case may be, and is in
England; since he has commanded us, to obey those that are over us in the
Lord, and submit our selves:) then indeed he adds to the words of Christ, and
not else; because he makes Christ to say more then he said. And this was the
fault of the Scribes and Pharisees, that they did teach for divine doctrines
the traditions of men; clayming that Authority to their own words or those of
the Elders, which is only due to the Words of God. These things, which I have
alleged, being considered, I willingly expose my self to be derided after the
Bishop of Exceter in page 89. of their Book; for holding, that the Power of
Lawful Rulers to institute such Ceremonies, is a principle to death to be
asserted. For if the Laws of the Land grant such a power, God has nowhere
forbad it. And this were to dye a Martyr to Justice, which is not so small a
part of Religion, as some make it: and so their loud laughter eccho's back upon
themselves. I have stayed thus long upon their Reason, as it is worded in the
contents of the eighth chapter; because I suppose they would set the best foot
foremost: and because I do not find it [in terms of the same import] to be the
subject of the chapter it self; as will appear by the Particulars of that
chapter, which I now come to examine.

SECT. IV.
The Ministers first Reason against conformity, viz. [ that it is not clear to
them to be lawful for all persons at all times to limit themselves by Forms]
examined. (1.) We are to obey the Magistrate in some things whose lawfulness we
are not clear in. (2.) The Liturgy does not limit all men at all times. (3.)
There is a difference betwixt limiting a man's self, and being limited. That a
man may limit himself, proved by their own words.

THey begin that which they call their first Reason, thus. It is not clear to
us, that it is lawful for all Persons, and at all times, to limit themselves
by any stinted Forms of Prayer. This stands in the Place of an Argument; and
therefore requires an answer, if a man could but divine whereabouts the Vis
arguendi lies in it. Let us search it all over according to the Proverb, which
bids us look where it is not, as well as where it is. When they say [It is not
clear to us] they must mean, if they will shape their Argument for their
present use, That the Magistrate is not to be obeyed, except in such things
whose lawfulness is clear to us. And when they say [At all times] their words
cannot amount to a Reason proper for the case, unless they suppose, that the
Common prayer cannot be used without limiting themselves at all times by some
stinted Forms of Prayer. And when they say [Limit themselves] their words have
no show of an Argument to their purpose, except it be employed, that it is all
one in the Present case for a person to limit himself, or to be limited by the
Magistrate. For if either that, which is not clearly to us lawful, may and
ought to be done when commanded: or the using of the Common Prayer does not
necessarily infer a man's limiting himself by stinted forms at all times; or it
be not all one to limit himself, and to be limited by the Magistrate: if either
of these things be so, and confessed to be so by the Authors; then it is
manifest, that the words under examination have not the face of an Argument in
their own eyes. Therefore, that we may put it into the best Posture of
Strength; we must needs suppose, that it implies the truth of the three
mentioned Positions: all which will be found too light. (1.) The lightness of
the first I demonstrate thus. The Lawfulness of an action is not clear to that
man who doubts of the Lawfulness: not being certain that the action is
lawful, nor yet certain that it is unlawful. But yet such a man is bound to
do that action, when it is commanded by the Magistrate. The Reason is, because
it is certain the Magistrate is to be obeyed, commanding Lawful things: but it
is uncertain, whether the thing commanded be unlawful. From whence it follows,
that the Person so doubting, sins more hainously in not doing that action, then
in doing it. And since he must needs venture one of the two ways, he should
choose to venture the safer. Now it is safer to obey doubtingly, then to
disobey doubtingly. For if the action be lawful; the omitting of it [besides
the injury done to the Magistrate] is of evil consequence to the public by the
violation of the Laws: But if it be unlawful, the bad influence of the action
is much more private. The Authors will give me occasion afterward to resume
this case; and therefore now I dismiss it with with a saying of that excellent
Casuist Dr. Sanderson now Bishop of Lincoln, who has fully resolved this
Question in his fourth Sermon Ad Clerum. Surely, when things hang thus even, if
the weight of Authority will not cast the Scale either way; we may well suppose
that either the Authority is made very light, or else there is a great fault in
the Beam. (2.) Neither is the second Thesis any whit sounder, which must be
supposed to make good their Argument, viz. that the use of the Common Prayer
does infer a limiting themselves to stinted Forms of Prayer at all times. I
cannot find any such limitation in the Liturgy, nor in the Act which
authoriseth the same: But if the Minister uses it at the times appointed, he
is left to his Liberty to pray otherwise at other times; if not in public, at
least in private. (3.) Of the same validity is their Third Supposition, That it
is all one for a man so to limit himself, or to be limited by the Magistrate.
For how can an Action and a Passion fall under the same Category? It is lawful
to any one to be injured (to put the case to their best advantage;) and yet it
is not lawful to him to injure himself. Even so, if it were not lawful for a
man to limit himself to stinted Forms; Yet it might be lawful to him to be
limited. Indeed, if it were a thing unlawful in it self, and to be done in no
case; their Reason would hold: because the Magistrate cannot limit us, that is,
we ought not to be limited by him, where submission to such limitations is
unlawful. But that is not granted, and is under present disputation. They
themselves grant in the next words, that those which have not the gift, may
help themselves by forms. Now that which is lawful in any case that may fall
out, is not unlawful in it self. And why is not the Magistrates Prohibition as
considerable a case, as want of a Gift? Id possumus quod jure possumus. There
is a Civel Faculty and License, as well as a Natural one: And both are required
in Persons under Government, to the doing of an Action well. Does the acquiring
of a Gift make that unlawful, which was lawful before in every case? I know
in some cases it does; because God requires that of him who has a gift, which
he does not of others. But if the case under question be such, the Authors
should show where God has commanded those that have the Gift, always to pray ex
tempore: and not argue merely from the Gift it self. For it is most certain,
that it is most lawful not to do many things, which a man has a Gift to do.
Otherwise, a man that has a Gift to drink his Beer cold, sins in drinking
it warm, though prescribed by the Physician: And a Schoolboy, that can make a
speech extempore to salute a stranger, sins in taking time, and consulting
his Phrasiology at the injunction of the Schoolmaster. Besides, who shall judge
of the sufficiency of the Gift? The Physician, or the Patient? The Master, or
the Scholar? The Magistrate, or the Subject? The Authors grant in their general
discourse about the use of Words in Prayer, that many a Private Christian has
an excellent degree of this extempore vein: By their Reason he should use it in
the Public, and at the time appointed for the Common Prayer; for that use of
it is only restrained by the Liturgy. If the non-ordination of the private man
be pretended to diversifie his case, from that of the Ministers: I reply, That
those which be ordained, are ordained to exercise their gifts in a Lawful way
only, and not contrary to the Rules prescribed them by their Superiors: as an
University Orator is chosen to use his Rhetorical Gift, but not contrary to the
will of the University, if they make known their will to him; and if they will
have him at some times to put into his Letter the very words, which they
dictate to him, he is bound to do it though he be ordained to exercise his Gift.

SECT. V.
Some things premised to the answer of their Argument from a man's obligation to
use his gift. The (1.) Answer, A man may use his gift otherwise, both (1.) In
Gods Service, and (2.) Out of it. (2.) A man is not bound to use his gift, when
the use of it would hinder another. It is no sin when hindered by Providence;
applied to the present case. A double reason, why Forms of Sermons might not as
well be imposed.

AND now way is made to answer the Reason they bring in the next words:
wherefore a Minister, that has the Gift of extempore Prayer, is bound to use
it in Public. It is in these words; Where God has given any that Gift, we
conceive it is a manifestation of the Spirit given him to profit others by; and
that he is defective to his duty, that does not use it to this end. They press
the same Argument in other terms, page 28. of their Book thus, The restraining
of Christians, especially of Ministers, in the exercise of the gift of Prayer
in the public Assemblies of the Church, looks like that quenching of the
Spirit, which is forbid to all men by the Apostle; and the choking the
coveting of the best gifts, which is commanded all Christians. For to what
purpose should those Talents be desired, which man has Authority to command to
be laid up in a Napkin? Before I give my answer to this Argument, it will be
seasonable to take notice of some expressions of Moment in the last clause,
which are not in the First. For there they speak of restraining not only
Ministers, but other Christians from the use of the gift of Prayer in public
Assemblies. So it seems they would have Laymen make extempore prayers in the
Church: For otherwise their gift is no more restrained by joining with the
Common Prayer, then with the Ministers extempore prayer. But I hope better
things of those I deal with, from some Prints of Learning they have left upon
their discourse; and therefore let that go, as a slip of their Pen, rather then
Error of their Mind. Again, they speak here of an active restraining, and not
of a Passive: But I have noted already, that to restrain others, is quite of
another Reason from being restrained by others: as to imprison, differs from
being imprisoned. Again they say, that it is to no purpose to desire such a
gift, which the Magistrate has power to command to be laid up in a Napkin. But
this is contrary to experience, if they keep to the Question of Public
restraints; For many a man would desire Learning for the use of his own soul,
though he should be restrained from teaching others: and in particular, the
science of Medicine. The Gifts of sundry Artificers are not to be exercised
freely, but in some places and Corporations, and under such and such
limitations of the Magistrate: and yet these gifts are desirable
notwithstanding. I confess, the Gift they speak of, is not so much to be
desired by public Officers, when the Public use is forbidden, as it would and
ought to be otherwise: But in this case, the remission of their desires is no
fault of theirs (if it be any fault at all) but rather of those who have taken
away the Reason which should intend the said desires. So much for that, which
is emphatical in the words last quoted above what is in the first. I now
proceed to answer the Argument common to them both. The sum is this, That he,
who has the Gift of extempore Prayer, if he uses it not in public, does
quench the Spirit, and is defective to his duty: seeing the said gift is a
manifestation of the Spirit given to profit others by. To this Argument, I
answer, (1.) That the same gift may serve to several uses; and he that uses it
to one, is in some cases excused, especially if he be hindered by Lawful
Authority to use it in another. Take their own confession page 78. There are an
hundred things that are the Gifts of God; of which yet there is no use in the
Worship of God. And again, Is there no way to serve God with the use of his
Gift, but to use it in his worship? I confess they speak of the Gift of
singing, and an hundred more: but I say, their words, are applicable to the
Gift of extempore praying in Public. It may be put to another use: both in the
Worship of God, and out of it. (1.) In the Worship of God. Because the same
faculty which enables a man to utter a good Prayer to God, enables him also to
make a good exhortation to the People. He that can confess sin in such a method
and way, as to stir up contrition in those that join with him, can also
aggravate sin to his hearers, to the same end in a Sermon. He that can back his
Petitions with forcible and Rhetorical Arguments [not to affect God, but men,]
can use the same arguments in a popular address to encourage the faith of his
Auditors. He that has a good gift of displaying and advancing the Love and
gifts of God in his Thanksgiving, may use the same Mediums to excite and
inflame Dvine Love in the People. They that become Public Readers of Divinity
in the Universities, though they use not their gifts to those ends to which
they might be used in a Country Church, yet cannot be said to quench the
Spirit, because they use them to other ends to which also they have an utility.
(2.) The Gift of Prayer may be put to other uses out of the Worship of God
also. Otherwise those Laymen, that have it, did highly sin that they are not
Ministers. But this is their excuse, that the same gift is of use in their
secular employment; even as the same Learning, which helps a Minister to
interpret the Scripture, helps the Philosopher to expound the Text of
Aristotle. The Authors themselves say in the beginning of their book, that he
that is able [supposing his knowledge of Philosophical and Political notions]
to make a good speech upon those Themes; is also able (supposing the like
knowledge of Theological subjects) to make a good Prayer to God. From whence
may be reciprocally gathered, that he that has the gift of making Prayers, is
by the same gift enabled to make Orations: And if he uses it one way for the
Public profit, he is not guilty of hiding his Talent in a Napkin, though he
uses it not the other way. My second Answer follows. (2.) That man, who uses
not a gift, sins not, when the using of it would hinder the use of another.
And this excuses Ministers that they do not pray without end; but afford some
time for the gift of Preaching, yea, and for the gift of reading too. Yea,
without this, most men would be inexcusable, except they come into the Church,
and make prayers there. For in that they do not so, it is manifest they use not
this Gift: And that they have it, or ought to have it, must needs be confessed
by the Authors, since, page 7. they make it to consist in Meditation and
Speech, with Gods ordinary blessing upon Industry. Now every man has the power
of meditati n, most men of speech: And, if the Authors Reason be good, every
man is bound to join industry, that so he may make Prayers in the public
Assemblies. But he is not bound to this, because he has other gifts to
exercise, and one cannot do all: Tu supplex ora, tu protege, tuque labora. To
apply this answer, If a Minister that has the Gift of extempore prayer, cannot
use it without hindering the exercise of his preaching gift, he is discharged
from the use of the former, that he may continue the use of the Latter. So that
if the Laws say, He that uses his gift of praying, shall not use his gift of
preaching, but lie in Prison, or worse; it is manifest that it is better to use
but one of those gifts, then by using them both, to be suffered the use of
neither. (3.) The Authors confess in the Place now under examination, that in
case the exercise of this Gift be hindered by providence, then it may be not
used: But when the Magistrate forbids it, it is hindered by providence. The
confession is more plain against themselves, page 57. We dare leave our
Ministry, if Authority command. What, dare you leave the use of all your
Ministerial gifts at once; and yet not leave the use of one of them, when the
discontinuance of the use of one may prove the continuance of the use of all!
Put another case, A Minister has no Living, and no body will lend him his
Pulpit: How does he use his gift in Public? If it be said, he cannot; it is
true: though he has a natural Power to usurp another man's Pulpit, yet he
cannot do it of Right. Why? Because the Laws forbid it. For were it not for
humane Laws, a stranger might use his gift in any Church, as well as the
Parochial Minister. So then the Result is this, He cannot use his gift, because
the Laws forbid him; and because he cannot, therefore he is excused. In like
manner he cannot use his gift of prayer in his own Church, who is forbid by the
Laws; and becase he cannot, he is guiltless, notwithstanding this objection
drawn from the use and end of the gift.

They go on in the same page thus, We are yet to learn that it is not as
lawful to impose Forms of Sermons upon Ministers, as forms of Prayer: Both of
them are lamentable restraints put upon the Gifts of God bestowed on his
Ministers. From which words charity will gather, That the Authors of this Book
were none of the contrivers or approvers of the Directory: For these lamentable
restraints both of Prayers and Sermons are to be found there. But I cannot
conceive them so unlearned, as to be yet to learn, why Forms of Sermons should
not be imposed as well as forms of Prayer. A man's Mother wit without the help
of much learning will prompt him easily with two Reasons. (1.) Because in the
Sermon the Minister speaks what he thinks is the Truth; and if it appear
otherwise, they may reject it. But in prayer the Minister in the name of the
people (for he says not I but We] presents desires to God, which sometimes
happen to be quite contrary to the desires of some of the People, yea of all
the People: it may possibly fall out, that the people can join with him not in
one expression: whereby it comes to pass both that the Ministers prayer is a
falsehood, and that the people being in a praying posture, do make a kind of
profession that they say Amen to those Petitions, which their souls abominate,
which makes it appear, why there is more reason the people should know before
hand what shall be prayed, then what shall be preached: which foreknowledge is
the effect of Forms. (2.) Because the Minister in his preaching is to expound,
confirm, and apply to his people all the Articles of Faith, as shall be
occasion; a work which will require many days, if not years. It would be
endless to comprise the subjects of all Sermons in forms: But we pray for the
same things continually: and therefore the directory saw reason to put down the
sense and Matter of Prayer, though not of Sermons. But this is so eccentrical
to the Question, I am sorry I have said so much of it. For if it were granted,
that both forms of Prayer and Sermons were miserable restraints; Yet the gifts
of many an honest Prisoner have been under miserable Restraints, and yet he
never the less honest for that.

SECT. VI.
Another of their Arguments [ That a man must pray with the greatest intention
and fervor: which is abated by Forms] answered. No man is bound to a greater
intention, then may be procured by lawful means. In some cases a man may
lawfully do that, which naturally will remit his fervor. Their own experience
proves not, that a man may not be as fervent with a form, as without it. This
kind of Fervor argues not the excellency of those Prayers, in which it is most
procured; It being often the Result of mere natural and animal forces.

I Proceed to the next words, because they have some show of an Argument. The
Major Proposition whereof is this, We are sure it is the unquestionable duty of
every one that prays, to do it with the highest intention of mind imaginable,
and with the greatest fervency of Spirit: And that it is not lawful for any
man in Prayer to allow himself in any thing, which may either divert his mind
from the most fixed contemplation of God, or intention upon his duty, or which
may any way cool the Heat and Fervency of his Spirit.

I answer to this Proposition by a distinction thus. True, Every man is bound
to pray with the highest intention of Mind, and with the greatest fervency of
Spirit, that can be obtained by the use of just means: But no man is to use
unjust means to procure that intention and fervency. And again, True, it is not
lawful for any man to allow himself in any thing that may hinder the foresaid
intention and fervency; if the phrase [allow] signifies only to approve and
like such an impediment, or such a condition as is necessarily exposed to it:
But if [allowing] signifies not accusing himself, or the vindication of himself
from the accusations of others that impute sin to him for praying while he
labors under such an impediment: then I say, a man may allow himself in
something that may hinder the intention of his mind, and fervency of his spirit
in Prayer. If He, or they, that made this book, take their Proposition in that
sense, wherein I grant it, it is nothing to the purpose: For a man may use the
Common Prayer, and yet wish he might be at his Liberty if the Magistrate
thought good. Therefore the Proposition must needs be taken in the sense
wherein I deny it: and the Reason of my denial is evident from the
forementioned Instance. He that is forbid by the Magistrate to go to the next
Church, and therefore is necessitated to go to one more remote, must needs be
more indisposed to Prayer by his long journey (except some men of a temper by
themselves:) so that he shall not perform that duty with so high an Intention
of mind, or with so great a fervency of Spirit, as might probably be
experienced, in case he came into the Church less weary, and weather-beaten.
But yet such a man may lawfully go to the furthest Church, and pray there:
though these hindrances of intention and fervor be consequent thereupon. The
Reason is, Because they are necessary, and not voluntary: He wishes the case
were otherwise with him: but, as things stand, if he should go to the next
Church contrary to the Magistrates prohibition, he should sin; and Evil is not
to be done, that good may come of it: especially, when a greater evil would
come of it then the good aimed at, as it is in this case. And consequently he
may allow himself, that is, not accuse himself for praying under such clogs and
remora's of his devotion. By the same Reason, though it were granted that the
use of the Common Prayer did hinder that height of Intention and fervor of
spirit they speak off; yet, the not using it being forbid by the Magistrate, a
man may use it and allow himself in the use. For it is clear, that these
inconveniences render it only inexpedient, but not unlawful. Indeed p. 90.
they urge, that things which (though otherwise lawful) are inexpedient, ought
not to be done. I say so too, if a man be left to the liberty of action: and be
not otherwise restrained by a Natural or Political necessity. For if the Law
restrains a man from that which otherwise were more expedient: then that which
was more expedient, becomes less expedient: Not only because it is made
unlawful, but also because in such a case (all things considered) it has no
tendency or instrumentality to that end whereto it was conducible before, but
rather to the contrary. Such Actions as before the Prohibition would have a
good effect, after the prohibition will have a bad one: supposing that before
the prohibition they were merely and purely lawful and expedient, and not also
otherwise necessary, which only are the subject of the present debate. To bring
down my Answer again to the Hypothesis: If it should be granted, that extempore
Prayers are most expedient to procure the highest intention and greatest
fervency in Prayer; Yet, being forbid by the Law, they are most inexpedient to
such an end, all things considered, and that for the Reason I have already
propounded, viz. Because if this violation of the Law escape that penal
animadversion, which is due to it by the Law; then Seditions and Wars must
needs ensue thereupon, which rough weather is no fit season for the fruits of
Righteousness, which are sown in peace: But if the Authority of the Law be
asserted by exemplary punishments; then the transgressors in the case must
lose the public exercise of their Ministry; which will be much more
incommodious and inexpedient to the foresaid intention and fervor in public
Prayers, since they will be suffered to pray none in public at all. The Major
Proposition being thus proved either false, or impertitinent; false in that
sense I take it in, and impertinent in any other: Their Argument must needs
fall without any more ado, since no Argument can stand on one Leg. But much
more, if the Minor also be found exceeding doubtful, as will be found, when we
have rehearsed it in its terms, which are these; We cannot be induced to
believe that any one can possibly so keep his soul fixed upon God, or so intent
upon God, while he reads a Prayer, as whiles he speaks it from his own
conception. To which I answer, That he who rationally believes any thing
impossible in the series of moral effects, where temper, education, custom, and
the influence of private affections does so commonly intend and remit the Power
of the Agent, must have more to propound then the mere experience of the
Non-event. But the producers of this Argument plead nothing to prove it not
possible, but only experience; and that not universal, but their own: not
daring to deny, but that others may experience the contrary, as may be seen in
their next words. We find by experience (not to determine positively of the
frame of other persons spirits) a great difference in the intention and
fervency of our spirits, when our words in prayer are directed and determined
by the inward heat, fervency and affection of our hearts, from what is, when
our words are determined for us by other men; yea by our selves before the time
of Prayer. Thus the Authors say for themselves: But if others may be admitted
to tell their Experiences, they will say the quite contrary for themselves. And
though the Authors find it thus, as they express; Yet, may be, the intention
and fervor is such as argues not the excellency of ex tempore Prayers above
others, being no excellent symptom it self; but possibly being the result of
the mere natural and animal forces, or worse, as will appear by five Instances
I shall immediately produce; and if the Authors impartially search themselves,
they may possibly find a sixth.

SECT. VII.
Five sorry causes assigned, wherefore some men may be more fervent in
extempore Prayers then in Forms. (1.) An Antipathy against the one, and a
persuasion that the other is a mark of Grace. 2. The Novelty which extemporary
Prayers give scope for. (3.) Nature is more intent in the exercise of gifts
then of Graces. (4.) Self-love, men's natural affection to their own Inventions,
and impatience of Restraints. (5.) In extempore Prayers there is room for
Ostentation of Parts, and (as some will interpret it) of divine experiences.
Two other causes of this Fervor.

(1.) SOme men by their education have received an Antipathy against forms,
having been taught that to pray by a Form is no prayer; and on the contrary, it
is a sign of grace to pray without one. This opinion has so prevailed, that
many men have gained a great name and repute of Religion, merely by their
prayers, among some well-meaning, but simple people, who undertook to be as
skilful as the tryers, who could taste men's spirits by their tones and phrases.
Now it is no wonder, that he can have but little intention or fervor in
reading a form of Prayer, who has a deep rooted antipathy against it; as he
will but coldly recite a Poem, who nauseates it. He may well be struck cold in
reading a Form, who either believes he sins in doing it, or scruples whether he
sin or no. And on the other hand no marvel, though he be intent and fervent in
making an extempore Prayer, who judges in any measure of the sincerity of his
heart, either by the copia verborum, which some call enlargements; or by the
sudden and easy suggestion of pertinent places of Scripture, or experience, to
serve as arguments in his Petitions. But that those which have the gift, do too
much thus judge of their grace by it, is evident, in that often, if they be
straitened, they let down their crist, and question their estate; though before
they had a full plerophory bred in them by some precedent enlargements, and
though they are conscious to themselves of no new sin, or neglect, that might
have altered the case. (2.) Some men may be more intent and fervent in
extempore Prayers; because there is so much place for novelty, which is so
taking with the nature of man's mind. This is so prevalent, that some have
confessed, that whereas at one time a Scripture has been set on their hearts
in prayer, to the powerful actuation and accension of their spirits, and has
continued in proportionable force for some time; yet by degrees it grows stale
and out of date: So that when the same Scripture-expression is used by them
(though not industriously, but fortuitously, and without study) it has lost
its sting and Energy; it has no more savor then the old Mumpsimus of
Common Prayer to their variable Gusto. And then a new phrase comes upon the
stage, and acts its part with like vigor for a time, and Exit; till at length
by difuse the old one has recovered its edge again. I know some will solve
this Phenomenon, by supposing the diversity of the Spirits impressions,
sometimes bringing one expression into the mind, and working it on the
affections, and sometimes another. But Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine
necessitate; there is no necessity to assign a Metaphysical cause for such an
accident, as we see obviously effected by the powers of Nature. For Scholars
experience the same thing in themselves, where the Spirit cannot be pretended,
beginning to read or meditate on a new subject with great intention and
fervency, but soon calmed, and ready to lay it aside, till the diversion of a
new one has made the old one new again. (3.) Nature it self is apt to be more
intent and fervent in the exercise of a Gift then in the exercise of a Grace;
and therefore where there is place for the exercise of both, there may probably
be more intention and fervor, then where there is place only to exercise
grace: And in this case the less intention is as acceptable to God as the
greater: For the overplus may arise from the gift, and not from the grace:
whereas the Lord delights not in the legs of a man, nor in his wit and tongue
neither; but his delight is in them that fear him. To apply this answer, He
that reads the Common Prayer, exercises no gift in comparison of that which is
exercised in extempore Prays; all that is left him to do, is, to exercise
Grace, as faith, love, humility, desire: But the other exercises his memory,
fancy, invention, an harder piece of judgment, besides method. Now since we
are most stupid to the best and most spiritual duties; and had rather read a
book where our parts and gifts are exercised, then a plain one (though more
practical) where the exercise of Grace is more purely and singly required: it
is manifest, that caeteri^ paribus, there will be more intention and heat in
the use of extempore Prayer, which sets so many gifts a work, then if the same
man should use the Common Prayer, which employs little else then his graces.
And yet this overplus of intention and heat is hardly a better sign to the
person in whom it is, that he or his Prayer is any whit more acceptable to God,
then the intention and heat which a schoolboy finds in using his invention,
and making his verses, above that which he finds in reading an Author. For
invention takes up the soul, be it in what subject it will. And this brings me
to a fourth Reason, wherefore some men may be more intent and fervent in
extempore Prayers, then in the Common Prayer. (4.) Men are naturally more
affected with their own inventions, then with those of others; and therefore
extempore Prayers may more affect them then prescribed forms, upon no better an
account then that of self-love. May be some have experienced, that they can
better join with others in an extempore Prayer, then in a Form: but that may
proceed from the first Reason, and moreover from this I shall now name; That it
is natural to be intent and fervent in hearing others to exercise their parts
notably; and it is no more then we find in reading or hearing any piece of Wit.
But the Authors have professed, that they come not under this Reason, being not
so much affected with premeditated forms of their own: therefore because it
reaches not them, though it does others, I will not account it a fourth
Reason, but substitute another, which, for ought I know, may agree to them. It
is natural to the mind of man to be impatient of restraint, and love to be at
its own liberty; whence it comes to pass, that a plausible fancy does more
prevail then a severe and sullen Argument; as Doctor Reynolds, now Bishop of
Norwich, has excellently noted, in his Treatise of the Passions and Faculties
of the Soul, cap. 4. Now men using their own liberty in extempore Prayers, but
being limited and tied up by Forms, they may be more intent and fervent in the
former then in the latter, upon no better principle then that which is most
predominant in the most corrupt men, which are the most independent, and say,
Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us. (5.) In
unpremeditated Prayers there is far greater room, and scope, and opportunity
for ostentation and vain glory in the discovery of men's parts and gifts; yea
(as some hearers will interpret) of their graces and divine experiences. And
what can flesh and blood be more intent and earnest about, then such an
employment? And that the intention and fervor of many in their Prayers
proceeds from this Reason, is evident from hence, in that when they pray before
others, they will weep and make other such signs of intention and fervor; but
it is not so when others pray before them. I have now mentioned the five
Reasons I promised, which may probably cause the overplus of intention and
fervor in these men, while they use extempore Prayers, above what they find in
using of Forms. I say not only possibly, but probably. For seeing the self-same
things are prayed for in the Letany, which can be the matter of the longest
extempore Prayer, though not in that novelty, variety, and elegancy of phrase,
if the heat and intention they speak of did purely proceed from the strength of
their desire to the things themselves, it would be equal in both cases. But
since it is not equal, it must needs proceed from some other cause, and
probably from one or all those I have assigned, since it is known that they are
apt in their own nature to produce such an inequality, It might be further
considered, that some persons, having entertained some private opinions of
their own, are engaged by them to pray for such things, which the Prayers of
the Church do not beg of God, but rather the contrary; as it was in the late
wars, when the late King thought one Reason of disliking the Common Prayer was,
that there were so many Petitions put up for him. I shall only add a Reason,
which relates more properly and especially to the fervency spoken of, then to
the intention of mind: And it is this, when a man does strongly bend his wit in
study (most of all in invention) he feels a sensible heat in his body, insomuch
that I have known some to put a napkin dipped in cold water on their heads. Any
man (I think) may experience, that in such an employment he does not breath so
freely and frequently as ordinarily he does; which will be most apparent to
such as take Tobacco; even as a man holds his breath when he is about with all
his might to strike a blow. And this obstruction of the breath alone is
sufficient to effect an extraordinary fervency in the blood and spirits.
Besides, when a man is not only to invent, but to invent as fast as the
Auditors expect he should utter: in case matter comes not fast enough, he will
be apt to draw out his last words to the great straining of his body, and to
make up the defect of matter with more then ordinary earnestness in the
delivery. Like him, whose notions being out before the glass, lifted up his
voice the higher, to make amends for the frivolousnesse of that which he
produced; of whom one of the hearers said, This Minister will be hot in spite
of his matter. Now this kind of fervency, being only the tumult of the bodily
spirits, is not much to be reckoned of, as depending much upon age, temper, and
the weather it self: The aged and grown Christian has the least of it, whose
devotion, in respect of stillness and quietness, comes nearer to that of the
soul in state of separation. The baseness of this kind of fervor is
excellently displayed by that holy and learned Doctor Henry More, in his divine
Poem of the Life of the Soul, in the description of Glaucis. And if any man
would be better informed of the natural Reasons of such heats and fervours,
let him consult Doctor Casaubon of Enthusiasme.

SECT. VIII.
The Ministers Reason, why unpremeditated Prayers beget intention, answered.
The Mind is not abstracted from all Created Objects in them. The advantage of
the Prints and Characters in a Book, in order to the easy bringing of the
Idea's into the head. The disadvantages to the Hearers by extempore Prayers.
The Soul dictates to the Tongue in Forms.

I Would not willingly pass over any thing in the Book which I oppose, that
has any show of Patronage to the cause maintained therein, and am careful to
answer every allegation under that head to which it does most properly
appertain. And therefore remembering, that page 28. this Reason is given,
wherefore the mind may be more intent in unpremeditated Prayers, viz. Because
the Soul is more abstracted from all created objects, then it can be while a
great piece of the work is to look on the Book to see what to say next: I think
this the most proper place for a reply. My Answer is this. Every man that is an
expert reader (especially in reading that, which he has read often, in a fair
print) does probably find, that he heeds the characters little, or not at all,
but minds the sense, or something else. Nor is the Soul necessarily more
abstracted from all created objects in extempore Prayers, then it may be in
reading a Prayer out of a Book. The created objects, which are met with in a
Book, are the Prints and Characters in the Book: But he that prays without
book (especially with vocal prayer) must needs look upon the like prints and
stamps made in the Brain: or whatsoever things the species are, without which a
man can neither speak nor think, they must needs be created objects; The very
Idea of a God being a Creature in the opinion of all that are not Plato's
Scholars, as I suppose the Authors are not. And the legible signs in the Book
do serve to bring the inward phantasmes more readily into actual view, and to
marshall them with less labor, diversion, and disturbance. That which they
say next, We do believe this may be experienced by any persons speaking to a
man for his life, comes not at all into my Creed. But whatever advantages
extempore prayers have to fix and inflame the spirit of the Minister, that
which he should most aim at in Public, is to affect his hearers. And those
things which most affect him, do many times least affect them, not being able
to understand what he does understand, nor to follow him at the first hearing
through a long-winded sentence. He that writes never so deliberately and
slowly, in the review sees cause to alter many things for perspicuity sake; and
much more may a sudden Speaker labor under such obscurity, since an Hearer
has not that time and other advantages of finding out the sense which a Reader
has. Therefore the main thing to be considered, is, not the Ministers own
experience of what alterations he finds in himself by these two ways of
Praying; but which is best for the People. They give their Opinion upon that
Question in these words; Nor can we believe that any Minister praying in any
form, uses so rational and experimented a means to affect his hearers hearts,
as he that uses none. As in preaching there is a certain lively efficacy of
the voice, which every hearer discerns more in the Ministers speaking ex
animo, then from his reading a Sermon. I know not what others discern: I should
think extempore Sermons made by the most able Preachers, much inferior to the
preprared ones of much worse Preachers. I have been more affected with a Sermon
read, then remembered: And when the Minister reads his Sermon, I expect a good
one. But let us see the Reason why they believe otherwise. Because the Speaker
himself is discernibly not so much affected in reading as in speaking. To make
up this Reason, it must be supposed, that he who appears affected himself in
speaking, is most likely to affect others: which is true, if other advantages
be equal, as if he be as clear as rational, and otherwise persuasive, but not
else, except among men but a small degree above bruits, who are more convinced
by a strained voice then a sober Reason, and take every knock on the Pulpit for
an Argument. Besides I have known some as discernibly affected in reading the
Common Prayer, as others are in their extempore Prayers. However, I think it
not much worth a Ministers labor to raise such affections in his People, that
are not founded upon the truth and reason of what he asserts; but only on the
boldness, confidence, and eagerness of the Assertion. I wish some course might
be taken to prevent such affections, rather then promote them: For such Persons
that are so easily passive under a loud voice, or other Symptoms of the the
Speakers affection, will hardly be able to withstand the assaults of a bawling
Quaker: whereas a wise man is so far from being affected with a noise without
Reason, or with Reason for the noises sake (for it is all one); that nothing is
more nauseous to him, then to hear that stoutly inculcated which is but weakly
demonstrated. The Authors add but one more Note upon this Point of the
expediency of extempore Prayers: and it is this in the Chapter under
animadversion, Sect. 4. Speaking is an immediate act of the tongue, but
commanded by the soul; The tongue is but the souls Organ, by which it
exercises that Power which God has given it, and it cannot be so well
performed, as when the soul that directs, performs its work by dictating
immediately to it. So that much of the life and spirit of Prayer is lost in
praying by forms. How comes this conclusion in, when there was no such thing as
[forms] in the Premises? I have but one shift to understand the Argument; and
that is by supposing that the soul performs not its work by dictating
immediately to the tongue in forms, which is so plain a falfity that I am loath
to suppose it. And I cannot imagine what moved these men to assert it, unless
it be this, that the words which a man utters in using a form are dictated by a
Book. That is true, by the Book mediatly, but not immtdiatly, as they say. The
Words are first in the Book, but they are conceived by the soul, and thence
dictated before they be uttered by the tongue. Indeed after much study for
their meaning, I fancy at length, that they intend a greater Emphasis in the
word [directs] then I was aware of. If so, possibly this may be their import;
That the same person who contrives the form of a Prayer, is most likely to
utter it to the best advantage: which would be true, if he could contrive as
well while he speaks as before he speaks, (because himself best knows the
weight of his own words) but not else.

SECT. IX.
The fifth branch of their first Argument, viz. [ It Is disputable whether it be
lawful, since there is no precept or president for it in the word] answered,
(1.) Disputable actions are lawful, when commanded. (2.) Few Actions are
indisputable; Nonconformity is not. (3.) We may do what we have neither
precept nor example for. (4.) There are General commands for the use of Forms:
and Particular are not necessary; proved from the Ministers own words and
deeds. (5.) There are Particular commands and examples of Forms in Scripture.
Their Objection, [ that the Liturgy is not fitted to their necessities]
answered. Three Reasons for the restraining of those in some cases who can pray
otherwise.

I proceed now to the fifth and last branch of their first reason, contained in
the eigth chapter of their book. The Paragraph begins thus; Nay lastly (to add
no more), if there were nothing else in the case, we should think it very
disputable, whether it be lawful for us in the public worship of God,
especially as to the momentous acts and parts of it, to do that for which we
have no command in the Word, no President or example. To which objection, I
have ready no less then four answers, and the Reader may take which he
pleases; for that which will not satisfy one man, will another.

1. First, What though the lawfulness of such actions be disputable? they may
not therefore be done, when commanded? I have proved the contrary, Sect. 2.
Besides what I said there, I add now another consideration. Such is the
diversity of the principles which men go by, that there are but few actions
that are not disputable. By this Reason the Authors have confuted their own
nonconformity. For its certainly a a disputable point: since many good and
learned men have actually disputed it to the satisfaction of many Readers of
the same stamp; and their Arguments have never been answered by their
Adversaries. For all they write, is no answer, till they undertake Hookers
Ecclesiastical Polity in the full body, and Dr. Sandersons Sermons with the
Prefaces thereof.

2. Secondly, I have already proved, that it is lawful in the public worship
of God, yea in the momentous acts and parts thereof, to do that which we have
no command, President, or example for in Scripture; as in an Oath, etc.

3. Thirdly, There is a General command for forms of prayer when they are
imposed by the Magistrate. For we are enjoined in Scripture to obey our Rulers,
when they command such things as Gods word nowhere forbids; and such things are
Forms in our Case. As for a particular command or example in Scripture, it is
not requisite by the Authors own concessions, which they make both in their
deeds and words. For if you observe their deeds, they praise God in prescribed
forms made by Hopkins and St^rnhold; whereas Praise being a part of Prayer,
there is the same Reason for extempore Hymns as extempore Petitions. Again,
when they visit the sick, they anoint him not with Oil: And yet they shall be
so far from producing a command for such a visitation in Scripture, that they
shall find the contrary in Saint James. If they say there is not the same
Reason for that anointing now, which was then; I reply, Neither is there the
same Reason for unpremeditated prayers now as was then: For now forms are
commanded by the Rulers; but according to the Authors opinion, they were not
then. But because it is usual with men to say one thing and do another,
condemning themselves in that which they allow; May be this giving of the
Question which we find in their deeds, will seem to be of less weight: see
therefore how they grant it in their words too, Page 73. Sect. 9. where they
give more then I ask at this time. For I contend only for the lawfulness of
doing things which are not particularly commanded; but there they grant the
lawfulness of imposing such things: freely allowing the Magistrate a Power to
command us to keep the statutes and commandments of God, and besides that to do
three things (1.) To command as in the circumstances relating to divine
Worship, to do those things which are generally commanded in the word of God.
Now a Form of Prayer is doubtless but a circumstance of Prayer; and I have
proved, that if the Magistrate thinks them convenient, Forms are generally
commanded in Scripture. (2.) To appoint time and place. Now, if he can appoint
a time which he thinks most convenient, though otherwise it would be less
convenient; and so of place: I would fain know a reason why he may not appoint
a Form, which he thinks most expedient, though possibly otherwise it would be
less expedient. And to appoint to begin at such a time, or to end at such a
time, is as really a limitation of the Spirit as to appoint a Form. (3.) To
appoint such circumstances, without which the worship of God, in the judgment
of ordinary reason must be indecently and disorderly performed. Now this
ordinary Reason which they speak of, must be either the reason of the
Magistrate, or the reason of the people, or both, or neither of them, but that
reason which is best, whether of the one or the other. If they mean the reason
of the people, then the sense is, that the Magistrate has power to appoint
such things as the subjects judge reasonable, and we thank them for nothing: if
both, we thank them for as much: if they mean that reason which is best,
without restraining it to any subject; I reply, That reason in the Idea does
nothing, but only as it is some bodies reason. The best reason has influence
on no man's actions any further then it is apprehended as best. And except the
Magistate has power to command what he apprehends most agreeable to the best
reason; he must command what the subjects apprehend so, or else he must command
nothing at all. Therefore it remains, that the reason which is to judge what
is undecent, is the reason of the Magistrate; and if he command such things as
be undecent, so that they be not otherwise unlawful, the people must submit by
the Authors own concessions.

4. Fourthly, There are particular commands and examples in Scripture for forms
of Prayer. For David's Psalms are Prayers: many of them consist more of
Petitions then of Thanksgivings; and some of them are expressly called so in
their Titles. Yet he appoints these Prayers to be uttered by others: li^^ting
the persons that officiate, not only in the sense and matter, but in the phrase
and form; yea not only in the tune but tone, prescribing the instruments
wherewith they are to be sung. Indeed the Authors take notice of this Instance,
and gather from it a clean contrary conclusion. We cannot but think that the
holy Psalmists variety of Prayers (none of which, as to words and phrases, agree
per omnia with another) sheuld rather teach us, when we go to God in prayer,
that we should rather take unto us words de novo, as God shall put them into
our hearts, etc. Mark the argumentation: the forementioned Prayers were to be
prayed over and over again in the same words; Ergo, we should in every Prayer
take words de novo. Indeed the variety they speak of, shows that they did not
use only one form of prayer; but the Liturgy is so far from confining us to
one, that the greatest offense that some take at it, is that there are so many
Prayers for the same things in diverse phrases. Thus some will be pleased
neither full nor fasting, I might add to this Instance of David's Psalms another
in the Propnet Hosea, chap. 14. v. 2. Take with you words, and turn unto the
Lord, and say unto him, etc. and another in Joel 2.17. Let the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the Altar; and let them say,
Spare thy people, O Lord, etc. It is frivolous to object, that this is the old
Testaments Directory; themselves, I believe, laugh at such a conceit in the
Antinomians; Yea they argue for their own purpose from the variety of phrase in
these Prayers, as has been noted. But if any require a new Testament example
or command, we probably have both, I am sure one. For, Acts 4.24. we have a
president, which in probability without any stretching will come home to our
case. For we find there a whole company of the Primitive Christans in consort
with the Apostles themselves, lifting up their voice with one accord, and
saying a Prayer, which is there registered in its terms. If it be said, that
the form was not composed beforehand, but that they all lighted upon the same
words by inspiration; this is more then any man knows; however it will justify
the joining of voices as well as hearts in prayer. Beside this probable
example, we have a particular precept for the use of one form, Luke 11.2. When
you pray, say, Our Father, etc. as will better appear in its proper place,
where I shall cite their own words in the 55. page of their book, We doubt not
but we may use it in the form: For b^ this Reason of theirs under
consideration, they might not use it, except they had a command for it in the
Word of God.

The next thing to be observed, is that Periphasis wherewith they would
disparge the use of Forms, calling it a borrowing of words from others, hardly
fitted to their hearts or present necessities. Whether the Liturgy be fitted to
their hearts, I cannot tell, because I know not their hearts. But if their
hearts be as they should be, the Prayers there cannot but be fitted to their
hearts; the matter of the petitions being only such things as every Englishman
should desire. But if they would have every man utter that in prayer, which is
set upon his own heart (as the phrase is) whether reasonably or unreasonably,
there would be mad work. And I wonder how the said Prayers should not be fitted
to their necessities, since they ask all good things. Indeed some men have more
necessities then others, and the Liturgy will not fit them; which no doubt did
much help to bring it into discredit, because it would not serve on fast-dayes
in the late wars, to beg those victories, which were accounted the one thing
necessary by some men. And yet were it granted that it did not fit the heart
and necessities of the Minister, so well as a Prayer of his own invention; yet
possibly it may better fit the peoples; and a Minister is to accommodate both
his Prayers and Sermons rather to his peoples hearts and necessities then his
own. For (unless he be like one of Jeroboams Priests) if he should preach upon
those points which sometimes are most material to be pressed on himself, and in
that way which is most effectual and prevalent upon his own more learned Soul,
it would have but small success among the most of his hearers.

They conclude the Chapter to this purpose in many words, too long to be here
inserted: That if stinted forms be allowed for some that canne^ pray otherwise,
yet it is not lawful, much less necessary, for their sakes to restrain the
abilities of those others that can. As for the lawfulness of restraining a
gift, when such a restraint is judged useful, I have proved it before. As for
the necessity of it to some end intended, it will appear in three cases. (1.)
In case uniformity is aimed at. If the Captain will have his Soldiers keep
their ranks, he must forbid the sound to out-march the lame. (2.) In case
liberty granted to some to do that which they have a gift for, will provoke
others which have it not, to imitate them beyond their ability. Thus the way to
make mean men not to wear gold lace to the empoverishing of their estates, is
for great men to leave it of. And thus the way to keep weak Ministers from
extemporising beyond their power, is for more able men to use the
Common Prayer. For if the denial of liberty to some who have the gift for the
sakes of those their brethren which have it not, be to cut the man fit for the
bed; the granting such a liberty will be to stretch a man fit for the bed, that
I may retort the Authors similitude. Now since both will needs lie together, it
is more equitable that the tall man pull up his legs, then that the low man be
put on the Rack. (3.) In case liberty given to an Officer to do something he
has a gift for, and the denial of that liberty to another Officer of the same
society, which has no such ability, but cannot be spared any more then the
former, would make the weaker Officer contemptible and useless, especially if
he be the weaker only in that particular, but the stronger in others. In our
case, one Minister having spent more time in hearing the Sermons and Prayers of
others, or brought up from his childhood to make his Prayers himself, or living
among people which applaud extempore Prayers, and so excite his invention, has
got the knack of such Prayers; but by this reason is not so well studied, so
solid, and judicious, nor so able to contrive a discourse upon premeditation:
Another having been taught from his childhood to pray by a book, and afterward
having exercised himself alone in reading and meditating of deep points, rather
then abroad in hearing popular harangues, prayers and preachments; or lastly,
living among a people which are more affected and edified by the prayers of the
Church, and so giving no encouragement to labor for the extempore faculty,
comes to have but little of it; yet is as needful an Officer as the other, more
able to oppose gainsayers, to regulate Church affairs, and to make a speech to
the people on any occcasion, if you give him time to contrive, and to commit to
memory what he has so contrived. Should this lattter Minister be rendered
contemptible, and so far useless in his place, by another liberty to use his
extempore gift? But that the latter by this means is in danger to become
contemptible among silly and self-conceited people, is plain by experience, and
asserted many times by the Authors in their book: And much more would it be so,
if he should be publicly prohibited, and others allowed. And so much for the
Authors first Reason in their eighth Chapter, which is levelled against stinted
forms in general.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
The Ministers second Reason [ that these Forms have been defiled by having
been used in an Idolatrous service] eventilated. A man may do that about and in
the worship of God, which has been done in an Idolatrous worship, proved. The
gross Idolatry of certain Non-conformists, pollutes not their extemporary
expressions.

THe ninth Chapter contain their second Reason, which goes on supposition, that
it is lawful to use some forms of Prayer, but denies it of the English Liturgy.
It is drawn (as the Title of the Chapter tells us) from the disputableness of
the lawfulness of using any forms of humane composure, formerly defiled by use
in an Idolatrous service, conjoined with the scandal of many Christians arising
upon that account. But that I may not conceal the strength of their Argument,
but bring it into view in the full body, before I oppose it; I shall put it
down first as it is worded, not only in the title, but in the Chapter it self.
Their terms are these; We cannot but have some doubts, whether it be lawful
for us in the worship of God, by an act of ours, to offer up any thing to God
(of mere humane composition) which has been once offered in an Idolatrous
service, especially when our Brethren say unto us, This has been so offered.
That the worship of the Church of Rome is idolatrous, we hope no sober
Protestant will deny: Their veneration of Images, adoration of the Eucharist,
invocation of the Saints, are all idolatrous. Some of these are done as often as
their Mass Book is used; so that their worship, toties quoties, as it is
performed is idolatrous, though not in every part, yet in the complex. To make
up the Argument, it must be supposed, that some of the Prayers in the Liturgy
are taken out or the Mass Book; which may be true for ought I know, and
therefore I shall answer on that supposition. (1.) I wonder wherefore that
Parenthesis is crammed in [of mere humane composition]. For when they come to
give an instance out of Scripture, they make it in Flesh offered to Idols. Now
I never heard that flesh was of mere humane composition. If the Authors have an
art to make flesh by mere humane power, they have more then the
Transubstantiating Mass Priest pretends to, and would do well to teach it the
world against a Famine. (2.) They say only, that they have some doubts about
the Question; but I have proved already that a mere doubt is to be overborn by
the certain in junctions of lawful Authority. And besides that which here they
doubt, themselves affirm elsewhere, if they know the meaning of their own
words. As page 63. The reverend Persons, which had an hand in composing the
Liturgy, did worthily in their Generation. I wonder how they can be said to do
worthily in imposing this Liturgy, if it be unlawful, unless they mean only,
that they did not all out so wickedly as their Predecessors, which imposed the
Mass: But by that reason he that murders a stranger, does worthily, because
others murder their Parents. The same confession is made by them page 65.
Certainly those first Reformers did like wise and pious men. It is true, they
put in, With respect to their age. But is it the part of a wise and pious man
in any age, to impose such actions as are unlawful? Again in the same page,
Their judgment was excellent as to those times. So it seems by what they say
in both places, that it is a piece of an excellent judgment in some times to
command men to sin. But (3.) To let this pass, and proceed to the main
strength of their Reason. Their Criticisme about the term [to offer] shall be
considered in its place. In the mean time I will suppose the sense of their
words to be this, That a man may not do such things relating to the worship of
God, as means, instruments, modes, or forms, which have been so done in an
idolatrous worship, i. e. a worship whereof some parts are idolatrously
performed. This I deny, and I give instances of my denial. The love of money is
idolatry; and the covetous actions done out of love to it, and to procure its
assistance, are not only mixed with idolatrous actions, (as in the present
case) but themselves are idolatrous, Yet we may do such actions to testify our
respects to God and to win his presence; at covetous men do out of their honor
to Mammon, and to procure his presence. That is, we may fast, we may watch, we
may go to Church as duly as they to the Exchange; we may think of God, and talk
of him, as they do of their money, we may say, that he answers all things; we
may lay out upon charitable works, as they do on a good bargain. Yea (to
prevent an Objection) these things we might do if God did never command them.
For what can be said against them? Are they not good? have they not a natural
tendency to express our love to God, and to procure his gracious presence with
us? What though these actions were done to a false God, to whom they were not
due? may they not be done to a true God, to whom they are due? And for the Ferm
of those actions, we may use that which we think best, though used by the said
Idolaters; as to fast from dinner, or supper, to rise early, or go to bed late,
to lay out our stock in alms, in money, or money worth. In like manner, look
what actions the Glutton does in the service of his god, which is his belly,
many of the like actions we may do in the service of the true God. Again, there
be others which do not indeed worship the true God before an Image, as the
Papists, but they worship an Image it self of their own framing, and that a
most deformed one, and not so like God at a piece of bread, wood, or stone, or
a glorified Saint, the objects of Popish worship. The God of some men is a
cruel, unnatural thing, like Saturn, who devoured his own children; only herein
more ugly, that he begets them on purpose to devour them. The God of others,
yea of many the same, is a fond thing like Cupid, taking no notice of the sins
of his darlings. The God of others, yea of many the same, is a wicked thing,
infallibly necessitating by his Decree, and powerfully instigating them by his
concourse to the lewdest actions. The God of others, yea of many the same, is a
false thing, making great and precious promises, but maintaining an infinite
malice and hatred in his heart. Now these Idolaters (the grossest that ever I
read of) have many times pretty phrases in their Prayers: yet some, who would
bring the like Argument with the Authors against the Liturgy, are so far from
abominating those phrases upon this account, that they affect them; they are
worn thredbare in every Pulpit; Notior in coelis fabula nulla fuit. And I doubt
not, but it is very lawful to use some of those forms of words in prayer to the
true God, which these Idolaters use to their false Gods. Ind^^^ I believe these
men do not think themselves Idolaters; no more do the Papists: But supposing
the opinions of them both, that which they both do, is consequentially
idolatrous; They both do disown the idolatry which is consequent upon their
doctrines; but they both maintain their own opinions which infer the idolatry.
The worst opinion, which the Papists are said to hold in reference to idolatry,
is, that Bread is God, and therefore to be worshipped: And the others are said
to hold, that something worse then the most course or moldy bread, is God, and
therefore to be worshipped. And in truth the Papists opinion, and consequently
their practice thereupon, is much more tolerable of the two: For they cannot
have an higher opinion of the bread, then of the humane nature of Christ in the
concrete, which (though God he predicated of it by virtue of the hypostatical
union, yet) is but a means to bring us to God, that God may be all in all, and
therefore cannot terminate our worship. But now the worship of the others is
terminated ultimately and lastly upon that monstrous Image, which they call
God. Which things, and many more that might be alleged, being considered, I
cannot much wonder, that though the worship of the Church of England be cried
down as idolatrous and superstitions, yet some give this Reason, wherefore
their judgments cannot side with the opposite party, namely, because of the
superstition and idolatry which abounds among them: For that it is among some
of them, I am as confident as I am that it is among the Papists.

SECT. II.
By their Reason the Scriptures would be defiled; and the Papists might pollute
the most darling phrases of unprepared Prayers. The Lords Prayer as much
polluted by Idolaters as the Common Prayer. Such Prayers as are not contrary to
the Scriptures, are as incapable of defilement as the Scriptures themselves,
and such are those of the Liturgy.

THey next go about to answer an Objection against this conceit of theirs,
which they quote from Doctor Causabon on the Lords Prayer: Their words are
these; We are not so silly us to think that the holy Scriptures (dictated by
the Spirit of God) or any thing else of purely divine institution is capable of
corruptions, and therefore cannot but with some laughter read the
Argumentations of them, who argue, that if we reject the Liturgy because the
idolatrous Papists used it, we must also refuse the Scriptures and the Lords
Prayer. These are but toys to blind common people, etc. The holy Scriptures
are incapable of pollution by any idolatrous service. By this it appears, that
it is not the mere using of a form of words in an idolatrous service, which
makes it unlawful to be used in the service of God, because the Authors except
the Scriptures; otherwise they know, A quatenus ad de omni valeret
consequentia. I say (if a man may understand their mind by their words) they
mean not, that such an use renders it unlawful; but that corruption and
pollution which is contracted by such an use to phrases of humane invention,
though not to Scripture phrases. And now they had done their work, if they had
but proved, that a true proposition, if not in Scripture, is polluted by using
it in idolatrous services any more, then a proposition of like truth in
Scripture; or that Churches, Bells, Fonts, Pews, praying with a book, and
preaching without book, are any more polluted by such an usage, then the Lords
Prayer, Baptism, or the Eucharist. It will (I believe) be beyond their power
to prove such a vast difference between things of divine institution and
humane. I am sure, that though the Temple was of divine institution, yet it
might have been defiled by bringing an Idol into it, much more then the cart
could, on which the Idol was brought, which could pretend to no more divine
institution then that of the wheelwright. In like manner, if a man should take
the consecrated wine of the Communion, carry it into the Alehouse, and there
make himself drunk with it, the wine which is of divine institution, is (one
would think more, but at least) as much polluted by the said drunkenness, as
the Alehouse can be, yea as much as other wine not consecrated could be. In
some cases things of divine Institution are so far from being privileged from
pollution above things of humane institution, that indeed the privilege lies
more on the other side, as the purest white is capable of most fouling; and as
that which pollutes a Minister, pollutes not another man. The Authors should
have told us what they mean by that pollution of words and phrases which they
say is effected by using them in an Idolatrous service, though they were
otherwise never so good. Do they mean such a pollution as is described in the
Levitical Law? No sure: For they never read there, that he who has spoken any
words used by Idolaters in their worship, should wash his tongue, and be
unclean till the Even. What pollution is it then, that by a kind of Theomagical
contagion is contracted by good words and sentences from the Idolatrous
services wherein they were used: when in the mean time the words of Scripture,
having been in the same infected house, escape sound, entire, and untainted?
Indeed if words be abused to a bad end, or if they should chance to be forbid
to be used to some persons by a positive command, in both these cases I could
allow to call them figuratively corrupted and polluted. But this pollution is
no such pollution as makes the use of those words unlawful to all persons. For
the Scriptures themselves are sometimes thus polluted both these ways. Its as
certain that they are sometimes abused to a bad end, as that they may be used
to an excellent end: And the Authors themselves tell us, page 67. that [Baali]
was a name applied to the true God by himself, Isa. 54.5. Yet this word was
polluted by abusing it to a bad end, and by a positive command not to use it,
Hos. 2.16. Thou shall call me no more Baali; so that forms of Scripture are
capable of corruption and pollution, as well as forms of humane invention: and
therefore the Authors distinction hinders not the Argument, which they thought
to have avoided by it from returning again upon them in its full strength. If
they mean some other kind of pollution, which I cannt conjecture; a kind by it
self, which contrary to the method and course of its fellows chooses not to
infect the most refined and delicate, but rather the more gross and feculent
constitutions: I can say nothing of it till they tell me what that strange
pollution is. For my part, I can at present imagine no other pollutions, which
words that are true and good, are capable of, besides those which I have named;
to which the phrases of Scripture have been shown obnoxious as well as others.
I know good speeches have been rendered nauseous by a bad speaker; and
therefore they have been sometimes put into a good man's mouth to make them more
acceptable: But the disliking of good sayings when uttered by bad men, is not
grounded upon reason but weakness. For in truth they are worthy of the more
acceptance upon that account, as when the Devil confessed our Savior; since
that is a most evident truth which extorts a confession from the Adversary. I
remember what the Apostle says. That to the pure all things are pure; and
Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused. The Papists might if
they would, spoil all the quaint and trite phrases of extempore Prayers, if
their use of them rendered them impure, and to be refused. If when the Authors
say that words are polluted, they mean only that they are rendered unlawful to
be used; then they beg the Question in their Reason, dispute in a circle, and
their Argument runs round: The Liturgy may not be used, because it is polluted,
i. e. because it may not be used. Therefore I conceive, that they mean such a
pollution as I have granted competible to words: But then they are out in
affirming that Scripture cannot be so polluted. And the Lords Prayer will come
into the same condemnation, which is by name exempted by them from the said
pollution. Yea, though it were granted that the Scripture could not be
polluted, yet the use of the Lords Prayer as a Form of words, and not merely of
sense, would be polluted by their Reason. For though the Lords Prayer be a part
of Scripture, yet since they will not grant that it was appointed by the
Scripture to be used as a Form of words in Prayer, it must needs follow by
their Reason that we may not use it as a Form, because the Papists did so. For
though the form of words be not polluted, yet the use of them as a form of
Prayer must be polluted according to their opinions, as much as the sign of the
cross. Again (that I may overthrow their Reply to Dr. Causabon another way)
since the deceit which lurks in generals, is discovered in particulars, let us
put a case. The Scripture says, God is rich to all that call upon him. If the
Massbook had this Prayer, Be thou Lord, rich to all that call upon thee, I ask
whether this Prayer be polluted by being in the Mass book. When they say it is
polluted, I must deal with them another way: in the mean time let us charitably
suppose that they are not so absurd, but will grant that this prayer is not
polluted, thought it were in the Mass book; and that their Reason is, because
this prayer consists of Scripture Phrase. This answer being supposed, I reply
thus: Indeed some of the single terms of the Proposition are in the Scripture I
quoted before; But the words so put together in this form are not. For in
Scripture the Verb substantive is of the Indicative Mood, in the prayer of the
Imperative; In the Scripture it is of the third Person, in the Prayer of the
second. Now if the Mass Book defiles not a sentence, in which the single words
(which are the Elements of a sentence) are so joined together as nowhere in
Scripture; why should any man imagine that the Mass Book can defile a word,
wherein the Syllables and Letters (which are the Elements of a word) are so put
together as they are nowhere in Scripture? Besides, if they say it is
sufficient to keep a Petition from the pollution of the Mass, that the words be
Scripture-words, though found together nowhere in Scripture in that form of
construction wherein they stand in the Petition; I answer, that in saying so
they justify the Liturgy. For I do not think, there is a prayer there, the
single terms whereof (and sometimes whole enunciations) are not to be found in
Scripture, excepting when some particular Persons or Offices are prayed for:
And yet sure a man might pray for the said persons and offices by the same
names, though they were so termed in the Mass book. Once more, This Petition
[Forgive us our trespasses] is Scripture; not only in the simple terms, but
also in the form of the Proposition: and therefore if there be any sentences
which can escape the profanation of the Mass Book, this must be one by their
Reason. But I challenge any man to give a satisfactory Reason, wherefore the
said Proposition cannot be polluted, by the Mass Book as easily as any of these
I shall name: [Let our iniquities be pardoned by thee] or, [acquit us from the
guilt of our transgressions] or, condemn us not for our sins] or any other the
like, which speak the same sense, though they be not found word for word in
Scripture. I conclude therefore, since the Authors confess that the Scriptures
cannot be polluted by men's using them in an Idolatrous service; and since I
have proved that such Prayers whose sense keeps an harmony with that of
Scripture, are as incapable of pollution as the Scriptures themselves: if it be
but further granted, that the Prayers of the Liturgy in their sense do agree
with the Scriptures (which I here affirm, and shall make good when called
thereto) it must needs follow that the prayers of the Liturgy remain
unpolluted, though they had been used in an Idolatrous worship, and
consequently may be lawfully used in the service of the true God, which will
further appear in the next Section.

SECT. III.
Upon the Ministers Reason its unlawful to use Churches for divine worship,
built in time of Popery. The impertinency of their Answer, that Churches are
not offered up to God. Churches are offered as truly as Words. Yea upon their
Reason Churches may be put to no use at all, proved by the case of Meats
offered to Idols.

I Have showed how ill they can justify the use of Scripture-phrases
themselves in prayer, if that phrases of humane composition are so polluted by
the Papists use of them, that a Protestant may not use them. The same may be
easily demonstrated concerning the use of such Churches as were dedicated in
the Reign of Popery, and then used not only in the pure parts of that worship
which the Authors by the Verdict of a most partial Synecdoche call idolatrous
in the complex (which yet is the worst that they say against the Liturgy) but
even in the very Idolatrous parts themselves, yea some of them in the
celebration of the Ethnic Mysteries before Christianity visited our Island. Let
us hear now how they can use these Churches in the reformed worship of the true
God, while they stand upon the grounds they have laid down in this Chapter.
That which they say upon this point, is word for word as follows. Their
Answer is silly, who tell us, that then we must use none of our Churches. When
we offer up Churches to God by any rational act, we will consider of this
frivolous answer; which indeed may concern them which dream of an holiness in
them by reason of dedication or the like: It concerns not us, which only use
them as convenient places, in which we meet to serve God, etc. The sum of this
answer is clearly this, that the Authors do not offer Churches to God, as they
should do words if they used the Common Prayer; and that they account no
holiness to be in Churches, as they account in the words wherewith they utter
their Prayers. And so the Answer implies also, that what things have been
offered in idolatrous worship, may be used in right worship, but not offered to
God. But I wonder how the words that are used in vocal Prayer, are offered to
God any more then Churches. It is our affections, and more directly our
desires, that are offered to God in Prayer: The words are only means and
instruments to signify these desires before men, or to excite them to concur
in the same desires. And the fittest and best words are but the fittest and
best means and instruments; and so the words are rather the censers then the
incense. If we can be said properly to offer words to God, we must offer him
the Air; or else we only offer a bodily quality without the subject, a mere
articulate motion of the Air. But if words are said to be offered, because they
are means and instruments used about the offering; then Churches may be said to
be offered too, being likewise fit means and instruments to the same purpose,
though another way. For does not the builder of Churches signify his desire,
that God may be worshipped? And is not a Church, when built, a means to unite
many in the same desires? And is not the most fit and convenient Church the
most fit and convenient means, as I said before of words? And why are not
Churches holy, as much as phrases and forms of words that are used in prayer?
Is not holiness a separation from a common use to a sacred and religious use?
And are not Churches as much set apart for prayer as words be? If not, the more
is the pity and shame. But whether the Authors dedicate, offer, or place any
holiness in Churches, or no, it is nothing to the purpose (though they think
the Argument concerns not them till they do): For whosoever shall consider
their second Reason (as it is explained, paralleld, and proved in this Chapter)
will easily discern that by that by that Reason it is unlawful for them not
only to offer, dedicate, or place holiness in them, but even to make use of
them to those ends, for which they have a fitness, either of their own nature,
or by institution; so that they may not pray or preach in them, yea they may
not convert them into stables, or prisons, which the Authors make more
tolerable then to dedicate them to God. Now that their reason forbids them as
much to make a common and natural use of Churches, as sacred, it appears by
that case put by St. Paul, which they imagine to be parallel to theirs. He
resolves that the meat which a man was told was offered to Idols, should not be
eaten. The Authors think the Analogy of his determination makes it unlawful to
pray to God with such forms of words that were used in an idolatrous service.
Their Opposites to drive them from this absurdity, put another case (as like to
the first as the second is, and more too) and say, that by the same reason it
were unlawful to use Churches that have been used in an idolatrous service. The
Authors reply, that the second and third case are not alike: for they offer
words in prayer, but they do not offer Churches to God. Now let it be granted
them, that the third case is not like the second; that is not material; Is not
the third as like the first as the second is? Yea the case of Churches is more
like to the case of meats offered to Idols (which is the first and ruling case
put by Saint Paul) then the case of the Liturgy is. They say the proportion
fails, because they offer words to God, but not Churches. Let it be granted;
Yet on which side does the proportion fail? Not in the case of Churches, but of
words. The Authors say, they offer words to God: and therefore what has that
case to do with Saint Paul's? in which it is not questioned, whether meat
offered to Idols might be offered to God, but whether it might be naturally and
commonly used and eaten for a man's dinner. But now the case of Churches is more
exactly like to that of St. Paul's: For he speaks not of offering meat to God,
but of using it according to his kind; and therefore by the Authors reason it
should forbid not only the offering of the said Churches to God, but the using
them according to their kind. Therefore it is impertinent to dispute, whether
Churches are offered to God, by the Authors, as much as Prayers: We are only to
consider, whether Churches were offered to God by the said Idolaters as much as
Prayers, that is, the words used in prayer. And we shall find, that Churches
were more consecrated to God, by the said idolatrous worshippers, then the
words of their Prayers. For they accounted it sacrilege to take away the least
part of a Church, and to divert it to a common use; but themselves used many of
those words about their common businesses, which they used in their Prayers.

SECT. IV.
Another consideration of theirs, viz. [ That we might provide other forms not
used by Idolaters] answered. The mischiefs of an affected running from the
Papists. What distinguishes a true Catholic from a Papist: Not phrases,
tones, habits, and gesture; but a greater Humility, Charity, and Freedom of
spirit. No reason but a man may offer the same to God, which had been offered
to an Idol.

IN the two immediately foregoing Sections I have made it appear, that while
the Authors labor to extricate themselves out of the stringent nooses of their
Opposites retortion, they have only more intricatly involved and entangled
themselves. It is time now to proceed in my animadversions to the next
Paragraph of their Chapter under debate, in which they explain their forecited
Reason in other words, and enlarge it with one consideration not hinted by them
before, viz: that there be other forms of prayer to be had beside those used by
Idolaters. Their words are these exactly; Prayer is a piece of
Gospel-sacrifice, and by a Rational act of our souls to be offered to God. Now
whether it be lawful for us, when the earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof, whereas God has given us an ability to speak words in another form,
to take-those very forms, and to offer them up to God in true Gospel Worship,
which have been offered in an idolatrous service (though the matter of those
forms be not idolatrous) is to us a great doubt, nor can we be satisfied in the
lawfulness of it. This affectation of using diversity of phrase from the
Papists, I never saw pleaded for before, but have often observed to be
practiced to my sorrow. For some men laboring to get far enough from the
Papists in their Dialect, have spoken like Turks in point of man's will, and
like Gnostics and Libertines in point of good works. But the true Catholic
Christian can approve a good saying, whoever be the speaker, and will behave
himself to the Papists, as Seneca to the Epicureans; who, though he was a
Stoic, confesses he borrowed many things from Epicurus, and gives this
reason, because he could call truth his own, though he found it in the enemies
camp, and under the enemies colors. The true Shibboleth, which must
distinguish a true Catholic from a Papist, and all other Heretics, is not
words and phrases, tones, countenances, habits, and gestures, by which
characters Popery is usually defined and distinguished among us; but it is a
greater Humility, Charity and Freedom of spirit. And that the Papists and other
Heretics may see that we differ from them, and place the difference of our
Religion in these excellent, uncontrovertible, and most material points; I with
with all my heart, that our language and phrase were as like to theirs, as
truly and lawfully may be, provided we still retain our Christian liberty of
varying from them. For if the words and forms of prayer, which they use, be in
themselves true and good, it is not their using them which can make them
unlawful, notwithstanding what I have newly quoted to the contrary. For what
though prayer be a piece of Gospel sacrifice, etc.? so are our bodies, so are
our estates, and both to be offered to God by a rational act of our souls.
Suppose then that my right knee has bowed to an Idol, upon my conversion must
not I bow to the true God with that knee, seeing I have another, but only with
my left? Surely I should use that knee to choose in Gods worship, which had been
defiled in the service of Idols. Again in point of Alms, which is no less a
piece of Gospel-sacrifice to be offered to God by a rational act of our souls,
then prayer is; may not a man give that money to the poor, which he knows
has been offered to a false God, or to the true God in an idolatrous service?
When the Temples of the Pagans were in many places demolished, might not the
Emperor as well, yea much better, have given the gold and silver, that was
found there consecrated to Idols, unto the poor, then have employed it about
the use of his Palace or the affairs of State? But since I see this Reason on
foot, I less wonder, that those who had the Revenues of the Church so long in
their hands, did so little good with them. May be they thought that they had
been offered to an Idol before, and therefore ought not to be given to the true
God, but to be called Nehushtan, and condemned to the base service of their
belly. I shall conclude my notes on the last quoted passage with one more
Instance of common practice, which I hope the Authors themselves allow of,
though it be vertually condemned by the Reason which they allege. Who the
Authors of the Book are, I know not, nor what their way is. But I am sure
others of their mind in point of nonconformity, will use some sentences of the
Common Prayer in their extempore Prayers, as, that Gods service is perfect
freedom, and the like. Now if a whole Prayer be defiled by the Papists use of
it, every part of it must be so defiled. If they say, that they use no
Sentences in their prayers, which have been used by Idolaters in theirs,
excepting such as are agreeable to the Scriptures; I must require them to show
what sentence of a Prayer in the Liturgy is not agreeable to the Scriptures;
and when they have shown that, I yield them the cause. But their present reason
argues against the lawfulness of using such forms of words, which themselves
confess are for the matter of them true and agreeable to the Scriptures.

SECT. V.
Their Argument from 1 Cor. 10. about Meats offered to Idols answered. Several
Reasons why Forms of prayer cannot be liable to those pollutions, which those
meats were.

THese confessed absurdities following from their assertion, let us now see
upon what grounds it is built; to which end I shall here transcribe their next
words. The ground of our scruple is in that known Text, 1 Cor. 10. where the
Apostle treats concerning the lawfulness of eating meats that had been once
offered to Idols. He determines as to a double case. (1.) That it is not lawful
to eat such meats in an Idols Temple. (2.) In case it be sold in the shambles,
and we know it not, he determines that we may buy and eat it. But in case our
Brother says unto us, This has been offered to an Idol; he says, eat it not:
so that our Brothers scandal upon such a foundation is to be avoided by us. He
gives the Reason, because there is other meat to eat. The earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof. Here they interweave an Argument from scandal with
that they have been so long upon, drawn from the unlawfulness of offering that
to God, which had been offered to Idols. I shall consider the case of scandal
by it self in the next Chapter. For they are two Arguments, though the Authors
observing (its likely) the weakness of each of them, confound them together in
these words. But I shall distinguish them in my answer; since if neither of
them is of force singly, they cannot be of force conjunctly. For if the
Common Prayer may not be used because it has been polluted by the known use of
it in an idolatrous service (as they have spent a whole leaf to prove already,
without mentioning scandal) then it were a sin to use it, though no man took
offense at it; and to come afterward with the consideration of scandal, does
not help on the proof that it is a sin, but only makes it a double one.

And again on the other hand, if there were more and more weighty scandal taken
at the use of the Common Prayer, then at the non-use, in such a case a man were
bound not to use it (supposing it were everywhit as indifferent, as the choosing
a piece of meat in the shambles) though it had never been used in an idolatrous
service. And indeed it does not appear to me that the Apostle says Eat not,
merely to avoid scandal. For I doubt whether the case would not have been the
same, if the person had seen it offered to Idols himself, or if not a brother,
but an Infidel had told him; or if he had bought it in a disguise, that no body
knew of it. I am sure the Apostle argues from a more intrinsecal Topic then
the scandal of the spectator, viz. that by eating meats offered to Idols they
were in danger to have fellowship with devils; since those that eat of the
sacrifices are partakers of the Altar. Indeed the men I deal with seem to
restrain those words to eating in the Idols Temple; but I know not upon what
Reason; for whosoever shall read the eighth Chapter, shall find that the
Apostle makes eating the said flesh in the Idols Temple to be no worse then
eating it in a private, house at an invitation; for there is no worse said of
the one then of the other. By this which has been said, the Reader will
easily, see a way made to the discovery of a wide difference between the case
of flesh offered to Idols and the Liturgy; except he be one of those which are
wont to blaspheme it with the Nickname of Porridge. When it is proved that the
Common Prayer is flesh offered to Devils, and so brings us into danger of
having fellowship with devils, then something is done to make good the Reason,
and not till then. The most which the Authors say to this purpose, is in the
next words; For our part, we are not able to fathom a Reason why a form of
words fitted up for use in prayer, should not be liable to the same corruption
and pollution, which a dish of meat fitted for natural use is. But I can
quickly tell them more reasons then one, wherefore some dishes of meat (namely
such as Saint Paul speaks of, offered to Idols) should be more polluted, as
they word it. I mean more unlawful to be used then some forms of words can be,
and in particular those which are in the Liturgy, notwithstanding the
forementioned use of them in time of Popery. (1.) The said Flesh was offered
to an Idol; but the prayers of the Liturgy were offered to the true God, while
used by the Papists. For the God to whom they prayed, has the same Attributes
with the God which we pray to. What though they think that bread in the
Sacrament is turned into the flesh of Christ, and consequently hypostatically
united to the Godhead! I do not believe that they think the bread is God. And
they have a Scripture, which if taken literally, would warrant their adoration
of the bread; which the Pagans have not for their Idols. However none of the
prayers in the Liturgy were made to this breaden God. If it be said, that
though the prayers were not made to an Idol, yet the putting up of these
prayers was joined with other acts of Idolatrous worship; I answer that still
they have not left the case in the same state with that which Saint Paul tteats
of: For those meats were offered to false Gods. Therefore to make the cases
alike, we must suppose the Heathens to offer flesh to a false God; and at the
same Assembly, either before or after, to offer other flesh to the true God.
The Question is, whether it were not lawful to eat the one, though not the
other? I must see the one forbid as clearly as the other, before I can doubt of
the difference. I might add, that if the Papists apprehend the Bread to be God,
or if they worship it with divine worship, yet they do not apprehend it to be
Mars, or Venus, or other false gods, neither do they intend to worship any such
God; but they intend to worship the true God, the same whom the Protestants
worship: But the meats which Saint Paul speaks of, were offered to other Gods
then that which the Christians worship. The Scripture says they worshipped
Devils; and that they did intentionally, calling them by that name themselves.
And this is one, and that no inconsiderable alteration of the case. (2.) The
Apostle only forbids the eating of the same numerical flesh which was offered
to Idols, not the same specifically. Though flesh was offered to Idols, yet a
man might eat flesh; and though Mutton or Beef was offered to Idols, yet a man
might eat Mutton or Beef, so that it were not that same individual Flesh,
Mutton or Beef that was offered to Idols. But now the words, sentences and
orations which are in the Common prayer book, are not the same numerically with
those in the Masse-book. Latin and English differ certainly as much as Male
and Female, if not as green and blew. Therefore when a Minister reads the
Liturgy, he does not speak one word which is numerically the same with those
which the Popish Priest speaks while he says Mass. As to instance, The
Protestant Reader says [Grant us thy peace]: But the Popish Reader offers not
these words to God in his Idolatrous service. May be he says, Da nobis pacem
tuam. But the word [Dae] is not the same numerically with the word [Grant]:
Yea, the Ear discerns as great a difference between them, as the Eye does
between red and yellow. The Genus of every word spoken is a sound; and if the
sound be not the same, the word is not the same. Nay if the Popish Priest
should read in English, grant us thy peace: the sound which he makes, is not
the same numerically with that which the protestant makes. For the same
numericall accident cannot be in two subjects. And there is another plain
alteration of the case. (3.) By eating meats offered to devils, the Corinthians
would be in danger of having fellowship with Devils, as the Apostle says, and
may be seen in the writings of those that relate the Pagan rites and Ceremonies
in their mysteries, and how the Devils were attracted by them. Thus to this day
those which use charms, amulets, or the like, do many times come under the
power of the Devil in their bodies or estates; and are said by Divines to make
an implicit, though not an explicit contract with him. But no such danger of
having fellowship with Devils, can be pretended in using those words in our
prayers to God, which were used to the same God, though in a service performed
to the same God after a false manner: supposing that the said words are
otherwise true and good, which my Opponents do themselves suppose in this
argument; And there is a third alteration of the case. (4.) The Authors give
this Reason wherefore meats offered to Idols might not be eaten, as may be seen
in their words cited already, viz. because there was other meat to eat; The
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: which implies that it was lawful
to eat such meats, in case none other could be had. Now this is our case in
respect of the Liturgy, supposing it to be established by Law. At such times as
are appointed for the use of the Liturgy, there are no other prayers to be had.
I know, a man has a natural power to put up other prayers: and so, if a
Corinthian could by buying, or begging, or other lawful means procure no meat,
but what had been offered to Idols; yet he had a natural power to steal some.
But doubtless he should rather eat meat offered to Idols, then take those
meats which were another man's propriety by the Laws of Corinth, and
consequently such as he had no right to. And doubtless an English Minister
should rather use the prayers of the Liturgy, though they had been offered in
an idolatrous service, then those which the Laws of England forbid him to
meddle with at such a time: But that so many do otherwise, it may well proceed
from the sweetness of stolen waters. But besides this restraint of the Laws
which allow us no other words to use, most men are further restrained by the
nature of the thing, except they have ready at hand as rich a Sylva of
Synonimous words, as there is a variety of meats in natures cornucopia. For a
man can hardly put up a petition without using some words that are used in the
Mass. And so by this Reason we should not pray at at all with vocal prayer. I
might bring the Authors to another absurdity by arguing that their Reason makes
it unlawful to use the Creed as a public profession of Faith, since the
Papists use it, and the Authors will not allow it to be of the Apostles making:
But I fear they will grant the absurdity, and therefore I dare not tempt them.

SECT. VI.
The Scripttures that they bring, which forbade the Jews to use such words,
gestures, and actions, as Idolaters did, signify nothing to their purpose.
Their Argument from Hos. 2.15, 16. and Zech. 13.2. considered. Popish Idolatry
is but an improvement of the Non-conformists principles. Their Pretense [that
conformity is a step to Popery] confuted and returned upon themselves, who
cannot confute a Papist but by quitting their own Principles.

I Have now produced the Ministers second Reason with all the forces which they
have assigned for its defense in their ninth chapter; and have I think,
manifested the very strength of it to be weakness. But they come up with a
reserve in the Postscript, where they cite multitudes of Scriptures which
forbid the Hebrews to use such words, gestures and actions that Idolaters did:
as to wear Linsie-woolsie garments, to let cattle engender with a diverse kind,
to sow a field with mingled seed, to call God by the name of Baali. But I
suppose the Authors can lawfully do these things themselves: Therefore I ask
them, if these Prohibitions bind us Englishmen? If they say they do, let them
give a Reason why they transgress them, and it will serve their brethren. If
they say that such prohibitions bind us not to forbear the actions which are
named there in terminis, but other actions of the like Reason as having been
done by Idolaters, as using the forms of prayer that were used by the Papists;
then they make themselves ridiculous. For how can a Law be supposed to forbid
only those things which are not named, because they bear analogy and proportion
to the things which are named, when the things themselves which are named
expressly in the Law, are not forbidden? If they interpret those prohibitions
as forbidding us to do such things as Idolaters did, not in civil usages, but
only in divine worship (as somewhere they make the distinction); then we are to
labor in all words, actions, and gestures, in which we are left to our
Liberty, to go contrary to the said Idolaters: and consequently, if they have
the Sacrament at Noon, we should have it at Midnight; if they worship toward
the East, we should worship toward the West (as the Authors say the Jews were
commanded to do for the same Reason); if their Churches stand East and West,
ours should be situate North and South; if they preach out of a Pulpit, we
should preach out of a pew; if their heads are bare in prayers, ours should be
covered; if their Communion Table stands in the chancel, ours should stand in
the bell-fry. In all which respects, I believe, the Authors themselves think it
not unlawful to be like the Papists; so that I wonder what they mean to quote
so many Texts, forbidding the Jews to be like the Idolaters not only in such
circumstances of Worship as I have named, but even in some punctilio's much
more trivial and inconsiderable, and some of them not at all concerning the
Worship of God, as sowing a Field with two sorts of seed. There is more show of
strength in a Marginal note, which they put down, page 97. in these words. Note
that both in Hos. 2.15, 16. and in Zech. 13.2. two Texts plainly relating to
the times of the Gospel, God forbids all mention of Idolatry, and declares his
will, that it should not be so much as remembered. Now we cannot see how we
should obey those precepts in keeping their very rites, modes and methods of
Worship. But I would fain know a Reason why they break these Precepts (or
rather Prophecies) by using such Rites and Modes of Worship as Idolaters have
used, (so that no Idolatry be committed in the using of them) any more then by
remembering and using the names of false gods, which are the things specified in
both those Texts: which certes are not so to be expounded, that Saint Luke may
not be found a transgressor in putting down the names of Castor and Pollux in
the Bible it self; or (if he be privileged by inspiration) that the Authors
may not condemn their Brethren, that in the cause of Nonconformity, have
sometimes left reading the Scriptures to their Parishioners, to read Ovids
Metamorphosis to their Scholars. I can conceive how Saint Luke and the said
Schoolmasters may be said to mention and remember the name of Idols: but I
cannot imagine how I remember the name of Idols by saying O God, the Father of
heaven, have mercy on us! or any other prayer of the Liturgy. Those who in
their Books, Sermons, yea and in their very Prayers, tell the people that the
said forms are taken out of the Masse-book^, which for my part, I profess to
be more then I know; these are they which keep up the names of Idols: The
greatest part of the people would not think of them, but that their Ministers
are their instant Remembrancers. The same may be said of the usual names of the
months, and days of the week, which do include the names of heathenish Gods
and Goddesses, which some have taken much pains to show and press for the
credit of Mr. Jesse's Almanac: But his Almanac would be needless except
these things were first pressed by such tinkerly Reformers, who make work, that
so they may mend it. For who thinks of Venus when he mentions Friday, though
Frea signify the same? And who thinks of keeping a Feast to Saturn, when he
celebrates the Nativity of our Savior; or of honoring Flora in a May pole?
None, I dare say, or but very few, excepting such as have been endroctrinated
by the said Reformers: No more then a man means to swear by Hercules, when he
says or writes Mehercule; which I am sure I have met with in Theological
discourses made by Authors, never suspected of any good inclination to Popery
or other Idolatry. In like manner, who thinks of the Lady of Loretto, or other
Popish Idols, in reading of the Liturgy? Only the discourse I oppose, is the
direct way to effect that, which they pretend to prevent.

I have argued all this while upon the Authors supposition, That the worship of
the Church of Rome in the whole complex is idolatrous. But they might more
properly say, that a bushel filled half with wheat and half with rye, is a
bushel of wheat, or that a Sermon is nonsentical in the whole complex, if some
few phrases of it be nonsense; or that a Translation is erroneous in the whole
complex, if there be some few Errata's in it. Whosoever faith a Blackamore is
white ih the whole complex, according to my Critics, tells a lie, though he be
white in his teeth. I might also add, that the Papists in the grossest part of
their idolatry, in adoration of the bread, are justified by a Principle, which
the Non-conformists (or most of them) do maintain; and their idolatry is but
the lawful emprovement of this Principle; viz. That Reason is not to judge what
points are to be received as articles of faith, and what not. For this
principle being supposed, there is no warrant to interpret those words
figuratively, This is my body, since all the warrant which is pretended, is,
that the literal sense is repugnant to Reason, which pronounces it absolutely
impossible that one body should be in two places at once. But according to this
Hypothesis of the exclusion of reason from the judgment seat, the Papist might
reply, Indeed my reason tells me that it is impossible, but the Scripture says,
This is my body; and therefore I ought not to mince the words at the command of
reason, which has nothing to do in matters of faith. Indeed the Scripture
says, the Body of Christ is in heaven; but I believe it is on earth too at the
Eucharist. Nothing but Reason gain-sayes, and she has nothing to do to judge
in the case. What can a man that goes on this Principle, reply to the so much
condemned Idolater? Out of his own mouth he is confuted: He laid down the
doctrine, and the other makes the natural and genuine use. Those therefore
which hold this principle, cannot judge the action of the Papists in adoring
the Bread to be idolatrous without self-contradiction; and if they will act
according to their light, this second Reason signifies nothing to them though
it may to others.

I cannot conclude my notes on their second Reason without reflecting upon
another, extracted from the same Topic; and by what they have said upon this
Reason, rendered more creditable to the unwary and half observing Reader. For
they have sprinkled in several pages of their book many shrewd hints, as if the
Liturgy ushered in the Mass, and conformity were a step toward Popery. As page
67. We know that those Ministers and people, who are most zealous against
Popery, are most averse to this Liturgy. But a zeal for any cause, except it be
bridled by discretion, and attended with an equal pace of strength, is not the
way to protect it, but to betray it. We saw lately, that the Statesmen which
were most zealous for the good old Cause, lost it; and the King had not better
friends then his most implacable enemies. Fury is as bad in a Champion as
torpour; it is an even temperature of wisdom and valor which does the
execution: A sober Protestant, though he rages less, shall prevail more on a
Papist then a mad Fanatic. The greatest part of the zeal against Popery, which
is found among the Non-conformists, is like that of one frantic, who wounds
himself while he would strike his foe. They are mad against Popery, but they
cannot tell why; they cannot confute it without condemning themselves, as I
could prove in many Instances. This unguided zeal will be sure to run far
enough from Popery, and so runs into it; as he that sails round the Globe, the
further he goes, after he is half way, the nearer he approaches to the place
from whence he set out. Thus the Quakers, a considerable part of the
Non-conformists, rayled at Popery till they began to be taken for Jesuits, or
their disciples. I have heard of several Papists that have turned Protestants
by the reasonings of men zealous for the Liturgy: But I profess unfainedly, I
never heard of one that of late years was won by any Nonconformist, excepting
by Mr. Baxter: And I believe he would have been as unsuccessful as others, but
that he goes upon more moderate principles. Me thinks the example of Doctor
Cosens, now Bishop of Durham, once most suspected of Popery for his zeal for
the Liturgy, and yet exercising a no less courageous then considerate zeal
against Popery in the time of his exile; methinks, I say, this example alone
were sufficient, not only to stop the mouth of calumny in this particular, but
to nonplus jealousy it self. I confess in some things the Conformists come
nearer to the Papists then others; but it is as Soldiers make their approaches
to the enemy to fight with him, and are therefore many times thought to fall
away; but when they return with their spoils, captives, and Trophies, none is
so hard-faced as to maintain the suspicion. Mr. Baxter himself, it is known,
has not only been suspected, but verily believed to be a Papist, and that by
some Rabbi's, merely for his conceding some Positions to the Papists, which no
reasonable and just man can deny them; whereby he has done more to the shaking
of the very foundations of the Papal Sea, then all the Non-conformists that
ever managed the Controversy, which I ever heard of. But I have so much to
say upon this subject, that it would require a Book by it self: Doctor
Sanderson in both his Prefaces to his Sermons has showed, how much service is
done to the Pope by the Non-conformists in many particulars; where the Reader
may be satisfied concerning the falsenesse of that which they affirm page 109.
That there is nothing of more tendency to confirm the Papists in their way of
worship, then for them to see us keep much the same. Indeed they may be
confirmed in the good parts of their worship by seeing us do the same, and all
the better; it is better they were Papists then Atheists: But how can they be
confirmed in the bad parts of their worship, by seeing us to use the good, and
refuse the bad? They are rather confirmed by such as refuse the whole: For then
they will think all to be refused out of humor, since some apparently is; and
that we have no more reason against the bad then against the good, since we
carry our selves with the same aversation to both. So that the experiment they
relate in the same page, How some foreign Papists, listening at the doors,
where they have heard Service read and sung, cried out, This is the same with
ours: This experiment, I say, is for the credit of the Liturgy, as more
facilitating the Papists coming over to us, and being a more easy stride then
extempore Prayers. The Authors tell me very good news, and I am heartily glad
to hear, that the Papists begin to like that service which heretofore they
persecuted with fire and faggot. And so much for the Ministers second Reason,
contained in their ninth Chapter.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
Their third reason from scandal, considered. (1.) No scandal has any
foundation in re. (2.) No scandal is allowed in Scripture. (3.) It is but
juggling for those to plead scandal, who hold the things unlawful. Or (4.) who
endeavor not to convince the scandalized of their error, but do themselves
most confirm them in it. (5.) The command of Authority out-weighs scandal, and
alters the case from that in St. Paul's days. (6.) Their Argument stands
charged equally against the Directory as the Liturgy.

THe Authors finding their Reason, drawn from the usage of the Liturgy in times
of Popery, to be too light, and the other taken from the scandal of Brethren
that are offended therewith, to be no more solid and weighty, have
sophistically joined them both in one in the ninth Chapter, that their
Respondent might be as much cumbered in the defense of his cause, as a man that
fights with two at once. For one Answer will not serve for these two Arguments,
which they have confounded together. But I have manifested already that they
are two distinct Arguments, since neither of them is rendered more accomplished
for the purpose by the accession of its fellow; and the Authors themselves
acknowledge the distinction, as by the many words they spend to prove the
unlawfulness of offering that to God, which has been offered in an idolatrous
service (without mentioning the case of scandal) so also in the Title of their
Postscript, where they plainly say, that the latter is another Reason from the
former.: Therefore having answered the former, it is very reasonable according
to the laws of Method, that I make the examination of the latter (taken from
the scandal of brethren) to be the proper subject of this present Chapter. In
the fortification of which, the first thing they do, after the naked
proposition of it, is to prevent an answer: The Prolepsis is in these words; We
are aware what the Doctors of Aberdeen said of old, to prove that the scandal
of Brethren weighs light, when put in the scale with the command of Authority.
There may something be said for their Assertion, where the scandal is merely
passive, and has no foundation in re; only men are offended, because they are
offended. But where the scandal is such, as is so far allowed by Scripture,
that a negative precept is given upon it, Eat it not; we are not of so easy a
faith as to believe what they say when Gods Word says, Do it not. To this I
reply (1.) That no scandal has a foundation in re; The foundation of scandal
is the error and weakness of the Person scandalized: And we ought to be so
far from respecting least such offended persons, that seem to labor under the
greatest weakness, that we are to respect them most. For to offend the little
ones is worse then to offend the Pharisees, Doctors, and Rabbis. But now
generally those which are offended at the Liturgy, as they do think themselves
the most able men and women, and accordingly declaim against the gross
ignorance of others, yea even of the Clergy, making it their recreation to
scoff and scorn at them, and to contrive and tell ridiculous fables of them;
so by the Authors themselves they are many times acknowledged to be the ablest
sort of Christians and Ministers; and therefore they ought not to abstain from
conformity for fear of offending them, whose offense is rather counterfeit then
real, having no foundation in re, that is, in weakness, nor in any error,
which is not easily vincible, if they are of so great gifts as they have the
credit of. (2.) Whereas they say, that the scandal alleged is such, and so far
allowed in Scripture, that a negative Precept is given upon it, Eat it not: I
answer, that no scandal is allowed in Scripture, and no Sctipture does so far
allow a respect to the scandal taken at the Common Prayer, as to say, use it
not, especially when the Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil say, use it. For I
have demonstrated in the Chapter foregoing a vast difference between the case
of meats offered to Idols and the Liturgy. (3.) It is but juggling for those
persons to use an Argument drawn from scandal, who believe the thing unlawful,
though no offense were taken. For whosoever says, he he does not an action
because people are offended, does thereby confess, that he thinks it an
indifferent thing. As if a man should say, I commit not adultery, because if I
did, I should offend the Brethren: The hearer would conclude, that the speaker
either thinks, that adultery is otherwise lawful, or else does hugely
prevaricate. Therefore, seeing the Authors do think the use of the
Common Prayer unlawful, though no body took offense at it, they should have
done ingenuously to cut short the controversy, and not mention scandal, that a
speedy issue might be procured. For I cannot see how I can argue with them upon
the point of scandal, but by supposing that the persons, who fear to give
scandal, by doing the action, grant the action to be lawful, though they, whom
they fear to scandalize, judge it unlawful. And therefore I am forced to
proceed here on that supposition. (4.) Such Persons cannot reasonably pretend
the scandal of their Brethren as a Reason of their Non conformity, till they
have used all means within their power to convince the scandalized Brethren,
that their offense is canselesse, and the thing is lawful. But if they on the
contrary by their actions, sermons, and familiar conferences, beside their
writings, do labor to confirm them in that weakness and error, which causes
the scandal (as usually they do) then this scandal is no more excuse for their
forbearance of conformity, then it would be for a child which comes not when
called by his Father, to say, the doors were locked, when he had locked them
himself. (5.) A man is to forbear many things, that he may nor give offense to
others, in case he is left to his liberty; which yet he is bound not to
forbear, but to do, in case he be commanded by Authority, which is the case in
hand. (6.) This Argument (if it were of force) would evince it unlawful to use
the Directory, as well as the Liturgy. For there was never Liturgy or Directory
made, nor can any be made, as things stand, but some will be offended at it.
Therefore other circumstances are to be considered, which have a power to
render the offense in considerable; of which hereafter.

SECT. II.
(7.) The several Sects of Non-conformists make nothing of offending one
another. An Instance in taking the Scandalous Tithes. (8.) An unanimous Essay
of these Ministers might remove the Scandal. What they count, scandal, is loss
of Reputation. Upon what account it is better that some suffer, then that Forms
should be laid aside. Persecution lies at their own doors. Their little
engaging against the known enemies of God, men's vices.

(7.) THe several Sects of Non-conformists make nothing to offend one another.
The Presbyterians the Independents, and they the Anabaptists, and they the
Quakers, and so vice versa, while every one of them does what seems good in
their own eyes. Why then do they scruple it in using a prescribed Form of
worship? May they offend the Brethren on their own heads, but not when
commanded by Authority? If they answer, that those things wherein they offend
one another, are by each party counted necessarily good; but the use of the
Liturgy they account a thing indifferent (for so we must suppose them to speak,
if they argue upon scandal) and therefore, though they boldly offend one
another in the former actions, they dare not in the latter: I reply, that they
ought to account conformity necessarily good so long as it is required by
Authority; and they ought not to account those actions necessarily good, by
which they offend one another. As to instance, how many were offended at the
Ministers for taking Tithes? Yet I never knew any man who feared to give the
offense, though it was not a necessary duty to take them. For why might not the
Minister remit the Tithes of his Parish, as well as Saint Paul did remit the
contributions of the Corinthians? Nothing can be said for taking Tithes,
notwithstanding the offense taken thereat; but the same may be said in the
defense of Conformity, for all the offense which is taken at it. Yea, and that
which makes the case worse, Tithes were as really offered to God in times of
Idolatry, as the Prayers of the Liturgy; and their offended Brethren usually
called them Antichristian Tithes for the same reason. But may be, the Authors
make light of offending other Sects beside their own; May be, they would use
the Common Prayer, if only other Parties were offended: but they dare not
offend their own Party. Therefore I answer. (8.) Lastly, That there is no fear
but that the Ministers whose case is here pleaded, have so much Authority and
influence upon their own party (whom I have found more submissive to one
sentence quoted from their own Teachers, then to an hundred Reasons in this
case), that if they would, they might easily change the Peoples minds;
especially, if they were unanimously resolved on the Essay, as they seem to be
on the quite contrary. Yea those who had so much power to bring them into the
Error, cannot have much less to bring them out; and they are the more bound to
endeavor it. But in that they do not so much as attempt it, it is very
probable even to the Judgment of charity it self, that what they call scandal
of the Brethren, is loss of Reputation among their own Sect; and the Bishop of
Exceters censure is easily reconcilable with that Charity and Candor which the
Authors miss in the same, and complain thereof in these words; The Bishop of
Exceter is mistaken therefore in suggesting that we forbear the using of the
Liturgy out of a little point of Reputation amongst some People rather weak
then wise, and to be pitied more then imitated; and he shows little candor or
charity in saying, we sacrifice our Judgments to our credits, and out of a
fear and lothness to offend some people, whom we may easily convince and
satisfy as well by our examples as Arguments, etc. This is not spoken like a
tender and good Christian. Why not? For if the People are in an Error, and that
such an one which has already done much mischief in Church and State, and is
likely to do the like again, except Gods great mercy prevent, and the Ministers
know it is an Error (for that must be supposed, if they expect the benefit of
this Argument), and yet will not labor to undeceive their People, especially
if they have been means of bringing them into this Error themselves; can
Charity it self imagine otherwise, but that this tenderness proceeds only out
of a point of Reputation? Whether it be so, God only knows; to their own Master
they must stand or fall: But so it appears. For though they oppose to this
censure a profession that they do not think Nonconformity to be now the way to
credit; yet they must certainly mean only a Credit with some Persons, whom they
care not for. But that Nonconformity is the way to get Credit with other
Persons, it is manifest by that which the Authors say in their Postscript of
their own observation, viz. That those who have returned to the use of the
Common Prayer, have made themselves the scorn of some, and the grief of others.
There is no such Reputation to be gained by a Divine as to preach against that
which is established by Law, and to be the Head of a discontented Faction. For
that cause which has least of the civil Power to maintain it, stands in most
need of wit and abilities to defend it: And the abilities which are so used,
shall be taken notice of and admired, when those which defend the opposite
cause shall be over-looked as needless. Beside that it is glorious in the Eyes
of the vulgar, to outface Authority, to go in a singular way; and for a man by
his irregular actions to censure his Superiors as if he were above them. Upon
which account the Cynicks of old, and the Quakers now, for all their pretenses
to humility, have deservedly obtained from wise men the name of the proudest
and most ambitious Sects that ever were.

The Authors stay most upon this Argument in their Postscript; and therefore
thither I must follow them when I have first left an animadversion upon the
exclamation they make in this chapter aganist certain persons, who (they say)
had rather their Brethren should be persecuted, and all the Christian World
scandalized, then that the forms of Prayer under question should be laid aside.
If there were any such Persons; I know not but others may be more blameworthy,
who had rather provoke those persecutions and pull them down on their own
heads, besides the scandalizing of a far greater part of the Christian World,
then that that the said forms of Prayer should be used. But indeed I know no
such Persons as those whom they stigmatize with this description. For neither
are all the Christians in the world scandalized with the Prayers; neither. do I
know any that had rather their Brethren should be persecuted, then the Prayers
laid aside, the laying of them aside being singly considered in the comparison,
and with abstraction from those things which are pretended as a Reason why they
should be laid aside, or would follow therefrom. The exacters of conformity
exact their due; give them their due, and then you may expect a dispensation:
otherwise the comparison is unjustly made betwixt the sufferings of those which
submit not, and the keeping up of the forms: The comparison should be made
betwixt the said sufferings, and the keeping up of the Credit and Authority of
the Laws. It were surely better that the Magistrate should keep them up, then
that the contempt of his Authority being grown so insolent and mighty that he
cannot master it, should force them to lay them down. For the keeping them up
notwithstanding the sufferings which by accident of humane corruption are
consequent thereto, can prove only to the prejudice of some particular Persons,
who (while the Law is in force) deserve to incur it by their own Act: But the
laying them down upon such an account, would be dangerous to the whole Church
and Kingdom, by submitting the discipline of both to the headstrong outrage of
the Subject. Suppose a Master command his servant some light matter upon pain
of suffering: It is not indeed better that the servant should suffer, then that
the commandment should be revoked, the terms of the comparison being simply and
abstractly considered. But it is better that the commandment should not be
revoked, then that the servant should get head over his Master. Let the servant
show his willingness, and th^n he may expect his Masters indulgence in
remitting the command. Let the prescriptions of the Liturgy be never so light
matters; yet certainly obedience is a matter of importance, and that is it
which is contended for; and it were better that the Subject should suffer, then
that obedience should be denied. By which note I may also answer another
Argument which they bring in the 90. page of their Book: viz. That though the
ceremonies were lawful, yet they are not expedient, because they will bring so
many scandals and sufferings: and every thing which is not expedient, so far as
it is not expedient, is not lawful. To which I answer (1.) A private man's using
of these ceremonies cannot be inexpedient in neither of those respect; neither
in respect of scandal, nor in respect of sufferings. For as for the former
respect, The good of obedience does overpoise the evil of scandal. And as for
the latter, The use of them brings no sufferings on him that uses them;
neither does his using them make another suffer who uses them not, but only as
he who does his duty by accident aggravateth the case of him who omits it. (2.)
Suppose that the ceremonies were too light and inconsiderable to be imposed by
such penal Laws; and consequently that the making of the Law was inexpedient,
though the keeping of it be not; yet, if the Magistrate judge it expedient, he
is bound to make it; and much more may he look for obedience to it, when it is
already made, until it be repealed, yea though he judged it inexpedient. Nay
furthermore, the case may be, that the same Law, which was once inexpedient to
make, it may be no less inexpedient to repeal, as I instanced before, when the
repealing of it shall let loose the reins to popular insolency, and shall be
interpreted as done out of fear of a mutiny and insurrection. To conclude, the
sufferings which are pretended, can at most be only an Argument to the
Magistrate to alter the Law; but this can be no reason wherefore a Minister
should not keep the Law while it is in force, which is the end it is alleged
for in the Book. There is no man can be more against placing much moment in the
light appurtenances of Religion then I am; or for Liberty to vary, so it be
extra casum contemptus: But to see men take this Liberty, because the
Magistrate thinks not fit to give it; and while they expect his indulgence in
things which they scruple, not to obey him so far as they can without scruple;
and lastly to see those claiming that liberty as a due, which they would not
grant to others as a Largess, if they were in power, but would forbid things
under as great pains as they are now commanded; I will say no more, but Quis
tulerit -- For that these rigid exactions of such things, as the Authors call
light and frivolous, is not the only fault of the Conformists, appears from
hence, That when they had lost their power, men were as severely dealt with for
not taking the Covenant, or for saying Gloria Patri, or the Creed in their
Churches. Therefore I can say an hearty Amen to the Authors wish, That men
would use their heat against the known enemies of God, such as drunkards,
blasphemers, unclean persons, cursers, and swearers (or rather against their
vices) then against the Servants of the living God. But here I find the
Non-conformists most at a fault, who (to my observation) preach least against
these vices; which makes their Auditors usually to call such a Minister as
bends his strength against them, a mere moral Preacher; and to account that the
most Gospel-preaching, which declaims more against the supposed faults of the
Magistrate, then the real ones of the People; more against Bishops, Ceremonies,
Common Prayer, and the like, then any of the vices forementioned.

SECT. III.
Their Question answered, Whether the Magistrate may command such things as are
matter of scandal. (1.) He may if the good to be procured by them be greater
then the evil of scandal. (2.) If the offense be taken after the Command, he
may continue it. This Question is quite beside the Question. Their pretense
[that the Magistrates command cannot justify any man in breaking Gods Command]
answered. That which was scandal before the Command, is none after: As that
which is murder in a private man, is not so in a commissioned Officer.

THis Reason (as I said before) is most largely insisted on in their
Postscript; where having quoted a multitude of Precepts, which forbid offending
the weak Brethren, they take notice of an Answer which is usually given, viz.
That these Precepts only concern us where the command of our Superiors does not
make the thing necessary. Whereto they reply thus, We would gladly know,
whether the Magistrate be not as much obliged not to command things
indifferent, where such a scandal will arise, as the inferiors not to do them.
I answer, (1.) If the things (though indifferent in themselves) be necessary to
procure a greater good, then the scandal which will arise from them be an evil,
he may; and if he thinks that the scandal is not considerable or worthy to be
respected, he is bound in such a case to command the said things. For he must
be judge of his own Acts; otherwise he is in worse case then a private
Christian, and must enact nothing, as I showed in my first Chapter. (2.) For
the same Reason (and with much more) if the Magistrate has commanded an
indifferent thing, and the offense be taken after the command, he may continue
his command. For else it were in the power of the Subject to bind the
Magistrate at pleasure, to repeal all his Laws concerning indifferent things.
As if he should make a Law, that there should be no traffic with a Nation that
he is minded to make war with: The people misliking the Law might say, they are
offended therewith; and so make it his duty to reverse that Law. And this is
the case under question. For the Authors themselves cannot say, that the
greatest part of the better sort were offended at the use of the Common Prayer,
when it was first imposed; but on the contrary it was highly liked and approved
by all, or most, except the Papists: and therefore a better Reason against the
Common Prayer might be drawn from the offense which the Papists took at it,
because they were offended before it was established by Law. But the offense,
which is pleaded by the Authors, is an offense taken since; and so it is an
offense taken at that which was made necessary in its use before, and therefore
not to be regarded. (3.) Though it should be granted, that the Magistrate
himself is by the Law of God restrained from commanding any thing, by which
weak Christians may be offended; yet that is nothing to the Question
controverted: For the Question is not, what the Magistrate is forbid to do, but
what the Minister ought to do. Now though the Magistrate might not, for this
Reason, impose the Liturgy; it does not from thence follow, that the Minister
may not use it.

Indeed in the same place the Authors frame an Argument to prove, that a man
may not do any thing which shall scandalize his Brother, though he be commanded
to do it by the Magistrate. The Argument is in these following Terms. We
suppose our Brethren will not say, that the Magistrates command can justify
any soul in violating the express Law of God. And as they themselves would not
interpret the Law of God thus, Thou shall not steal, that is, except thy
Superior command thee; or, Thou shall not commit adultery, that is, except
thou be commanded: so they must pardon us, if we cannot so interpret the Law
of God in the case of scandal. To which I answer, That those Material Actions,
which would be transgressions of the Moral Law before they are commanded by the
Civil Law, are sometimes no such transgressions after they are so commanded.
And the reason is, because these Actions have not the same formality which they
had before; and consequently many times the change of their Nature is commonly
owned and expressed by the change of their denomination, which will easily
appear by particular Instances. For that very Action (for the matter of it)
which would be Theft and a breach of the eighth Commandment before the act of
humane Authority commanding it, or only permitting it, is not theft after such
an humane precept or permission, nor any breach of the eighth Commandment. And
the self-same Action (for the matter of it) which would be Murder before
commanded by humane Authority, and a violation of the sixth Command, is
afterward neither Murder, nor any breach of that Command. And therefore by good
proportion I may add, that the self-same action, which was scandal in property
of speech before commanded by humane Authority, is no such scandal afterward,
nor any violation of those precepts of the Apostle, which the Authors cite. The
Reason is, because that scandal, which is forbid by the Apostle, lies in an
indifferent action: So it might be scandal before commanded by the Magistrate,
because indifferent; but it is not scandal after commanded, because made
necessary by the divine Law requiring obedience to Rulers, which Law binds in
particular upon the Emergency of an humane Law. To make this answer most plain:
If I should drive away my neighbors Cattle, and convert them to my own use, or
to another man's, this were Theft, and a sin against the eighth Commandment. But
then there comes the command of a lawful Magistrate, which makes me a Constable
or other Officer, and binds me to strain them, and convert them to the use he
prescribes: this is no theft, nor any breach of the eighth Command, though the
Action be the same materially; for I drive away the same Cattle. Nay if there
be no command, but only a Permission, the case is the same: For if my
Neighbors goods be confiscated and given to me, I may do the same Action, and
yet be guiltless of theft. In like manner for John, being a private man,
wittingly and willingly to kill Thomas, or to cause him to be killed, this is
murder, and a sin against the sixth Command: But for John, being a Sheriff, and
receiving a humane injunction to kill Thomas, so to do is no Murder, nor any
breach of the sixth Command. So then I need not make such a silly
interpretation of the Precepts of the Moral Law, as the Authors suppose
necessary to defend my Cause. I need not argue thus; The Command says, Thou
shall not steal, i. e. unless thy Superior command thee. But rather thus, Thy
Superior commands thee to do that action, which would be stealing otherwise;
but in that he commands it, it is no stealing. In this Instance the very
Appellation and name is altered with the Nature of the thing, merely by the
Magistrates Command, nothing else intervening de novo: But in other cases also,
though the name be retained, yet the nature of the Action is changed; so that
whereas before it was contrary to the Moral Law, now it is made agreeable to
it. For examples sake, let us read the sixth Commandment, as the last
Translation has Englished it; Thou shall not kill: The Sheriff does that
Action, which is called killing, and yet breaks not that Commandment, because
th s killing which he does, is not of the same kind with that which is forbid
in the sixth Command. And wherein lies the difference but in this? That the
Moral Law forbids a private man to kill without public Authority: But the
Sheriff kills by virtue of a power so to do, derived to him from humane Laws. In
the case under hand, Do no action, says Saint Paul, that may give offense: I
am commanded by the Magistrate to do an action, which is otherwise lawful, but
gives offense; I do the action, and yet I break not the Apostles precept,
because it is not such an offense as he means, though it go under the same
general name, as the Act of the Sheriff and of the private man do. For Saint
Paul means (as the Authors Confess) an offense taken from an action which in
other respects and antecedently to the offense I might do or not do: But in
this case my action is no such; it is not an action which I might either do or
leave undone antecedently to the offense; but I was bound in conscience to do
it, if no offense had been taken, and that by the Command of God, requiring
obedience to the Magistrate, and therefore the duty being necessary
antecedently to the offense in order of nature, yea and in order of time too,
the falling out of the offense cannot warrant the omission of it, much less
oblige to the said omission.

SECT. IV.
Conformity is not in its own Nature so scandalous as Difformity, both in
provoking Distaste, and in laying stumbling blocks in the way of the weak. The
Ministers Reasons make as much against the Oath of Allegiance as the
Common Prayer. It is absurd to offend the Magistrate, that they may avoid the
offense of private men. Their Reply to this is but a mere begging of the
Question, and betraying their cause.

IN the next place they describe the scandal which they say would be taken at
their reading of the Common Prayer, and make it consist in two particulars.
(1.) That people would scorn and vilify them, and withdraw themselves from
communion with them; And (2.) That they would be encouraged by the examples of
these Ministers to do the like, although not convinced of the lawfulness of so
doing, and so sin against their own consciences. But I reply to them thus: As
for the first part of the scandal, supposing that you are satisfied of the
lawfulness of using the Common Prayer, and have nothing to say against it but
the scandal (as the supposition is made by your selves upon this Argument) I
say, supposing your selves thus satisfied, then the people have more cause to
vilify you, and withdraw themselves from your communion on the other hand for
disobeying those to whom God has commanded you to submit your selves. This
has evidently more appearance of evil in it then the other: I mean
disobedience has much more appearance of evil in it then obedience, and
consequently is much more scandalous in its natural tendency, and more apt to
give offense of this first kind; that is, to procure a disrepute and contempt
among men who stand not on their heads, and have not their Optics inverted.
May be men will take a pretense from your conformity to call you Time-servers,
Men pleasers, and the like. But they may much more reasonably take an occasion
from your Nonconformity (supposing your selves are satisfied of the
lawfulness of conformity, were it not for the scorn which attends it) to
accuse you of a far greater sin, which the Scripture parallels with that of
Witchcraft. If therefore you stick on your credit, you should rather fear a
greater reproach, to which you give not only a greater pretext, but also a real
cause; then a less reproach, to which you yield a less pretense, and no real
cause at all. For though people (at least those whose votes you most regard)
are more apt to vilify where there is less cause, then where there is more;
yet you ought more to fear the giving cause of reproach, then to be reproached:
And besides, who knows how soon their minds may be turned? For we see how men
alter in their opinions about Religion; and then may be they will reproach you
for omitting of that which now they would reproach you for doing. And as for
the second part of the scandal, you may by your example as much encourage some
to sin against their consciences, by not using of the Common Prayer as by using
it: For why may they not be as well-emboldned to Non conformity with a doubting
conscience by your example, as you think others will be encouraged to
Conformity by the same example? In case they be, you lead them into a far
greater sin: For to conform purely in imitation of you, is their sin only
because they do it with a doubting conscience; But the contrary is a sin
without any respect to the said doubts. If it be said that there are none, or
but a few of such Persons whom these Ministers ought to regard that scruple the
Lawfulness of Nonconformity; and therefore that there is no danger they
should be led into sin that way: I answer, that the Peoples Nonconformity is a
sin, whether they do it doubtingly or no; and the Ministers practice does
confirm them in this sin, and hinder them from doubting of it, that so they
might leave it. Yea though the People think it lawful to disobey the Act for
the Common Prayer; yet they are very wild indeed, if they think without any
scruple that they may violate other Acts: But now seeing their Ministers to
break one act as well as themselves, they will the more easily be carried on in
their Error, till they come to think they may break others also, And how the
contempt of Laws has proceeded by degrees from one to another, till the most
fundamental Laws were overturned, we have seen by late and lamentable
experience. And it is no wonder: For the very same Arguments which are brought
against the use of Common Prayer, do serve as much against the taking of the
Oath of Allegiance; For a Form of words in Prayer is there imposed, since an
oath is an invocation of God, and so are significative ceremonies: which the
first Argument of this book, which I oppose, pronounces unlawful. Again, such
words, actions and gestures are there used in divine worship (for such is an
oath) which were used by Idolaters; and this is pronounced unlawful by their
second Argument. And lastly, to take the Oath of Allegiance, is scandalous and
offensive to many of the weak Brethren which are offended at the Common Prayer;
and therefore it ought not to be taken, if the third Reason was of any force,
which is under my present examen. And I cannot let this pass without putting
this question, Should a man refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance when required
thereto, because others are offended at it? I hope the Authors will allow such
an offense (how many or how good soever the Persons are that are offended) to
be inconsiderable. And yet it cannot be denied that the thing is indifferent in
it self, and only made necessary by humane Laws: For till the Law was made, no
man was bound to take that Oath. Therefore, since humane Laws have force in
this case to make that action lawful which many are offended with, they must
needs have the like force in the case of the common Prayer, supposing it to be
indifferent; save only for the scandal, which the Authors do suppose, and yet
will not grant what is so evidently inferred from the Hypothesis.

With no better success do the Authors make an Essay to overthrow another
answer, which is usually given to this Reason of theirs, page 110. Whereas we
are told that we offend many others, yea and those our Superiors too, because
we do not do it; We answer, we are not willing to offend any, much less our
Superiors: but if we be brought to this strait, that we must either offend God
or men, the choice is not difficult. By these words they must needs signify,
that to do it is to offend God; and so they beg the question, and are gone
quite beside their present Argument, which supposes the action indifferent,
were it not for the offense which is taken at it, and that God is offended only
because men are offended. Yea that is the Reason which themselves give in their
very next words, wherefore God would be offended by their use of the Common
Prayer, viz. because some men would be offended. The question is, whether God
would be offended by the use of the Common Prayer: To prove he would, they urge
the offense of some men: To this it is replied, that others more to be
considered, are offended by their not using it: They answer its true; But God
is offended by the using of it: and that is the very question, and so their
Reason runs in a most ridiculous round. Therefore the comparison which they
make, is sophistically stated betwixt the offending of God by the use, and the
offending of so me men and their Superiors by the Non-use. The comparison
should be made between the offending of some men by the use, and the offending
of other men by the Non-use; yea between the offending of Private men by the
use, and the offending of our Superiors by the Non-use. And thus the force of
arguing in those words which the Authors pretend to answer, stands firm. For
how can it be supposed that God should be offended with their offending of some
by reading the Common Prayer, rather then that he should be offended at their
offending of others by not reading it? Yea who can conceive that God should be
offended at their offending of private men by using the Common Prayer, and not
be offended rather at their offending of Superiors by not using it, supposing
the thing otherwise indifferent, as they suppose in this Argument: So that the
only thing to be considered, is, which of the two offenses is the most weighty;
that of some, or that of others; that of private men, or that of the
Magistrate: For look which offense is most considerable, God is most offended
with that offense. And no doubt it is a greater offense for a Servant to offend
his Master by not doing an indifferent action which his Master bids him do,
then to offend a fellow servants by doing it: And there is the same Reason of
offending a Magistrate, rather then a fellow-subject. Therefore the comparison
which they make betwixt offending God and offending the Magistrate, will be
much more odious, if it be made betwixt the offending of God who requires
obedience to the Magistrate, and the offending of some inferior Persons who
dislike this obedience in this case. Thus the Authors have underpropt this
their third Reason taken from scandal, till they have made it fall down. They
confess their Argument cannot be made good without supposing that God is
offended at the use of the Common Prayer as well as men: They confess that men
are offended on one side, as well as on the other; and so the case is at least
equal on both sides: They are forced for their last refuge to fly to the
unlawfulness of using the common prayer, whosoever be offended; and so they fly
from this Argument, by which they undertook to prove that the Liturgy is not to
be used because of scandal, though in all other respects it were never so
lawful: since therefore themselves have relinquished the Fort, I may well
withdraw my Battery.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
Their fourth Reason from the Covenant, answered, (1.) Supposing that Oath a
lawful one, it can at most but bind them to endeavor the repeal of the Act for
Common prayer, and that only by lawful means; But it does not free them from
the obligation of it while in force. (2.) Conformity is not inconsistent with
endeavors to root out Superstition, or (3.) To promote the power of Godliness.
Thetr Oath could not make Forms unlawful, if they were indifferent before. The
New light they talk of, not comparable to the old. Their Argument [ That the
establishment of the Liturgy by Law is not pleadable against the Covenant]
answered. And what they urge from Numb. 30.

THe Title of their Fourth Reason, in the tenth chapter of their book, is this,
Because they have sworn to endeavor a Reformation in worship, and to endeavor
to extirpase superstition, and what hinders the Power of Godliness. Suppose
that Oath wete lawful to be taken, why may they not keep so much of it as here
is recited, notwithstanding the use of the Common Prayer? For (1.) If it were
granted that the worship prescribed in the Liturgy did need a Reformation; yet
they may endeavor such a Reformation, and use the worship prescribed as it is,
till it be altered; since nothing unlawful is prescribed, though we suppose a
Reformation might make it more expedient: Even as the Judges and Lawyers may
endeavor a Reformation of the Laws, and yet proceed according to the legally
settled course, till it be legally altered. Their Oath on such a supposition
binds them to endeavor that they may be free (and yet to endeavor by the use
of lawful means only) from the imposition which lies on them: But it does not
remit or release them while they stand bound. (2.) They may endeavor to root
our Superstition, and yet use the Common Prayer, since no superstition needs to
be committted in the use of it. For if there did, sure these Authors would have
proved it; which they do not, as has been made to appear already. Yea their
main charge with this weapon amounts to no more but this timorous and partial
supposition; Nor possibly is it clear to every one, that there is nothing in
those Forms of worship savouring of Superstition. But I may retort, nor
possibly is it clear to every one, that there is nothing savouring of
Superstition in the Directory made by the Assembly; or in any other that can be
made. And when they question whether there be Nothing savouring of Superstition
in the Common Prayer, they seem to confess that all things there savor not of
Superstition. If then they would use so much of it, omitting that one thing
which possibly some doubt to be superstitious, they would express a more
moderate and peaceable Spirit. Neither (3.) Is the use inconsistent with the
third point of their oath, to endeavor to promote the Power of Godliness:
since obedience to the Magistrate in lawful things, is so far from being
inconsistent with it, that it is most necessary thereto.

They proceed in the same page to tell us that if heretofore they looked on the
use of those forms as indifferent, surely the oath which they have taken, puts
it into another capacity. But that cannot be, both because in the former
Section I proved it consistent with their Oath so far as they quote it; and
also because that which was before the oath thought by themselves indifferent
in it self, was at the same time necessary in its use, being commanded by Act
of Parliament; and therefore being in truth necessary, and not then apprehended
by themselves as unlawful, it could not be dispensed with, much less rendered
unlawful by the following Oath. For if it could, a man might evade every Act of
Parliament about indifferent things with a safe conscience: It is but swearing
that he will not do what the Act requires; and so according to this doctrine
that which is commanded, though lawful before the Oath, is put into another
capacity after. They add, It is no wonder though their judgments be altered,
and they hold the use now to be unlawful, considering how much Light has shone
into the World in that space of time. But I wonder in what Horizon that Light
dwells, since for ought I can find by my best enquiry, the ancient Divines were
more moderate and clear in their positions; and the Modern Divinity (like the
Book which goes under that name) has only strained the several Points of our
Religion into absurd extremities; and run out of one Error into another.

In the sixth Section of the Chapter under animadversion, they say that the
establishment of the Common Prayer by Law, is not pleadable against the
Covenant agreed upon by Lords and Commons legally assembled in Parliament;
though contrary to some former Act of Parliament. But let the Lawyers say,
whether the Lords and Commons without the Kings consent can bind by oath (or
give permission) to do any thing contrary to a former Act of Parliament, while
it is not repealed. For whereas they add, that the Covenant was so far ratified
by the King, as unquestionably in conscience would suffice to discharge any
that shall keep it: I know what Ratification they mean. Indeed in their next
Section they seem somewhat to explain their mind, urging Numb. 30. where they
say, God expressly determines the Oath established for ever, if the Husband of
the Wife, or Father of the child, either at first consented, or did not
presently dissent, but hold his peace. But let Histories and the Memory of men
speak, whether the King consented, or did not dissent, but held his Peace.
Besides, his consent might warrant an Oath taken to do something that was
lawful before, which is the case in Numbers: but if the Wife, or Child, or
Subject swear to do any thing contrary to any Law in force, the consent of the
Husband, Father, or Sovereign cannot ratify that Oath, but it is dissolved by
its own Principles. Now such is the Covenant, if it were contrary to any former
Act of Parliament, as the Authors themselves make the supposition in this case;
and therefore so far as I could ever learn, the Lords and Commons with the
consent of the King could not ratify it without an Act disannulling the former
Act, to which it is supposed to be contrary. But I dismiss this their Fourth
Reason, hoping that the Burning of the Covenant since has saved me the labor
of any further exanimation.

SECT. II.
Their Other Reasons answered. (1.) Their pretense against the perfection of
the Common prayer, since it is more perfect then the Directory. None can be
perfect. And it is lawful to use an imperfect Good. (2.) what they except
against the Matter of the Liturgy. And (3.) against Particular prayers for
every day, dividing the Service between Minister and People, and the Number of
short prayers.

I Shall add as an Appendix to this Chapter, a Reply to the Authors eleventh
Chapter, containing other Reasons why diverse Ministers are not satisfied
concerning the use of the Common Prayer, and to their twelfth, entitled, A
summary recapitulation of the Ministers Reasons.

And first they accuse the Common Prayer of imperfection thus: Surely none can
say that take the Ordinary Prayers appointed to be read every morning-Prayer or
Evening-Prayer, they do contain all things requisite to be confessed or
petitioned for. But a little use of unbiassed consideration would have easily
prompted them with this triple solution. (1.) The Prayers appointed for every
Morning and Evening Prayer are palpably more perfect then any appointed for
those times by the Directory: For that prescribes none at all to be used every
Morning and Evening. And besides, the Letany which is appointed to be read
thrice a week, is a more perfect prayer then I believe ever was any put up
extempore. For I will appeal to any man, how seldom he has heard this most
necessary Petition used in an extempore Prayer, which yet is in the Liturgy,
viz. Forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and slanderers, and turn their hearts.
(2.) If they would have every particular sin confessed, and good thing
petitioned for explicitly and expressly in prayer, they would allow no room for
Preaching, which they declaim against in others: For to utter such a Prayer,
would take up a whole day. Wherefore then do they argue from the imperfection
of the Common Prayer, that it is unlawful to use it? since their own prayers
are more imperfect then it; and though a Prayer may be made more perfect, yet
still it must be imperfect, except it shoulder out Preaching. (3.) What though
the Common Prayer be not perfect? what is that to prove a man may not use it?
May not a man use a Bible where much is torn out? or make a Petition for his
Life, except he says all which can be said, and forgets or omits nothing? A
good thing may be used, though it be imperfect; as an hand which has lost a
finger. Otherwise these Ministers should discard their own Sermons; since they
must confess with Paul, that they prophecy but inpart.

(2.) They next argue from the Matters of some things in the Liturgy, which in
their judgment is not so approveable. But I wonder where they ever heard or
spoke a Prayer wherein were not some things not approveable in their own
judgments, at least in the judgments of others. Take the best extempore
prayer that they have ever made, and let it be copied out and published, and be
extant an hundred years together, and in all men's hands for every body to pick
a fault in it; and let it be the interest of the examiners to find it faulty:
and no doubt but they will find many things not so approveable in their
Judgments. But let us see the particulars of the Liturgy, which in their
Judgment are not so approveable. They name two. (1.) That they understand not
how they can say to God eight days together, that he sent his Son to redeem us
as upon that day, nor yet as to any particular day. For satisfaction in this
point, let us make use of the Method so much commended by Socrates in Plato,
who says, That comparing, and as it were colliding two parallel cases, we may
easily make the justice of that which is under enquiry, to flash forth as light
from the attrition of two flints. And the Parallel which I shall present to
this purpose, is the Jewish Passover. Let it be supposed first (what the
objection seems to intimate) that Christ-mass day (when the words are to be
used which are disliked) has not exactly the same place in the Revolution of
the Solar year which the day on which Christ was born, had. No more (some
years) did the day on which the Jews began the Passover, agree with that whose
deliverances occasioned it, as any man will grant, who holds Saint Austins
reason to be good, viz. The Eclipse of the Sun at the death of our Savior was
in the Time of the Passover; ergo in the full moon. And as our Liturgy annexeth
to the twenty fifth of December seven suceeding days to make up the same
Feast; so besides the night wherein the Paschal Lamb was killed, when
unleavened bread began to be used, The Feast of unleavened bread continued
seven days in remembrance of those deliverances which were wrought for the
Israelites in the night of the fourteenth day of the Month Abib: All which
days being appointed for one solemnity, may be well termed one day of
thanksgiving. For how else could that self same day wherein the Israelites were
brought out of Egypt, be possibly observed seven days together, as it is
commanded Exodus 12.17. These things being considered, let any reasonable man
judge whether the Israelites (not only on the first night, but also on the
seven following days) might not very lawfully say in their Anniversary
Thanksgivings, Lord, we thank thee for delivering us from the destroying Angel,
and from Egypt, as upon this day. For the sense is notoriously known to be
figurative, if there had been never a quasi expressed. Now that which is false in
one sense, is not only true in another, but it has not as much as the show of
an Aequivocation to speak it, if the sense be notoriously known. Besides, it
may as well be said, that God sent his son for eight days together, as that
his Mother was puerpera, for a month. (2.) That they understand not how we can
pray in Faith to be delivered from lightning, and tempest, and sudden death:
And yet they add, that they can understand how we may pray for deliverance from
these Judgments, if it be the Lords will; and so in the same breath they grant
what they deny. For that condition is as notoriously included in all prayers
for temporal blessings, as homo is understood in quidam. Did not the Saints in
the Old Testament pray for children? and is it not usual in extempore prayers
to beg temporal blessings without expressing the condition? But any Argument
will serve them to delude silly people, though it make as much against
themselves.

(3.) They add, that the spirits of sober People are no ways Reconcilable to
the Liturgy, who cannot understand what foundation is either in Scripture or
right Reason for using particular prayers for every day, or dividing the entire
service of God betwixt Ministers and People, or for using so many shreds or
ends of Prayer, or repeating the Lords Prayer so often. But these sober People
give no testimony of their sobriety by their irreconcileableness to that which
it good, merely because their own Eyes cannot see any ground for it in
Scripture or Reason. If they were wise to sobriety, they would conclude that
those who have greater abilities, and have more studied the case alone, and
debated it in Convocation, may see Reason for those things which they see no
Reason for. And as for the Particulars excepted against, those who use
extempore prayers, do the same things whether they see a ground for it or no,
as will appear by running over the four things instanced in. For (1.) as for
using particular prayers for every day, it is accounted the excellency of the
extempore faculty to bring a particular Prayer for every day, and not to be
guilty of saying the same Prayer any two days. And (2.) as for dividing of the
entire service of God betwixt Ministers and People, this is usuallly done in
private meetings, where Ministers and Laymen pray alternis: Yea and in public
too, since the People sing Praises in the meeters of Thomas Sternhold, as well
as the Minister, and not only Praises but Prayers too. And as in some places of
the Liturgy the People are enjoined to say after the Minister, so in the
foresaid singing they say after the Clerk. (3.) I know not what they mean by
the shreds or ends of Prayer which they speak of, except it be the several
Prayers appointed to be read in the Liturgy; which possibly they would have put
all into one long and continued Prayer. If that be their mind, they seem to
forget themselves. For page 44. they commended Variety of prayers. And why may
not many Prayers be said at one and the same assembly, as well as at several?
And yet they are very earnest for this last. Yea they themselves if they follow
the Directory, use three prayers at the same assembly; one before they read,
another before they preach, and a third after. And in extraordinary days one
Minister comes with one Prayer, another with a second, and a third with a
third, and so forth. Yea the several Petitions put up in every prayer, may as
well be called shreds and ends of prayer, as the several collects and short
ejaculations of Morning and Evening-Prayer, Letany, or Communion-service. (4.)
As for the repeating of the Lords prayer so often, it is repeated twice in some
Churches at the same Assembly where no Common Prayer is admitted. Now if it be
lawful to repeat it twice, why not thrice? Yea where the Lords Prayer it self
is ejected, thete are frequent iterations of new-coyned Petitions. We know it
is so where but one man is the speaker especially in a long prayer; but much
more in a Fast, when four or five succeed one another, not only in long
Prayers, but for one and the same thing.

SECT. III.
(4.) They aggravate their Argument from scandal; from the looseness of many
of the Persons who are for the Liturgy. Four Answers given to this charge. (5.)
Another of their considerations is, that the Liturgy is made an Idol, which is
retorted on their own Party. Those which have a true esteem for the Liturgy,
cannot disesteem Preaching.

(4.) THey next aggravate their Argument from scandal by this consideration;
Many of the persons offended at our forbearance of the Liturgy, are not of the
stricter, but looser sort of Prefessors, such at his Majesty has stigmatized
in his Proclamation, as vicious, profane and debaucht persons, Drunkards,
Tavern-haunters, Swearers. But I answer (1.) That the Qualifications of the
Champions or Assertors, are but a deceitful Rule to try a cause by. For
sometimes good men may have a private interest against a duty, and bad men
none. Sometimes those who are under an habit of general vitiousnesse, may do
something right; yea Herod did many things: And on the other hand a sanctified
person may do something wrong. If we should judge of a cause by the Adherents,
Christ himself should be condemned, since owned by the Devil, and denied by
Peter. The receiving of the Sacrament at night should be the most approvable
celebration, since practiced by the Anabaptists, and not by the Papists: except
these Ministers prefer a Papist before an Anabaptist. There are many high and
Heroic pieces of justice, clemency, and fidelity acted by the Heathens, which
many that have the name of precious Christians are impatient of: Are these
things the worse for that? In like manner, if the foresaid stigmatized persons
yield a better obedience to the Magistrate then others of a contrary quality,
the difference of the persons is impertinent to the Question, The Authors
should Parcere person is, dicere de vitiis; not speak of the vitiousnesse of
the persons, which are for the Common Prayer, but whether it be a vice to be
for it; nor of the virtues of those which are against it, but whether that
opposition be any of their virtues. (2.) Desinant maledicere, malefacta ne
noscant sua. They say, that many, who are for the Liturgy, are Drunkards, etc.
and so are many which are offended at the use of it, and some such as curse and
swear against it in the open Church. (3.) A very great, if not the greatest
part which are against it, if they are not drunkards, etc. yet they are much
worse, and such as blaspheme their virtues by entertaining them in a den of
most beastly vices; of whom I may say, Horum temperantia male habitat. Persons
which are notoriously malicious, and envious, and seditious, traitors, heady,
high minded, Quakers, Ranters, and the like, it is these men's cause which this
book patronizeth. I will not add into the catalogue the Anabaptists and
Independents, though some of the Presbyterian Brethren have publicly charged
the more sober Sect of the two to have done more hurt then all the Drunkards
and debaucht persons in the Land. But methinks this Argument of theirs was
sufficiently retorted by that horrible Insurrection, which was made at London
last Christmas. For if it be asked, Who were those inhumane and diabolical
persons, who rose up to murder man, woman, and child, in such a manner, that no
ink is black enough to represent it! the answer must be, that these were some
of those, which are so impatient of the Common Prayer. (4.) Let those which are
for the Liturgy be never so bad, and their opposites never so good, yet since
the use of it upon the command of the Magistrate is a necessary duty, it ought
not to be forborne out of fear of offending, no not the better sort, as has
been sufficiently evinced. And therefore this conclusion of theirs is a very
frivolous one, viz We cannot think it lawful for us to scandalize the far
greater number of strict Christians, that we may gratify a few others, etc.
For it is not to gratify others, but the Magistrate and the Laws; or rather to
gratify right reason and conscience, in compliance with that plain Command of
God, Obey those that rule over you in the Lord, and submit your selves.

5. They add another consideration to the like purpose, That that sort of
people, who are most zealous for the Liturgy, do so dote upon it, that it is
clearly become their Idol. Possibly it may be so with some: For every one is
for their own form and way of worship, and need the counsel of Saint Ambrose to
Monica, to follow the custom of the Church she comes to. But are not the
Non-conformists as much for their way, and make as much an Idol of extempore
Prayers (many of them thinking a man's prayers cannot be accepted, unless not
premeditated) yea and with much less reason, since those Prayers are sometimes
forbidden, but the Liturgy is sometimes commanded? But I cannot believe what
they subjoyn, since both my observation and reason evidence the contrary, viz.
With many people we see it demonstrably true, that if a Minister did never
preach the Word of God, yet if he did but read the Common Prayer, it would be
enough. My reason wherefore I believe not this testimony (to say nothing of my
experience, which is quite contrary) is this, because the Liturgy prescribes
Sermons, and therefore whosoever has an high esteem of the Liturgy, must needs
care for Sermons. But however it be with many people in that respect, what does
the Minister contribute to all this by reading the Common Prayer? which is the
thing they should have demonstrated. Certainly no more then he, who sets two
dishes of wholesome meat before a man that likes one better, is the Reason why
the other is neglected or possibly not touched. I would fain know, how the
joining of Prayer with Preaching, according to the Liturgy, does nurse the
people up in this conceit, that preaching is needless?

SECT. IV.
Both Precept and Example are alleged for Forms, though neither is necessary.
Their Reasons [ wherefore its lawful to use the Lords Prayer, and yet not the
Common-prayer] refelled.

I Now proceed to the twelfth Chapter, entitled, A summary recapitulation of
the Ministers Reasons; where they argue against limiting our selves to a form
of Prayer, because they can find no precept for it in the word of God. But that
is notoriously false. For the Prophet says, Take unto you words and return
unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away iniquity, etc. And I have already
proved the same from the titles of David's Prayers, which clearly speak them
appointed, for the use of others. Yea I have proved also, that if the use of a
Form be not forbid in Scripture, it is lawful, though there were no precept for
it, nor example neither. But I must needs deny what follows, That there is no
pattern of it in Scripture, but the Lords Prayer. For I have already produced a
Form used by the Primitive Disciples. As for the Lords Prayer, they say, that
they doubt whether it were intended for a form of Prayer or no, and rather
think it a Direction for the matter of Prayer; one Evangelist saying no more
then After this manner. But that hinders not, but that it might be intended to
be said in terms: For he that says the express words, says After this
manner; though he that says after this manner, does not always say the same
words. So then he that says the words, has both Evangelists to warrant him;
he that does not, has but one. And what though Christ and his Apostles leave
no record of their using of this form, which is another thing they urge, where
do they leave record of their not using it? which if it were recorded, would
never the more prove the use unlawful. For where do they leave any record of
singing Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter, and other forms of worship, which yet are
thought lawful? Indeed this is the Antisabbatarians argument, If the seventh
day was sanctified from the creation, then the celebration and keeping of it by
the Patriarchs before the giving of the Law would have been recorded. But they
have been answered by these Authors, Brethren in nonconformity, That many
things may have been done which are not recorded. For all this they add, Yet we
doubt not but we may use it in the form; and so put it to an use for which God
never intended it. Their Reasons are, (1.) Because it is holy Scripture. But I
would fain know a reason why a form of words which are not holy Scripture, may
not as lawfully be used as those which are. (...) sure all the phrases or forms
of speech, which are used in extempore Prayers, are not holy Scripture. (2.)
Because (say they) it is so short, that we may easily get it by heart, and not
employ our souls at our eyes by reading, while they should be wrestling with
God It seems then, that (whatsoever they said before) though there be no
precept or pattern in the Word of God, yet a man may use a set form of Prayer,
if it be so short that it may be easily remembered; and that one thing, which
they have against the Common Prayer, is, that it cannot be remembered, but must
be read. But I answer, that the reading of the Common Prayer, which they
disallow, is not such a diversion of the soul from wrestling with God, as the
remembering of the Lords Prayer, the use whereof without book they allow. I
never knew a man in reading of a Prayer frequently to skip what he intended to
say: but I have been told of a man, and that of very great parts, who never
offered to say the Lords Prayer in public but he was out. The employing of the
soul at the eye in reading, is nothing so much as her employment in that part
of the brain which is the shop of memory, since the characters imprinted on the
book are not so easily obliterated and defaced as those instamped on the brain.
Let any man tell me, whether his thoughts be not less roving from the subject,
while he is reading a book which he remembers not, then while he is remembering
a speech got by heart? or whether the soul be not put to more labor by saying
it memoriter, then by reading it in a plain print. (3.) They say, that they can
use the Lords Prayer, because the divine authority of it is such, as it has
another manner of influence on their spirits in using, as all the Scripture
has, then can be pretended for any other forms. But if they mean by this
divine Authority they speak of, a divine institution, this cannot be pleaded by
them, except they will grant, that Christ appointed us to use these words in
prayer, which before they denied; and therefore I think that not to be their
meaning. If by this divine authority they allow to the Lords Prayer, they
understand only that the form of words came out of the divine Mint, not
excogitated by man, but dictated by the Spirit of God; then the same influence
may be expected from some other forms, being of divine authority as well as the
Lords Prayer, as those in the Liturgy, O Lord open our Lips, save thy people,
bless thine inheritance. But if the Reason wherefore they can lawfully utter
the Lord Prayer before God, be the divine authority of it, then something (at
least) tantamount to divine authority must be found in the Prayers which they
invent themselves, that they think it lawful to vent them. For it seems, if the
Lords Prayer were not of divine authority, they would not use it. By the same
Reason they would not use their own Prayers, if they were not of divine
authority, or were not endowed with something of an equivalent credit with
divine authority. But now their own Prayers are not of divine authority;
therefore without doubt the Authors believe some excellency to be in them,
which renders them as good and lawful as if they were. And what is that, but
clearly the extempore uttering of them? This is laid in the scales with divine
authority, and out-ballanceth it too, as will appear by these two cases
compared together. These Authors would not use the Lords Prayer so as to utter
the express words, if it were not of divine authority; but because it is of
divine authority, therefore they will. In like manner these Authors would not
utter those words, which usually they do in prayer (besides the Lords Prayer)
if they were not invented extempore, but dictated by another, or by themselves
beforehand; but because they are invented extempore, therefore they will. So
that you see extempore invention is as much preferred before divine authority,
as their own invented prayers are inferior to the Lords Prayer. And now no
marvel, though men stickle so much for the liberty of the extempore vein; for
so did Alexander for divine honors. How otherwise shall they be deified by the
people? If you take away the divine authority of their Prayers, they may
complain with Micah, What have we more? (4.) They give this as their last
Reason, wherefore though they cannot use other forms, yet the Lords Prayer they
can; Because, say they, By the length of it we easily understand, that it was
never intended to be used without any other Prayer. But that, which they easily
understand, will not enter into the head of a rigid Non conformist whom I know;
who, while he stayed in his place, was wont very often to begin at Church with
the Lords Prayer, and to join no other Prayer with it. Yet if they were all of
as easy a conception as these Authors, and agreed in the premises, that the
Lords Prayer was never intended to be used alone; yet how does the conclusion
follow thence, that therefore the Lords Prayer may be used, though not the
Common Prayer? By this Reason they might more lawfully use the Common Prayer,
if they might be suffered to join their extempore Prayers with it: But who can
conceive that it should be lawful to use a set form, so that it be in company
with some other Prayers of their own framing, and yet it should be unlawful to
use it alone! For that Prayer, which is bad when alone, can make no better a
sound among a pack of good ones then a Goose among Swans. But it seems they
compare forms of prayer, as the Wag did the Committee men to Fiddlers, as if
they were Rogues when single, but in consort with extempore Prayers were
Gentlemen-Musicians.

SECT. V.
Their pretense, that no Forms were in use till four hundred years after
Christ, answered. Their Arguments from the uselesness of Forms, from the
Heresies, Persecutions, and separations, which they cause, and from peoples
resting in them, considered and retorted.

THeir next Argument against the Common Prayer is this; Because we cannot find,
that there was ever any Forms of prayer used in the Church till four hundred
years, or very nigh after Christ. But (1.) they must needs except the Lords
Prayer, and many other Scripture Forms. (2.) As for other forms, I have noted
at first, that it were needless to rake into Antiquity for a Solution of this
Question, since they will not stand to the judgment of Antiquity. And
therefore I thought it fitter to argue with them upon common and agreed
Principles, then upon an Authority which must be demonstrated to them.

They argue thus in their following Section, Because we cannot imagine any use
at all of them, or any good they ever did, especially when imposed. This
Argumentation is frequently inculcated; We see no need. What good do they? What
use is there? and the like. But take this Argument singly, as it is placed in
their Book, and it sounds nothing. For this Argument cannot prove, that a
Minister ought not to use the Common Prayer, except it be supposed that he must
do nothing (though otherwise lawful) but what himself sees to be useful and
necessary; and by consequence he ought not to conform to the Directory, except
he should see the usefulness of the several Directions; and so it seems that
the Directory bound men not only to a conformity of practice, but also of
judgment, which is a much more Tyrannical imposition then that which these
Authors so much complain of. But I wonder to see, that those who would be left
to the liberty of Practice to do what themselves think best, will not allow
others the liberty of their consciences, but would have all men not only to act
like them in things lawful, but also to think like them touching the expediency
of lawful things. A man knowing it lawful to conform to the Liturgy may do it,
and yet keep his judgment free, thinking that it might be much bettered and
mended; so that though he be bound in his practice, he is left to the liberty
of his thoughts. But when a man is required to subscribe the long Confession
made by the Assembly of Divines, he is bound not only to do what he thinks
might better be undone, but to think that to be true which he thinks to be
false. There is no comparison betwixt the imposing of Ceremonies, and the
imposing of a Confession of Faith. A man may dislike the Ceremonies, and yet
use them; as he that said he would preach with a pair of horns on his head,
rather then not at all: But a man that subscribes a Confession of Faith, is at
no liberty to dislike it. Now my Observation is this, That those men who are
most against the imposing of Ceremonies, are most for the imposition of
Confessions of Faith, and complain against the Articles of our Church, because
there is not enough cramd into them to choke the swallow of an Arminian. Those
who think themselves highly injured, when they are required to wear such a
white Garment as others do, in the mean time have the conscience to expect that
all men should be of the same mind that they are of. But to return to what I
said at first, A Minister may lawfully do some things which he knows no use of,
were it only to conform to custom, or to gratify some private persons;
supposing that as he knows no good it does, so he knows no hurt by it neither.
But now when a thing of an innocent quality is commanded, there is this Use of
it, if there were none else, that by doing this thing we render obedience to
our Rulers, which is an high part of our Religion. It is for them to judge,
what use and need there is of it, and what good it does: It belongs to us to
enquire only whether it be lawful. He is a naughty Son or Servant, who will not
do a lawful thing commanded by his Father or Master, except himself be informed
what good it will do, or what use there be thereof. The Question is, what hurt
the use of Liturgies has done, or is likely to do. And indeed in that place I
am now upon, the Authors speak something to this pertinent point, asserting
that Liturgies have been the Mothers of Heresies, causing separations, and
dreadful persecutions, and will do so still in Reason. But (1.) How have they
caused separations any more then Christ (if you understand it of Liturgies in
the general, and not only of naughty ones) only by accident? They should prove
that there is in a Liturgy quatenus a Liturgy, a natural and proper tendency of
it self to cause separations and Heresies, or else they do nothing but accuse
the Gospel it self. Who have made the greatest Separations and Heresies among
us? those who used the Liturgy, or they who forsook it? Ask the Quakers and
Ranters where they began, and they will tell you. (2.) As for Persecutions,
what the imposing of Liturgies has done to raise them, is nothing to the
Question: For the Authors pretend to give Reasons wherefore a Minister may not
use them when imposed, not wherefore Rulers may not impose them. Now a Minister
may use that which a Magistrate may not impose; as I have showed already, and
could do it in an hundred undeniable instances. It is most certain indeed that
some men have been persecuted for the use of the Liturgy: but without their
fault, and only by men of the same mind with the Authors. If any others have
been persecuted for not using it, such instances assist not this their
Argument, but make against it: For they should show how the using of it, and
not how the not using of it does raise persecutions. But for my part I cannot
see how such Persons who use it not, can be said to be persecuted while no
other Mulcts are inflicted on them, then what are established by the sanction
of the Laws; unless by Persecution we understand Prosecution: For so I
confess, not only they, but many a Thief and other Law-breakers have been
persecuted.

The next Argument which has not been already fully answered, is in their
eighth Section; Because the Generality of those given up to all manner of
looseness, are impatient for it, and rest in it; it is as the Papists beads to
them, and they care for no other worship of God: and we conceive it far from
our duty to harden any in what we know is their sin and wickedness. To which I
answer, That any persons care for no other worship of God, then what is
prescribed in the Common Prayer Book, it is no wonder; since all is there
prescribed, Prayer, Reading, Singing, Preaching, Sacraments. If they mean that
they care only for the Prayers, and not for the preaching: what they say,
cannot enter into my faith, no not in a dream; and I have given the Reason of
my disbelief already. If any rest in the common prayer, they should be taught
better; as those which rest in afternoon Sermons, or extempore prayers, who
place their Religion in them, and think that a man cannot pray in the spirit,
if he pray by a Form. Why do not the Authors fear to harden such Persons in
their sin by their example? Certainly those which think the Common Prayer may
lawfully be used, saving for fear of scandal, ought sometimes to use it, were
it only for this Reason, that their Example might not tempt weak Christians to
think Religion consists in Nonconformity, as many do, restraining the name of
Christians, the Godly, the Brethren, to the Non-conformists. For such an
opinion wrought or confirmed by such an Example, would prove by much a more
grievous scandal, then that which the Authors pretend to be so tender of; since
there is more Reason for a man to rest in conformity, then in Nonconformity:
For the former is a piece of obedience performed to the Moral Law, Honor thy
Father; but the latter is disobedience thereto.

SECT. VI.
The impertinency of pleading that the Liturgy is pressed on them out of
Malice. Such a supposition makes rather for Conformity. Their scruple at the
obsolete words, dubious phrases, and antique Responds, answered. Their
Conclusion, and mine.

THey produce another Reason wherefore they cannot use the Common Prayer in the
next Section, in these words, Because we are assured in our consciences that
very many of those who are earnest for it, press the use of it upon no other
account, then from a principle of Malice against Gods Ministers and People. But
I think there was never seen a more feeble objection brought in a case of so
much moment. For may not good and necessary duties be pressed out of Malice?
Was not the solemn League and Covenant accounted a good and necessary duty? and
yet upon many a man was it pressed out of Malice by those who thought he would
not take it, and so they should have advantage against him. Is not the taking
of the Oath of Allegiance a good and necessary duty? and yet possibly it may be
pressed upon some out of Malice. The truth is, this Argument taken from Malice
is so far from making against conformity, that it makes strongly for it. For by
how much the more the Enemies of these Ministers watch for their fall, and
desire a just occasion against them; so much the more careful they should be to
give them none, but conform to the Laws, and stop the mouths of their
ill-willers by an orderly and peaceable conversation.

In their next Section they say they cannot use the Common Prayer, because it
is full of obsolete words, dubious phrases, antic Responds. But (1.) As for
the Obsolete words, I have heard that there is an intention of reforming them.
However there are the like in Sternholds and Hopkins translation, and yet
probably these Authors do sing them with their People. Besides, these obsolete
words are not so hard to be understood, as many which the Assembly has put
down in their childrens Catechism; and may be all interpreted to the meanest
capacity in one Sermon, and the hour better spent then often it is. And so may
(2.) The Dubious phrases, though I believe there is hardly made an extempore
prayer which for the length of it has not as many dubious phrases; especially
if captiously examined as long as our Liturgy has been. (3.) If by Antic
Responds they mean Ancient; what hurt is there in that? Can these Authors use
nothing that is ancient? why then do they quarrel at Innovations? If by Antic
they mean foolish and ridiculous; they should remember that it is with modes,
forms, fashions, and ceremonies, as it is with other things: secundum modum
Recipientis, salves all. That which is foolish and ridiculous to one, is grave
and wise to another. Broad-brim'd Hats are ridiculous generally, when out of
fashion, and so are narrow ones when the others have been used awhile. If the
Authors and the rest of their minds would but unanimously use these Responds,
the seeming antickness and ridiculousnesse in the Eyes of some at present would
quickly be worn out. But therefore men think the fashion ridiculous, because it
is not worn by such Persons as they most esteem.

The Authors add in the same Section, that the Method of the Common Prayer
(through the whole) is like to none in any reformed Church in the World. But I
wonder that the Church of England should be so inconsiderable a part of the
Christian world, that she must go to other Churches, and not they rather come
to her. I am sorry that Divines of several foreign Churches have spoken much
more reverently of our Liturgy, then the Authors.

They conclude, This is the sum of our Apology: always reserving to our selves
further liberty of adding any further Arguments or Exceptions. Indeed they had
need to reserve that liberty; otherwise they have left their cause in a very
poor condition. But we may easily see that they are so far from seeking
satisfaction in these disputes to their present doubts and scruples; that they
are purposed to study and devise new Cavils, when these are answered. And
therefore I sadly prognosticate, that neither this of mine, nor any other more
able attempt will prevail with many such persons; that are rather active then
passive in their doubts, and that study more how to fortify their own
Objections, then how to confute them. But if this undertaking may be but so
successful, as to preserve other more indifferent Readers fi^^^ being misled by
the Reasons whose sophistry I have detected, I am infinitely recompensed for my
pains, and can contentedly wait on the divine Suada to give a satisfactory
answer to the Rest.

FINIS.

