Peake DOMINE DIRIGE NOS

blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
Martis primo die Septembris 1668. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Dei
Gratia, Angliae, etc. XXo.
Whereas by an Order of his MAJESTY in Council, made the 22. of July last,
intimating that diverse Scandalous and Seditious Pamphlets, tending very much to
the Disturbance of the Peace and Quiet of this Kingdom, are daily sold and
dispersed about the Cities of London and Westminster and Parts adjacent by a
sort of Loose and Idle people called Hawkers, under pretense of carrying about
and bending News-books and Gazetts, It is required and commanded, for
preventing the great Mischiefs and Inconveniences that may ensue by permitting
the same, that the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of London, and Justices of
Peace within the Liberties of Westminster and Middlesex, shall not permit or
suffer any of those people called Hawkers, whether Men or Women, to carry
about, cry, sell or disperse any Gazetts, News-books, Libells, or other
Pamphlets whatsoever, within their respective Liberties or Jurisdictions; but
that they cause all such to be forthwith apprehended and sent to the House of
Correction, to be there kept at hard Labor: This Court therefore, for the more
effectual Execution of his MAJESTY's said Pleasure and Command, and in Addition
to what has been already done by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor in
obedience thereunto, does think fit and Order, That the Provost-Marshalls and
all Constables and other Officers whom it may concern, in their several
Precincts and elsewhere (as they shall have opportunity) within this City and
Liberties, shall diligently apply themselves to discover the said Hawkers,
Sellers or Dispersers of Gazetts, News-books, Libells, or other Pamphlets, and
them to apprehend, and bring before his Lordship, or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to be sent and set to Labor at Bridewell, or
(as the Case may require) to be otherwise disposed and prosecuted to more
condign Punishment ordained by Law. And if any the said Marshalls, Constables
or others, shall be found remiss or negligent of their Duties herein, such
Offender, upon notice or information thereof, shall be strictly proceeded
against, and receive the most severe Penalties of the Law for his Offense.

Avery.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


