AN ACT OF Common Council MADE The sixth of October 1646. Alderman Adams Major.

For reformation of sundry abuses practiced by diverse Persons in the
Common-Markets and Streets of the City of London.

arms

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1656.

The Laws of the Market. ADAMS Major.
WHereas several good Laws and Ordinances have been heretofore made, as well by
the Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen, as by this Court, for the wel-ordering of
the Markets of the City of London, for the redress of several abuses of
Butchers, Victuallers, and others thereunto resorting, for sale of their Flesh
victuals, and other Commodities in the several Markets of this City, and
assigning places and times for the said Markets to be kept and held; Which said
Laws and Ordinances by daily experience are found not effectual to prevent some
present and growing inconveniences, nor have wrought that good effect, as was
intended thereby.

For redress whereof, be it enacted by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, and by authority of the
same, That no Butcher or Country Farmer, Victualler, or other person or persons
whatsoever, either free of the City of London, or not free of the said City,
from and after the first day of December next, after the publication of this
Act, shall sell, utter, or put to open show or sale in the Streets or
White-markets within this City; that is to say, Leadenhall street without the
Hall, Cheapside and Newgate-market, any Beef upon pain that every person or
persons that from and after the time aforesaid, shall sell, utter, put to sale,
or show in any of the said Markets any Beef, shall forfeit and lose Twenty
shillings for every time so offending or doing contrary to the true intent and
meaning of this Act, And further be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that all
and every Butcher, free, or not free of the City of London, who keeps no
Butcher Shop or Shops within the said City and Liberties thereof, or within two
miles distance of the Liberties thereof, shall, and may fell, utter, show, and
put to sale, his, or their Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pork, and other Butchery
ware, at certain stalls and places in that behalf appointed in Leadenhall and
the Greenyard there, and that only upon Wednesdays and Saturdays weekly, and
not in any other place or places within the said City of London and Liberties
thereof, upon pain that every such Butcher or Butchers who shall sell, utter,
or put to sale, or show any Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pork, or, any other
Butchery ware in any other place or places within the City of London, or
Liberties thereof, then in Leadenhall and the Greenyard there, shall for every
such offense or doing forfeit Twenty shillings And whereas of late times, many
of the stalls and standings within Leadenhall and the Greenyard there, have,
and yet are in the occupations of several persons who are not Butchers by
Trade, nor use or exercise the Trade of a Butcher, who let them out at dear
rates to others; And likewise many of the said stalls are in the possession of
Butchers who live within the City of London and Liberties thereof, who keep the
said Stalls and likewise their Shops, By means of which said doings, the
Country Butchers, and other Butchers who keep no Shops within the said City, or
within two miles of the Liberties of the City of London, and would furnish the
said Markets with Butchery ware, can get no convenient room there, and so are
necessitated to fell and utter their Commodities in the White-markets and other
places, or to forbear the Markets, whereby prices are inhaunsed and the said
Market disfurnished.

For remedy whereof, be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the
ground where the standings and places for sale and uttering of Flesh and
Butchery ware within ^eadenhall and the Greenyard there, be resumed and taken
into the Cities hands and actual possession, before the said first day of
December next ensuing.

And further that no Stall, standing, or place within Leadenha^l or the
Greenyard there, shall from thenceforth be letten or farmed out unto any Butcher
or Butchers, who does, or shall keep any Butchershop or shops within the City
of London or Liberties thereof, or within two miles of the Liberties of the
said City, for so long time as he, or they shall keep any Butchers shop within
the Limits aforesaid.

And that from thenceforth the Stals, standings, and places in Leadenhall and
the Greenyard there, be let unto Country Butchers, or such Freemen who are
Butchers, and keep not any Butcher shop or shops within the City of London and
Liberties thereof, or within two miles distance of the Liberties of the said
City, and for so long time only as he or they shall furnish the said stalls,
standings, and places with wholesome Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pork, or other
Butchery ware upon Wednesdays and Saturdays, being the usual Market days
there, in his or their own rights, and not as Servant or Servants to others.

And further, That no Butcher whatsoever shall have and enjoy more then one
stall, standing, or place within Leadenhall or the Greenyard there at one time.

Provided always that the Butchers Freemen of the City of London, shall and
may at all times convenient, sell utter, show, and put to sale their Flesh and
Butchery wares in their Shops within the said City of London, and Liberties
thereof, as formerley they have done and accustomed; any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided that the Country Farmer, Lader, or Kidder, as to all wholesome Flesh
victuals and other Commodities except Beef, may have liberty to sell, show and
utter the same in the Common and public White-markets within the City of
London and Liberties thereof in Market times this Act, or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as of late the Forain Butchers, Victuallers, and other people
resorting to the Markets of the City of London to sell their Flesh victuals and
other Commodities, do continue and keep their Markets all the day, and until
night, not observing the hours appointed for their departure by former Acts and
Ordinances, To the end the streets may in due time be cleansed for the health
of the Inhabitants of those places; which doing of theirs tends much to the
disorder of the said Markets (pestering the streets where those markets are
kept) inhaunsing the prices of Commodities, disturbance and hinderance of
Passengers and Tradesmen dwelling near the said places, and by reason thereof
the streets cannot be cleansed as they ought to be, to the scandal of the
Government of the City of London and is very necessary to be reformed.

And whereas it is pretended, that the formerly appointed times for raising of
the Markets is too soon; by reason whereof the parties repairing thereto cannot
have sufficient time to sell off their Commodities: To the end therefore that
such persons may have a convenient time to vend their Commodities, and be
rendered without excuse and that there might be also a convenient time
afterward for cleansing of the streets;

It is enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Market-bell in the several
Markets within the City of London shall ring twice every market day (that is to
say) the first ringing (from the five and twentieth day of March yearly, until
the twenty ninth day of September) at seven of the clock before noon; and from
the twenty ninth day of September yearly, until the five and twentieth day of
March at eight of the clock before noon, and not before: And that before that
time no person or persons shall sell, show, or put to sale his Flesh, Victuals,
or other Commodites.

And that the second ringing of the said market-bell in the several markets
aforesaid, for raising of the said Markets, shall begin to ring, from, and
after the five and twentieth day of March yearly, until the twenty ninth day
of September yearly, half an hour after four of the clock in the afternoon, and
to continue ringing till five of the clock: And from and after the twenty ninth
day of September until the five and twentieth day of March, to begin to ring
half an hour after two of the clock, and to continue ringing till three of the
clock in the afternoon, And that no Butcher and Butchers, or other market
people whatsoever resorting to any public or Common-market within the City of
London or Liberties thereof, shall utter, sell, or put to open show or sale any
Flesh, Victuals, or other Commodities whatsoever in the said Markets that day
after the end of the ringing of the said bell, but shall immediately after the
said bell has done ringing as aforesaid, depart from the said markets, upon
pain that every person or persons who shall offend, or do contrary to this
clause of this Act, shall forfeit the sum of Ten shillings for every time
offending or doing contrary to this clause of this Act.

And forasmuch as the market is most principally intended for the benefit of
Housekeepers, who buy for their own use and behoof; It is further enacted by
Authority aforesaid, That at the beginning of the ringing of the market-bell
for raising of the said market, and during the time of the ringing thereof, the
Retailers and Traders of this City who buy to sell again, may lawfully enter
into the said several Markets, or any of them and make their Provisions, and
buy the remainder of the said markets, and carry the same to their several
Houses and Shops, and not before, upon pain that every such Retailer or
Retailers, or Traders, who shall buy any Commodity in the said markets to sell
again, before the Ringing of the market-bell for raising of the said markets as
aforesaid, contrary to the intent of this clause of this Act, shall forfeit for
every time Forty shillings.

And forasmuch as all dead Fleshmeat ought be sold in open and common markets,
and not to be carried up and down, and sold by way of Hawking; by means whereof
much unwholesome Meat has been vended and sold, to the great deceit of the
buyer thereof, and prejudice of the Commonwealth; And whereas by the Custom
of this City, such Flesh and other things hawked are become forfeited; It is
enacted by Authority aforesaid, That no Butcher or other person or persons
whatsoever shall sell, utter, or offer to put to sale by way of Hawking, or as
a Hawker, any manner of Flesh whatsoever; in any Street or Lane, Inn, or other
place or places within this City of London or Liberties thereof, but only in
his, or their open Shop or Shops, Stall or Stalls, or in the usual Market place
or places, and in Market time only, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Flesh
so carried or offered to be put to sale by way of Hawking without any manner of
favor, according to the ancient Custom of the City of London used and
approved.

And whereas diverse Inhabitants dwelling in, or near unto the several market
places aforesaid, do exact and take several sums of money of the Country
people who bring Victual to the said several markets, for, and under pretense
that it is in their power to hinder such market people from standing in the
Markets before their doors to sell their Victual; which pretense of theirs is
utterly against Law, for that they have no power to hinder any the market
people from standing or sitting in the said Markets: Be it declared and Enacted
by Authority aforesaid, That no such person or persons dwelling or inhabiting
in, or near any of the said Markets; or other person or persons whatsoever,
other then the Clerks of the several Markets, Beadles, and other persons for
their ancient Fees, Duties and Allowances usually paid and taken, shall from
henceforth directly or indirectly take, require or exact any sum or sums of
money, or other thing or things, of any person or persons bringing any Victual
or other Commodities or Provisions to the said Markets to be sold, for, and in
respect of any such place, standing, or sitting in the said several Markets,
upon pain that every person or persons who after publication of this Act, shall
exact, require, or take any such sum or sums of money or other thing or
reward, shall forfeit and lose for every time so doing and offending Twenty
shillings. And it is the true intent and meaning of this Act, That in the
White-markets no Bag or Bags of straw be used or permitted, nor any Boards for
that purpose, but such as shall not be above one Ell in length, and half an Ell
in breadth, upon pain of six shillings eight pence to be forfeited by any
person or persons for every time he or they shall do or offend against this
clause of this Act.

And it is thought fit for the more convenience of the Markets and market
people, for the show and sale of their Victual, that such Boards as aforesaid
may be used; and if any the market people aforesaid shall desire to use any
such Boards provided by any of the Clerks of the several Markets, that then
such Clerk of the several Markets shall not take for any such board above Two
pence for one market day.

Provided always, this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend unto
such person or persons who shall bring Peascods, Strawberries, Resberries,
Roses, or milk to the markets or streets of the City of London to sell, but
that he or they may stay, and tarry longer time then is before expressed, if
they see occasion, so as the same persons that bring them first to market do
continue the selling thereof, and do not transfer them to any Huckster or
Retailer to sell the same, any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted that all and every Act and Ordinance heretofore made
for the regulating and wel-governing of the markets within the City of London,
not being contrary to this present Act, shall stand and be in their former
strength and force, any thing in this Act notwithstanding.

All which pains, forfeitures and penalties, sum and sums of money to be
forfeited by virtue of this Act, shall be recovered by action of Debt, Bill, or
Plaint to be commenced and prosecuted in the name of the Chamberlain of the
City of London for the time being, in the Court holden before the Mayor and
Aldermen in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London, wherein no
Essoin or wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant. And that
the Chamberlain of the said City for the time being in all suits to be
prosecuted by virtue of this Act against any Offender or Offenders contrary to
the same, shall recover the ordinary costs of suit to be expended in and about
the prosecution thereof. And if the suit pass for the Defendant, then the said
Defendant to recover his costs. And that the Chamberlain for the time being
shall not have power to take less of any Offender, then herein is limited to
be forfeited for every offense.

And further, That one moity of all forfeitures to be recovered by virtue
hereof, (the costs of the suit for recovery of the same being deducted) shall
after recovery and receipt thereof, at, or before the twenty fifth day of March
yearly be paid and delivered to the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital, to be
employed toward the relief of the poor children to be brought up and maintained
in that Hospital: And the other moity to him or them which shall first give
information of the offenses for which the forfeitures shall grow, and prosecute
suite in the name of the Chamberlain of the said City for recovery of the same,
any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

