An ESSAY Toward An UNIVERSAL ALPHABET.
HAving observed a great difficulty in truly writing what is pronounced, or
truly pronouncing what is written, either in our own or foraign Languages, by
the Ordinary Alphabets now in use, arising either from the want of some
Letters, or the differing Pronounciation of the same Character or Letter in
differing Languages, and the irregularities of its various Sounds in any one
Language, I saw a necessity of some such expedient as I have here attempted,
Viz. An Universal Alphabet, which should contain an Ennumeration of all such
single Sounds or Letters as are used in any Language, which I have endeavored
by Examining all those Languages, which hitherto I have considered: Although this
my attempt be not new, but what before by others has been attempted, yet I
hope what herein I have done will not be unuseful.

The Benefits of such a Collection being perfect.

1. Children from their first beginning, being taught and accustomed to the
true Expression of all these single Sounds or Letters, will without difficulty
be brought to pronounce truly and readily any Language how seemingly difficult
soever; for the pretended difficulty to some Persons of Pronouncing some
Letters, is only that they have not been accustomed to pronounce them, either
singly or in conjunction with others, and this difficulty is chiefly in Persons
come to Age.

2. It will enable any one, accustomed to the true Pronounciation of this
Alphabet, truly to describe the Pronounciation of any Language whatever, that
shall in his hearing be distinctly pronounced; so as another also accustomed to
this Alphabet, although he before never had heard this Language pronounced,
shall notwithstanding at first sight of such Writing, be able so truly to
pronounce it, that it shall (if at all) very little differ from the Original
Pronounciation. Whereas by the use of the common Alphabets, if any strange
Language be written, another, and a stranger to that Language, shall never be
able truly to pronounce such Writing, as it should be or was by the Writer
intended, nor even the Writer himself sometime after that he has forgotten
what Sound he designed to describe.

3. It will also be useful to perpetuate the true Sounds of any Language, and
serve as a Standard thereof to after Ages: for if all the single Sounds
expressable, be here Collected and Characterized, And that no one Character
have more than one Sound, nor any one Sound be expressed by more than one
Character; it cannot fall out that any Character should be falsely pronounced,
but it will soon be discovered; for this false Sound he gives it, must be the
true Sound of some other Letter of this Alphabet: and so none can Err herein,
but he that wilfully or carelessly will do it.

In this Collection I proceed according to these Rules.

1. THat no true single Sound can be truly described or expressed by the
Conjunction of any two or more other single Sounds, Viz If a Vowel, by the
Conjunction of other single Vowels, or if a Consonant, by the Conjunction of
other single Consonants.

2. That whatever Sound cannot be expressed or described, but by the
Conjunction of two or more single Sounds, is no single but a compounded Sound.

3 That in every composition of single Sounds, the particular single Sounds
which make up that Composition, ought to be truly and clearly discerned in the
Sound of the Composition, otherwise it cannot be truly said to be a
Composition, and composed of such single Sounds.

The Single Sounds
USually named Letters, are commonly distinguished into Vowels and Consonants.
Vowels are such as are singly expressable: as, a, e, o, etc. Consonants are
such as cannot singly be expressed without the Conjunction of a Vowel, as, b,
d, f, g, etc.

Of Vowels
THe whole number of them are these 14 following, to which, for the better
discerning of their Sounds, I have annexed so many words wherein they are
expressed, all English but three, Viz. the 7, 8, 12, because no English words
occurred to my memory, wherein they are expressed.

1 a as tall 2 a tallow 3 a tale 4 e tell 5 ea teal 6 i till 7 u dure French 8
ui muis Lowdutch 9 y tile 10 o tone 11 u tun 12 u une French 13 oo tool 14 ou
told

These are the Vowels, each of which are long and short. Short as in the words,
God, Man, Sin. Long as in Ball, Demand, Seen, etc.


Of Dipthongs.
A Dipthong in the ordinary use of the Word signifies a Compound of two Vowels
but those in ordinary so named, are most o^ them nothing but only single
Vowels, as ea, oo, ou, eo, ai, in the Words teal, tool, told, people, main,
etc. That these are but single Sounds will appear, if we consider the Sounds of
the Vowels singly, that make those supposed Compositions, and then whether
those Sounds in Composition will make out the true Sound required, so as both
of them may be clearly discerned in these pretended Compounds. For instance, in
ea in Teal.

Consider the Sound of e in the Word sent, or in the word scene; and a in the
Word ball, or in the Word and, or in the Word tale, and then whether e, in
either of the two Sounds going before and a in either of the three Sounds
following joined together, will make out the true Sound of ea in the Word teal,
if not, then is it a single Sound; thus, if you proceed to examine all the
other, you will I doubt not find the same event, and I believe the true
Dipthongs and Tripthongs of the Greeks were no other but a true expression of
the single Vowels they joined together, but in so short a time, as both or all
three were expressed in the time that in ordinary one single Vowel was
expressed.

Of Consonants.
THe whole number of Consonants are these undermentioned, as nigh as I could
Collect, by examining all the Languages I am acquainted with or have heard
expressed, and I think but few, if any single Consonants have escaped my
Notice, all which in this following Table I have ranged in 11 Files, and 6
Ranks.

1 2. 3 4 5 1 B b^^^ D dark J Jest G Game = 2 p pond T tart Ch Chest K came = 3
M mind N name gn Seigneur Fr. ng song = 4 = dh this J Jean Fr. g gave l.d. V
Valley 5 = th thing sh shall ch dach l.d. F Folly 6 h ^^^se fr.

6 7 8 9 10 11 ^ L land H hand Y yard R rand W ^and Fr. sign. Fren. Lowduch
Welsh ^ ^ Z Zeal ^ w S S^^l^

The First File contains three Consonants, the Second six, the Third and
Fourth ten, the Fifth and Sixth four, the seventh two, the remaining four each
one, in all twenty nine Consonants.

The Second Rank in each File contain Derivatives [so I shall name them] in
relation to the First Rank, or their Primitives, all alike in kind, so also all
the Derivatives in the Third Rank, in the Fourth and Fifth Rank, whereby their
Sounds will be the better comprehended.

Those places filled by two strokes (=) signify that Sounds may be expressed
by the same posture of the Mouth with their Primitives, answering in kind to
those in the same Rank wherein they stand, but they would be so like in
pronounciation to some others in the Table, that the difference would be too
nice for common discernment, and also for that I have not observed them used in
any Language I have heard expressed by a perfect Mouth, I thought it needless
to characterize them.

As those of the Fourth and Fifth Rank in the First File are like those of, the
Fourth and Fifth Rank in the Fifth File, those of the First, Second, Third
Ranks in the Fith File, are like those of the same Ranks in the First File,
those of the First, Second, Third Ranks in the Sixth File, are like those of
the same Ranks in the Second File.

Some of these abovementioned twenty nine single Consonants, are vulgarly
supposed compounded, as th, ch, sh, gn, ng, etc. But if you shall consider the
Sound of each single Consonant in the Composition apart, and then the
Conjunction of them in that order, so as the single Sounds may be clearly
discerned, in the Composition you will never make the Sounds required, and if
neither by this nor by any other Conjunction the required sound can be made
out, it must be a single and no compound Sound.

Whereas these single Sounds, vulgarly described as Compounds, ought to have
single Characters; and Secondly, that some of the single Characters have in the
same Lanuage a different Sound, as c in the Words, can, mice; g in the Words
George, Game, etc. and also a different Sound in different Languages, as I
Consonant differently expressed in several Languages, as in English, Low Dutch,
French, Spanish; and Thirdly, that some single Sounds are
different-characterized in the same Language, as the Sound of s in same, and c
in mice, the same Sound by two different Characters; so also c in can, and k in
kind the same, etc. and the same also in different Languages, as ch in the
French Word chose, and sh in the Word shall, the same, etc. It will be
imposible in the use of the present Characters or Alphabets to add those
wanting, and to correct and limit the Sound of others in use, thereby to
constitute a perfect Alphabet because people so long accustomed or habituated
to such corrupt and differing Expressions of the present Characters, will be
always subject on the sight of the old to give them those Sounds they have been
used to, and to Spell Words according to their old and corrupt custom,
whatsoever Rule^ shall be set to the contrary, and therefore there will be a
necessity of a whole new Set of Characters, both of Vowels and Consonants.


