A SPEECH TO THE KING:

Made by a MINISTER OF THE FRENCH CHURCH OF THE SAVOY, The 19th. of October,
1681. in the French Tongue.

And published at LONDON By His MAJESTY's special Command.

Rendered into English.

DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at Colledge-Green, for William Mendey in the
Exchange. 1681.

A SPEECH TO THE KING, Made by a Minister of the FRENCH CHURCH of the SAVOY,
the 19th. of October 1681.
IT is not I who speak, though it is I who utter the Words, nor is it your
French Church of the Savoy, though it is She, most humbly pray's your Royal
Audience: It is, Sir, a pious Colonie of French Protestants which the Tempest
daily casts into your Ports; these are the Israelites which pass through the
Sea, to retire into Canaan; these are the Merchants of the Gospel, which sell
all they have for the Pearl of great price, and in your Kingdom seek for the
Kingdom of Heaven. These are those, Sir, who with all the reformed World,
explain themselves this day by my mouth, and my mouth may be called the Echo
of their voices.

See, Sir, in our Persons they come with your Declaration in their hands, to
present themselves before that most August Throne from whence it proceeded; as
your Majesty has in express terms pronounced, that you esteem it a point of
honor and conscience to do them good; they also hold it a point of Conscience
and honor, to come and kiss those pious hands, which have saved them from
their Shipwreck, and are to them a perpetual spring of blessings and favors.
They look, Sir, upon this your mysterious Declaration, given in their favor,
as the Masterpiece of Providence, and if I may so call it, An admirable
Apparition to the eyes of the Church, and the World it self.

The Established Church admires it as the effect of extraordinary Piety, and
the astonished World looks upon it as the Produce, of the highest Prudence; in
all places this your Majesty's Oracle is heard, they tell it in Gath, and
proclaim it in Ascalon, and the seven Hills Echo the noise which it every
where makes, the Isles clap their hands, and the Continent answers the Isles.

All the World speaks of it, but those, from whom a Declaration so full of
Zeal, for the name of Protestants, has taken away all pretense of calumnious
talking, and condemned them to everlasting silence.

I already hear by anticipation the voice and applauses of equitable Posterity:
and it is not to be doubted that great work, both of good Policy and good
Conscience, shall be equally celebrated in the Annals both of the Age and
Church. This Oracle of your Majesty shall be twice in History, witness of your
Wisdom and witness of your Piety; And there we shall see to appear with
splendour, both Virtue human and Virtue divine; and it will be no easy task to
distinguish which shines brightest, the Monarch or the Defender of the Faith.

But, Sir, this charitable Declaration has already found another sort of
Panegyrists, whose blessings and praises (God himself the King, who makes
Kings) takes pleasure to hear* these are our Children, Sir, those little Moses
which float on the Waters, before they have scarcely touched the Earth: those
poor young Orphans; those little ones of the Family of Faith, to whom the great
Defender of the Faith proclaims himself Father. These are the Angels of the
Earth who in consort with the Angels of Heaven do praise God for what he has
done by his Anointed. Methinks I see them in their Mothers Bosoms, attentively
listening, when they relate to them what God in our days, by your means has
done for them. Methinks I see them begin to stammer out the Language of your
people: to learn to bless you in more than one Tongue; and for their first
Lesson, they learn, to read that tender, that Fatherly Declaration of your
Majesty. Methinks, Sir, I hear them cry out when they see you appear, Let the
KING live, let him live who has made us live, and with our bodily Lives
preserves our Souls.

Methinks moreover I hear many other of Christ's Confessors, of all Estates, of
all Arts, and all Orders which the World would subdue by Famine, but their
Faith succor'd by your Charity, has conquered the World. I hear them, I say,
speak without ceasing of your Majesty, and emulously celebrate your Royal
bounty. Ah Sir! could you hear it, how pleasant would the harmony be to your
Majesty's Ears! a melody a thousand times more agreeable and charming, than that
which so highly pleased the Emperor Augustus, when passing along he heard the
people praise him, he protested in all his life he never heard so grateful a
sound; yet was that but the vain noise of some frivolous and worldly praises;
but those which your Majesty receives on the part of these poor afflicted ones,
are Divine, Eternal, and the same to the bottom, which the Poor will give to
their Charitable Benefactors, by the mouth of our Lord himself, at the
solemnity of the last day.

But also, Sir, what occasion do you not give to these poor Job's to sing in
the night, when they see your Majesty ask for them (as I may say) the Alms of
your Subjects? What comfort is it when the Defender of their Faith, does open
at once so many Fountains for their subsistence, which were prohibited them,
for the hatred of their Faith, in the Country from whence they came? What
sweetness is it, to see themselves enrolled amongst the natural Inhabitants of
your Estates, as soon as they set their Feet upon them? How great is their Joy,
that they may for the future be born, live and die in peace? I am witness, Sir,
that one of them fallen sick a few days after his arrival in this County, at
last gave up his pious Soul to God, blessing that Providence which had
conducted him hither, to die in peace, under the shadow of your Sacred Throne,
and in the bosom of your Jerusalem.

In truth, Sir, it is impossible that so many wishes and blessings, which issue
from so many faithful mouths, should not strike a great stroke in Heaven; it
cannot be, but those Just ones which so highly bless the bounty of their
Trajan, must obtain for his Reign the felicity of Augustus. And who knows,
whether that Heaven which takes charge of all the interests of its Church, will
not likewise take care of all the acknowledgments they owe you, and make known
by the effects the success of their Prayers? Who knows but the example of so
many Protestants, marked with a good stamp, who cast themselves into the Arms
of your Church, may help to disarm those which trouble its peace? Who knows but
our Children who cross the Seas for security of their Salvation, may by their
presence officiate as little Mediators, between Brethren animated against each
other, with so much passion and so little reason? Who knows but they may relent
at the sight of so piteous an object, and may hereafter make it conscience, not
to rip up the Entrals of a Mother, to whom so many Confessors of the Faith
(whom some have endeavored to make Martyrs) do every day throng, to beg her
Blessing as adopted Children?

But expecting the Success of those Vows, which a just and pious acknowledgment
inspire us with, retiring my self, what shall I say which may well express it
to your Majesty? where shall I on this Subject find words powerful enough to
explain our thoughts? for my Weakness cannot reach it in an ordinary style; and
in those raptures of Admiration which I feel, I fancy it easy to raise my self
to the highest flights of Eloquence, and after the example of an ancient
Orator, and the sight of so many Miracles, to call the Dead to this great
Spectacle. I can scarce forbear crying out, O admirable Elizabeth! O most happy
James! O most great and good Charles the first, Kings of the Apocalypse! who
have carried your spiritual Riches, and the Crown of your Virtues into the holy
City! Great Souls! Souls divine! which have so often given ear, to the Cries
and Groans of the Protestants Strangers, in this very Palace in which I speak;
what will you say this day to see your pious Intentions, so faithfully and
happily executed! what will you say, to see such a concourse of faithful
Mourners which arrive every day, and are met on the shores! All those
Assemblies and voluntary Contributions, all those pious emotions and commerce
of Charity which we see this day in these fortunate Islands! what will you say
to see Lazarus in the Bosom of Abraham, and upon our Earth the Representation
of your* Heaven! what will you say to see England assume the Figure of the
ancient Rome, which was called the Patroness of the world; and become after her
Example the Patroness of all the Reformed world, by the pious and profound
Policy of your Illustrious Successor! But what have I been doing* Sir, I speak
to the dead: when I should have made the living speak; It Is the rapture in
which I am, it is the confused motion of many passions at once, which makes me
speak in this tone, and throws me beyond bounds and ordinary rules: Judge, Sir,
by these extraordinary transports, the extraordinary causes which occasion
them, and the impressions which your Bounties have made in our Hearts; judge
how sensible we are of Gratitude for your Goodness to us, how much Ardor, Zeal,
and, if I durst say it, Love it self for your Majesty; but why should I not
dare it? all things ought to be permitted us in this our Ecstasy:

Yes Sir, we love you, we love you, Sir, as the Gods of the Earth, (such as your
Majesty) should be loved; as the Romans loved their Trajan, or their Scipio,
whom they affectionately called their dear Hearts; And it is with a Passion the
most strong and lively, yet the most respectful and submissive, that we are
all, Sir, Your most humble, most obedient and most faithful Servants, and
Subjects.

FINIS.

