WHereas the Committee for the Militia of London, taking into consideration,
that not withstanding their Commismission, directed to their Sub-Committee
sitting at Salters Hall in Breadstreet, for the listing of all persons fit for
the Wars, and forming them into several Regiments, and arming such persons
as they are able to furnish, and notwithstanding the several directions issued
out from the same Sub-Committee to the Aldermans Deputy, and the rest of the
Common Councellmen and Constables in the several Wards, and the great pains
and care formerly taken in the prosecution of the same, the business is not
yet brought to effect: A speedy performance whereof is required: These are
therefore according to renewed directions by the Militia in that behalf given
to request you, the Aldermans Deputy, and the rest of the Common-Councell-men
of the Ward, with such of this Company, as present this unto you, to review and
rectify the said Lists, according to the Instructions formerly given; as also
to inquire what Arms have been received by any person or persons, for the
service of the State in the Auxiliary Companies within your Ward, and who else
are able to arm themselves, their Servants or others, and the same to return
to the said Sub-Committee, with your several names thereunto subscribed, that
they may give an account thereof unto the Committee for the Militia, which is
forthwith expected; And you the Constables of the Ward, and each of you are to
be aiding and assisting in the premises, as often as occasion shall be, hereof
you are entreated not to fail as you tender the safety of the City, and what
may depend thereupon.

Dated at Salters Hall in Breadstreet this fourth day of April, Anno Dom.
1644. Edward Peed Clerk to the Committee. By order of the said Committee.

To the Aldermans Deputy and the rest of the Common Council men of the Ward of
and to the Constables of the same Ward and to each of them respectively*

