arms armsCommune Concilium tent' apud Gresham-House London die Jovis, vicesimo
primo die Martii, Anno Domini 1666, Annoque Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi,
Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor',
etc. decimonono, Coram Willielmo Bolton Milit', Majore Civitat' London, Johanne
Lawrence, Thoma Bludworth and Willielmo Turner, Militibus and Aldermannis,
Samuele Starling, Armigero, Aldermanno, Georgio Waterman, Roberto Hanson and
Willielmo Hooker, Milit' and Aldermannis, and Johanne Moore, Armigero,
Aldermanno, necnon maiore part Communiariorum de Communi Concilio ejusdem
Civitat' tunc and ibidem assemblat'.
WHEREAS in the Act of this present Parliament for Re-building the City of
London it is contained, That the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the
said City shall, on or before the first day of April next ensuing, declare
which and how many shall hereafter be accounted and taken to be By-lanes, which
and how many shall hereafter be deemed Streets or Lanes of Note, and high and
principal Streets, by Act of Common Council to be passed for that purpose:

Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained and Declared by the right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, the right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in
this Common Council assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and
every the several Streets, Lanes and places next under mentioned, and all other
Streets, Lanes and common Passages within this City and Liberties, which are
not hereafter in this present Act mentioned and declared to be high and
principal Streets, shall hereafter be deemed Streets or Lanes of Note. That is
to say, Addlestreet. Aldermanbury. Augustine-friers. Abchurch lane Alhallows
lane. Ave-Mary lane. Anchor lane, Thamestr. Addle-Hill St. Ann's lane. St.
Andrew's hill. Austin's Court, Coleman-street. Basinghal-street. Breadstreet.
Broadstreet. Bucklers-bury. Budge-row. Birchin lane. Bearbinder lane.
Bartholomew lane. Bow lane. Basing lane. Bride lane. Butchers-hall lane. Beer
lane. Bush lane. Botolph lane. Blackfriars lane. Broad lane, Thamestreet.
Bridewell Dock. St. Bennet's hill. Brick-hill lane. Breadstreet hill. Broken
wharf. Bear key. Brook's wharf. Bull wharf. Botolph wharf. Billingsgate Dock or
key. Barkin alley. Bosse alley. Thamestr. Black-raven alley. Thamestr.
Black-swan alley. Thamestr. Black-boy alley. Thamestr. Bell alley. Thamestr.
Black-horse alley. Colemanstr. Bell alley. Colemanstr. Bishop's Court.
Colemanstr. Brickington Court. Colemanstr. Cannon-street. Cateaton-street.
Colemanstreet. St. Clement's lane. Crooked lane. Cloak lane. Cosen lane.
Campion lane. Carter lane. Creed lane. Carew lane. Cow lane. Cock lane. Church
lane, Thamestr. Cock's key. Custom House key. Chester's key. College hill. 3.
Cranes wharf. 3. Cranes lane. Common stairs, Thamest. Cole-harbour. Cannon
alley, near St. Paul's. Curriers alley, Shoo-lane. Cradle alley, Colemanstr.
Churchyard alley. Thamestr. Castle alley. Thamestr. Chequer-yard. Thamestr.
Distaffe lane. Duxfield lane. Dice key. Dowgate Dock. Dowgate hill. Dean's
Court, St. Martins le Grand. Eastcheap great. Eastcheap less. Elbow lane.
Ebgate lane, Thamestr. Emperour's-head alley, Thamestreet. Friday-street. Finch
lane. Fleet lane. Foster lane. Fetter lane. Fresh wharf. Flower-de-luce alley,
Thamestreet. Friar alley, Thamestreet. Gutter lane. Green-lettice lane,
Thamestreet. Galley key. Garlic Hyth. Gray-friers. Gunpowder alley, Shoo-lane.
Glean alley. Colemanstreet. George alley. Colemanstreet. George alley,
Thamestr. Grocers alley, Poultrey. Hartstreet, within Criplegate. Honey lan^.
Haggin la^e. Harp lane, Towerstreet. Harp alley, Shoo-lane. Ironmonger-lane.
Ivy lane. Idle lane. Jerusalem alley, Grace-churchstreet. Knightrider-street.
King'^-head alley, Shoo-lane. Katherine-wheel alley, Thamestreet. Lime-street.
Lothbury. St. Laurence lane. Love lane. Lillypot lane. St. Laurence Pountney
lane. Lion key. Lambeth hill. Milkstreet. Mugwell-street. Mark lane. Minceing
lane. Maiden lane, St. Thom. Apostles. Maiden lane, near Woodstreet. St.
Michael's lane. St. Martin's Orgars lane. St. Martin's lane, le Grand St. Mary
hill. Noble-street. St. Nicolas lane. Old Fi hstreet. Old B ily great. Old
Baily less. Old Change. Old Jury. O^t l^ne. Old-Fishstreet hill. Old-Swan
alley, Thamest. Paternoster row and Amen corner. Philpot lane. St. Pancras
lane. Philip lane. Pitcock lane. St. Peter's hill. Paul's wharf. Porter's key.
P^ddle-dock. Pope's-head alley. Paul's alley. Pannier alley. Pissing alley,
Fridaystreet. Paved alley, Blackfriars. Priest Court, Foster-lane. Queenhyth.
Rotherhyth, alias Pudding-lane. Rood lane. Ralph's key. Red-bull alley.
Thamestreet. Red-cross alley. Thamestreet. Ram alley, Fleetstreet.
Silver-street. Smi^her's l ne. Suffolk lane. Smart's key. Summers k^y. Sab's
deck or key. See^hing lane. Sherborn lane. St. Swithin's lane. Soper lane, and
so to Thamesstreet. St. Sith's lane. Sermon lane. Snow-hill. Seacole lane.
Shoo-lane. Salisbury Court. Stillyard. Sweeting's alley, Cornhill. Scotch yard.
Swan alley, Colemanstr. Towerstreet. Thredneedlestreet. Thamestreet.
Throgmortonstreet. Trig lane. St. Thomas lane. Trinity lane great. Trinity lane
less. Tower dock. Tennis-court alley, Thamestreet. Vintners lane, Thamestr.
Walbrook. Watlingstreet. Wood treet g eat. Wood treet little. Whi^e-friers.
Warwick lane. Wa^er lane, T^werstr. Water lane Fleetstreet. Whi e-friers lane.
White-friers dock. Wiggin's key. White-horse yard. Colemanst. White-hind alley.
Colemanst. White's alley. Colemanst. White-cock alley, Thamestreet. Young's
key.


And be it farther Enacted, Ordained and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the other Streets under mentioned shall hereafter be deemed
high and principal Streets: that is to say,

The Street from Temple-barr through St. Paul's Churchyard into Cheapside, and
so throughout to Algate.

The Street from Newgate to Cheapside.

The intended New Street from Guildhall into Cheapside.

Lumbardstreet.

Fenchurch treet.

The Street from London Bridge to Cornhill and thence to Bishops-gate.

Ordered that this Act and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published, for
the Guidance and information of all persons concerned to proceed in their
respective Buildings, according to the Rules, Directions and true meaning of
the said Act of Parliament.

Avery.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


