blazon or coat of arms of the City of London

AN ACT OF Common Council, Concerning ORPHANS.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1663.

Commune Concilium tentum in Guildhald' civitatis London, decimo tertio die
Octobris, anno regni Edwardi sexti Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, fidei defensor', and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hiberniae supremi
capit' quinto, coram Andrea Judde mil' Major' civit' praedict', Recordator',
Laxton, Bows, Hill, Jervis, White, Turk, Hind, Lion, Kirton, Offley, Aylyffe,
Wyther, Huett, Robins, and Lambard Vic' ac majore part Commoniar' etc. sic
ordinat' fuit etc.
FOr as much as the City of London is of late years sore decayed, and daily is
like to decay more and more, a great cause and occasion whereof, among other,
has been, for that free-mens children, Orphans of the said City, sometimes in
the lives of their parents, and sometimes after their deceases, being left
wealthy and rich, do bestow themselves in ungodly marriages for the most part
in their young age, at their own wills and pleasures, without the consent, and
against the minds of their friends, saying and affirming, that the Law and
custom of the said City gives unto them their portions, whether they marry by
the assent of their friends or not, and so do daily cast away and undo
themselves, in trust to have their said portions whether their parents or
friends will or not, and thereby do bestow themselves upon simple and light
persons, having neither cunning, knowledge, substance, ne good or honest
conditions: by reason whereof such Orphans inordinately and insolently do
spend and consume their patrimony and portions in short time, not only to the
undoing of themselves, and to the great ignominy and shame of their friends,
but also to the great slander of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City, who
being reputed and taken as fathers and protectors of the same Orphans, and to
the great loss and hinderance of the said City.

And for as much as the said Lord Mayor and Citizens have by their laws and
customs, power and authority to make laws and ordinances by their Common
Council for redress of the same: It is therefore now, to the intent to reduce
the same to a more godly, more profitable and decent order and conformity, by
the said Lord Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens in this present Common Council
assembled, and by the authority of the same Common Council ordained, enacted,
authorized, and established for a Law perpetually to be observed and kept
within the said City, That if any Orphan or child of any freeman or freewoman
of the said City, do offend in any the things hereafter expressed, and be
thereof lawfully convicted before the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen, or elsewhere,
that then they and every of them, shall to all intents, purposes, constructions
and meanings, be unabled and barred to demand and claim their portion or
portions, and also shall lose and forgo, and be barred for ever of all and
every his, her or their part or parts and portions, to him or them belonging,
by and after the death of his said father or mother, of the goods and chattels
of every such father and mother, by reason of any law, custom, ordinance,
usage, franchise, privilege, act of Common Council, or other things heretofore
had or used within the said City, the same Law, custom, ordinance, or other
thing whatsoever heretofore had, made, ordained, allowed and put in ure to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding: That is to wit, First, If any man child
or woman child shall maliciously go about or attempt to do or cause to be done
any bodily harm, death or destruction to his or their father or mother, or if
any man child do hereafter marry or contract marriage in the life of his father
or mother by whom he will claim any portion, under the age of one and twenty
years, without the consent of his said father or mother by whom he will claim
any portion, or if any woman child do hereafter marry or contract marriage in
the life of her father or other parents by whom she shall claim any portion,
before the age of eighteen years, without the consent of her father or such
other parent by whom she shall or may claim any portion, or if any man child
be a thief, or a felon, or common whorehaunter, or common dicer or common
player at unlawful games notoriously known, or if any woman child shall
hereafter commit any whoredom or be a common picker, that then every of the
persons so offending shall be barred and excluded to have or demand any
portion: Provided always that it shall be lawful for the father or mother of
any such child or children to give and bequeath in legacy to such child or
children as much as the portion of such child so offending shall amount unto by
the custom of the said City, and then such child thereby to be enabled to have
and demand the same as portion, this act notwithstanding; so that the same
legacy be contained in his or their testament in writing and not otherwise: and
that then and from thenceforth his said child or children to be admitted and
restored to claim such legacy or legacies in such sort, manner and form, as if
there had been never such offense done or committed by any such child.

Item, it is further ordained, enacted, authorized and established by authority
aforesaid, that if any woman child being an Orphan and under the age of xxi.
years, at any time hereafter after the death of her father do censure or
contract her self in marriage, or else according to the Ecclesiastical laws
of this Realm do perfectly solemnize or consummate marriage with any freeman
of this City, the consent and agreement of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the
said City of London for the time being, not obtained and had, that then for
every such default and offense committed or done by any Orphan or Orphans of
the said city, the same being confessed or sufficiently proved by two witnesses
or otherwise, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this said City of London
for the time being at and in a Court of Aldermen, she or they that so happen to
behave her or themselves as is aforesaid, shall forfeit and forgo and lose
xii. d. of and for every pound so due or to be due unto her or them by reason
of any such Orphanage: The sum of xii. d. of every pound to go or be to the
use of the Chamber of the said City, according to the ancient custom before
this time in such case used. And if the said contract or marriage of the said
Orphan or orphans be made with any foreine, not being free of this City at the
time of any such contract or marriage made, that then the said Orphan or
Orphans and every of them shall forfeit and lose three shillings of every pound
due or to be due unto her or them by virtue of any Orphanage or custom, had or
used within the said City, the one shilling of the said three shillings of
every pound to go or be to the use of the Chamber of the said City, in such
manner and form as is aforesaid, and the other two shillings so forfeited of
every pound to go to the use of such other Orphan or Orphans as then shall
remain unmarried, or else for default of such Orphans or Orphans to remain to
the next of the kindred of the Orphan so offending.

Also be it further enacted, ordained and established by authority aforesaid,
for and in eschewing of diverse variances, contentions and suites that daily
heretofore have and hereafter may ensue, That if any free-mans child man or
woman fortune to be married hereafter in the life time of his or their father
by his consent, and not fully advanced of and to his or her full part or
portion of his or her said fathers goods as he shall be worth at the time his
decease, according to the ancient laws and customs of this said City, that
then every such free-mans child so being married in the life time of his or her
father shall be to all intents and purposes disabled to demand any further part
or portion of his or her fathers goods after the decease of his or their
father, but shall be adjudged, reputed and taken to be fully advanced,
according as the law and custom of this City has been long time out of mind,
except his or her said father do mention certainly in his last will or
testament, or by other writing signed with his own proper name or mark, the
certainty of the sum or sums of money, goods and chattels, and the value of
them, that the father gave or departed withal or otherwise assured, or
hereafter shall give, pay or depart withal, or otherwise make assurance of
unto him or her, before, at, or after the marriage of him or her, or otherwise
in his life time for and toward their advancements in the name of his or her
part or portion. And then every such Orphan or child which after the decease of
his or her said father can bring forth the said testament or other writing
signed or marked with their fathers hand or mark, wherein the certainty of such
money, goods or chattals as they have or shall have received of their said
father or by the same father assured by especialty, or otherwise, shall have as
much of the ready money, goods, chattals and debts of the said father as (with
that which he or they shall have received toward their advancements in the
life of their said father) shall make up a full child's part of his goods and
chattels as he shall be worth at the time of his decease, the same to be
demanded, asked and claimed, or sued for against the Executor or Executors,
Administrator or Administrators of the goods and chattels of the said father by
Bill original, to be commenced in our Sovereign Lord the Kings Court holden in
the utter Chamber of the Guildhall of the said City, before the the said Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being: any law or custom
heretofore made or used to the contrary notwithstanding: in which action no
wager of law shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, and it is further enacted, that if any free-mans son being of
full age, which shall hereafter be married with the consent of his father or
any other person, being of full age, which shall hereafter marry any free-mans
daughter, do at the time of the espousals, or any time after, confess
themselves by writing fully satisfied of his or their portion, or do otherwise
acquit and discharge the father of such free-mans sonns or daughters of all
their part and portion, due, or to be due by the law and custom of this City:
that then every such person so confessing, acquitting, or otherwise
discharging, shall be reputed and taken as fully advanced of his or their full
part and portion, and shall not be enabled to demand any further or greater
part of the substance, goods and chattels, of his or her father: this law, or
any other law or custom, heretofore had, made, or used to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And further, for as much as it is thought very prejudicial and hurtful to the
fatherless children and Orphans, when the mother or mother in law, being
Executrix of the last will and testament of her late husband, by whom, and
after whose death, the Orphans are entitled to an Orphanage, according to the
laudable customs of this City, do diverse times marry, or contract matrimony,
some with forreiners and persons unknown, and some with freemen, or ever a
just inventory of the goods, chattels, plate, jewels, ready money of the
testators, be by them brought in, by reason whereof many times they either for
fear or affection of their husbands, or for some other sinister cause, do bring
in very suspicious inventories, omitting therein, either ready money, plate,
jewels, or debts, or some other thing or things, whereby some benefit should
redound to the fatherless children, to the great loss and hinderance of the
Orphans, and sometimes slander to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City,
notwithstanding their great care and travail that they take for the good
ordering and true answering of the said Orphans: It is therefore by like
authority ordained, established and enacted, that if after the first day of
November next ensuing, any widow, which is or shall be made Executrix of the
testament and last will of her late husband being freeman, or shall take upon
her the Administration of the goods and chattels of her late husbeing a
freeman, do not upon her oath bring and exhibit, or cause to be brought in
and exhibited, before the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this said City for
the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, a just and perfect inventory to
their knowledge of all the goods, chattels, plate and jewels, ready money and
debts as were her said husbands at the time of his death appraised according to
the Law of the said City, before she do ensure her self in marriage or
contract marriage, or else according to the Laws of the Realm do perfectly
solemnize or consummate marriage with any person, before such time as
aforesaid: That then every person so offending, shall forfeit and lose eight
shillings of every pound of her portion of the goods of her late husband, due
to her by the laudable Custom of this said City, the same to go to the use of
such Orphan or Orphans as then shall be entitled to have or demand any
Orphanage or Portion after the death of his or her late Father, the same to be
demanded, asked, claymed, or sued for, against such Executrix or Administratrix
by Bill original or Debt to be commenced in our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Court, holden in the utter Chamber of the Guildhall of the said City, before
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, any Law, etc.

In which Action no Wager, etc.

FINIS.

