QUAKERISM NO PAGANISM: OR, A FRIENDLY REPLY To W. R. his UNFRIENDLY DISCOURSE
ENTITLED. Quakerism is Paganism. SHOWING The Insufficiency of what he has
Written to Unchristian the Quakers, and to render them as Heathens and Pagans
to the People

By W. L. a Lover of Peace more than of Parties.

Let not them that are mine Enemies wrongfully Rejoice over me.

For they speak not Peace, but they devise deceitful matters against them that
are quiet in the Land.

Psalm. 35.19.20. Nihil quidquam tam probe aut provide dic^ potest, quod non
vellicare malignitas poss^^.

Just. Lip. de u^a Relig. London, Printed in the Year, 1674.

To all called Non-Conformists, who are Lovers of Holiness, and Followers of
Peace with all Men.
BELOVED BRETHREN,
MAny have been my Perils at Sea, and Perils at Land; and now, for your sakes,
I am brought to taste of those Perils, which the unkindness of some, and malice
of other False Brethren have cast upon me. The occasion they have taken is this;

No sooner was a breathing space of Liberty granted us, to Worship God
according to our Consciences; but presently the Spirit of Strife and Debate
entered into the Sons of Diotrophes, and filled Pulpits and Presses with
Disputations and Controversies against an Innofensive People about matters, in
no moderate man's Judgment, Fundamentally necessary to Salvation; and yet
furiously pressed upon that account by those, who otherwise could have no
pretense for their impertinent Zeal.

When I saw this Imprudence could not contain it self within the bonds of our
respective Meeting places, nor quietly be lodged in Booksellers shops, for
those only to read, and buy that took delight in matters of Controversy; but
that Books of that kind, full of bitter and disgracing Language, were sent to
be cried about the Streets, and in the Gates of our Exchange, to publish our
Simplicity, and make us a Disgrace, and a By word to the Merchants of all the
Nations about us, who certainly could not but withal Pity us (though some do
not pity themselves) while we stabbed, and wounded with such envious Tongues
and Pens; I say, the sight, and report of these things, so pressed my Spirit,
that I could not forbear to write a few Lines, only that I might signify what
a desire I had, and many more, to quench those flames of Zeal, which under
pretenses of Truth, are burning up all Christian Love and Charity among us.

I have good reason to say many, for I cannot meet with one sober Christian of
any Church whatsoever, that is not grieved at heart for these unprofitable
Assaults.

The Title I gave that small Treatise, is, the Twelve Pagan Principles. This I
foresaw would make a fearful sound: But I sent it up with that name, that you
in the City might know what Language some taught us in the Country by their
mincing Negatives: for we know but one word in opposition to Christianity, and
that is Heathenism or Paganism, though I confess this word Pagan, is not so
common as Heathen, yet we know both signify one thing. So that when you tell
us the Quaker is no Christian, what says every Plough man? then he must be a
Heathen.

Again, Sometimes an odious and shameful Name brings a thing into contempt
undeservedly, much more when it is deservedly and properly given. My Design was
to make Disputations of this kind contemptible, and therefore I did hope the
Name might make them nauseous to the people: And I have the Apostle for an
Example, who when he went about to wean the Ceremonious Galatians from
Elements, calls them weak and beggarly.

Soon after I had published my Observations upon these Twelve Opinions,
collected by T. H. out of his Dialogues, I was in hope to hear of more able and
powerful Instruments (as little Pearcers make way for great ones) appearing in
so seasonable and honorable a work as Pacification; whose Wisdom and Prudence
might allay the noise of that Passion which so much hinders the sound of Truth,
and produce such charitable thoughts, and friendly Correspondency, that the
Government under which we live, might be encouraged to continue our Liberty; a
peaceable Neighbor being a good sign of a peaceable Subject.

But behold, (O Friends!) contrary to my expectation, another Goliath starting
forth, and in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin bidding, in effect, Defiance to Peace,
deriding and abusing my moderate considerations, tendered only to incline the
minds of both Parties to forbear farther Contentions about these Opininions.

And although he tells us in the first line of his Book, That he designs not to
traduce the Person of any man, or wrong him in his Sentiments of Religion, yet
he has closed up with an Epistle which does both; and that in such a Malicious
and Contradictious manner, as in probability may bring a blast upon his whole
Design, as I shall show in the Conclusion. It Is true, I cannot lay the Epistle
it self at W. R. his door, but this is plain, that if he had no design nor
desire to traduce, he might have sent me a Copy of that Letter before he
published it, and if I could not have satisfied him, he had been blameless; but
now I may say, qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet.

But moreover, though he traduces not my Person; yet you may perceive a Spirit
very unlike to a Lover of Christianity, creeping along the Book, slighting,
jeering, endeavoring to sow Discord, and create Trouble* groundlessly charging
me with Shifts and Equivocations; and what this may be called, I know not, nor
do I much care, being confident that he who has enabled me by his Grace, to
pass through good Report, will also assist me to bear the contrary; which (all
things considered) is a burden more easy, and less dangerous.

As touching the Book it self, I shall not meddle with those matters in it
which have already been sufficiently controverted, but only such of those
particulars which relate to my Constructions put upon those Twelve Opinions,
which were the occasion of my first Writing.

W. R. is much mistaken if he think to draw me to dance after his Disputing
Pipe, especially at such a time, and in such a Cause as this is, which one
grain of Christian Charity would easily Reconcile.

In a word, If the Controversy had not been served up so high, as to exclude
the Quakers from the number of Christians, and to render them as Heathens,
Pagans, and Infidels to their Neighbors, Friends, and Relations, W. R. perhaps
had never heard of such a Title as Pagan Principles, but hinc illae Lachrimae!

Having thus given you the true occasion of that Book, and the Reasons of its
Title; I shall first take some notice of W. R. his Preface, and then to the
particular Charges as before mentioned.

1. He begins with a Complemental Persuasion to Mr. Penn to own the Man Christ
Jesus. This is very strange, that when he and others, he especially, has so
owned him in us plain words as can be desired, to the satisfaction of so many,
that W. R. should say he seems yet to deny him. Could I persuade him, he should
not write a Line more upon this Subject, for I know the Spirit of Curiosity and
Jelousie will never be satisfied, but call whatever he says, Masks of evasive
Pretenses, Clouds of Impertinences, etc. Nay, in all probability, if he should
write much more about it, he would soon have others as loudly calling upon him
to own the Divinity, as now W. R. and many more do to own the Humanity; for so
it happened after his writing the Sandy Foundation, etc.

2. The next thing remarkable, are the Reasons why he presents his Book to Mr.
Penn. In the first, he insinuates such an intimacy betwixt us, as if he had a
hand in Composing the Pagan Principles, which in a word is false. In his Second
and Third Reasons, see how plainly he contradicts himself, in saying, I have
espoused W. P. his Quarrel, and yet have laid nothing to Mr. Hicks his Charge;
when as Mr. Penns Charge is the only Quarrel (as W. R. calls it) and I never
heard of any other betwixt them. Neither have I espoused this any farther, than
in a moderating way betwixt them in Love to both, which I believe is a Duty
more incumbent upon many others, for neglect whereof, I desire they may not be
accountable at the Great Day. W. R. might plainly perceive that my design was
not to Charge, for in p. 4. I said, My Intent is only to show how small a
quantity of Christian Charitable Construction might make these Charges passable
among us all Again, what a strange Inference does VV. R. draw from my calling
T. H. my Friend, that therefore W. P. ought not to call him Forger. may not one
of my Friends wrong another of them, and no necessity lie upon me to fall out
with either, or to interpose, unless for the Reason aforenamed? T. Hicks his
Conversation has been reputed honest for many years, and being willing to hope,
that in general it is so still, I called him Friend, and desire not to carry it
otherwise toward him, though I am no Friend to his Dialogues. And if in them,
he has wronged VV. P. or others, either by adding to, or substracting any thing
from their writings, or by putting down any Answers for theirs, which are not
theirs (which is to be feared) he would do very well to follow that Counsel W.
R. gives W. P. viz. retract, and count it no dishonor to him.

It Is a difficult thing to turn Religious Controversies into a Dialogue,
without consent of both Parties; for if he change but a letter, he is liable to
a lash, unless he has been so careful to preserve the sense of his Antagonist,
that he cannot object against it; and then no man can be angry. You nay see by
what I have done, that the Quakers are not so curious of their words, but that
they will give us leave to put in such as may help us to a right understanding
of their Principles, when their own expressions seem dark unto us.

The remainder of what W. R. has writ, worth noting, before he comes to the
Charges, contains a bad Comparison, and a far-fetcht Conclusion.

First, He compares me to him that intending to kill his Enemy with a stab, let
out the Imposthume. But let him remember the Proverb, mala men's, malus animus.
The Imposthume indeed is somewhat (proh dolor) to the purpose: For it is greatly
to be feared that there are too many inward Swellings of Pride, Covetousness,
Evil Surmizings, and Malice among many sorts of Professors this day; And O how
happy would those Pens be, that (by the blessing of the Almighty Physician)
should be made Spiritual Love Lances to let them out. But as for the other Part
of the Similitude which represents me as an Enemy to the Baptists, he does
thereby eminently signify his Ignorance, and adds that, which his last seven
years Certificate will not countenance.

Secondly, W. R. draws such a Conclusion from my Title Page, as I think Zoilus
himself would not have done. Because I say, these are Twelve Opinions for which
T. H. has published the Quakers to be no Christians, that therefore I confess
they hold them. If this be not a Quibble, I never heard one. And the root of it
is this Particle (for) But is it not a common and plain form of Speech among us
to say, Such a man was posted for a Coward, or accused for a Jesuit, and does
it follow then that he was so? I doubt W. R. minds the Idioms of Greek and
Hebrew so much, that he forgets the Propriety of his Mother Tongue. But what
need all this, when in p. 4. I say, to prevent mistakes, Think not I plead for
them, as if I my self, or they owned them; for both in their Books, and
Conferences, they deny at least ten of them, as they are laid down and
construed by T. H. Alas, poor Quakers! Now I pity you more than ever; no marvel
if you complain so sadly of wrong Constructions, Forgeries, and Lies, when such
plain words as these will not free me from a Confession I never thought of.
Poor Flock of Slaughter! Zac. 11.4. I see your own Country men must not speak a
word for you, unless they resolve to be your Companions in Tribulation. All
words that can be bended against you shall, and those that cannot shall be
rejected as Whimsies and Impertinencies. However, I shall proceed to make some
brief Reply: But here I am in a straight, for I see my brevity is liable to be
fille^ up with Words to make it speak Absurdities or contrary Senses: And if I
us^ many words, then I shall be counted (...) man of words, wanting Wisdom o^
good Argument. Well, do as the Lord directs, O my Soul, and leave the issu^ to
himself.

1. The first Charge against the Quakers is, That the light in every Man is God
Now because this Charge as it lies, seem to fix many foolish and improbable
Absurdities upon them, as that when they pray, they only pray to a God within
them and that they make as many Gods as there are men in the world, therefore,
said I, to moderate the Charge, prevent mistakes and render it more
intelligable to every man, put in but (of) and all is well. And this W. P.
himself do^s in p. 8 of R. against R. Where we have him thus answering T. H.
about this very Charge, and saying That the Light within present with us every
where, is to us the great proof of Gods omnipresence, and therefore of God. And
in page 7, he blames T. H. for insinuating from G. W. his words that every
Illumination is whole God* And as much he said to John Faldo page 10th of
Quakerism a new nick name. Far be it from us to assert, every such illumination
to be the only Lord and Savior and very God; and more to the same purpose in
that page. And indeed in these places W. R. should have looked for W. P. his
sense and not have run 48 pages farther and bring something spoken of Christ as
a contradiction to what he said before, to which it had no relation.

But farther methinks I see W. R. sporting and triumphing over this Addition of
mine, by letting fly so many Scripture instances, to show what strange senses
the taking out or putting in of a word or letter will produce. He tells us of a
Printer that left out, Not, in the 7th Commandment and then it was Thou shall
commit adultery. And another fancy (perhaps) of his own, which had been better
concealed, for it looks too much like profane Drollery, from 1 Cor, 15, 51,
where says he take away (c) from Changed, and then it is, We must all be
hanged. But are these Instances to our purpose? Is the Case all one between the
Scriptures and those men's writings who are alive to approve or disown what
additions you make again: the words and letters that W. R. substracts from
Scripture are such as make the Sense remaining, run directly contrary to all
Scripture and Reason, whereas my Addition made the Charge agree with both. But,

Thirdly, Though I know we cannot add any word into the Scripture, yet consider
whether most Christians do not either in their Doctrinal or Practical Comments
upon it, make Additions. When any man Bap^izeth by virtue of the Commission
Mat. 28.19. does he not add the word (water) to it? When we oppose the Roman
Purgatory pressed upon us from 1 Gor. 3.13. do not we add (before Death) or
some words to that purpose? When one says, Christ died for all men, and proves
it from 1 Timothy 2.6. will not another of a contrary mind say the word (Elect) is
to be understood or added to make it agree with other Scriptures? Now this is
my Case, and they who make these Additions, justify me: for as these words
make these texts in their understanding agree with others more plain and less
liable to exception, so my Addition made this Charge more agreeable to other
plainer Writings of the Quakers. Seeing then there are different senses put
upon these Texts and others I could name; W. R. did not considerately compare
the Quakers Writings to Heathen Oracles, because in some places they may seem
to admit of diverse Constructions: for he cannot but see what will follow, if an
Argument should be drawn from the Premises upon him.

The Second Charge against the Quakers is, That the Soul is a part of God, and
of Gods Being, without Beginning, and Infinite.

Here faid I, what hurt is there in all this? that is, in this Notion about the
Soul, or In twenty more of the like nature? But when I proceed to say I never
heard the Heathen were of this Opinion, then W. R. makes advantage of my
brevity, and presently falls to proving that the Heathen had divine
Apprehensions of the Soul, which I deny not: but this is not our business; W.
R. should have kept his eye upon the main design of this Charge, as I did,
which T. H. tells us verbatim in p. 16. of the first Dial. is to bring an
absurdity upon the Quakers; for says he, If this be so, then their Opinion
must be thus understood, God sets up a Light in himself, which He Himself is to
obey, and in so doing he shall be saved: Now to this being the substance of the
Charge (and without this there is no hurt in it) I said the Heathen were not of
this Opinion, or drew they any Consequences from their Apprehensions of the
Soul, leading them to any inward Idolatry: but rather on the contrary, as the
changing the glory of God into Images of Men and Beasts, Romans 1. So that
nothing is more opposite to Quakerism, than Heathenism, vulgarly understood,
that being all for Inward Spiritual Worship, and this for an Outward gross
Idolatry.

Moreover, under this Charge, W. R. makes a disparity betwixt the Soul of Man,
and Spirit of God, which I oppose not, because it hurts not the Question, viz.
Why may we not as well say God has given us a measure of Himself as a measure
of his Spirit: No faith he, because the Soul is a Creature made by God
immortal, and cannot die: But in so saying he opposes Austin and Jerome, who
say, That if the Soul be seminated with the Flesh, or come ex traduce, then it
shall die with the flesh. If I should tell him what the Lord says, Ez. 18. The
Soul that sins shall die; I know he would answer, that Soul there signifies the
Body; and why it may not so be taken in Isa. 57. I leave to others to judge.
For my own part, though I believe the Soul Immortal, yet I never saw any great
cause to Anathema those that held it slept with the body, so long as they
firmly believed, it should be raised again to partake of Immortality; for the
Contest betwixt us is but about a little space of time, which in the Grave
signifies nothing: but indeed betwixt them and the Roman Catholics this
Contest is of great concernment, for it utterly overturns their profitable
Doctrine of Purgatory. Therefore they have no reason to suffer it. But why we
may not bear with one another about that, and this Notion about the Soul in the
Charge, so long as the Absurdity aforesaid is detested, I know not. And for all
W. R. huffs at my Confidence in saying, It Is strange we should differ about we
know not what; I see no reason he has given to leave off this Admiration: For
if he should devote himself to read all that ever has been written about the
Soul, and all its Definitions, and all such Quiddities about it as tota in
toto, and tota in qualibet part, I dare affirm he will not be more able to
tell us what the Soul of Man is than he was before. Therefore let him not think
that I write any thing about the Soul to make him much the wiser, but only in
this sense, that we may all be so wise as to leave contending about it. And for
this cause I shall take no notice of more Questions of that Subject; for I
think he puts them but to try whether I will be so foolish as to Answer them.

I shall conclude this Charge with telling W. R. that I writ not those Verses
he jerks me for, to jeer my Friends, but that by telling them what others say,
they may be weaned from these unprofitable and dishonorable Disputes, whom it
chiefly concerns to think on it. But if I were minded to seek after a jeering
Spirit in his Writings, I doubt I should find a downright one in that pertinent
Question, he so often has put to the Quakers, viz. What some of those things
were, that our Savior did upon Earth that are not Written? Don't you think
this a wise one, and a charitable one too?

Doubtless he might have posed the Prophet David with an easier Question than
this; For he says, Psalm. 35.15. That the Abjects gathered themselves against
him, and he knew it not, though it is like they were not very far from him.
Nothing is more common now a days, than to jeer with a Question. Our Savior
himself was so served, Mat 26.68. Prophecy unto us thou Christ, who is he that
smote thee?

The Third Charge, That Jesus Christ is not a distinct Person without us.

To this I said, as a Motive to Moderation, That because this Definition of a
Distinct Person without us, is not in Scripture, why should we impose it on
them? especially considering what Reason they give for their tenderness in
refusing such Expressions, because they occasion people to retain mean, and
dark Apprehensions of God and Christ, and his place of Residence. W. P. Count.
Christ, p. 79. If W. R. fears no such Consequences, let him use them without
Unchristning others that do not. And whereas he says, It is shameful for a
Quaker to refuse those Expressions because not in Scripture, while he owns not
the Scripture for a Rule; I say it is much more shameful for those that own the
Scripture for a Rule, to impose such expressions upon others which are not in
Scripture, they have reason to keep you to what you call the Rule.

But W. R. will prove the word Person, yea and a distinct Person too, from 2
Cor. 2.10. where the Apostle says, for your sakes forgave I it in the Person
of Christ. Here a grain of his Greek might have been useful: For that which the
Translators according to their Judgment have rendered Person of Christ, whether
it may not as well be read in the sight of Christ, (...), in conspectu Christi,
or in Christ's steed: I leave to more able men, than W. R. or I am to determine.

There is sixteen more pages spent in this Charg, which I can account no other,
than a vain flourish, to let W. P. see what W. R. can do, if he be not constant
to what he has spoken: For these pages are chiefly spent (laying aside the
quibbles about the Ass) in proving the Humanity of Christ, which I told him the
Quakers did not deny, and brought W. P. his Confession at the Barbican Meeting
to prove it, viz. that we do faithfully believe the holy Manhood to be a Member
of the Christ of God: and a little after, We believe the Man Christ Jesus to be
glorified in Heaven. This, though VV. R. cannot dislike, yet he will distrust,
and therefore says, that when W. P. has given us some infallible Demonstration,
that he did not speak equivocally, then, and not till then do his words deserve
my Cognizance.

What Unbelief is here! Nay, what a strange Demand is this, for one that is an
utter Enemy to Infalibility in the Quakers, to demand an Infallible
Demonstration from them? Now that must be visible or else he cannot judge of it:
And what visible Demostration any Christian can give, which may not be
counterfeted by an Hypocrite, I never yet knew. The truth is, W. R. does
ignobly to apply Aug. words to Mr. Penn, viz. They speak it with their lips,
they believe it not with their hearts. What is this in plain English, but to
tell the world W. P. is a dissembling Hypocrite, and his word, how sincerely
soever given, not to be taken; for truly I will not believe that man's word in
Civil Affairs, whose solemn public word I cannot believe in Spiritual. But
that you may know this is not such a new Article of their Faith as to hear date
from that Barbican Meeting, hear what Edward Burrowes some years ago said, in
his 138, and 281. pages of his works, We prize the Lord Jesus Christ as God
Man, and own him alone to be the Foundation God has laid. Now if this be not
ground enough for Christian Charity toward them (the thing I aim at) God
deliver me from such Judges; for I know not what can be farther urged in this
partiticular to induce them to it.

The Fourth Charge is, That Christ Redeemed himself.

This I said was but T. H. his Consequence; and I believe he thinks it natural
from some of the Quakers sayings: But if they disown it, as we see they do, and
call it a gross perversion of their words, why must we not believe one as well
as the other, and give them leave to take those words of J. N. and G. F. in a
Figurative fence as well as W. R. takes liberty to expound Isa. 59.16. and
63.4. by a Figure? For so VV. P. says, p. 63. of R. against R. they are to be
taken; and there he treats at large of the Redemption of the Seed, and in what
fence they hold it, wherein there is nothing sounds like Heathenism, or
unworthy of Toleration in my understanding; to be sure it cannot be called
their Principle, that is but his Inference. But I think we need say no more of
their Consequencing Charge; for it is so harsh and sour, there is no fear that
any sober man will drink it.

The Fifth Charge against the Quakers, is, That they deny the Scriptures to be
the Rule of Faith, and Practice unto Christians.

The first thing necessary in this Charge is to resolve VV. R. what I mean by
We, Us, and Our, in this Discourse. I Answer, that now we are Charging them
with denying the Scriptures, I understand all of us that do own the Scriptures
for our Rule. And at other turns in my former book, I understand all such
ridged Opposers of the Quakers as for these Twelve Opinions render them as
Pagans and Heathens; and yet I would hope they do it from a zeal only to
promote (as they think) the Glory of God, and the Authority of the Scriptures:
And therefore my hearts desire and prayer for them is, that they may see that
this Zeal of theirs, is not according to knowledge; for the Nature of it is
such as will directly lead them to join with those, who when Opportunities are
offered, will fall to killing Christians upon a Principle of doing Christ good
service, Joh. 16.2. And I put my self among them, (though thanks be to God not
inclinable to that Zeal) because the Purport of the Book represents me as
standing among them, pleading as well as I could for a little Moderation
toward the poor Quakers, and not the Quakers Cause, any farther than as it
might admit of favorable Constructions for that End. Neither can you say I am
any otherwise guilty of Uncharitableness, when I say, let us be Charitable,
than the Apostle was of Cursing, when he said, therewith curse we men, Jam.
3.9. But you will say, the Apostle and they were Brethren, but I am not in
fellowship with these that now oppose the Quakers. For your satisfaction in
this Particular, I refer you to my Narrative in Answer to the Reading Letter in
the conclusion hereof; and proceed to tell you that I perceive you cannot
escape my Covering as you call it; as narrow as it is, I see it wraps you so
fast that it makes you angry, and call their book of the Barbican Meeting,
Scurrilous, and the close of the Title page, an Abominable Untruth, and that
they seem to have no regard to Truth or Honesty. If these be not angry words, I
know none. But in all these five pages concerning this Charge, where is a
particular of any one Scripture, not relating to some external part of Worship,
which they deny. Why should you say they deny the Bible which contains all the
Books? This is but quibbling, by which you know I may easily prove that you
deny it all by denying Circumcision, a part therein contained. But in short,
Sir, Be not angry, for I must tell you, that until all we, that own the
Scriptures for our Rule, come to an Unity in Faith and Practice, according to
it, and its well known we are now far from it, methinks it seems a pitiful
contradiction for us to press it upon others as an easy, plain, intelligible
and unalterable general Rule.

Do you think our Divisions, both in Doctrine and Discipline about it, do not
wonderfully weaken our Commendations of it, as the Evangelical appointed Rule?
yea, in so much, that Church, Discipline, Doctrines will hardly keep people
awake while they are Preaching up even from Scripture Authority.

They may well say unto us, Physicians heal your selves; agree among your
selves, ye wise and Learned, what is the mind and meaning of the Scriptures,
about which now ye dispute, and then we will more willingly conform to what you
call Scripture Ordinances and Appointments.

Lastly, Sir, you conclude this Charge with a palpable abuse of my words:
Seeing then (said I) the great Design of all the Scripture, is to bring us to
an holy life, let us bear with Opinions, which we plainly see do not subvert it,
especially considering, that we read of no punishment denounced against men for
their Opinions. Now can any fairly and honestly conclude from hence, that I
allow of wicked, Atheistical, and Antichristian Principles? But I see you are
resolved to bring me under some manner of Scandal if you can: therefore in your
42d page, you say I forget, That Corrupt Principles lead to Corrupt Practices.
No, I do not forget it; nor do I plead for, or go about to extenuate any sinful
or corrupt Principle, but to oppose that of Pride and Bitterness against
others; Demonstration is the best proof in this Case. Survey the Quakers, and
put their Lives and Conversations into one Balance of the Sanctuary, and the
lives of any other sort of Christians into the other, and if they be found the
lighter, I Will never speak a word more for them as a People. How long must we
wait to know a corrupt Principle? They have been among us about six or seven
and twenty years, and yet we see no corrupt Practices growing from their
Principles. Certainly, were such evil Fruit, as you imagine, natural to the
Tree; we should have seen it before now: for you say, when a man's Conscience is
debaucht, we shall quickly see him a man of a debaucht Conversation.

The Sixth Charge is, That the speaking of the Spirit in any, is of greater
Authority than the Scriptures.

To this I said, (and I see no cause to alter my saying) that there is no
Reason for this Charge to be drawn from G. VVhiteheads words: For these words
(and greater) being added to the closing of the Sentence does plainly signify
to me that it must relate to the Influence: For what does Authority signify
without Influence? Of what worth is the Authority of a Magistrate, where his
Commands are not regarded? Now it must be the Spirit opening of our hearts, as
it did the heart of Lydia, to hearken to the Scriptures, and suffer them to
have any impression upon us, or Authority over us; wherefore VV. R. says well,
That whatever good effect the Preachers Doctrine has upon the Soul, it is
wrought by those words, not as they are the words of men, but as indeed the
words of God, which effectually work in them that believe. So that they must
first believe them before there will be any effectual work wrought by them; and
this they cannot do without the inward operation, and Conviction of the Holy
Spirit; Therefore I see no evil in ascribing the greater to the Spirit, so long
as they give a great Authority to the Scriptures; both which, G. VV. does in
his Answer cited by T. H. viz. That which was spoken from the Spirit of Truth
in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and
greater. I must put in Chapters now, for Civilities sake, for VV. R. catches at
my leaving them out before; but truly I know no difference or force depending
on Chapters more than Scriptures; they were Scriptures before they were in
Chapters. But the great Reason of this Charge is yet behind, and the Apeal
directing me to Dial. 1. p. 28. there I find it, viz. That because the Script.
if diligently consulted with, would deter persons from believing the Quakers
feigned Revelations, therefore it is, they so much endeavor to beget in the
minds of men an ill Opinion of them.

This is a hard Censure, and how he will get off I know not, unless by way of
supposed Consequences, for I dare say they never told any man, that their
endeavors were to beget in the minds of men all ill opinion of the Scriptures,
or that they feared the Scriptures would deter persons from believing them. But
it being none of my Purpose to give a particular account of their Faith in
this, or other Points, I refer those that are minded to know their Judgment
about the Script. to the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th, Chapters of
Quakerism a new nick name for old Christianity, and the Defense of it. And
whereas he says, a man may see how dark my Understanding is, that I should
acknowledge G. W. ' s words, and yet see no Reason for the Charge. Is not the
Reason of the Charge what I last mentioned, as a hard Censure? And indeed he
that sees a Reason for that Consequence in G. VV. his words, I confess sees
more than I do.

The Seventh Charge is, That is no Command from God to me, which God has given
by way of Command to another: neither did any of the Saints act by the Command
which was to another: Every one obeyed their own Command.

This in Substance is but the two former Charges dressed up in other words: For
by Commands, I suppose T. H. means Scripture Commands, and by Saints, such as
are recorded in Scripture: And then it is no more than what Ben. Furly said
before, that there is nothing in the Scripture which he is obliged to obey
because there Recorded. And so say I, not only because Recorded in that Book,
do I obey any Command, but because the Spirit of God convinces me that it is
my Duty. For if its very being in that book be the ground of Obedience, what
would become of him, who should happen to have one of that false Impression,
whose Compositor W. R. says was a Papist, and left out NOT in the 7th
Commandment? How should he know it was false Printed, supposing he could have
no other to correct it by? Must not the Spirit, or Light within be minded in
such Cases? Yea, or the Man's undone. But a little more to this Charge, wherein
I said there is no great danger because it is stated so in general that it may
admit of good or bad particular Applications: And for proof I showed several
particular Commands from God to others, which did not concern any man now. And
several which concerned every man. Neither did I ever hear a Quaker say, That
not any one of the Commands in Scripture, concern them, though W. R. says it is
manifest they say so, p. 47. If T. H. had told us what particular Commands they
denied, the work had been more easy and plain to reconcile. But I observe all
the Charges against the Quakers concerning the Scriptures run in a general way.
I wish it be not, to stop the mouths of all others from speaking a word in
their behalf, I am sure it is not fair. Had they been charged with owning
Childrens Baptism, perhaps some Presbyterian might have put in a word for them.
Had they been charged with denying Tithes, some Baptist might have helped them,
before now. If for denying Laying Hands upon all, to be fundamentally necessary
to Church Fellowship, it is probable J. I. himself might have assisted them in
this, or in opposing the Saturday Sabbath, or in maintaining their Doctrine of
General Redemption. But now they being accused for denying Scripture for their
Rule, all we which profess the Scripture to be our Rule, though we are divided
into SIX several Churches, and all differing so much in Doctrine and
Discipline, that we do not own one another as true constituted Churches, yet we
are all stirred up by this general Charge of denying Scripture, and Gods
Commands, to fall upon them. And if the Quakers were all suppressed or banished,
whose turn of all the Six would be next I know not; but of this I am confident,
That the same Spirit which thus persues them, will not let others be quiet when
they are gone. Strange that we cannot make better use of our time!

But W. R. puts some more Queries to me also, under this Charge, about the
Scriptures, How they can know swearing to be a sin, or how they can try Spirits
without them. To both which, there has been enough said, at least to beget
Moderation, if not Satisfaction, by VV. P. in page 96. of Wisdom Justified,
etc. And in his Rejoinder in defense of Quakerism a new nick Name, etc. the
first part of it being almost all about the Scriptures.

The Eighth Charge, That Justification by that Righteousness which Christ
fulfilled for us, wholly without us, is it Doctrine of Devils.

To moderate this Charge, I offered two things to be considered: 1. The Greek
word which generally in the New Testam. serves for Justification and
Righteousness, which are both Latin words themselves in English habit, and
(...) serving for both, I said, that to be justified was all one in my
understanding as to be made Just or Righteous: And this W. R. himself confirms
out of Mr. Leighs Critica Sacra, for he says, The word must be understood, to
respect that Integrity, Holiness and Innocence of the Souls of Good men, by
which they live a holy Life and please God; which in substance is what I said
before, and W. P. before both of us; viz. to be made Just or Righteous. But
says W. R. this cannot be done without their persons be first acquitted of
their former Sins by the Justification they receive from Christ through
believing; which in plainer English, is all one as to say, This cannot be done
before it be done.

In the next place, W. R. falls to distinguishing between a Legal
Righteousness, an Evangelical Righteousness, and thirdly a Righteousness which
Christ fulfilled for us in his own Person, wholly without us.

The first he says, is a perfect Obedience to all God requires at all times,
both in thought word and deed. But where this is called a Legal Righteousness,
I know not. I think the Gospel requires as perfect obedience as the Law, and
more strict, as in Mat. 5.

But Secondly, W. R. 's Evangelical Righteousness is (only) a sincere endeavor
of the Soul to do all that God requires, although by reason of the pravity of
his Nature, he cannot uttain it. Is not this plainly to say, that God requires
us now under the Gospel, to do that which he knows we cannot do? This made the
Slothful Servant say, Mat. 25. that he was an hard Master.

But Thirdly, he has distinguished out another Righteousness, which Christ
fulfilled for us, which it seems cannot properly be called Legal, or
Evangelical: But what he means by all this, I know not, unless he would bring
us to expect to be justified by such a Faith as is without works, and that I
hope he will disown, and if so, all these Distinctions will vanish of
themselves, and that I believe they do as fast as they are Preached, being so
intricate and hard to be understood, that I know not how any man can tell how
to regulate his Faith or Life according to them.

The Second thing I propounded to moderate this Charge, was these words (wholly
without us) which I said might very well satisfy us, that the Quakers levelled
not at Scripture Justification, but at our conceits of it; of which I see W. R.
takes no notice. And no doubt he saw cause for it. For wholly without us, must
either (in this point of Justification) signify wholly without our Faith, or
wholly without our works, or wholly without both: And where the Scriptures
account any one a justified Person wholly without both or either of these, I
know not.

But for as much as W. P. has already treated so largely upon the Doctrine of
Justification in his 8th Chapter of the said Rejoinder. I do hereby desire
William Russel to go thither to satifie himself about their Faith in that
matter. As I told him at first, I intend not a Dispute, much less a Quarrel
about words; if any thing I have said will but put the least stop to Carears of
that Nature, I have all the Reward I look for.

The Ninth Charge is, That Justification is by Works.

This I said is almost, yea I might have said altogether of the same nature as
the former; And it is a great deal of pity to Heathenize men for Preaching up
good works, especially in an Age when they are so scarce. To which W. R. (...)
replies, Rarely well guest, Is T. H. finding fault for Preaching up good works?
But W. R. might not I have said the same, to T. H. his 4th Charge, That Christ
Redeemed himself. Rarely well guest, was that ever the Question? did the
Quakers ever say so in terminis, much less in T. H. his sense? but I like none
of this upbraiding, braving Language. Certain it is that T. H. rates the
Quakers for making them necessary to Justification, and that I think is as far
from Christianity, as the contrary is from Heathenism.

The Tenth Charge against the Quakers is, That Christ fulfilled the Law only as
our Pattern.

This word only being the occasion of this Charge, I did endeavor to moderate,
and said, That to an innocent understanding, it signifies no more than chiefly
as our Pattern, which is far from signifying, that there is no other end of
Christ's fulfilling the Law. And W. P. himself mentions other ends in p. 79. of
R. against R. But says W. R. How can I count this an honest Sentence, and yet
will not justify it. And here he leaves out one half of my Sentence, and then
cries out, I am very Inconsistent. And well may I, or any man else at this
Rate. But take all together, and it is thus: This is an honest Sentence, though
I will not justify it so worded and understood as T. H. does: For T. H. Prints
this word only in a different Caracter, that it might have such an Emphasis put
upon it, as was never intended for it. And again, T. H. understands (or else
would have others to understand) by this word only, That Christ fulfilled the
Law (yea and died too) for no other end but as our Pattern of Obedience and
Sufferings. And if this be not his understanding of W. Penns Sentence, this
Charge is frivolous and of no use or advantage at all against the Quakers. And
this sense of it I will not justify: and I am sure W. P. denis it, and
oppugnes it. Again, W. R. queries, why I call this Heathen Doctrine, seeing the
word Heathen is not so much as mentioned by T. H. I answer, every Plough-man
teaches it me, from the Title page of his Dialogue, by a better sort of
Inferencing, than helped him to the 4th Charg, That Christ Redeemed himself,
and far more plain and passable among the people. And whereas W. R. says, the
honor of that name belongs to me; I must tell him, that upon a second view, I
find he does Mr. Faldo wrong; For although the Dialogues made the first noise
of Heathenism in these parts, yet it seems Mr. Faldo put out a Book to degrade
the Quakers from the Title of Christians a little before.

The Eleventh Charge is, That the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is
Irreligious, and Irrational.

As he who is truly desirous to quench a fire, will be most active in pulling
away those Brands that increase the Flame. So he that heartily mediates for
Peace, labors more to remove those words that stir up wrath, than to make
Arguments to strengthen either side. Upon this very Account I said, substract
the word Irreligious: In hopes, that rhen the greatest offense taken at this
Doctrine might cease. For I know many, and hope there are thousands more,
unknown to me, that live religiously, though they believe this Doctrine even in
T. H. his sense; yea and the Doctrine of Predestination too: And am verily
persuaded I shall meet them there where all Controversies shall fly away; But
for all I have adventured to do this, yet I see W. R. will not be satisfied; he
must have the whole Charge subtracted before the Dispute shall be ended. How
true a Representative is this man of the generality of the Contenders, and
Disputers of this Day! but oh how lamentable is it! For go into any of their
Congregations, and you shall hear them Commending, Preaching up, and Praying
for Peace, Moderation, and Christian Charity: But when you come to put them to
the test, and know what they will do, or what they will abate toward such an
Accommodation? you will ^ind not a word, not a letter, not a hair of their head,
or a Notion that signifies ^s little, to be parted with for it. So that ^ndeed
when any of them pray for Unity or Charity, it is in Substance no more but that
all may be turned to their Opinions, or else Anathama, Maranatha, God convert
them. But here I cannot but take notice of the Quakers peaceable desires in not
contending with me about ^eaving out this word; though W. R. ^ells me in a
jeering way, it is not to be left ^ut, for W. P. spoke it by immediate
Inspiration. Well then, I perceive men speak^ng by Inspiration are more easily
made ^olyable to cease from Controversy, than ^hey that speak without it. But
let VV. R. his pretenses for Truth be never so great, I Will not regard them,
while he can both scoff at one of the greatest Evangelical Doctrines, abuse
them that confess it, and by such Fire-kindling Books as this he has now
published, not endeavor ^o accommodate but extend the diffe^ence to the
hinderance of Peace. So much concerning Irreligious.

Now as to the Irrationality of the Doctrine, I find VV. R. himself makin^ it
no Attempt to vindicate it from such (...) Charge, only sporting himself with
(...) idle quibble or two about it, lets it pas^ but not without an Untruth to
bring u^ the Rear: For the Searcher of all hear^^ knows, I spoke nothing to
this or an^ other point to gratify W P. or any m^^ else, which this Enemy to
Paganism ha^ so little Christianity as to suggest.

The Twelfth Principle Charged (...) the Quakers is, That this Body which di^^
shall not rise again.

Now we are come to the main (...) the grand Charge. Now says W. R. (...) 61.
Speak out, and be not afraid, now comes to the Point. I though I had spoke
plain enough before, or else he does (...) if he does not understand me, to sa^
There is no more difference betwixt me a^^ a Quaker in this Article, than
betwi^^ four pence and a groat. But if I can y^^ speak louder I shall. Know
therefore W. R. that I believe from the bottom of my heart, That the Quakers
are m^^^ basely abused in this matter, by the cras^ Insinuations of many
malicious men. For though the Citizens generally have such ^^arp Needle Heads,
that there is very ^^w of them that mind things of this nature, but see, or are
easily brought to see ^here the fallacy of a Proposition lies; ^^t scarce one
Country man of an hundred can discern it. Tell not me what is ^^e Question, but
what is the fruits and ^ffects of it; I strike at that. And if you ^re not
willing such absurd Consquences ^ould be sucked out of your Questions, ^^ate
them so plain as to prevent it. If ^ou would not have the Quakers called
Heathens, do not say they are no Chri^^ians. Let T. H. come into a Country
^uditory and Preach that the Quakers ^eny the Resurrection of this Body, and
^^t me afterward examine them, and if ^^e generality do not go away with this
^elief (if they give any credit to him) ^^at the Quakers deny the Resurrection,
^^e burn my Books. How often have I ^eard them in Sermons compared to Hy^eneus
and Philetus, who concerning the truth, have erred Saying that the Resurrection
is past already? And what think ^ou can be the Design of this Compari^^n, but
to possess peoples minds, that they deny any Resurrection at all* Whereas you
cannot but know, that the Difference betwixt them and us, is onl^ about the
manner of the Resurrection* a needless, nay, a forbidden Controversy, even by
him that you think says mo^^ for your Notion. And let any imparti^^ man but
read the very Quotations yo^ have brought out of their Books, an^ all that ever
W. P. has writ about it, an^ they will say the same. And I shall plain tell you
more, That if I did understan^ the Quakers as well in all other poin^^ as in
this, I should not have refrain^ their Meetings as I have done and d^ (not that
I think it unlawful to go) b^^ I will not say, I would be a Quaker; th^^ is one
of the weakest passages in all yo^^ book! As if a man could be a Qu^ker or any
other Profession, when (...) pleased.

Its true indeed he may perha^^ when he will, take up the formal of any thing:
But to get into (...) Life, Spirit, and Power of Reli^^on, is not a work so
easy as you su^gest. Next I shall speak to that whi^^ has something of
Argument in it, and conclude. I brought a Demonstration sufficient to convince
any rational man, that the Quakers did own a Resurrection, and a better Being
after Death, or else they would never be so mad as to expose themselves to all
sorrows and miseries in this life, when they may avoid it. The Apostle himself
confirms this Consequence, saying, Let us eat and drink, if to morrow we shall
die, and be no more. But W. R. rejects this, and brings two Witnesses to be of
his side. The first of the Saduces, which, says he, were men that professed
Religion, in opposition to the common Opinion of the Jews, and so consequently
were exposed to sufferings. Mark it, he says they were but Consequently exposed
to Sufferings, he tells us of none: Nor do I remember any they suffered for
their Religion; as tide a Consequence as T. H.'s used to be. It Is true, they
shared in the unavoidable Calamities of War; but, that is not to our Business.
Other stories mention a Tolleration among them, and that they lived peaceably
in their several ways. Again, if I may draw Consequences also, it is as probable
they were wicked men as good, notwithstanding their Profession, and their fine
name: For nothing is more common, than for the worst men to get the best names.
The Pharisees name was as full of Holiness, as the Sadduces of Justice: and yet
were the vilest men in those times. But suppose some particular Sadduces should
rather suffer death than deny their Notions; this would be no better proof,
than if you had brought some high Spirited Gallant, who will out brave death
for a point of Honor. Besides, there is no Confession of theirs now extant,
and we know what it is to take one at another hand, nor does Josephus make all
of them so to hold. Your other Testimony is of the Esseans. And you bring some
of Josephus his words, saying, That notwithstanding they denied the
Resurrection of the Body, yet they could not be forced to revile their Law
Maker, but scofft at their Tormentors and joyfully yielded up their Souls, as
though they hoped to receive them again. And so indeed they did hope, for in
the same page, says Josephus, It was an Opinion among them, that the Body is
corruptible, but yet the Souls remain for ever immortal. And that when they are
delivered out of these carnal bonds, then presently as freed from a long
bondage, they joyfully mount aloft, the good to felicity, the bad to misery.
Now why would you conceal this? did you think I would trust you? No, you knew
this confirmed what I had said, That the Quakers exposing themselves to this
life's miseries, was a plain Demonstration they owned a better being hereafter.
But you serve Josephus as you serve me, either take no more than serves your
turn, or stop where it makes an ill sound to the Reader. Mind your dealing in
page 63. where you bring in my Answer thus, But suppose they should tell us
this very Body shall not rise, what care I -- Is this a handsome place to stop
at, or just, to do so? What will a hasty man be ready to say when he reads
this? surely this is a careless man indeed, he cares not whether his Body rise
or not: And so may take pett and read no farther; and then what reports must I
expect? Sir, this is not Christianity, nor Paganism in the best sense. Such
devises as these will do you no service in the end, tho for a time they may
bring Scandals upon Quakers, and all that desire their Toleration. You know the
whole Sentence is this; But suppose they should tell us this very Body should
not rise, what care I, so long as they tell me I shall have a better. And, Sir,
when you hear of any Beggar that rails upon another for taking away his earthen
Pitcher, after he has given it him again turned into Gold, then will I repent
of this carelessness. Your last and greatest Argument to prove your Notion
about the manner of the Resurrection you would have grounded upon Reason. A
thing I confess I love so deerly, that I daily pray to be delivered from
Unreasonable men, for all men have not Faith. 2 These. 3.2. whence I conclude,
that an unreasonable Faith commonly produces the worst sort of unreasonable
works; that is, Conscience Persecution. But to your Argument which you say is
highly rational; the substance whereof is, That if the Body be a partaker of
the Sin, it should also partake of the Punishment. But the Body is a partaker
of the Sin, therefore -- This I think is your sense, for these are your words.
Its absurd to imagine, that one Body should commit the sin, and another Body
that never sinned, be punished. To this then I answer, that the Minor is
defective: For in this you suppose that the Body is a part of man capable of
Action or Passion without, or distinct from the Soul: and if it were so, I
confess you are in the right. But it is no such matter. This should have been
proved, but I fear it is too Philosophical for you. This Body is but a piece of
Animated Clay, and can do nothing, and is good for nothing without the Soul.
See Dr. More on the point. The evil Spirit cares not for it, if he did, he
would not let Witches and Reprobates be burned. But he knows they shall have
such a body at the Resurrection, as is more fit for his purpose; in which, the
Soul, like Perillus in his Brazen Bull, may be tormented for ever. So on the
other hand, though you say it is not to be allowed, never fear it, I Will venture
my eternal life upon it, that none will disalow of the Change of their vile
bodies, when they see them fashioned like unto the glorious body of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The text you bring makes against you. I grant, the end of the
Resurrection is, That we might receive a reward according to the deeds none in
the Body, 2 Cor. 5. But it does or say, we shall receive the reward in the same
Body wherein the deeds were done. No, the Apostle tell us in the same Chapter,
that this House or Tabernacle (meaning his Body) was but a groaning Burdensome
thing, and desired to be clothed with that House which is from Heaven, suppose
a poor Tenant in a thackt Cottage should do his Landlord such faithful Service,
that at length he should take him out of that Cottage, and Seat him in one of
his best Buildings, and therein reward him for his former Service, do you think
this will not be allowed? or is this to deny rewards?

But you say you cannot possibly understand that the Quakers intend the same
Resurrection the Apostle does in 1 Cor. 15. I believe you: For there is a veil
over your Understanding, which all your Wisdom cannot remove, the Lord remove
it. And the Quakers may say the like to me; for they believe some five things
perhaps which yet I cannot possibly understand: What then, shall I speak evil
of that I know not? no, let us wait in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, and God
shall reveal to us whatsoever he sees necessary for us in his own time. Thus,
Beloved Friends, I have given you, and all that please to read me, a faithful
account why I writ that little Book called The Twelve Pagan Principles, and the
Reasons of that Title, together with those Considerations; which, in my
understanding, ought in some measure to calm the passions of those, who at
first sight of those Charges (thus separated from all Sayings that might help
them) have been hasty to condemn the Quakers upon their account. And that I
intended nothing but to beget at least a moderate Language, and Behavior, and
to stir up others to the same work; methinks the great condiscending and little
better than beseeching way of Arguing I used might convince, even W. R.
himself. Had I come forth with a Resolution to help the Quakers to a Victory
(though more than I think them sufficient to their own defense, and that their
Adversaries have both wanted and fallen into a confederacy) I would not have
talked at that submissive truckling rate, of putting in, or taking words out of
their Sayings to facilitate their being understood? No, I would have betook my
self to the more laudable Sanctuary of Rhetoric (especially at a Pinch, as W.
R. does page 37.) where Figures, honorable among some men, lie ready to
overturn these Charges with little trouble, if better Reason had been wanting:
But W. R. himself satisfies you that my Pen was indifferent, notwithstanding he
would have me a Quaker, for he says, all along my Book that I have cleared T.
H. of Forgery: then I hope T. H. his Party cannot be angry. And on the other
side, the Quakers making no complaint, signifies they are not offended with
what I writ. And if this be not Indifferency, there is none in the world. I have
heard as if he commended the endeavors of that Quibbling Author of the Quakers
Quibbles, and that as an indifferent Pen; if so, he shows great blindness that
faults me of Partiality. I am of that mind, had W. R. been guided by this
Loving, Meek, and Peaceable Spirit of Christ when he began to write, he might
have expected a Blessing upon his Labors; but let him know assuredly, that
while he is a Promoter of these unprofitable and dishonoarable Disputes, the
Lord will not hear his Prayers.

FINIS.
NOtwithstanding the manifest Innocence of my Purpose, and Innosensiveness of
my words, yet has W. R. published an abusive Letter, to which he might very
pertinently (if he knew all) have annexed one Line of his Title page, saying,
Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? I shall give you an account of the
Principal matters in the Letter, relating to my self; but say nothing of the
latter part of it, which is all in praise of him to whom it was sent; and
smells too much of daubing and design.

Some Animadversions upon a Letter sent from D. R. at Reading, to J. I. as
London, concerning W. L.
IN my Account hereof I shall observe this Method.

1. I shall tell you the Occasion of it. 2. Something of him that Subscribed it.
3. Of the matter contained in it concerning my self.
1. The Occasion was briefly thus,

I the said W. L. being at the Barbican, Meeting, Oct. 9. and with grief of
heart observing, through the unfair carriage of some, how unprofitable it was
like to be to the People (the generality of whom also not showing that
Reverence to the matter treated on, though of a Religious nature, and regard to
the desires and Entreaties of those chiefly concerned, that became the weight
of the affair) I sent a Letter to J. I. bewailing this, and some other
unchristian Passages at that time. In this Letter, upon the account of former
familiarity, yea and Church Society, never before (but now) disowned, I called
him Brother; as we usually did when we met, But at this time it happened to be
offensive. A little while after I writ the Treatise mentioned in the beginning
of this. In one place of that Discourse I blamed T. H. for leaving out a
Sentence of W. P.'s which explained his meaning in the matter of that Charge:
This thing G. W. taking notice of, bids the Baptists consider how "I, their
Friend, and Brother had "rebuked T. H. Now began ill blood to stir: For some
Baptists observing the Quakers to lay some weight upon this Brotherhood,
thought it greatly concerned them to cancel that. Nay W. R. is so troubled at
it, that in his passion he says, I am a Quaker, and concludes, p. 53. that I
avoid the name only, that I might be serviceable in propagvting their Cause,
which is utterly false. For though Paul made it a motive among the simple
Idolatrous Athenians, and so perhaps it may be now among some poor weak People,
to tell them of their own Poets; yet I do not believe Examples of this kind are
of any force now, merely as such among those that are impartial, and but of an
ordinary Capacity. However, because I had endeavored to procure any Charity
for the Quakers, it must be published, that I am no Baptist, to let all know,
that no real Baptist will offer to speak a word for a Quaker. But I hope they
are mistaken. In order to this, some sent down into the Country where I live,
and had a Certificate, that I had not been in Communion with the Baptists here
this seven years past. And though this was as much as was needful to satisfy
the Quakers, that they might not call me a Baptist any more; yet this did not
answer the Design of some. This Certificate was too fair and clean, I must not
go off so. They wanted some dirt, which it seems they were resolved to sling at
me, though they daubed their own fingers in doing it. Down therefore they send
to Reading, where I had lived about 12 years ago, and where I had much more
reason to expect they would miss of their purpose. But I was deceived. For
there my old Friend D. R. (at whose instigation I know not) presently sends up
some Dirty Rags to pin at my back, and some Sugar Plums for Jeremy, all in this
Letter. But truly if his Case had been mine, I would have put them up in my
pocket, and never have showed them, least an intelligent Reader should suspect
I had begged them. This in short was the Occasion of this Letter.

2. Concernig this D. R. that Subscribed it, and, as he says, by Consent.
First, it is some comfort that I know the Latitude of that word so well, that I
may be bold to say, unless there be a very late increase, they need not fear
the late Act against Conventicles. But 2dly, as to the Man himself, He is one
with whom I have had such intimate familiarity, that I may truly say of him, as
David of his Friend, Psalm. 55.13. In many things He was my Guide, and mine
Acquaintance, we took sweet Counsel together, and walked unto the places of the
Worship of God in Company. In short, by his persuasion chiefly, I left a
certain for an uncertain way of livelihood, to my great loss, that I might be
serviceable to him and others upon a Christian Account. There we continued in
Church Fellowship together until the Heat of Persecution brake all in pieces,
and made us Brethren in Tribulation also. In which Condition it is well known,
none of them was a greater Sufferer than my self; for as much as my Concerns
were in Ireland, and I could not get Liberty to eversee them. And now for this
Daniel, without any personal provocation, or any other than what he himself
counts but a piece of folly, viz. Writing in behalf of the Quakers, I say, for
him to break all bonds of Christianity and Friendship, publish Fireside, and
Chamber Discourses, and private Transactions 12 years old, and mix them with
false, frivolous, and and scandalous Conceits of his own; What shall I say?
shall I write out the 4th verse of the 9th of Jer. and put in the word Baptist
before Brother? God forbid. One Swallow makes no Summer. Although D. R. has
hereby rendered himself unfit for any man's intimate Friendship, who has made so
great a breach of it. yet I hope there are many hundred of the Baptists that
scorn this Baseness. But for all this I will lessen his fault as much as I can;
for I doubt he was hurried into it by some that knew how to work upon his
Principle, which is, not private, viz. That unless a Believer be Baptized in
Water, he has no right to any Promises in the Gospel. Now no marvil if this
Zeal which lays the wait of Salvation upon a little Water, as the Roman
Catholics do, be easily stirred up to revile and persecute such as say, this
Baptism is not Fundamentally necessary to Salvation. Again, Ignorance does in
part excuse any fault, and it is well known he never learned Illud Amicitia
sanctum and venerabile Nomen; nay that he can hardly read the English Rules of
Friendship; and withal, being an Enemy to that Light within, which would teach
him those Rules, no wonder if he be easily provoked to break them under a
pretense for Christ; as if Christianity and Humanity were inconsistent. I wish
therefore I may be a warning to all, how they make Friendship with an angry, or
such an illiterate man, as makes Formalities the Substance of his Religion.

But 3dly, The Matter concerning me in the Letter, first it relates to some
things done in Prison, which gives him occasion to say, That I was blamed for
refusing to give God thanks for any of his Mercies, or to join with them that
did; which is a great and manifest untruh. The story in short is this, I was
sometimes desired to say Grace (as it is called) at Dinner time, which I was not
willing to do, but referred it to others, with whom I did join; and signified
it by my constant conformity to those outward Ceremonies which are usual at
such times. And from hence is this Reproach raised.

The next Charge is, That I was looked upon by All to be a Quaker. This word
All must be cut off to the Stumps, and cured with a Figure, or else I should
prove it a loud -- For I can, if need were, produce hundreds, yea the whole
Town in general, that will say they never took me for a Quaker, (not that I
count it any disgrace to be taken for one, I would have my unkind Friends know,
but to show the untruth of this Accusation.) Neither was there any rational
ground for it; for I never was at any Quakers Meeting all the time I was there,
nor never conformed to any of their Formalities either of Gesture or Language.
And then what Reason any man had to look upon me as a Quaker, let the Reader
judge.

As for my being a Behmanist, I know not what it is; and therefore can say
nothing to it I never saw any thing of his writing that I could understand, but
some Epistles; And perhaps in private Conference I might commend them: And if
this procured me the Name, they might as well have called me Stilling fleetist,
Greenhillist, Baxterist, Carilist, etc. For in theirs, and many other Writings,
I have read things worthy of great Commendation. But among all my Names, I
wonder he omitted Jesuit, which was more talked of among the Great Men there,
than any of the other; and was whispered abroad by some others so long, till at
last it began to catch fire among some weak Presbyterians; and then I took a
little pains to quench it, though the Catholics themselves knew it was but an
Ignis fatuus, or bugbear to fright filly people.

In the next place D. R. was about to do me some kindness in this Letter, and
tell the Truth of me, But he recollected himself (poor man) and thought it not
seasonable to do it now, and therefore cuts off that part which might commend
me: For he says, I am for Universal Communion with All sorts, he should have
said (of Good men) and then he had said right: but leaving that out, he does me
wrong. I know the cause of this, he tells you our private Discourses about Mr.
Jesse, whose practice of this kind I have so much commended, that it is much he
did not call me a Jessite. But that Name was thought too honorable for me.

As for the other traducing Phrases in the Letter, such as, Strange Humors,
uncertain Fictions, wandering Fancles, giddy Brains, tottering Buildings, and
rotten Posts, they are so commonly used among those, and none but those, that
fall to scolding about Religion, that I think it is greater folly to take notice
of them, than it was to Print them. A word in behalf of G. W. and I have done.

From what has been said, and what I could farther say concerning my Relation
to the Baptists, I do assure W. R. that G. W. might properly call me their
Brother, according to the Method of their own Discipline; For since the time I
first was joined to them, about twenty seven years past. I never heard the
least word of being disowned before now. And as wandering as D R. says my fancy
is, yet in all this time I never joined, or commonly Assembled with any other
People but them. In all their Dangers and greatest Sufferings I have been
Partaker with them, not as it were of Necessity, but Choice; and he and others
know I have been more than once invited to Preach among them. It Is true indeed
I could not consent to what they call Close Communion in this Country, (though
often desired to it) because of some unnecessary Divisions among them, which I
did hope in time would be removed; of which in Charity I now forbear to mention.

To Conclude, therefore though G. W. is not to be blamed in this matter; yet
had I known before he published it, I should have desired him not to mention my
Relation to them at this time; And then probably this trouble about it had been
prevented. Only I am doubtful whether I should have stopped the publishing D.
R.'s Letter, because it was so exactly squared to the present Design of my
Defamation; and consequently (as much as in him lay) of my Destruction: But I
trust they shall never hear of my rendering Evil for Evil to any man. All the
harm I wish the Contrivers of it is, That the Lord would not lay this Sin to
their Charge.

W. L.

BY these two Letters my Name is well known to the Persons particularly
concerned in this Book, and I have no desire to spread it farther; for that
Reason which a Learned Man gives us in his Preface to EIPHNIKON, or a Treatise
of Peace, Printed for N. Brooks, 1660. His words are these.

That my Endeavors (says he) might the rather Prosper, I have concealed my
Name, as well knowing that men are wont to make a God or a Devil of a man's
Name. If such or such precious Man speak this or that, it is received do an
Oracle from God; If the same thing be spoken by one decryed, as supposed
Heterodox and Erroneous, it is esteemed by the same Man, a Damnable Error.

FINIS.

