blazon or coat of arms
Lunae, decimo tertio die Novembris, 1671. By the Commissioners for Sewers,
Pavements, etc. in LONDON,

IT is Ordered, That the Clerk do forthwith send to the Deputies and Common
Council-Men of the several Wards, a Note of the Names of the Pavier or Paviers
designed for each Ward; and because the present Season of the Year, being
sometimes frosty, and at other times foul and dirty, is judged inconvenient for
a thorough Paving of such Streets and Common Passages, as are needful to be
altered, paved, and amended; (the High-streets being designed to be paved
Causway or round fashion) the Commissioners do hereby desire the said Deputies
and Common Council-Men to employ and set to work the said Paviers in amending
such Pavements in each of their respective Precincts, which they shall observe
or have notice, are much broken and are needful and of necessity at to be
amended for the present: And the said Pavier or Paviers giving timely notice to
any the Officers attending the Commissioners, such Stones and Gravel shall be
sent as shall be requisite and needful for the same Works: And the
Commissioners do further Order, that upon Certificate of the said Deputy or
Common Council-Man of any Precinct, under his or their Hand or Hands of such
Workmanship performed, the same shall be forthwith paid (according to the Rates
agreed on by the Commissioners and the Fellowship of Paviers) out of the Moneys
now rating or collecting within this City and Liberties, touching this Affair.

And the Commissioners do desire the Deputies and Common Council-Men in whose
Ward any Grate or Grates, belonging to any Common Drein or Sewer, is or are
standing, to return to the Commissioners the Name of a fit Person for each
Grate, with the Place of his Habitation, who will undertake constantly to look
after and cleanse the same Grate and Cest-pools thereto belonging, and to
certify what they adjudge fit to be allowed him yearly out of the Chamber of
London. And for that Falls or Cest-pools are wanting to some of the said
Grates, whereby the said Grates and Sewers are presently choked with Soil, to
very great Charge and other Inconveniences; the Commissioners do again
earnestly entreat the said Deputies and Common Council-Men to cause the same
forthwith to be made by the Advice of the Surveyors of New Buildings or one of
them, and to certify the Charge thereof to the Commissioners, and thereupon
the same shall be immediately paid.

And lastly, because some Questions have arisen by several Persons touching the
present Car for Pavements, Whether the same be for a Year, or otherwise, or
intended to be a Rule for a standing and yearly Payment. The Commissioners do
desire the said Deputies and Common Council-Men to send for their Scavengers or
Collectors, and to declare to them, that so they may acquaint the Persons
dissatisfied, That the said present Car was rated, and is to be paid into the
Chamber of London, as by the Act of Parliament is directed, for putting in good
order and repair all the Pavements in the Streets and Common Passages
complained of to be greatly broken and defective and to be employed to no other
use than such as shall relate to Paving, without making the same any Rule for a
yearly or other certain Payment for the future, but that in all
After-assessments for this Affair, such prudent Care and Respect shall be taken
and had as (if possible) will tend to General Satisfaction.

Ja. Cole, Cler.

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON at his House
in Aldersgatestreet. MDCLXXI.


