THE Good Order OF TRUTH JUSTIFIED; Wherein our Women's Meetings and Order of
Marriage (by some more especially opposed) are proved agreeable to Scripture
and Sound REASON.

By an old and true Friend to Liberty of Conscience, but not to Disorder,
William Loddington.

Formality, not Form, feeds the Spirit of Persecution. So the Service of the
House of the Lord was set in Order, 2 Cor. 29.35. Though I be absent in the
Flesh, yet am I with you in Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the
stedfastness of your Faith in Christ, Col. 2.5. Printed and Sold by Andrew
Soul, in Holloway-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1685.

The Good Order OF TRUTH JUSTIFIED.
UNITY in Spirit is the true and firm Foundation of Love and Fellowship: All
Uniformity and Conformity not springing from this, is but Hypocrisy. Where
there is Unity in the Life and Spirit of Christ, there will be Uniformity (if
no Temptation hinder) in the visible Life and Order, answerable to the measure
received. Do men gather Grapes, or Grape Leaves of Thorns? The Sap puts forth
the same Leaf as well as Fruit, in every Branch. Yet the comparison holds no
further than to the faithful, because Men may counterfeit, but Trees cannot.

Outward appearances beget a Name, as to outward Fellowships: He shall by men
of the World be reputed a Quaker, that is conformable to their Language and
Gesture; but the true Quaker (or rather true Christian) takes his Measures from
better Foundations. There are Virtues, Behaviors or Operations of men's Spirits
discernable to the Spiritual, more or less, and according as they feel Unity in
these, they join together to exalt his Glory, who brought them to a sense of
Life Immortal, into which the Hypocrite cannot enter; though from this men may
fall.

Never more need to watch and pray, that we be not deceived; for Truth was
never more lively counterfeited; nor never did the Mystery of Iniquity work
more plausibly to break Sion's Peace. What more hated than Imposition? What
more nauseous than Formality? What more ridiculous than impertinent Ceremony?
The Serpent knowing all this, covers himself in some places with pretenses for
Moderation and Liberty of Conscience, as it were in opposition to all
Imposition, when indeed its to bring in Bondage to corruption: But the Daughter
of Babylon is known, though decked with Pearls and fine Array, glorious words
of Truth.

This Spirit never had a fairer advantage, because so many have turned
Persecutors under pretenses of Conformity to Religious Order and Government; so
that many Arguments now brought in behalf of good Order, though sound and
rational, yet are slighted, because formerly some Persecutors have made use of
them to a wrong end. Hence strong Delusions get over such as receive not the
Love of Truth, that they may be saved. Yea, some who I believe did in love
receive it, yet not keeping to it, are drawn into opposition to its Order;
whereby Divisions and Offenses arise, contrary to the peaceable Doctrine of
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Two things are principally pretended to be the subjects of their
Dissatisfaction, viz. our Women's Meetings, and Order of Marriage. But alas! if
these two things were removed, other Dissatisfactions would spring up, and
others after them, till and Order and Government were dissolved. They know not
what Spirit it is which makes them stumble; give it an Inch, and it will take
more: Nay, some have even lost all their Profession of Religion by doing so.

Now because I am verily persuaded in my own Spirit, that good Words and fair
Speeches deceive many simple hearts, I feel a freedom for their sakes, (some
are so far gone, pure Reason does not reach them) to write something of what
the Lord, not man, nor by Man, opened to me about these matters, that after my
searching and trying them, I might be established (glory to his Name) in his
blessed Truth, and enabled in some measure to give a Reason of my Hope and
Practice.

1. As to the First then, this Question, in my Understanding, contains the
whole matter.

Q. Whether it be agreeable to Scripture for our Women Friends to meet by
themselves, or to sit, speak and act equally with men in Meetings of Business
of an outward or temporal nature or tendency?

Answ. I put Scripture in the Question, because I know its a common Objection,
That Women's Meetings are not to be found there. Is not this plain limiting the
Spirit of the Lord to those only times when that was written, as if nothing of
Order hereafter may or must be necessary and expedient, but what was so in
those days? There is a general Rule (not the worse because Superstition has
abused it) in 1 Cor. 14. That all things be done Decently, and in Order; but
the particular Circumstances of Decency and Order are left to the judgment of
Christians in every Age, a the Lord shall direct them. But to come closer to
the Question, its very clear to me, that our Women's Meetings are plainly
agreeable to the scope and fence of the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 13.3. where he
weightily argues, and earnestly presses us to take notice of it, saying, I
would have you to know, That the Head of the Woman is the Man. If so, then if
our Women's Meetings consist with the Headship, they are justified by this
Scripture; but such Meetings as are destructive to it, and take it away, cannot
be lawful.

That the first are consistent with this Headship, and the other destructive,
appears by what follows.

If Women be taken into Men's Meetings, appointed for outward or temporal
Concerns, with equal freedom to sit, speak and act with them, then I see no
Headship man has: For if he has any, it must be either in Temporal or
Spiritual matters. In Spirituals he has none, for the same Apostle, Gal. 3.28.
affirms, That Male and Female are all one in Christ; that is, in services
purely spiritual, relating only to Christ and the Soul; such as Prayer and
Prophecy; Therefore in 1 Cor. 11. equal freedom is given to the Woman as much
as to the Man to Pray and Prophecy.

But on the other hand, Women Friends meeting by themselves, may without the
least suspicion of usurping Authority over the Men, confer and reason together,
how to serve Truth in their places, in such things as are most proper and
suitable for them, still submitting to the Wisdom of God in the Men's Meetings:
Whereas being mixed together, if a man should make a motion about any business,
and a Woman should stand up, and signify her dislike of it, though in most
mild and tender words, would not any Man, yea, an Unbeliever (if he should come
in and hear it) would he not conclude the Women in such Meetings had as much
Power as the Men? Let none Reply, It matters not what Unbelievers say; for Paul
himself was very careful that nothing might be done in the Church of Christ,
that might stumble Unbelievers, as hereafter will be noted, from 1 Cor. 14.
Wherefore he knowing Man's Headship to be owned by the Law of Nature, commands
the Woman to be covered when she prays or prophecies; which Covering, verse.
10. is called, Power on her Head, because it was to signify to all that should
come into the Meeting, that though she had equal freedom with Man to pray or
prophecy, yet nevertheless she still was to own, and did own the Man's Power
over her in visible or temporal things. But the Man praying or prophesying, is
to be uncovered, in testimony that there is no Power in any Creature above him.
And to answer all Objections, in ease this his Epistle should come where People
did wear no Coverings on their Heads, then he directs them to Nature's covering
to confirm this Headship: The Woman's Hair (says he, verse. 15.) is given her
for a Covering, and she is not to cut it off, nor the Man's to be worm of a
length like the Woman's; for that would be a shame in Nature, verse. 14. for it
would signify he has lost his Headship.

Thus we may observe how zealous the Apostle is in this matter; there was no
need to write this to distinguish their Sex, for that was as plainly manifest
by their other Garments, in those days as well as ours.

This Headship of Man over the Woman, being only in Temporals, hinders not
their Spiritual Unity: So the Headship of God mentioned in the same Verse,
takes not away the Unity of God and Christ. Jesus himself rightly divides this
word of Truth; for in John 10.29. speaking of his spiritual Power to save his
Sheep, he says, I and my Father are one: But in chap. 14.28. relating to the
concerns and sufferings of his Body, then he says, My Father ^s greater than
I. So Male and Female are all one in Christ, that is, in Spirituals, but Man
the Head in Temporals.

Obj. If any reply, This Headship is only to be understood in Family Affairs.

Ans In granting this they grant the other also, unless they will say, Man is
Head in some small private Concerns, but in public and weighty matters the
Woman is to be his equal in Power. This renders the Apostle very weak in
writing so earnestly for so small a matter, which indeed requires no Proof at
all. But further, if this Objection were true, then these Gestures of covering
and uncovering the Head, before commanded, should only be used in private
Family Prayer or Prophecy, where the Headship thereby signified, is only to be
in force.

Obj. 2. But I have heard it hinted, That Women might be with Men in Meetings
of Business, provided they were silent, as if they were in such Meeting the
Apostle relates to, when he commands Women to be silent, 1 Cor. 14.25. and 1 Timothy 2.

Answ. Then must they sit as useless Spectators, not daring to speak what may
open in their Understandings, touching any thing among them. But a little to
explain these Scriptures; there is not the least ground to suppose the Apostle
diverted his Mind from Meetings of Worship to Meetings of Business, when he
said, Let the Women be silent: for in this 14th chapter, he writing principally
about Prophecy, recommends some Circumstances necessary to be observed, which
he would have every man, that thinks himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, to
own as Gods commands, verse. 37. Two Scandals he labors to prevent. 1st. When
any speak with Tongues (which he would not forbid, though he commends
Prophesying in plain known Language before it) that there should be an
Interpreter ready, or else it were better to be silent, verse. 28. and the
Reason is in v. 23. Because if an unlearned Man, or an Unbeliever should come
in, he would say they were Mad. Mark how careful he is of Truth's Honor, that
Unbelievers Mouths might not be opened against it. And, 2dly, he commands,
That Women should then be silent; that is, when any speak with Tongues above
their Understanding, it is not permitted unto them to speak in the Church; that
is, by way of asking Questions there: But if they will learn (says he) that
is, if they have a desire to know the meaning of any thing there spoken in a
Tongue unknown to them, let them ask [Mark, ask] at home: For if a Woman should
but ask, or desire a Man in the Church to explain himself, it might be apt to
be taken for a Command by Unbelievers, if they should come in; and so that
might occasion another Scandal, That Christian Women did usurp Authority over
the Men. Wherefore writing to Timothy, he requires the same thing to be
observed by the Women there, telling him, That they were to learn in silence
with all Subjection or Quietness, and not to teach or speak in any such way as
might look like usurping Authority over the Men, either in the Church, or
indeed in any other place; for that would stumble even Unbelievers they could
not endure that. And so he gives two Reasons why Man is to have this Headship;
Because Adam was first formed, v. 13. Secondly, Because Adam was not deceived,
(that is, by the Serpent) but the Woman being deceived, was in the
Transgression, v. 14. And this in short is the plain sense and substance of
these two Scriptures compared together, which are so often mis-applyed to wrong
ends and practices this day. But now, all this does not forbid a Women's
opposing a wrong Spirit, if it shall dare to speak in the Church; Woman or
Child, as well as Man, in the movings of the Spirit of God may do that; Nor
does it forbid a Woman's Praying or Prophesying; for then he had contradicted
what (in chap. 11. of the same Epistle) he allowed of. Thus the Scripture, so
plainly asserting Man's Headship, by true consequence, condemns all Practices
that overthrow it. And truly, I often admire, that some whom I know to be
ingenious and rational in other things, should not see how they cloud
themselves at present, nor foresee the future Inconveniences of such Meetings
they contend for.

Obj. 3. I once heard a kind of arguing against this Headship, from the state
of Adam and Eve before the fall, As if Truth's Principles did lead us to join
Man and Woman together now, in ordering all things as they two did in Paradise.

Answ. I own, Truth presses to that Perfection in Spirit: He that is in Christ
is a new Creature, as to the spiritual part, being baptized into that Spirit
which knows no distinctions, according to Flesh, as of Jew or Greek, Bond or
Free, Male or Female. But to turn this into an Argument for outward things; and
to say, if any one be in Christ, his outward Body is a new Creature, not of the
same Flesh and Bones, nor liable to the same Distempers as before; and so to
make void all distinction in the natural Sex, States and Conditions, is great
Darkness, and contains such Absurdities as run all into Confusion.

I shall say no more to this particular: There is more light in one Sun than in
many Stars. Until this Principle of Man's Headship in Temporal things be
dissanulled, I know nothing can be urged in opposition to the Order of our
Women's Meetings, or in behalf of the mixed Meetings before mentioned.

The Second thing in the Order of Truth, by some opposed, is Our way of
Marriage; which though established by the Wisdom of God in our Meetings, being
comely and commendable, even in the Eyes of sober discreet People of the World;
yet some professing Truth, (A Shame to see it!) are so pettish and conceited,
that nothing will please them, unless a liberty be granted to Marry what way,
yea, and what Persons too they please. And except we will consent to, and
approve of such a Liberty, they cry out, Imposition, Formality, etc. And they
are very ready to urge the Apostles granting liberty of eating Herbs and Flesh,
Romans 14. as a good Argument for them. Is Marriage of no greater concern than
such things? According to my measure in Truth, I affirm, they may more
plausibly contend for a liberty to put off their Hats in Salutations, as the
World does; for this would not so much reflect upon Truth as diversity of
Marriages: The World does not regard our Gestures or Salutations, as matters of
Religion; but Marriage is generally owned to be Gods Ordinance: Wherefore if
our Meetings, (which we believe have greater light in Religious matters than
other gatherings) should not agree in the manner of celebrating this Ordinance
of God, would they not render themselves very weak, yea, below the Wisdom of
other Churches (so called?) Will the Jew tolerate his Circumcision? the
Baptist, Water Baptism? or the Bishops, their Matrimony to be administered after
diverse ways and different forms? Do not we truly conclude against all them who
contend for Water Baptism, that they are all in the dark about it, because they
cannot agree either as to the subject, or to the manner of its Administration?
And would they not say the same of us, if we should fall into the like
Controversy? But blessed be God, a Remnant are kept by his Power over all
these vain janglings and Oppostions. These Hearts are knit together in Love and
Peace by his Spirit; and they strive together, and are strengthened by his
Might to hold fast the Faith and Order of his blessed Truth.

But the great scruple is, Propounding Intentions of Marriage to the Women's
Meetings; and no other Reason for it, as I remember, but that it was Needless.
-- A few words to this.

If one principal end of publishing Intentions of Marriage, is to prevent
Abuses, and to discover deceit in either Party, if there be any, then all means
very serviceable to this end, ought not to be accounted needless: But our
Women's Meetings have been very serviceable to this end. -- Therefore I know not
which part of this Argument can be denied. If it be queried in contempt of
them, What Service have they done, which might not as well have been done by
the men? Ans. This is a gross Reflections take heed of it. Its all one as to
say, A Man might have slain Sisera, as well as Jac^, Judge. 4.22. A Man might
have directed Naaman to the Prophet, as well as the little Maid, 2 Kings 5. Men
might have brought the Tidings of the Resurrection of Jesus, as well as the
Women, Matthew. 28. But who art thou that replyest against Gods Instruments? Many
Instances might be given, of later date than the Scriptures, of Gods making
Women serviceable in diverse things of this Nature. Therefore such deserve a
sharp Rebuke, as would put Women out of all Service in the Church, and confine
them to their Household Affairs, which I fear is indeed the Bottom and Root of
the Scruple.

If it be replied, That these Services I instance were done by particular
private Women, and not by Women's Meetings; and that they could freely tell
their Intention of Marriage to any particular Women, but not to a Meeting of
Women.

Answ. Then the scruple falls upon them as a Meeting. Then the Question will
be, Whether their Act only of coming together be disliked, or their Business?
The first is proved before, and the other must needs be approved by these
Instances last mentioned. For if the Scripture testify, That God has often
blessed the Advice and Instructions of particular Women, much more Reason have
we to expect and hope for good Advice, and Assistance from them, in matters
propounded to them, when they are solemnly met to wait upon the Lord for Wisdom
and Counsel in things committed to their care. For there is an absolute Promise
of Gods Presence to two or three met in his Name, Mat. 18.22. Who dare say,
this was made only to men? Much might be written upon this very Argument. But I
love both hearing and speaking few words, and they (in disputable cases
especially) as close to the point as possible.

Now I am writing about the form of Godliness, I feel it necessary to add a
little to prevent the fears that may enter, lest some who contend for Form,
lose Power, and turn Persecutors, as others have done, for their Forms, when
got into temporal Power and Authority.

That some may fall from Truth's Principles, is too true; but that contending
for the Form of it, is either a sign they are fallen, or a means to make them
fall, I must deny. If others have turned Persecutors, its no wonder, because
the Principles upon which they stand, if well considered, do naturally lead
them to Persecution. And if any of them do not persecute, its either for want
of Power, or they refrain in Policy, or esle the natural goodness and
tenderness of their own Dispositions overpower their Principles; for many men's
natural Tempers are better than their Religions.

But now, Truth has taught a little Flock such peaceable Principles as destroy
Persecution Root and Branch. How is it possible he should persecute, that
heartily believes, Every Religions Meeting ought to have liberty worship God
according to their Consciences? Can men desire more Moderation? That its not
lawful to hurt any man's Person, good Name, or Estate, for matters of Religion;
and Conscience toward God. Can civil Property be better secured from
Persecution? In brief, our Gospel teaches our Hands to seed them that would
starve us; our Tongues to pray for them who curse us. And the God of Peace,
(glory to his Name) has brought this little Flock into his Lamb's Nature, the
New Creature, that cannot kill, hurt, or do violence to any. And without this
New Nature all Religion is but sounding Brass.

Now if any man cannot be content with this Liberty, that is, to join himself
to what Meeting best likes him, but he will thrust in for Fellowship with us,
and will exclaim against us as Persecutors, if we will not let him have a
liberty which we cannot take our selves; does not such a pretending Friend
become rather a Persecutor of us, than we of him? To force a liberty to break
Order, and to force to conform to it, are Impositions alike to be denied.

There is a caution necessary to mind, relating to these things. I have
observed, that such as oppose the Order of Truth, under pretense for Truth, do
frequently in their writings and speakings, call upon us, To keep to that which
first convinced us. Good Counsel: Would they themselves were obedient to it.
But they abuse it, by applying it to a wrong end. For when they bid us keep to
that which first convinced, and withal tell us of the blessed Appearance of the
Lord among Friends in the beginning, their sense is, we should keep to that
Order and Discipline which was then among Friends: Which I grant to be good and
suitable for that day and time: But by directing to that now, they secretly
insinuate a Reproof of what ever is more than was at first, as if set up by
Man's Wisdom, as Women's Meetings, Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly Meetings, our
present Order of Marriage, etc. And so, such Friends as now walk in this Order,
being thereunto led and guided by the same Spirit which convinced them in the
beginning, are by these pretending Friends, cried down, as men of Form,
Apostates, Innovators, etc.

And now, to show that this is their design and sense, mark but the scope and
drift of W. R's Book against the Apostate Quaker (as he calls them) because (in
his meaning) fallen from what they were in the beginning, which he dates to be
about twenty six years then last past, page 3. 1st part But more briefly this
may be seen in Anne Docwrays Paper, later printed, wherein there is some Rhyme,
but not a word of Reason to convince, that what she scoffingly calls
Formalities and Directories, have any Evils or Absurdities in them. W. R. and
She, exclaim much against Imposition, which we disown more than they. But mark
how she concludes, after many fine words against Forms, outward Rules,
Contrivances, etc. thus, [But God is bringing back again his People to their
first Principles and Practice, whereby they were gathered into Community with
him, and with one another in his Life and Power.] By this its as clear as the
Sun, that she misapplies this Doctrine, as before noted.

Many such Instances might be given. Had this Woman lived in the Apostles days,
might she not as readily have charged them with Apostasy, when they left often
having all things common, and set up Property among them? Might she not have
said to Paul, -- Keep to that which first convinced thee, and tell not us of
ordaining Elders or Overseers in Churches, Tit. 15. 1 Timothy 3. Away with thy
form of sound Words, 2 Timothy 1.13. That Light which met thee going to Damascus,
spoke nothing then to thee of these things. Thou art now got into an aspiring
Mind, and seek Pre-eminence over others. Thou art setting up Forms and
Directories, outward Rules and Prescriptions, which will be but Baits for the
Enemy to withdraw men's Minds from the inward Teachings of the Grace of God
into Contention. After this rate A. D. runs on in her Paper against the Truth
of God now, which may as well be applied to the Primitive Times, as ours.

But now, let us consider, whether these who cry out so much of Apostasy, are
not themselves the Apostates. Whom the Lord convinces and converts, them he
adds to his Church, Acts 2.47. Whom he adds to his Church, them he teaches to
be obedient to the Discipline therein, Heb. 13.17. This is plain Scripture. And
the true Light in us, if we keep to it, will certainly satisfy us in the truth
of this spiritual Rule and Government, and the strength of it over our Spirits,
we shall as sensibly feel, as outwardly we may feel the strength of another
man's Body over ours, by trying it. But as stubborn Bodies will not yield to
stronger Bodies, though they dye for it; so stubborn forward Spirits will
despise this spiritual Government, till they loose their spiritual Life, 2 Pet.
2.10. A false Birth may cry, but not for the Breasts. That which is born of God
first breathes after him, and then after the Flocks of his Companions, Cant.
1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make
thy Flocks to rest at Neon: For why should I be as one that turns aside from
the Flocks of thy Companious? Love to Christ, and to his Flock cannnot be
separated. So though I join to this Flock, its not because they are a Flock,
but because they are Christ's Companions: And although I believe as they
believe, yet I can faithfully say, its not because they believe or practice
this or that, but because that Power, which brought me from the barren
Mountains, (blessed be his Name) gave me the same Faith, and led me into the
same fruitful Valleys, where they were feeding. So by this I know, and dare be
bold in Truth to say, not to upbraid, but in Love to inform our Opposers,
pretending Friend ship, That either they mistook at first, their Opinions were
not right-they took that for the Lords Anointing which was not, or else they
are really fallen off, or to speak most moderately, turned aside from the Works
of the Lord: Oh! that they may return with greater Zeal than ever, to serve the
Truth in this their day, before eternal Night come over them! It is very sad to
see any, that were first, to be last, but more to feel them in danger to be
lost.

Obj. If any should Reply, That our Meetings are fallen from their first Faith,
and have set up Formalities, contrary to Scripture and Reason; and therefore
its as lawful now for any one, as it was for Luther formerly, to oppose a whole
Body, when so corrupted.

Ans. Blessed be the Lord, this is not our case. I do not find, nor did I ever
meet any impartial Friend, or friendly Man, that would say, These our Opposers
have proved any one of our Principles, or any part of our Order, guilty of any
Errors or Evils, or any way contrary to Scripture or sound Reason. Neither did
I ever hear they propounded a better Order or Discipline. But the burden of all
their Books and Papers I meet with, is either against particular Persons, or
for Liberty, Liberty, against Forms, Orders, outward Rules, etc. which if they
would speak plain English, is as much as to say, We would have a Religion like
the Earth in its Chaos, without Form, void of Order, Genesis 1. We would be a
Garden, but not enclosed, like that in Cant. 4.12. We would be fellow Citizens
with you, provided there may be no Walls or Gates about your City. We are for
Salvation for Walls, in that sense which allows no means of Salvation, though
lawful and honest. We are for liberty of go in and out of the City, which way,
and when we please. In short, they say in effect, as Israel of old, We would
have liberty for every one to do what is right in his own Eyes. Thus strange
confused Notions have entered, under pretense of keeping to the Light within (a
true Doctrine) and have deceived many, and will certainly devour their strength
unawares, if they do not return speedily to the Lord, Hos. 7.9.

I would not be supposed by writing this, to be more zealous for the Form, than
for the Power of Godliness; my daily Watch is against it: And I pray God, I and
all that love the Truth, may not only grow in Words to speak for it, but also
in unfeigned Love to the Brethren, and that the very Spirit of our Minds may
daily feel strength renewed to withstand all the fiery Darts, and all the
gilded Baits of the Enemy.

I do in this matter, as the Apostles did about Faith and Works, and as all
Christians ought to do, viz. to countermine where we feel the Enemy
undermining. When the Romans began (an early beginning) to be tainted with a
Belief, That Works, without Faith, would save them; Paul zealously writes for
Faith, Romans 4. But when James perceived the scattered Tribes inclinable to err
on the other hand, he writes as fervently for Works, chap. 2. So a concern is
upon my Heart, to vindicate even the Form of Godliness, because I feel the
Serpent designing to bring us to Disorder and Confusion, under the fair
pretenses of Liberty, as before mentioned.

And if it be true, as I heard one, (no small Opposer, and for whom I greatly
sorrow) say, That the Worm which spoils the Shell, breeds in the Kernel; then
there is much more cause to examine their Pretenses to Power, than many
apprehend. For by this Argument, all their talk of Power, and seeming Power, is
to be suspected as wrong, because no Worm can breed in the true living Power of
God, that will spoil the Shell or Form of Godliness.

Obj. There is one thing more with me to add concerning Judgment: It has
sometimes been returned upon me, in conference about these things, That I
judged none to be Friends, by these Arguments, but such as were conformable to
our Order and Forms; and this was judging according to outward Appearances; and
that I must not judge, lest I be judged, and such like.

Answ. There is thick Darkness in this Objection, especially being made by one
in some things conformable to Truth, whereby the World judges him to be a
Quaker. Now he must either own or disown this Judgment: If he own it, be
contradicts himself, in saying, No judgment is to be made by outward
Appearance: If he disown it, he condemns himself of Hypocrisy, in appearing to
be what he is not. But further, let such pretending Friends, who thus object,
consider, whether they themselves do not in their own Thoughts, daily, as they
walk the streets, make a judgment of People according to outward Appearances? I
do not mean as to their eternal state, but do they not judge such to be no
Quakers, who are dressed in the World's Fashions? So by the same Rule as they
judge them to be no Quakers, which have not the visible dress or habit of
Quakers, must they justify me in judging them to be no Members of our
Meetings, whose Behavior there is not orderly and agreeable to our Principles.
He is not of a right Spirit, who is not as watchful not to offend those he
pretends to own as a Church of Christ, as not to offend ^^w or Gentile. And if
he believe us not to be a Church of Christ, why does he frequent our Assembly,
and there sit, as in Unity with our Worship?

Qu. But what then is forbidden by these two Scriptures, Mat. 7.1. John 7.24?

Answ. In Mat. 7.1. Christ forbids judging so of others, as we would not be
judged our selves. Wherefore he adds, For with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged. He that judges without Mercy, shall have Judgment without Mercy. So
this takes not away all, but only partial and unjust Judgment.

2. In John 7.24. That judgment is forbid which the Jews made according to the
appearance of Letter of the Law. When the literal Sense or Letter, is a Figure,
we must not judge by that sense. The foregoing Verses clear this: The Jews
were angry because Christ made a man whole on the Sabbath day: He convinced
them, it was no Breach of their Sabbath, by their own practice of Circumcision
upon that day, in case of necessity. For that day was but a Figure of future
Rest, Exodus 31.17. So it was made for Man, not Man for it; that is, it was to
be subject to man, not man to it, Mark 2.27. And though the Letter of the Law
was, In it thou shall not do any Work; yet if they judged righteously, this did
not forbid good Works, as necessity called for, as Circumcision, or saving the
Life of a Beast, themselves being Judges, much more doing good to men.
Wherefore he reproves them for judging after the Appearance or Letter of the
Law, and not according to the Equity or Righteousness of it in his case, as
well as in their own. Great is that blindness and ignorance which wrests these
Scriptures, to silence all judging and condemning what in Truth ought to be
judged and condemned.

So I shall conclude, with referring to what the Apostle Paul says concerning
our Bodies, 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy. This Temple, in chap. 6.19. he expounds to be our Bodies. Now as the
Body is a Temple for the Soul, so I own the Form to be but as a Temple for the
Power. Yet if any man wound this living Temple, this living Form, the Life,
Spirit and Power within it, will cry out, and testify against him.

THE END.

