A THIRD LETTER FOR TOLERATION, TO THE AUTHOR OF THE THIRD LETTER CONCERNING
Toleration.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. MDC XCII.

The Reader may be pleased to take notice, that

L. 1. Stands for the Letter concerning Toleration.

A. For the Argument of the Letter concerning Toleraration briefly considered
and answered.

L. 2. The Second Letter concerning Toleration.

P. The Pages of the Third Letter concerning Toleration.

A Third LETTER for Toleration. Chap. 1.

CHAP. I.
SIR,
THE Business which your Letter concerning Toleration found me engaged in, has
taken up so much of the time my Health would allow me ever since, that I doubt
whether I should now at all have troubled you or the World with an Answer, had
not some of my Friends, sufficiently satisfied of the Weakness of your
Arguments, with repeated Instances, persuaded me it might be of use to Truth in
a Point of so great Moment, to ^lear it from those Fallacies which might
perhaps puzzle some unwary Readers; and therefore prevailed on me to show the
wrong Grounds and mistaken Reasonings you make use of to support your new way
of Persecution. Pardon me, Sir, that I use that Name, which you are so much
offended at: for if Punishment be Punishment, though it come short of the
Discipline of Fire and Faggot, it is as certain that Punishment for Religion is
truly Persecution, though it be only such Punishment as you in your Clemency
think fit to call moderate and convenient Penalties. But however you please to
call them, I doubt not but to let you see, that if you will be true to your own
Principles, and stand to what you have said, you must carry your some ^egrees
of Force (as you phrase it) to all these Degrees which in Words you declare
against.

You have indeed in this last Letter of yours, altered the Question; for page
26. you tell me the Question between us, is, Whether the Magistrate has any
Right to use Force to bring Men to the true Religion? Whereas you your self own
the Question to be, Whether the Magistrate has a Right to use Force in matters
of Religion? Page 76.
Whether this Alteration be at all to the Advantage of Truth or your Cause, we
shall see. But hence you take occasion ^ll along to lay load on me for charging
you with the Absurdities of a Power in the Magistrates to punish Men, to bring
them to their Religion: Whereas you here tell us they have a Right to use Force
only to bring Men to the true. But whether I were more to blame to suppose you
to talk coherently and mean Sense, or you in expressing your self so doubtfully
and uncertainly, where you were concerned to be plain and direct, I shall leave
to our Readers to judge; only here in the Beginning I shall endeavor to clear
my self of that Imputation, I so often meet with, of charging on you
Consequences you do not own, and arguing against an Opinion that is not yours,
in those Places, where I show how little Advantage it would be to Truth, or the
Salvation of Men's Souls, that all Magistrates should have a Right to use Force
to bring Men to embrace their Religion. This I shall do by proving, that if
upon your Grounds the Magistrate, as you pretend, be obliged to use Force to
bring Men to the true Religion, it will necessarily follow, that every
Magistrate, who believes his Religion to be true, is obliged to use Force to
bring Men to his.

You tell us, That by the Law of Nature the Magistrate is invested Page 31.
with coactive Power, and obliged to use it for all the good Purposes which it
might serve, and for which it should be found needful, even for the restraining
of false and corrupt Religion: And that it is the Magistrate's Duty, to which
he is commissioned by the Law of Nature, Page 35.
but the Scipture does not properly give it him.

I suppose you will grant me, that any thing laid upon the Magistrate as a
Duty, is some way or other practicable. Now the Magistrate being obliged to use
Force in Matters of Religion, but yet so as to bring Men only to the true
Religion, he will not be in any Capacity to perform this part of his Duty,
unless the Religion he is thus to promote, be what he can certainly know, or
else what it is sufficient for him to believe to be the true: Either his
Knowledge or his Opinion must point out that Religion to him, which he is by
Force to promote; or else he may promiscuously and indifferently promote any
Religion, and punish Men at a venture, to bring them from that they are in, to
any other. This last I think no body has been so wild as to say.

If therefore it must be either his Knowledge or his Persuasion that must guide
the Magistrate herein, and keep him within the Bounds of his Duty; if the
Magistrates of the World cannot know, certainly know the true Religion to be
the true Religion; but it be of a Nature to exercise their Faith, (for where
Vision, Knowledge and Certainty is, there Faith is done away) then that which
gives them the last Determination herein, must be their own Belief, their own
Persuasion.

To you and me the Christian Religion is the true, and that is built (to
mention no other Articles of it) on this, that Jesus Christ was put to Death at
Jerusalem, and rose again from the Dead. Now do you or I know this, (I do not
ask with what Assurance we believe it, for that in the highest Degree not being
Knowledge, is not what we now inquire after) Can any Magistrate demonstrate to
himself (and if he can to himself, he does ill not to do it to others) not only
all the A^ticles of his Church, but the Fundamental ones of the Christian
Religion? For whatever is not capable of Demonstration (as such remote Matters
of Fact are not) is not, unless it be self-evident, capable to produce
Knowledge, how well grounded and great soever the Assurance of Faith may be
wherewith it is received; but Faith it is still, and not Knowledge; Persuasion,
and not Certainty. This is the highest the Nature of the thing will permit us
to go in ^atters of revealed Religion, which are therefore called Matters of
Faith: A Persuasion of our own Minds, short of Knowledge, is the last Result
that determines us in such Truths. It Is all God requires in the Gospel for Men
to be saved: and 'twould be strange if there were more required of the
Magistrate for the Direction of another in the way to Salvation, than is
required of him for his own Salvation. Knowledge then, properly so called, not
being to be had of the Truths necessary to Salvation, the Magistrate must be
content with Faith and Persuasion for the Rule of that Truth he will recommend
and enforce upon others; as well as of that whereon he will venture his own
eternal Condition. If therefore it be the Magistrates Duty to use Force to
bring Men to the true Religion, it can be only to that Religion which he
believes to be true: So that if Force be at all to be used by the Magistrate in
Matters of Religion, it can only be for the promoting that Religion which he
only believes to be true, or none at all. I grant that a strong Assurance of
any Truth settled upon prevalent and well-grounded Arguments of Probability, is
often called Knowledge in popular ways of Talking: but being here to distinguish
between Knowledge and Belief, to what Degrees of Considence soever raised, their
Boundaries must be kept, and their Names not confounded. I know not what
greater Pledge a Man can give of a full Persuasion of the Truth of any thing,
than his venturing his Soul upon it, as he does, who sincerely embraces any
Religion, and receives it for true. But to what Degree soever of Assurance his
Faith may rise, it still comes short of Knowledge. Nor can any one now, I think,
arrive to greater Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion, than the
first Converts in the time of our Savior and the Apostles had; of whom yet
nothing more was required but to believe.

But supposing all the Truths of the Christian Religion necessary to Salvation
could be so known to the Magistrate, that in his Use of Force for the bringing
Men to embrace these, he could be guided by infallible Certainty; yet I fear
this would not serve your turn, nor authorize the Magistrate to use Force to
bring Men in England, or any where else, into the Communion of the National
Church, in which Ceremonies of humane Institution were imposed, which could not
be known, nor (being confessed things in their own Nature indifferent) so much
as thought necessary to Salvation.

But of this I shall have occasion to speak in another Place: all the Use I
make of it here, is to show, that the Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the
Sacrament, and such like things, being impossible to be known necessary to
Salvation, a certain knowledge of the Truth of the Articles of Faith of any
Church, could not authorize the Magistrate to compel Men to imbra^ the
Communion of that Church, wherein any thing were made necessary to Communion,
which he did not know was necessary to Salvation.

By what has been already said, I suppose it is evident, that if the Magistrate
be to use Force only for promoting the true Religion, he can have no other
Guide but his own Persuasion of what is the true Religion, and must be led by
that in his Use of Force, or else not use it at all in matters of Religion. If
you take the latter of these Consequences, you and I are agreed: if the former,
you must allow all Magistrates, of whatsoever Religion, the Use of Force to
bring Men to theirs, and so be involved in all those ill Consequences which you
cannot it seems admit, and hoped to decline by your useless Distinction of
Force to be us^d, not for any, but for the true Religion.

It Is the D^y, you say, of the Magistrate to use Force for pro^ing the true
Religion. And in several Places you tell us, he is o^liged to it. Persuade
Magistrates in general of this, and then ^ll me how any Magistrate shall be
restrained from the Use of Force, for the promoting what he thinks to be the
true? For he being persuaded that it is his Duty to use Force to promote the
true Religion, and being also persuaded his is the true Religion, What shall
stop his Hand? Must he forbear the Use of Force till he be got beyond
believing, into a certain Knowledge that all he requires Men to embrace, is
necessary to Salvation? If that be it you will stand to, you have my Consent,
and I think there will be no need of any other Toleration. But if the believing
his Religion to be the true, be sufficient for the Magistrate to use Force for
the promoting of it, will it be so only to the Magistrates of the Religion that
you pro^ss? And must all other Magistrates sit still, and not do their Duty
till they have your Permission? If it be your Magistrate's Duty to use Force
for the promoting the Religion he believes to be the true, it will be every
Magistrate's Duty to use Force for the promoting what he believes to be the
true, and he sins if he does not receive and promote it as if it were true. If
you will not take this upon my Word, yet I desire you to do it upon the strong
Reason of a very judicious and reverend Prelate of the present Church of
England, In a discourse concerning Conscience, printed in 4to, 87. p. 18. You
will find these following Words, and much more to this Purpose: Where a Man is
mistaken in his Judgment, even in that Case it is always a Sin to act against
it. Though we should take that for a Duty which is really a Sin, yet so long as
we are thus persuaded, it will be highly criminal in us to act in contradiction
to this Persuasion: and the Reason of this is evident, because by so doing, we
wilfully act against the best Light which at present we have for the Direction
of our Actions. So that when all is done, the immediate Guide of our Actions
can be nothing but our Conscience, our Judgment and Persuasion. If a Man, for
Instance, should of a Jew become a Christian, whilst yet in his Heart he
believed that the Messiah is not yet come, and that our Lord Jesus was an
Impostor: Or if a Papist should renounce the Communion of the Roman Church, and
join with ours, whilst yet he is persuaded that the Roman Church is the only
Catholic Church, and that our Reformed Churches are Heretical or Schismatical;
though now there is none of us that will d^ny that the Men in both these Cases
have made a good Change, as having changed a false Religion for ^ruo one, yet
for all that I dare say we should all agree they were both of them great
Villains for making that Change, becauso they made it not upon honest
Principles, and in pursuance of their Judgment, but in direct contradiction to
both. So that it being the Magistrate's Duty to use Force to bring Men to the
^rue Religion; and he being persuaded his is the true, I suppose you will no
longer question but that he is as much obliged to use Force to bring Men to it,
as if it were the true. And then, Sir, I hope you have too much Respect for
Magistrates, not to allow them to believe the Religions to be true which they
profess. These things put together, I desire you to consider whether if
Magistrates are obliged to use Force to bring Men to the true Religion, every
Magistrate is not obliged to use Force to bring Men to that Religion he
believes to be true?

This being so, I hope I have not argued so wholly besides the purpose, as you
all through your Letter accuse me, for charging on your Doctrine all the ill
Consequences, all the Prejudice it would be to the true Religion, that
Magistrates should have Power, to use Force to bring Men to their Religions:
and I presume you will think your self concerned to give to all these Places in
the first and second Letter concerning Toleration, which show the
Inconveniences and Absurdities of such an use of Force, some other Answer, than
that you are for punishing only such as reject the P. 24.
true Religion. That it is plain the Force you speak of is not Force, my way
applied, i. e. applied to the promoting the true Religion only, but to the
promoting all the National Religions in the World. And again, P. 29.
to my arguing that Force your way applied, if it can propagate any Religion,
it is likelier to be the false than the true, because few of the Magistrates of
the World are in the right way. You reply, This would have been to the purpose,
if you had asserted that every Magistrate may use Force your indirect way (or
any way) to bring Men to his own Religion, whatever that be. But if you
asserted no such thing, (as no Man you think but an Atheist will assert it)
then this is quite besides the business. This is the great Strength P. 27.
of your Answer, and your Refuge almost in every page. So that I presume it
reasonable to expect that you should clearly and directly answer what I have
here said, or else find some other Answer than what you have done to the second
Letter concerning Toleration. However acute you are in your way in several
places on this occasion, as p. 11, 12. for my Answer to which I shall refer you
to another place.

To my Argument against Force, from the Magistrates being as liable to Error as
the rest of Mankind, you answer, That I might have considered that this
Argument concerns none but those who assert that every Magistrate has a right
to use Force to promote his own Religion, whatever it be, which you think no
Man that has P. 15.
any Religion will assert. I suppose you may think now this Answer will scarce
serve, and you must assert either no Magistrate to have right to promote his
Religion by Force, or else be involved in the Condemnation you pass on those
who ass^rt it of all Magistrates. And here I think, as to the decision of the
Question betwixt us, I might leave this Matter: but there being in your Letter
a great many other gross Mistakes, wrong Suppositions, and fallacious Arguings,
which in those general and plausible Terms you have made use of in several
places, as best served your turn, may possibly have imposed on your self, as
well as they are fitted to do so on others, and therefore will deserve to have
some notice taken of them; I shall give my self the trouble of examining your
Letter a little farther.

To my saying, It is not for the Magistrate, upon an Imagination of its
Usefulness, to make use of any other Means than what the Author and Finisher of
our Faith had directed; you reply, Which how true soever, is not, I think, very
much to the P. 31.
purpose. For if the Magistrate does only assist that Ministry which our Lord
has appointed, by using so much of his coactive Power for the furthering their
Service, as common Experience discovers to be useful and necessary for that
End; there is no manner of ground to say, that upon an Imagination of its
Usefulness, he makes use of any other Means for the Salvation of Men's Souls,
than what the Author and Finisher of our Faith has directed. It Is true indeed
the Author and Finisher of our Faith has given the Magistrate no new Power or
Commission, nor was there any need that he should, (if himself had had any
Temporal Power to give:) for he found him already, even by the Law of Nature,
the Minister of God to the People for Good, and bearing the Sword not in vain,
i. e. invested with coactive Power, and obliged to use it for all the good
Purposes which it might serve, and for which it should be found needful; even
for the restraining of false and corrupt Religion; as Job long before (perhaps
before any part of the Scriptures were written) acknowledged, when he said,
that the worshipping the Sun or the Moon, was an Iniquity to be punished by the
Judge. But though our Savior has given the Magistrates no new Power, yet being
King of Kings, he expects and requires that they should submit themselves to
his Scepter, and use the Power which always belonged to them, for his Service,
and for the advancing his spiri^ual Kingdom in the World. And even that Charity
which our great Master so earnestly recommends, and so strictly requires of all
his Disciples, as it obliges all Men to seek and promote the Good of others, as
well as their own, especially their Spiritual and Eternal ^se, by such Means as
their several Places and Relations enable them to use; so does it especially
oblige the Magistrate to do it as a Magistrate, i. e. by that Power which
enables him to do it above the r^e of other Men.

So far therefore is the Christian Magistrate, when he gives his helping Hand
to the furtherance of the G spel, by laying convenient Penalties upon such as
reject it, or any part of it, from using any other Means for the Salvation of
Men's Souls, than what the Author and Finisher of our Faith has directed, that
he does no more than his Duty to God, to his Redeemer, and to his Subjects,
requires of him.

The Sum of your Reply amounts to this, that by the Law of Nature the
Magistrate may make use of his coactive Power where it is useful and necessary
for the Good of the People. If it be from the Law of Nature, it must be to all
Magistrates equally: And then I ask whether this Good they are to promote
without any new Power or Commission from our Savior, be what they think to be
so, or what they certainly know to be so. If it be what they think to be so,
then all Magistrates may use Force to bring Men to their Religion: and what
Good this is like to be to Men, or of what use to the true Religion, we have
elsewhere considered. If it be only that Good which they certainly know to be
so, they will be very ill enabled to do what you require of them, which you
here tell us is to assist that Ministry which our Lord has appointed. Which of
the Magistrates of your time did you know to have so well studied the
Controyersies about Ordination and Church Government, to be so well versed in
Church History and Succession, that you can undertake that he certainly knew
which was the Ministry which our Lord had appointed, eithat of Rome, or that of
Sweden, whether the Episcopacy in one part of this Island, or the Presbytery in
another, were the Ministry which our Lord had appointed? If you say, being ^mly
persuaded of it, be sufficient to authorize the Magistrate to use Force; you
with the Atheists, as you call them, who do so, give the People up in every
Country to the coactive Force of the Magistrate, to be employed for the
assisting the Minis^ of his Religion: And King Lewis of good right comes in
with his Dragoons; for it is not much doubted that he as strongly believed his
Popish Priests and Jesuits to be the Ministry which our Lord appointed, as
either King Charles or King James the 2d believed that of the Church of England
to be so. And of what use such an exercise of the coactive Power of all
Magistrates, is to the People, or to the true Religion, you are concerned to
show. But it is (you know) but to tell me, I only trif^e, and this is all
answered.

What in other places you tell us, is to make Men hear, consider, study,
embrace, and bring Men to the true Religion, you here do very well to tell us
is to assist the Ministry: and to that it is true, common Experience discovers
the Magistrate's coactive Force to be useful and necessary, viz. to those who
taking the Reward, but not over-busying themselves in the care of Souls, find
it for their Ease, that the Magistrates coactive Power should supply their want
of Pastoral Care, and be made use of to bring those into an outward Consormity
to the National Church, whom either for want of Ability they cannot, or want of
due and friendly Application, joined with an exemplary Life, they never so much
as endeavored to prevail on heartily to embrace it. That there may be such
Neglects in the best-constituted National Church in the World, the Complaints
of a very knowing Bishop of our Church in a late Discourse of the PASTORAL
CARE, is too plain an Evidence.

Without so great an Authority I should scarce have ventured (though it lay
just in my way) to have taken notice of what is so visible, that it is in every
one's Mouth, for fear you should have told me again, that I made my self an
occasion to show my Good Will toward the Clergy. For you will not, I suppose,
suspect that eminent Prelate to have any Ill Will to them.

If this were not so, that some were negligent, I imagine the Preachers of the
True Religion (which lies, as you tell us, so obvious and exposed, as to be
easily distinguished from the False) would need or desire no other Assistance
from the Magistrates coactive Power, but what should be directed against the
Irregularity of Men's Lives; their Lusts being that alone, as you tell us, that
makes Force necessary to assist the true Religion; which were it not for our
depraved Nature, would by its Light and Reasonableness have the advantage
against all sal^e Religions.

You tell us too, That the Magistrate may impose Creeds and Ceremonies; indeed
you say sound Creeds and decent Ceremonies, but that helps not your Cause: for
who must be Judge of that P. 13.
sound, and that decent? If the Imposer, then those Words signify nothing at
all, but that the Magistrate may impose those Creeds and Ceremonies which he
thinks sound and decent, which is in effect such as he thinks ^t. Indeed you
telling us a little above in the same page, that it is a Vice not to worship
God in Ways prescribed by those to whom God has left the ordering of such
Matters; you seem to make other Judges of what is sound and decent, and the
Magistrate but the Executor of their Decrees with the Assistance of his
coactive Power. A pretty Foundation to establish Creeds and Ceremonies on, that
God has lest the ordering of them to those who cannot impose them, and the
imposing of them to those who cannot order them. But still the same Difficulty
returns; for after they have prescribed, must the Magistrate judge them to be
sound and decent, or must he impose them, though he judge them not sound or
decent? If he must judge them so himself, we are but where we were: if he must
impose them when prescribed, though he judge them not sound nor decent, it is a
pretty sort of Drudgery is put on the Magistrate: And how far is this short of
implicit Faith? But if he must not judge what is sound and decent, he must judge
at least who are those to whom God has left the ordering of such Matters; and
then the King of France is ready again with his Dragoons for the sound
Doctrine, and decent Ceremonies of his Prescribers in the Council of Trent, and
that upon this ground, with as good right as any other has for the
Prescriptions of any others. Do not mistake me again, Sir; I do not say, he
judges as right; but I do say, that whilst he judges the Council of Trent, or
the Clergy of Rome to be those to whom God has left the ordering of those
Matters, he has as much right to follow their Decrees, as any other to sollow
the Judgment of any other Set of mortal Men whom he believes to be so.

But whoever is to be Judge of what is sound or decent in the case, I ask,

Of what Use and Necessity is it to impose Creeds and Ceremonies? for that Use
and Nec^ssuy i^ all the Commission you can sind the Magistrate has to use his
coactive Power to impose them.

1. Of what Use and Necessity is it among Christians that own the Scripture to
be the Word of God and Rule os Faith, to make and impose a Creed? What
Commission for this has the Magistrate from the Law of Nature? God has given
a Revelation that contains in it all things necessary to Salvation, and of this
his People are all perswad^d. What Necessity now is there? How does their Good
require it, that the Magistrate should single out, as he thinks sit, any number
of those Truths as more necessary to Salvation than the rest, if God himself
has not done it?

2. But next, are these Creeds in the Words of the Scripture or not? If they
are, they are certainly sound, as containing nothing but Truth in them: and so
they were before as they lay in the Scripture. But thus though they contain
nothing but sound Truths, yet they may be imperfect, and so unsound Rules of
Faith, since they may require more or less than God requires to be believed as
necessary to Salvation. For what greater necessity I pray is there that a Man
should believe that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, than that he was born
at Bethlehem of Judah? Both are certainly true, and no Christian doubts of
either: But how comes one to be made an Article of Faith, and imposed by the
Magistrate as necessary to Salvation, (for otherwise there can be no necessity
of Imposition) and the other not?

Do not mistake me here, as if I would lay by that Summary of the Christian
Religion, which is contained in that which is called the Apostles Creed; which
though no body who examines the Matter, will have reason to conclude of the
Apostles compiling, yet is certainly of reverend Antiquity, and ought still to
be preserved in the Church. I mention it not to argue against it, but against
your Imposition, and to show that even that Creed, though of that Antiquity,
though it contain in it all the Credenda necessary to Salvation, cannot yet
upon your Principles be imposed by the (...) Power of the Magistrate, who even
by the Commission you have found out for him, can use his Force for nothing but
what is absolutely necessary to Salvation.

But if the Creed to be imposed be not in the Words of Divine Revelation; then
it is in plainer, more clear and intelligible Expressions, or not: if no
plainer, what necessity of changing those, which Men inspired by the Holy Ghost
made use of? If you say, they are plainer; then they explain and determine the
Sense of some obscure and dubious Places of Scripture, which Explication not
being of divine Revelation, though sound to one Man, may be unsound to another,
and cannot be imposed as Truths necessary to Salvation. Besides that, this
destroys what you tell us of the Obviousness of all Truths necessary to (...).
29.
Salvation.

And as to Rites and Ceremonies, are there any necessary to Salvation, which
Christ has not instituted? if not, how can the Magistrate impose them? What
Commission has he from the Care he ought to have for the Salvation of Men's
Souls, to use his coactive Force for the Establishment of any new ones which
our Lord and Savior (with due Reverence be it spoken) had forgotten? He
instituted two Rites in his Church; Can any one add any new one to them? Christ
commanded simply to baptize in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; but the signing of the Cross, how came that necessary? Humane Authority
which is necessary to assist the Truth against the Corruption of humane Nature,
has made it so. But it is a decent Ceremony. I ask, Is it so decent that the
Administration of Baptism, simply, as our Savior instituted, would be indecent
without it? If not, then there is no Reason to impose it for Decency's sake;
for there can be no Reason to alter or add any thing to the Institution of
Christ, or introduce any Ceremony or Circumstance into Religion for Decency,
where the Action would be decent without it. The Command to do all things
decently and in Order, gave no Authority to add to Christ's Institution any new
Ceremony, it only prescribed the manner how, what was necessary to be done in
the Congregation, should be there done, ( viz.) after such a manner, that if it
were omitted, there would appear some Indecency, whereof the Congregation or
collective Body was to be Judge, for to them that Rule was given: and if that
Rule go beyond what I have said, and gives Power to Men to introduce into
Religious Worship whatever they shall think decent, and impose the Use of it; I
do not see how the greatest part of the infinite Ceremonies of the Church of
Rome could be complained of, or refused, if introduced into another Church, and
there imposed by the Magistrate. But if such a Power were given to the
Magistrate, that whatever he thought a decent Ceremony, he might de novo
impose, he would need some express Commission from God in Scripture, since the
Commission you say he has from the Law of Nature, will never give him a Power
to institute new Ceremonies in the Christian Religion, which, be they decent,
or what they will, can never be necessary to Salvation.

The Gospel was to be preached in their Assemblies, the Rule then was that the
Habit, Gesture, Voice, Language, etc. of the Preacher (for these were necessary
Circumstances of the Action) should have nothing ridiculous or indecent in it.
The Praises of God were to be sung; it must be then in such Postures and Tunes
as became the Solemnity of that Action. And so a Convert was to be baptized,
Christ instituted the essential part of that Action, which was washing with
Water in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; in which Care was also to
be had, that in the doing this nothing should be omitted that preserved a
Decency in all the Circumstances of the Action. But no Body will say that if
the Cross were omitted, that upon that Account there would be any thing
indecent in Baptism.

What is to be done in the Assemblies of Christians for the Salvation of Souls,
is sufficiently prescribed in Scripture: But since the Circumstances of the
Actions were so various, and might in several Countries and Ages have different
Appearances (as that appears decent in one Country which is quite contrary in
another) concerning them there could be no other Rule given than what is, viz.
decently, in Order, and to Edification; and in avoiding Indecenci^s, and not
adding any new Ceremonies (how decent soever) this Rule consists.

I judge no Man in the Use of the Cro^ in Baptism; the Imposition of that, or
any other Ceremony not instituted by Christ himself, is what I argue against,
and say, is more than you upon your Principles can make good.

Because you think your Argument for the Magistrate's Right to use Force has
not had its d^e Consideration; I shall here set it down in your own Words, as
it stands, and endeavor to give you Satisfaction A. p. 16.
to it. You say there, If such a Degree of outward Force as has been mentioned,
be of great and even necessary Use for the advancing those Ends, (as taking the
World as we find it, I think it appears to be) then it must be acknowledged
that there is a Right somewhere to use it for the advancing those Ends, unless
we will say (what without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and benign
Disposer and Governor of all things has not furnished Mankind with compe^nt
means for the pro^oring his own Honor in the World, and the Good of Souls.

And if there be such a Right somewhere, where should it be, but where the
Power of compelling resides? That is principally, and in reference to the
Public in the Civil Sovereign. Which Words, if they have any Argument in them,
it in short stands thus. Force is useful and necessary: the good and wise God
(who without Impiety cannot be supposed not to have furnished Men with
competent means for their Salvation) has therefore given a Right to some Men to
use it, and those Men are the Civil Sovereigns.

To make this Argument of any Use to your Purpose, you must speak a little more
distinctly, (for here you, according to your laudable and safe way of Writing,
are wrapped up in the Uncertainty of general terms) and must tell us, besides
the End for which it is useful and necessary, to whom it is useful and
necessary. Is it useful and necessary to all Men? That you will not say, for
many are brought to embrace the true Religion by bare Preaching, without any
Force. Is it then necessary to all those, and those only, who as you tell us,
reject the true Religion tendered with sufficient Evidence, or at least so far
manifested to them, as to oblige them to receive it, and to leave them without
Excuse if they do not? To all therefore, who rejecting the true Religion so
tendered, are without Excuse, your moderate Force is useful and necessary. But
is it to all those competent, i. e. sufficient means? That it is evident in
matter of Fact, it is not; for after all, many stand out. It Is like you will
say, which is all you have to say, that those are such, who having resisted
this last means, moderate Force, God always refuses his Grace to, without
which no means is ^fficacious. So that your Competent at last, are only such
means as are the utmost that God has appointed, and will have used, and which
when Men resist, they are without Excuse, and shall never after have the
Assistance of his Grace to bring them to that Truth they have resisted, and so
be as the Apostle, 2 Timothy III. 8. calls such, Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith. If then it shall be, that the Day of Grace shall be over
to all those who reject the Truth manifested to them, with such Evidence, as
leaves them without Excuse, and that bare Preaching and Exhortation shall be
according to the good Pleasure of the benign Disposer of all things, enough
(when neglected) to make their Hearts fat, their Ears heavy, and shut their
Eyes that they should not perceive nor understand, nor be converted, that God
should heal them. I say, if this should be the Case, then your Force, whatever
you imagine of it, will neither be co^petent, useful, nor necessary. So that it
will rest upon you to prove that your moderate Degrees of Force are those means
of Grace which God will have, as necessary to Salvation, tried upon every one
before he will pass that Sentence in Isaiah, Make his Heart fat, etc. and that
your Degree of moderate Force is that beyond which God will have no other or
more powerful means used, but that those whom that works not upon, shall be
left reprobate concerning Faith. And till you have proved this, you will in
vain pretend your moderate Force (whatever you might think of it, if you had
the ordering of that Matter in the Place of God) to be useful, necessary, and
competent means. For if Preaching, Exhortation, Instruction, etc. as seems by
the whole Current of the Scripture, (and it appears not that Isaiah in the
Place above cited, made their Hearts far with any thing but his Words) be that
means, which when rejected to such a Degree, as he sees fit, God will punish
with a Reprobate Mind, and that there be no other means of Grace to come after;
you must confess that whatever good Opinion you have of your moderate Force
after this Sentence is passed, it can do no good, have no Efficacy neither
directly nor indirectly, and (...) a Distance, toward the bringing Men to the
Truth.

If your moderate Force be not that precise utmost means of Grace, which when
ineffectual, God will not afford his Grace to any other, then your moderate
Force is not the comp^tent means you talk of. This therefore you must prove
that Preaching alone is not, but that your moderate Force joined to it is that
means of Grace, which when neglected or r^ted, God will assist no other means
with his Grace to bring Men into the Obedience of the Truth; and this let me
tell you, you must prove by Revelation. For it is impossible to know, but by
Revelation, the just Measures of God's Long-suffering, and what those means
are, which when Men's Corruptions have rendered ineffectual, his Spirit shall no
longer strive with them, nor his Grace assist any other means for their
Conversion or Salvation. When you have done this, there will be some Ground for
you to talk of your moderate Force, as the means which God's Wisdom and
Goodness is engaged to furnish Men with; but to speak of it, as you do now, as
if it were that both necessary and competent means, that it would be an
Imputation to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, if Men were not furnished with
it, when it is evident, that the greatest part of Mankind have always been
destitute of it, will I fear be not easily cleared from that Impiety you
mention; for though the Magistrate had the Right to use it, yet wherever that
moderate Force was not made use of, there Men were not furnished with your
competent means of Salvation.

It Is necessary for the Vindication of God's Justice and Goodness, that those
who miscarry should do so by their own Fault, that their Destruction should be
from themselves, and they be left inexcusable: But pray how will you show us,
that it is necessary, that any who have resisted the Truth tendered to them
only by Preaching, should be saved, any more than it is necessary that those
who have resisted the Truth when moderate Force has been joined to the same
Preaching, should be saved? They are inexcusable one as well as the other, and
thereby have incurred the Wrath of God, under which he may justly leave the one
as well as the other; and therefore he cannot be said not to have been
furnished with competent means of Salvation, who having rejected the Truth
preached to him, has never any Penalties laid on him by the Magistrate to make
him consider the Truths he before rejected.

All the Stress of your Hypothesis for the Necessity of Force lies on this,
That the Majority of Mankind are not prevailed on by Preaching, and therefore
the Goodness and Wisdom of God is obliged to furnish them with some more
effectual means, as you think. But who told you that the Majority of Mankind
should ever be brought into the strait way, and narrow Gate? Or that Force in
your moderate Degree was the necessary and competent, i. e. the just sit means
to do it, neither over nor under, but that that only, and nothing but that
could do it? If to vindicate his Wisdom and Goodness, God must furnish Mankind
with other means, as long as the Majority, yet unwrought upon, shall give any
forward Demander occasion to ask, What other means is there left? He must also
after your moderate Penalties have left the greater part of Mankind unprevailed
on, be bound to furnish Mankind with higher Degrees of Force upon this Man's
Demand: And those Degrees of Force proving ineffectual to the Majority to make
them truly and sincerely Christians, God must be bound to furnish the World
again with a new Supply of Miracles upon the Demand of another wise Controuler,
who having set his Heart upon Miracles, as you have yours on Force, will
demand, what other means is there left but Miracles? for it is like this last
Gent. would take it very much amiss of you, if you should not allow this to be
a good and unquestionable way of arguing; or if you should deny that after the
utmost Force had been used, Miracles might not do some Service at least,
indirectly and at a Distance, toward the bringing Men to embrace the Truth.
And if you cannot prove that Mi-racles may not thus do some Service, he will
conclude just as you do, that the Cause is his.

Let us try your Method a little farther. Suppose that when neither the
gentlest Admonitions, nor the most earnest Entreaties will prevail, something
else is to be done as the only means left, What is it must be done? What is
this necessary competent means that you tell us of? It is to lay Briars and
Thorns in their way. This P. 10
therefore being supposed necessary, you say, there must somewhere be a Right
to use it. Let it be so. Suppose I tell you that Right is in God, who certainly
has a Power to lay Briars and Thorns in the way of those who are got into a
wrong one, whenever he is graciously pleased that other Means besides
Instructions and Admonitions should be used to reduce them. And we may as well
expect that those Thorns and Briars laid in their way by God's Providence,
without telling them for what End, should work upon them as effectually, though
indirectly, and at a Distance, as those laid in their way by the Magistrate,
without telling them for what End. God alone knows where it is necessary, and
on whom it will be useful, which no Man being capable of knowing, no Man,
though he has coercive Power in his Hand, can be supposed to be authorized to
use it by the Commission he has to do Good, on whomsoever you shall judge it to
be, of great and even necessary use: No more than your judging it to be of
great and even necessary use, would authorize any one who had got one of the
Incision-Knives of the Hospital in his Hand, to cut those for the Stone with
it, whom he could not know needed cutting, or that cutting would do them any
good, when the Master of the Hospital had given him no express Order to use his
Incision-Knife in that Operation; nor was it known to any but the Master, who
needed, and on whom it would be useful; nor would he fail to use it himself
wherever he found it necessary.

Be Force of as great and necessary use as you please; let it be so the
competent Means for the promoting the Honor of God in the World, and the Good
of Souls, that the right to use it must necessarily be somewhere. This Right
cannot possibly be, where you would have it, in the Civil Sovereigns, and that
for the very reason you give, viz. because it must be where the Power of
compelling resides. For since Civil Sovereigns cannot compel themselves, nor
can the compelling Power of one Civil Sovereign reach another Civil Sovereign,
it will not in the hands of the Civil Sovereigns reach the most considerable
part of Mankind, and those both for their own and their Subjects Good, have
most need of it. Besides, if it go along with the Power of compelling, it must
be in the hands of all Civil Sovereigns alike: which by this, as well as
several other Reasons I have given, being unavoidable to be so, this Right will
be so far from useful, that whatever efficacy Force has, it will be employed to
the doing more Harm than Good; since the greatest part of Civil Sovereigns
being of false Religions, Force will be employed for the promoting of those.

But let us grant what you can never prove, that though all Civil Sovereigns
have compelling Power, yet only those of the true Religion have a right to use
Force in Matters of Religion: your own Argument of Mankind being unfurnished
(which is Impiety to say) with competent Means for the promoting the Honor of
God, and the Good of Souls, still presses you. For the compelling Power of each
Civil Sovereign not reaching beyond his own Dominions, the right of using Force
in the hands only of the Orthodox Civil Sovereigns, leaves the rest, which is
the far greater part of the World, destitute of this your necessary and
competent Means for promoting the Honor of God in the World, and the Good of
Souls.

Sir, I return you my Thanks for having given me this occasion to take a review
of your Argument, which you told me I had mistaken; which I hope I now have
not, and have answered to your Satisfaction.

I confess I mistook when I said that cutting being judged useful, could not
authorize even a skilful Surgeon to cut a Man without any farther Commission:
for it should have been thus; That though a Man has the Instruments in his
Hand, and Force enough to cut with; and cutting be judged by you of great and
even necessary Use in the Stone; yet this, without any farther Commission, will
not authorize any one to use his Strength and Knise in Cutting, who knows not
who has the Stone, nor has any Light or Measures to judge to whom Cutting may be
necessary or useful.

But let us see what you say in answer to my Instance: 1. That P. 53.
the Stone does not always kill, though it be not cured; but Men do often live
to a great Age with it, and die at last of other Distempers. But Aversion to
the true Religion is certainly and inevitably mortal to the Soul, if not cured,
and so of absolute necessity to be cured. Is it of absolute necessity to be
cured in all? Is so, will you not here again think it requisite that the wise
and benign Disposer and Governor of all things, should furnish competent Means
for what is of absolute necessity? For will it not be Impiety to say, that God
has left Mankind unfurnished of competent, i. e. sufficient Means for what is
absolutely necessary? For it is plain in your Account Men have not been
furnished with sufficient Means for what is of absolute necessity to be cured
in all, if in any of them it be left uncured. For as you allow none to be
sufficient Evidence, but what P. 51.
certainly gains Assent; so by the same Rule you cannot call that sufficient
Means which does not work the Cure. It is in vain to say, the Means were
sufficient, had it not been for their own Fault, when that Fault of theirs is
the very thing to be cured. You go on; And yet if we should suppose the Stone
as certainly P. 53.
destructive of this temporal Life, as that Aversion is of Men's Eternal
Salvation: even so the necessity of curing it would be as much less than the
necessity of curing that Aversion, as this temporal Life falls short in value
of that which is Eternal. This is built upon a supposition, that the necessity
of the Means is increased by the value of the End, which being in this case the
Salvation of Men's Souls, that is of insinite concernment to them, you conclude
Salvation absolutely necessary: which makes you say that Aversion, etc. being
inevitably mortai to the Soul, is of absolute necessity to be cured. Nothing is
of absolute necessity but God: whatsoever else can be said to be of necessity,
is so only relatively in respect to something else; and therefore nothing can
indefinitely thus be said to be of absolute necessity, where the thing it
relates to is not absolutely necessary. We may say, Wisdom and Power in God are
absolutely necessary, because God himself is absolutely necessary: but we
cannot crudely say, the curing in Men their Aversion to the true Religion, is
absolutely necessary, because it is not absolutely necessary that Men should be
saved. But this is very proper and true to be said, that curing this Aversion
is absolutely necessary in all that shall be saved. But I fear that would not
serve your turn, tho it be certain that your absolute Necessity in this case
reaches no farther than this, that to be cured of this Aversion is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and Salvation is absolutely necessary to Happiness; but
neither of them, nor the Happiness it self of any Man can be said to be
absolutely necessary.

This Mistake makes you say, that supposing the Stone certainly destructive of
this temporal Life, yet the necessity of curing it would be as much less than
the necessity of curing that Aversion, as this temporal Life falls short in
value of that which is eternal. Which is quite otherwise: for if the Stone will
certainly kill a Man without Cutting, it is as absolutely necessary to cut a
Man of the Stone for the saving of his Life, as it is to cure the Aversion for
the saving of his Soul. Nay, if you have but Eggs to fry, Fire is as absolutely
necessary as either of the other, though the value of the End be in these Cases
infinitely different; for in one of them you lose only your Dinner, in the
other your Life, and in the other your Soul. But yet in these Cases, Fire,
Cutting, and Curing that Aversion, are each of them absolutely and equally
necessary to their respective Ends, because those Ends cannot be attained
without them.

You say farther, Cutting for the Stone is not always necessary in order to the
Cure: But the Penalties you speak of are altogether necessary P. 53.
(without extraordinary Grace) to cure that pernicious and otherwise
untractable Aversion. Let it be so; but do the Surgeons know who has this
Stone, this Aversion so, that it will certainly destroy him unless he be cut?
Will you undertake to tell when the Aversion is such in any Man, that it is
incurable by Preaching, Exhortation and Entreaty, if his spiritual Physician
will be instant with him in season, and out of season; but certainly curable,
if moderate Force be made use of? Till you are sure of the former of these, you
can never say, your moderate Force is necessary: Till you are sure of the
latter, you can never say, it is competent Means. What you will determine
concerning extraordinary Grace, and when God bestows that, I leave you to
consider, and speak clearly of it at your leisure.

You add, That even where Cutting for the Stone is necessary, it is withal
hazardous by my Confession. But your Penalties can no way endanger or hurt the
Soul, but by the Fault of him that undergoes P. 53.
them. If the Magistrate use Force to bring Men to the true Religion, he must
judge which is the true Religion; and he can judge no other to be it but that
which he believes to be the true Religion, which is his own Religion. But for
the Magistrate to use Force to bring Men to his own Religion, has so much
Danger in it to Men's Souls, that by your own confession, none but an Atheist
will say that Magistrates may use Force to bring Men to their own Religion.

This I suppose is enough to make good all that I aimed at in my Instance of
Cutting for the Stone, which was, that though it were judged useful, and I add
now necessary to cut Men for the Stone, yet that was not enough to authorize
Chirurgions to cut a Man, but he must have besides that general one of doing
good, some more special Commission; and that which I there mentioned, was the
Patient's Consent. But you tell me, That though, P. 54.
as things now stand, no Surgeon has any right to cut his calculous Patient
without his Consent; yet if the Magistrate should by a public Law appoint and
authorize a competent number of the most skilful in that Art, to visit such as
labor under that Disease, and to cut those (whether they consent or not) whose
Lives they unanimously judge it impossible to save otherwise: you are apt to
think I would find it hard to prove that in so doing he exceeded the Bounds of
his Power: And you are sure it would be as hard to prove that those Artists
would have no right in that case to cut such Persons. Show such a Law from the
great Governor of the Universe, and I shall yield that your Surgeons shall go
to work as fast as you please. But where is the public Law? Where is the
competent Number of Magistrates skilful in the Art, who must unanimously judge
of the Disease and its Danger? You can show nothing of all this, yet you are so
liberal of this sort of Cure, that one cannot take you for less than cutting
Morecraft himself. But, Sir, if there were a competent number of skilful and
impartial Men, who were to use the Incision-Knife on all in whom they found
this Stone of Aversion to the true Religion; what do you think, would they sind
no Work in your Hospital?

Aversion to the true Religion you say is of absolute Necessity to be ^ured:
What I beseech you is that true Religion? that of the Church of England? For
that you own to be the only true Religion, and whatever you say, you cannot
upon your Principles name any other National Religion in the World, that you
will own to P. 11.
be the true. It being then of absolute Necessity that Men's Aversion to the
National Religion of England should be cured: Has all Mankind in whom it has
been absolutely necessary to be cured, been furnished with competent and
necessary means for the Cure of this Aversion?

In the next Place, what is your necessary and sufficient means for this Cure
that is of absolute Necessity? and that is moderate Penalties made use of by
the Magistrate, where the National is the true Religion, and sufficient means
are provided for all Men's Instruction in the true Religion. And here again I
ask, Have all Men to whom this Cure is of absolute Necessity, been furnished
with this necessary means?

Thirdly, How is your necessary Remedy to be applied? And that is in a way
wherein it cannot work the Cure, though we should suppose the true Religion the
National every where, and all the Magistrates in the World zealous for it. To
this true Religion say you Men have a natural and great Aversion of absolute
Necessity to be cured, and the only Cure for it is Force your way applied, i.
e. Penalties must be laid upon all that dissent from the National Religion,
till they conform. Why are Men averse to the true? Because it crosses the
Profits and Pleasures of this Life; and for the same Reason they have an
Aversion to Penalties: These therefore, if they be opposed one to another, and
Penalties be so laid that Men must quit their Lusts, and heartily embrace the
true Religion or else endure the Penalties, there may be some Efficacy in Force
toward bringing Men to the true Religion: But if there be no Opposition
between an outward Profession of the true Religion, and Men's Lusts; Penalties
laid on Men till they outwardly conform, are not a Remedy laid to the Disease.
Punishments so applied have no Opposition to Men's Lusts, nor from thence can be
expected any Cure. Men must be driven from their Aversion to the true Religion
by Penalties they have a greater Aversion to. This is all the Operation of
Force. But if by getting into the Communion of the National Church they can
avoid the Penalties, and yet retain their natural Corruption and Aversion to
the true Religion, what Remedy is there to the Disease by Penalties so applied?
You would, you say, have Men made uneasy. This no doubt will work on Men, and
make them endeavor to get out of this uneasy State as soon as they can. But it
will always be by that way wherein they can be most easy; for it is the
Uneasiness alone they fly from, and therefore they will not exchange one
Uneasiness for another; not for a greater, nor an equal, nor any at all, if
they can help it. If therefore it be so uneasy for Men to mortify their Lusts,
as you tell us, which the true Religion P. 7.
requires of them, if they embrace it in earnest: But which outward Conformity
to the true Religion, or any National Church, does not require, what need or
use is there of Force applied so, that it meets not at all with Men's Lusts, or
Aversion to the true Religion, but leaves them the liberty of a quiet Enjoyment
of them, free from Force and Penalties in a legal and approved Consormity? Is a
Man negligent of his Soul, and will not be brought to consider? obstinate, and
will not embrace the Truth? Is he careless, and will not be at the Pains to
examine Matters of Religion? corrupt, and will not part with his Lusts, which
are dearer to him than his Firstborn? It Is but owning the National Profession,
and he may be so still: If he conform, the Magistrate has done punishing, he is
a Son of the Church, and need not consider any thing farther for fear of
Penalties, they are removed, and all is well. So that at last there neither
being an absolute Necessity that Aversion to the true Religion should in all
Men be cured: nor the Magistrate being a competent Judge who have this Stone of
Aversion, or who have it to that degree as to need Force to cure it, or in whom
it is curable, were Force a proper Remedy as it is not: nor having any
Commission to use it, notwithstanding what you have answered: It is still not
only as, but more reasonable for the Magistrate, upon pretense of its
Usefulness or Necessity, to cut any one for the Stone without his own Consent,
than to use Force your way to cure him of Aversion to the true Religion.

To my Question, In whose Hands this Right (we were a little above speaking of)
was in Turkey, Persia or China? you tell me, You answer roundly and plainly, in
the Hands of the Sovereign, to use P. (...).
convenient Penalties for the promoting the true Religion. I will not trouble
you here with a Question you will meet with elsewhere; Who in these Countries
must be Judge of the true Religion? But I will ask, Whether you or any wise Man
would have put a Right of using Force into a Mahumetan or Pagan Prince's Hand,
for the promoting of Christianity? which of my Pagans or Mahumetans would have
done otherwise?

But God, you say, has done it, and you make it good by telling me in the
following Words, If this startle me, then you must tell me farther, that you
look upon the supreme Power to be the same all the World over, in what Hands
soever it is placed; and this Right to be contained in it: And if those that
have it do not use it as they ought, but instead of promoting true Religion by
proper Penalties, set themselves to enforce Mahumetanism or Paganism, or any
other false Religion: All that can or that needs be said to the matter, is,
that God will one Day call them to an Account for the Neglect of their Duty,
for the Dishonor they do to him, and for the Souls that perish by their Fault.
Your taking this Right to be a part of the supreme Power of all Civil
Sovereigns, (which is the thing in Question) is not, as I take it, proving it
to be so. But let us take it so for once, what then is your Answer? God will
one Day call those Sovereigns to an Account for the Neglect of their Duty. The
Question is not, What God will do with the Sovereigns who have neglected their
Duty; but how Mankind is furnished with your competent Means for the promoting
of God's Honor in the World, and the good of Souls in Countries where the
Sovereign is of a wrong Religion? For there, how clearly soever the Right of
using it be in the Sovereign, yet as long as he uses not Force to bring his
Subjects to the true Religion, they are destitute of your competent means. For
I imagine you do not make the Right to use that Force, but the actual
Application of it by Penal Laws to be your useful and necessary Means. For if
you think the bare having that Right be enough, if that be your sufficient
Means without the actual Use of Force, we readily allow it you. And (as I tell
you elsewhere) I see not then what need you had of Miracles to supply the Want
of the Magistrates Assistance, till Christianity was supported and encouraged
by the Laws of the Empire: For, by your own Rule, the Magistrates of the World,
during the three first Centuries after the publishing the Christian Religion,
had the same Right, if that had been enough, that they have now in Turkey,
Persia, or China. That this is all that can be said in this matter, I easily
grant you; but that it is all that needs be said to make good your Doctrine, I
must beg your Pardon.

In the same Sentence wherein you tell me, I should have added Necessity to
Usefulness, I call it necessary Usefulness, which I imagine is not much
different. But that with the following Words wherein my Argument lay, had the
ill luck to be overseen; but if you please to take my Argument, as I have now
again laid it before you, it will serve my turn.

In your next Paragraph you tell me, that what is said by me L. 2. p. 48.
is with the same Ingenuity I have used in other places; my Words in that Place
are these: The Author having endeavored to show that no Body at all of any
Rank or Condition had any Power to punish, torment, or use any Man ill for
Matter of Religion: You tell us, you do not yet understand why Clergymen are
not as capable of such Power as other Men: Which Words of mine containing in
them nothing but true matter of Fact, give you no Reason to tax my Ingenuity:
Nor will what you alledg make it otherwise than such Power; for if the Power
you there speak of, were externally coactive Power, is not that the same Power
the Author was speaking of, made use of to those Ends he mentions of tormenting
and punishing? And do not you own that those who have that Power, ought to
punish those who offend in rejecting the true Religion? As to the remaining
Part of that Paragraph, I shall leave the Reader to judge whether I sought any
occasion so much as to name the Clergy; or whether the itching of your Fingers
to be handling the Rod, guided not your Pen to what was nothing to the Purpose:
For the Author had not said any thing so much as tending to exclude the Clergy
from secular Employments, but only (if you will take your own Report of it)
that no Ecclesiastical Officer, as such, has any externally coactive Power;
whereupon you cry out, that you do not yet understand why Ecclesiastics or
Clergymen are not as capable of such Power as other Men. Had you stood to be
Constable of your Parish, or of the Hundred, you might have had Cause to
vindicate thus your Capacity, if Orders had been objected to you; or if your
Aim be at a Justice of the Peace, or Lord Chief Justice of England, much more.
However you must be allowed to be a Man of forecast, in clear-ing the way to
secular Power, if you know your self, or any of your Friends desirous of it:
Otherwise I confess you have Reason to be on this occasion a little out of
Humor, as you are, for bringing this matter in Question so wholly out of
Season. Nor will (I fear) the ill-sitted Excuse you bring, give your self, or
one who consults the Places in both yours and the Author's A. p. 17.
Letter, a much better Opinion of it. However I cannot but thank you for your
wonted Ingenuity, in saying, that it seems I wanted an Occasion to show my good
Will to the Clergy, and so I made my self one. And to find more Work for the
excellent Gift you have this way, I desire you to read over that Paragraph of
mine again, and tell me, whether you can find any thing said in it not true?
Any Advice in it that you your self would disown? any thing that any worthy
Clergyman that adorns his Function is concerned in? And when you have set it
down in my Words, the World shall be Judge, whether I have showed any ill Will
to the Clergy. Till then I may take the Liberty to own, that I am more a Friend
to them and their Calling, than those amongst them, who show their Forwardness
to leave the Word of God to serve other Employments. The Office of a Minister
of the Gospel requires so the whole Man, that the very looking after their Poor
was by the joint Voice of the the twelve Apostles, called, leaving the Word of
God, and serving Acts IV. 2.
of Tables. But if you think no Men's Faults can be spoken of without ill Will,
you will make a very ill Prcacher: Or if you think this to be so only in
speaking of Mistakes in any of the Clergy, there must be in your Opinion
something peculiar in their Case, that makes it so much a Fault to mention any
of theirs; which I must be pardoned for, since I was not aware of it: And there
will want but a little cool Reflection to convince you, that had not the
present Church of England a greater Number in Proportion, than possibly any
other Age of the Church ever had, of those who by their pious Lives and Labors
in their Ministry adorn their Profession, such busy Men as cannot be content to
be Divines without being Laymen too, would so little keep up the Reputation
which ought to distinguish the Clergy, or preserve the Esteem due to a Holy, i.
e. a separate Order, that no Body can show greater good Will to them than by
taking all Occasions to put a Stop to any Forwardness, to be meddling out of
their Calling. This I suppose made a learned Prelate of our Church, out of
Kindness to the Clergy, mind them of their Stipulation and Duty in a late
Treatise, and tell them that the Pastoral Care is to be a Man's entire
Business, and to possess both his Thoughts and his Time. Disc. of Past. Care,
p. 121.

To your saying, That the Magistrate may lay Penalties upon A. p. 2.
those who refuse to embrace your Doctrine of the proper Ministers of P. 121.
Religion, or are alienated from the Truth: I answered, God never gave the
Magistrate an Authority to be Judge of Truth L. 2. p. 59.
for another Man. This you g^ant; but withal say, That if P. 64.
the Magistrate knows the Truth, though he has no Authority to judge of Truth
for another Man; yet he may be Judge whether other Men be alienated from the
Truth or no; and so may have Authority to lay some Penalties upon those whom he
sees to be so, to bring them to judge more sincerely for themselves. For
Example, The Doctrine of the proper Ministers of Religion is, that the three
Creeds, Nice, Athanasius's, and that commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought
to be thoroughly received and believed: As also that the Old and New Testament
contain all things necessary to Salvation. The one of these Doctrines a Papist
Subject embraces not; and a Socinian the other. What now is the Magistrate by
your Commission to do? He is to lay Penalties upon them, and continue them: How
long? Only till they conform, i. e. till they profess they embrace these
Doctrines for true. In which Case he does not judge of the Truth for other Men:
he only judges that other Men are alienated from the Truth. Do you not now
admire your own Subtilty and Acuteness? I that cannot comprehend this, tell you
my dull Sense in the Case. He that thinks another Man in an Error, judges him,
as you phrase it, alienated from the Truth, and then judges of Truth and
Falsehood only for himself. But if he lays any Penalty upon others, which they
are to lie under till they embrace for a Truth what he judges to be so, he is
then so far a Judge of Truth for those others. This is what I think to judge of
Truth for another, means: If you will tell me what else it signifies, I am
ready to learn.

You grant, you say, God never gave the Magistrate any Authority to be Judge of
Truth for another Man: and then add, But how does it follow from thence that he
cannot be Judge, whether any Man be alienated from the Truth or no? And I ask
you, Who ever said any such thing did follow from thence? That which I say, and
which you ought to disprove, is, That whoever punishes others for not being of
the Religion he judges to be true, judges of Truth for others. But you prove
that a Man may be Judge of Truth, without having Authority to judge of it for
other Men, or to prescribe to them what they shall believe; which you might
have spared, till you meet with some body that denies it. But yet your proof of
it is worth remembering: Rectum (say you) est Index sui and obliqui. And
certainly whoever does but know the Truth, may easily judge whether other Men be
alienated from it or no. But tho Rectum be Index sui and obliqui; yet a Man may
be ignorant of that which is the right, and may take Error for Truth. The Truth
of Religion when known, shows what contradicts it, is false: but yet that Truth
may be unknown to the Magistrate, as well as to any other Man. But you conclude
(I know not upon what ground) as if the Magistrate could not miss it, or were
surer to find it than other Men. I suppose you are thus favorable only to the
Magistrate of your own Profession, as no doubt in Civility a Papist or a
Presbyterian would be to those of his. And then infer; And therefore if the
Magistrate knows the Truth, though he has no Authority to judge of Truth for
other Men, yet he may be Judge whether other Men be alienated from the Truth or
no. Without doubt! who denies it him? It Is a Privilege that he and all Men
have, that when they know the Truth, or believe the Truth, or have embraced an
Error for Truth, they may judge whether other Men are alienated from it or no,
if those other Men own their Opinions in that matter.

You go on with your Inference, And so may have Authority to lay some Penalties
upon those whom he sees to be so. Now, Sir, you go a little too fast. This he
cannot do without making himself Judge of Truth for them: The Magistrate, or any
one may judge, as much as he pleases, of Men's Opinions and Errors; he in that
judges only for himself: but as soon as he uses Force to bring them from their
own to his Opinion, he makes himself Judge of Truth for them; let it be to bring
them to judge more sincerely for themselves, as you here call it, or under what
pretense or color soever; for that, what you say, is but a Pretense, the very
Expression discovers. For does any one ever judge insincerely for himself, that
he needs Penalties to make him judge more sincerely for himself? A Man may judge
wrong for himself, and may be known or thought to do so: But who can either
know or suppose another is not sincere in the Judgment he makes for himself, or
(which is the same thing) that any one knowingly puts a mixture of Falsehood
into the Judgment he makes? For as speaking insincerely is to speak otherwise
than one thinks, let what he says be true or false; so judging insincerely must
be to judge otherwise than one thinks, which I imagine is not very feasible. But
how improper soever it be to talk of judging insincerely for one's self, it was
better for you in that Place to say, Penalties were to bring Men to judge more
sincerely, rather than to say, more rightly, or more truly: for had you said,
the Magistrate might use Penalties to bring Men to judge more truly, that very
Word had plainly discovered, that he made himself a Judge of Truth for them. You
therefore wisely chose to say what might best cover this Contradiction to your
self, whether it were Sense or no, which perhaps whilst it sounded well, every
one would not stand to examine.

One thing give me leave here to observe to you, which is, That when you speak
of the Entertainment Subjects are to give to Truth, i. e. the true Religion,
you call it believing; but this in the Magistrate you call knowing. Now let me
ask you, Whether any Magistrate, who laid Penalties on any who dissented from
what he judged the true Religion, or as you call it here, were alienated from
the Truth, was or could be determined in his judging of that Truth by any
Assurance greater than believing? When you have resolved that, you will then
see to what purpose is all you have said here concerning the Magistrate's
knowing the Truth; which at last amounting to no more than the Assurance
wherewith a Man certainly believes and receives a thing for true, will put
every Magistrate under the same, if there be any Obligation to use Force,
whilst he believes his own Religion. Besides, if a Magistrate knows his
Religion to be true, he is to use means not to make his People believe, but
know it also; Knowledge of them, if that be the way of entertaining the Truths
of Religion, being as necessary to the Subjects as the Magistrate. I never
heard yet of a Master of Mathematics, who had the care of informing others in
those Truths, who ever went about to make any one believe one of Euclid's
Propositions.

The Pleasantness of your Answer, notwithstanding what you say, does remain
still the same: for you making, (as is P. 65.66.
to be seen) the Power of the Magistrate ORDAINED for A. p. 22
the bringing Men to take such care as they ought of their Salvation; the
reason why it is every Man's Interest to vest this Power in the Magistrate,
must suppose this Power so ordained, before the People vested it; or else it
could not be an Argument for their vesting it in the Magistrate. For if you had
not here built upon your fundamental Supposition, that this Power of the
Ma^istrate is ordained by God to that end, the proper and intelligible way of
expressing your meaning had not been to say as you do; As A. p. 22.
the Power of the Magistrate is ordained for bringing, etc. so if we suppose
this POWER vested in the Magistrate by the People: in which way of speaking
this Power of the Magistrate is evidently supposed already ordained. But a
clear way of making your meaning understood, had been to say, That for the
People to ordain such a Power of the Magistrate, or to vest such a Power in the
Magistrate, (which is the same thing) was their true Interest: but whether it
were your Meaning or your Expression that was guilty of the Absurdity, I shall
leave it with the Reader.

As to the other pleasant thing of your Answer, it will still appear by barely
reciting it: the pleasant thing I charge on you is, that you say, That the
Power of the Magistrate is to bring Men L. 2. p. 60.
to such a care of their Salvation, that they may not blindly leave it to A. p.
22.
the choice of any Person, or their own Lusts or Passions, to prescribe to them
what Faith or Worship they shall embrace; and yet that it is their best course
to vest a Power in the Magistrate, liable to the same Lusts and Passions as
themselves, to choose for them. To this you answer, by asking where it is that
you say that it is the Peoples best course to vest a Power in the Magistrate to
choose for them, that you tell me I do not pretend to show? If you had given
your self the pains to have gone on to the end of the Paragraph, or will be
pleased to read it as I have here again set it down for your perusal, you will
find that I at least pretended to show it: my Words are these; If they vest a
Power in the Magistrate, to punish them when they dissent from his Religion, to
bring them to act even against their own Inclination, according to Reason and
sound Judgment, which is (as you explain your self in another place) to bring
them to consider Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them;
how far is this from leaving it to the choice of another Man to prescribe to
them what Faith or Worship they shall embrace? Thus far you cite my Words, to
which let me join the remaining part of the Paragraph, to let you see that I
pretended to show that the Course you proposed to the People as best for them,
was to vest a Power in the Magistrate to choose for them. My Words which follow
those where you left off, are these; Especially if we consider that you think
it a strange thing, that the Author would have the care of L. 2. p. 60.
every Man's Soul left to himself. So that this Care being vested in the
Magistrate, with a Power to punish Men to make them consider Reasons and
Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them of the Truth of his Religion;
the Choice is evidently in the Magistrate, as much as it can be in the power of
one Man to choose for another what Religion he shall be of; which consists only
in a power of compelling him by Punishments to embrace it. But all this you
tell me, is just nothing to my purpose: Why P. 66.
I beseech you? Because you speak not of the Magistrate's Religion, but of the
true Religion, and that proposed with sufficient Evidence.

The Case in short is this; Men are apt to be misled by their Passions, Lusts,
and other Men in the choice of their Religion. For this great Evil you propose
a Remedy, which is, That Men (for you must remember you are here speaking of
the People putting this Power into the Magistrate's hand) should choose some of
their Fellow-Men, and give them a Power by Force to guard them, that they might
not be alienated from the Truth by their own Passions, Lusts, or by other Men.
So it was in the first Scheme; or, as you have it now, to punish them, whenever
they rejected the true Religion, and that proposed with sufficient Evidence of
the Truth of it. A pretty Remedy, and manifestly effectual at first sight: That
because Men were all promiscuously apt to be misled in their Judgment, or
choice of their Reli^ion, by Passion, Lust, and other Men, therefore they
should choose some amongst themselves, who might, they and their Successors, Men
made just like themselves, punish them when they rejected the true Religion.

If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, says our Savior.
If Men apt to be misled by their Passions and Lusts, will guard themselves from
falling into Error, by Punishments laid on them, by Men as apt to be misled by
Passions and Lusts as themselves, how are they the safer from falling into
Error? Now hear the insallible Remedy for this Inconvenience, and admire: the
Men to whom they have given this Power, must not use it, till they find those
who gave it them in an Error. A Friend, to whom I showed this Expedient,
answered, This is none: For why is not a Man as fit to judge for himself when he
is in an Error, as another to judge for him, who is as liable to Error himself?
I answered, This Power however in the other can do him no harm, but may
indirectly, and at a distance, do him good; because the Magistrate who has this
Power to punish him, must never use it but when he is in the right, and he that
is punished is in the wrong. But, said my Friend, who shall be Judge whether he
be in the right or no? for Men in an Error think themselves in the right, and
that as confidently as those who are most so. To which I replied, No body must
be Judge; but the Magistrate may know when he is in the right. And so may the
Subject too (said my Friend) as well as the Magistrate, and therefore it was as
good still be free from a Punishment, that gives a Man no more Security from
Error than he had without it. Besides, said he, who must be Judge whether the
Magistrate knows or no? for he may mistake, and think it to be Knowledge and
Certainty, when it is but Opinion and Belief. It is no matter, for that in this
Scheme, replied I, the Magistrate we are told may know which is the true
Religion, and he must not use Force but to bring Men to the true Religion; and
if he does, God will one day call him to an Account for it, and so all is safe.
As safe as beating the Air can make a thing, replied my Friend: for if
believing, being assured, confidently being persuaded that they know that the
Religion they prosess is true, or any thing else short of true Knowledge will
serve the turn, all Magistrates will have this Power alike, and so Men will be
well guarded, or recovered from false Religions; by putting it into the
Magistrate's Hand to punish them when they have alienated themselves from it.

If the Magistrate be not to punish Men but when he knows, i. e. is infallibly
certain (for so is a Man in what he knows) that his National Religion is all
true, and knows also, that it has been proposed to those he punishes with
sufficient Evidence of the Truth of it: 'Twould have been as good this Power
had never been given him, since he will never be in a Condition to exercise it;
and at best it was given him to no Purpose, since those who gave it him were
one with another as little indisposed to consider impartially, examine
diligently, study, find, and infallibly know the Truth as he. But, said he at
parting, to talk thus of the Magistrates punishing Men that reject the true
Religion, without telling us, who those Magistrates are, who have a Power to
judge which is the true Religion, is to put this Power in all Magistrates Hands
alike, or none. For to say he only is to be Judge which is the true Religion,
who is of it, is but to begin the round of Enquiries again, which can at last
end no where but in every one's supposing his own to be it. But, said he, if
you will continue to talk on thus, there is nothing more to be done with you,
but to pity or laugh at you, and so he left me.

I assure you, Sir, I urged this part of your Hypothesis, with all the
Advantage I thought your Answer afforded me: and if I have erred in it, or
there be any way to get out of the Strait (if Force must in your way be used)
either of the Magistrates punishing Men for rejecting the true Religion,
without judging which is the true Religion; or else that the Magistrate should
judge which is the true Religion; which way ever of the two you shall determine
it; I see not of what Advantage it can be to the People (to keep them from
choosing amiss) that this Power of punishing them should be put into the
Magistrate's Hands.

And then, if the Magistrate must judge which is the true Religion, (as how he
should without judging, punish any one who rejects it, is hard to find) and
punish Men who reject it till they do embrace it, (let it be to make them
consider, or what you please) he does, I think, choose their Religion for them.
And if you have not the Dexterity to choose the National Religion, wherever
you are, I doubt not but you would think so too if you were in France, though
there were none but moderate Penalties laid on you to bring you even against
your own Inclination to act according to what they there call Reason and sound
Judgment.

That Paragraph and mine to which it is an Answer, runs thus.

L. 2. page 60. I do neither you nor the Magistrate Injury, when I say that the
Power you give the Magistrate of punishing Men, to make them consider Reasons
and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them, is to convince them of
the Truth of his Religion, and to bring them to it. For Men will never, in his
opinion, act according to Reason and sound Judgment, (which is the thing you
here say Men should be brought to by the Magistrate, even against their own
Inclination) till they embrace his Religion. And if you have the brow of an
honest Man, you will not say the Magistrate will ever punish you, to bring you
to consider any other Reasons and Arguments, but such as are proper to convince
you of the Truth of his Religion, and to bring you to that. Thus you shift
forwards and backwards. You say, The Magistrate has no Power to punish Men, to
compel them to his Religion; but only to compel them to consider Reasons and
Arguments proper to convince them of the Truth of his Religion; which is all
one as to say, no Body has Power to choose your way for you to Jerusalem; but
yet the Lord of the Manor has Power to punish you, to bring you to consider
Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince you (of what?) that the
way he goes in, is the right, and so to make you join in Company, and go along
with him. So that, in Effect, what is all your going about, but to come at last
to the same Place again; and put a Power into the Magistrate's Hands, (under
another Pretense) to compel Men to his Religion; which Use of Force the Author
has sufficiently overthrown, and you your self have quitted. But I am tired to
follow you so often round the same Circle.

L. 3. page 67. But it seems you have not done with this yet: For you say, you
do neither me nor the Magistrate Injury, when you say that the Power I give the
Magistrate, of punishing Men to make them consider Reasons and Arguments proper
and sufficient to convince them, is to convince them of the Truth of his
Religion, (whatever that be) and to bring them to it. Which seems a little
strange and pleasant too. But thus you prove it: For Men will never, in his
Opinion, act according to Reason and sound Judgment, till they embrace his
Religion. And if you have the Brow of an honest Man, you will not say the
Magistrate will ever punish you, to bring you to consider any other Reasons and
Arguments but such as are proper to convince you of the Truth of his Religion,
and to bring you to that. Which (besides the pleasant Talk of such Reasons and
Arguments as are proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth of the
Magistrate's Religion, though it be a false one) is just as much as to say, It
is so, because in the Magistrate's Opinion it is so; and because it is not to
be expected that he will act against his Opinion. As if the Magistrate's
Opinion could change the Nature of things, and turn a Power to promote the true
Religion, into a Power to promote a false one. No, Sir, the Magistrate's
Opinion has no such Virtue. It may indeed keep him from exercising the Power he
has to promote the true Religion; and it may lead him to abuse the Pretense of
it, to the promo^ing a false one: But it can neither destroy that Power, nor
make it any thing but what it is. And therefore whatever the Magistrate's
Opinion be, his Power was given him (as the Apostles Power was to them) for
Edification only, not for Destruction: And it may always be said of him, (what
St. Paul said of himself) that he can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. And therefore if the Magistrate punishes me, to bring me to a false
Religion; it is not his Opinion that will excuse him, when he comes to answer
for it to his Judge. For certainly Men are as accountable for their Opinions
(those of them, I mean, which influence their Practice) as they are for their
Actions.

Here is therefore no shifting forwards and backwards, as you pretend; nor any
Circle, but in your own Imagination. For though it be true that I say, The
Magistrate has no Power to punish Men, to compel them to his Religion; yet I no
where say, nor will it follow from any thing I do say, That he has Power to
compel them to consider Reasons and Arguments proper to convince them of the
Truth of his Religion. But I do not much wonder that you endeavor to put this
upon me. For I think by this time it is pretty plain, that otherwise you would
have but little to say: And it is an Art very much in Use among some sort of
learned Men, when they cannot confute what an Adversary does say, to make him
say what he does not; that they may have something which they can confute.

The Beginning of this Answer is part of the old Song of Triumph; What! Reasons
and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth of Falsehood?
Yes, Sir, the Magistrate may use Force to make Men consider those Reasons and
Arguments, which he thinks proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth
of his Religion, though his Religion be a false one. And this is as possible
for him to do, as for a Man, as learned as your self, to write a Book, and use
Arguments, as he thinks proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth of
his Opinion, though it be a Falsehood.

As to the remaining part of your Answer, the Question is not, Whether the
Magistrate's Opinion can change the Nature of things, or the Power he has, or
excuse him to his Judge for misusing of it? But this, that since all Magistrates
in your Opinion have Commission, and are obliged to promote the true Religion
by Force, and they can be guided in the Discharge of this Duty by nothing but
their own Opinion of the true Religion, What Advantage can this be to the true
Religion, what Benefit to their Subjects, or whether it amounts to any more
than a Commission to every Magistrate to use Force for the promoting his own
Religion? To this Question therefore you will do well to apply your Answer,
which a Man of less Skill than you will be scarce able to do.

You tell us indeed, that whatever the Magistrate's Opinion be, his Power was
given him (as the Apostles Power was to them) for Edification only, and not for
Destruction. But if the Apostles Power had been given them for one End, and St.
Paul, St. Peter, and nine others of the twelve had had nothing to guide them
but their own Opinion, which led them to another End; I ask you whether the
Edification of the Church could have been carried on as it was?

You tell us farther, that it may always be said of the Magistrate, (what St.
Paul said of himself) that he can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. Witness the K. of France. If you say this in the same Sense that St.
Paul said it of himself, who in all things requisite for Edification, had the
immediate Direction and Guidance of the unerring Spirit of God, and so was
infallible, we need not go to Rome for an infallible Guide, every Country has
one in their Magistrate. If you apply these Words to the Magistrate in another
Sense, than what St. Paul spoke them in of himself, sober Men will be apt to
think, you have a great Care to insinuate into others a high Veneration for the
Magistrate; but that you your self have no overgreat Reverence for the
Scripture, which you thus use; nor for Truth, which you thus defend.

To deny the Magistrate to have a Power to compel Men to his Religion: But yet
to say the Magistrate has a Power, and is bound to punish Men to make them
consider till they cease to reject the true Religion, of which true Religion he
must be Judge, or else nothing can be done in Discharge of this his Duty, is so
like going round about to come to the same place, that it will always be a
Circle in mine and other Peoples Imagination, and not only there, but in your
Hypothesis.

All that you say turns upon the Truth or Falsehood of this P. 76.
Proposition; That whoever punishes any one in Ma^ters of Religion to make him
consider, takes upon him to be Judge for another what is right in Matters of
Religion. This you think plainly involves a Contradiction; and so it would, if
these general Terms had in your use of them their ordinary and usual meaning.
But, Sir, be but pleased to take along with you, That whoever punishes any Man
your way in Matters of Religion, to make him consider, as you use the word
consider, takes upon him to be Judge for another what is right in Matters of
Religion: and you will find it so far from a Contradiction, that it is a plain
Truth. For your way of punishing is a peculiar way, and is this; That the
Magistrate, where the National Religion is the true Religion, should punish
those who dissent from it, to make them consider as they ought, i. e. till they
cease to reject, or, in other words, till they conform to it. If therefore he
punishes none but those who dissent from, and punishes them till they conform
to that which he judges the true Religion, does he not take on him to judge for
them what is the true Religion?

It Is true indeed what you say, there is no other reason to punish another to
make him consider, but that he should judge for himself: and this will always
hold true amongst those, who when they speak of considering, mean considering,
and nothing else. But then these things will follow from thence: 1. That in
inflicting of Penalties to make Men consider, the Magistrate of a Country,
where the National Religion is false, no more misapplies his Power, than he
whose Religion is true; for one has as much right to punish the Negligent to
make them consider, study and examine Matters of Religion, as the other. 2. If
the Magistrate punishes Men in Matters of Religion, truly to make them
consider, he will punish all that do not consider, whether Conformists or
Nonconformists. 3. If the Magistrate punishes in Matters of Religion to make
Men consider, it is, as you say, to make Men judge for themselves: for there is
no use of considering, but in order to judging. But then when a Man has judged
for himself, the Penalties for not considering are to be taken off: for else
your saying that a Man is punished to make him consider, that he may judge for
himself, is plain Mockery. So that either you must reform your Scheme, or allow
this Proposition to be true, viz. Whoever punishes any Man in Matters of
Religion, to make him in your sense consider, takes upon him to judge for
another what is right in Matters of Religion: and with it the Conclusion, viz.
Therefore whoever punishes any one in Matters of Religion, to make him
consider, takes upon him to do what no Man can do, and consequently misapplies
his Power of punishing, if he has that Power. Which Conclusion you say you
should readily admit as sufficiently demonstrated, if the Proposition before
mentioned were true.

But further, if it could enter into the Head of any Lawmakers but you, to
punish Men for the omission of, or to make them perform any internal Act of the
Mind, such as is Consideration. Whoever in matter of Religion would lay an
Injunction on Men to make them consider, could not do it without judging for
them in Matters of Religion, unless they had no Religion at all, and then they
come not within our Author's Toleration, which is a Toleration only of Men of
different Religions, or of different Opinions in Religion. For supposing you
the Magistrate with full Power and (as you imagined) Right of punishing any one
in Matters of Religion, how could you possibly punish any one to make him
consider, without judging for him what is right in Matters of Religion? I will
suppose my self brought before your Worship, under what Character you please,
and then I desire to know what one or more Questions you would ask me, upon my
Answer to which you could judge me fit to be punished to make me consider,
without taking upon you to judge f^r me what is right in Matters of Religion?
for I conclude from the Fashion of my Coat, or the Color of my Eyes, you would
not judge that I ought to be punished in Matters of Religion to make me
consider. If you could, I should allow you not only as capable, but much more
capable of coactive Power than other Men.

But since you could not judge me to need Punishment in Matters of Religion, to
make me consider, without knowing my Thoughts concerning Religion, we will
suppose you (being of the Church of England) would examine me in the Catechism
and Liturgy of that Church, which possibly I could neither say nor answer right
to It Is like, upon this you would judge me fit to be pu^ished to make me
consider. Wherein, it is evident, you judged for me, that the Religion of the
Church of England was right; for without that Judgment of yours you would not
have punished me. We will suppose you to go yet farther, and examine me
concerning the Gospel, and the Truth of the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and you find me answer therein not to your liking: here again no
doubt you will p^nish me to make me consider; but is it not because you judge
for me, that the Christian Religion is the right? Go on thus as far as you
will, and till you find I had no Religion at all, you could not punish me to
make me to consider, without taking upon you to judge for me what is right in
Matters of Religion.

To punish without a Fault, is Injustice; and to punish a Man without judging
him guilty of that Fault, is also Injustice; and to punish a Man who has any
Religion to make him consider, or, which is the same thing, for not having
sufficiently considered, is no more nor less, but punishing him for not being
of the Religion you think best for him; that is the Fault, and that is the
Fault you judge him guilty of, call it considering as you please: for let him
fall into the Hands of a Magistrate of whose Religion he is, he judges him to
have considered sufficiently. From whence it is plain, it is Religion is judged
of, and not Consideration, or want of Consideration. And it is in vain to
pretend that he is punished to make him judge for himself: for he that is of any
Religion, has already judged for himself; and if you punish him after that,
under pretense to make him consider that he may judge for himself, it is plain
you punish him to make him judge otherwise than he has already judged, and to
judge as you have judged for him.

Your next Paragraph complains of my not having contradicted the following
Words of yours, which I had cited out of your A. p. 26. which that the Reader
may judge of, I shall here set down again. And all the Hurt that comes to them
by it, is only the suffering some tolerable Inconveniences, for their following
the Light of their own Reason, and the Dictates of their own Consciences: which
certainly is no such Mischief to Mankind, as to make it more eligible, that
there should be no such Power vested in the Magistrate; but the Care of every
Man's Soul should be left to him alone, (as this Author demands it should be:)
that is, that every Man should be suffered quietly, and without the least
molestation, either to take no care at all of his Soul, if he be so pleased; or
in doing it, to follow his own groundless Prejudices, or unaccountable Humor,
or any crafty Seducer, whom he may think fit to take for his Guide. To which I
shall here subjoin my Answer and your Reply.

L. 2. p. 67. Why should not the care of every Man's Soul be left to himself,
rather than the Magistrate? Is the Magistrate like to be more concerned for it?
Is the Magistrate like to take more care of it? Is the Magistrate commonly more
careful of his own, than other Men are of theirs? Will you say the Magistrate
is less exposed in Matters of Religion, to Prejudices, Humors, and crafty
Seducers, than other Men? If you cannot lay your Hand on your Heart, and say
all this, What then will be got by the change? And why may not the Care of
every Man's Soul be left to himself? Especially, if a Man be in so much danger
to miss the Truth, who is suffered quietly, and without the least (...), either
to take no care of his Soul, if he be so pleased, or to follow his own
Prejudices, etc. For if want of Molestation be the dangerous State wherein Men
are likeliest to miss the right way, it must be confessed, that of all Men, the
Magistrate is most in danger to be in the wrong, and so the unfittest (if you
take the Care of Men's Souls from themselves) of all Men, to be entrusted with
it. For he never me^ with that great and only (...) of yours against Error,
which you here call Molestation. He never has the benefit of your soverain
Remedy, Punishment, to make him consider; which you think so necessary, that
you look on it as a most dangerous State for Men to be without it; and
therefore tell us, It Is every Man's true (...), not to be left wholly to
himself in Matters of Religion.

L. 3. p. 76. (...) Words you set down at large; but instead of contradicting
them, or offering (...) show that the Mischi^t spoken of, is such (...) ^akes
it more eligible, etc. you only deman^ Why s^uld not the Care of every Man's ^l
be le^ (...) himself, rather than the (...)? Is the Magistrate like to be more
concerned for it? Is the Magistrate like to take more care of it? etc. As if
not to leave the Care of every Man's Soul to himself alone, were, as you
express it afterward, to take the Care of Men's Souls from themselves: Or as if
to vest a Power in the Magistrate, to procure as much as in him lies (i. e. as
far as it can be procured by convenient Penalties) that Men take such Care of
their Souls as they ought to do, were to leave the Care of their Souls to the
Magistrate rather than to themselves: Which no Man but your self will imagine.
I acknowledge as freely as you can do, that as every Man is more concerned than
any Man else can be, so he is likewise more obliged to take care of his Soul;
and that no Man can by any means be discharged of the Care of his Soul; which,
when all is done, will never be saved but by his own Care of it. But do I
contradict any thing of this, when I say, that the Care of every Man's Soul
ought not to be left to himself alone? or, that it is the Interest of Mankind,
that the Magistrate be entrusted and obliged to take care, as far as lies in
him, that no Man neglect his own Soul? I thought, I confess, that every Man was
i^ some sort charged with the Care of his Neighbor's Soul. But in your way of
reasoning, he that affirms this, takes away the Care of every Man's Soul (...)
himself, and leaves it to his Neighbor rather than to himself. But if this be
plainly absurd, as every one sees it is, then so it must be likewise to say,
that he that vests such a Power as we here speak of in the Magistrate, takes
away the Care of Men's Souls from themselves, and places it in the Magistrate,
rather than in themselves.

What trisling then is it to say here, If you cannot lay your Hand upon your
Heart, and say all this, (viz. that the Magistrate is like to be more concerned
for other Men's Souls than themselves, etc.) What then will be got by the
Change? For it is plain, here is no such Change as you would insinuate: but the
Care of Souls which I assert to the Magistrate, is so far from discharging any
Man of the Care of his own Soul, or lessening his Obligation to it, that it
serves to no other Purpose in the World, but to bring Men, who otherwise would
not, to consider and do what the Interest of their Souls obliges them to.

It Is therefore manifest, that the thing here to be considered, is not, Whether
the Magistrate be like to be more concerned for other Men's Souls, or to take
more care of them than themselves: nor, Whether he be commonly more careful of
his own Soul, than other Men are of theirs: nor, Whether he be less exposed, in
Matters of Religion, to Prejudices, Humors, and crafty Seducers, than other
Men: nor yet, Whether he be not more in danger to be in the wrong than other
Men, in regard that he never meets with that great and only Antidote of mine
(as you call it) against Error, which I here call Molestation. But the Point
upon which this matter turns, is only this, Whether the Salvation of Souls be
not better provided for, if the Magistrate be obliged to procure, as much as in
him lies, that every Man take such care as he ought of his Soul, than if he be
not so obliged, but the Care of every Man's Soul be left to himself alone:
Which certainly any Man of common Sense may easily determine. For as you will
not, I suppose, deny but God has more amply provided for the Salvation of your
own Soul, by obliging your Neighbor, as well as your self, to take care of it;
tho it is possible your Neighbor may not be more concerned for it, than your
self; or may not be more careful of his own Soul, than you are of yours; or may
be no less exposed, in Matters of Religion, to Prejudices, etc. than you are;
because if you are your self wanting to your own Soul, it is more likely that
you will be brought to take care of it, if your Neighbor be obliged to
admonish and exhort you to it, than if he be not; tho^h it may fall out that he
will not do what he is obliged to do in that case: So I think it cannot be
denied, but the Salvation of all Men's Souls is better provided for, if besides
the Obligation which every Man has to take care of his own Soul, (and that
which every Man's Neighbor has likewise to do it) the Magistrate also be
^trusted and obliged to see that no Man ^trusted his Soul, than it would be, if
every Man were left to himself in this matter: Because though we should admit
that the Magistrate is not like to be, or is not ordinarily more concerned for
other Men's Souls, than they themselves are, etc. it is nevertheless undeni^bly
true still, that whoever neglects his Soul, is more likely to be brought to
take care of it, if the Magistrate be obliged to do what lies in him to bring
him to do it, than if he be not. Which is enough to show, that it is every
Man's true Interest, that the Care of his Soul should not be left to himself
alone, but that the Magistrate should be so far entrusted with it as I contend
that he is.

Your Complaint of my not having formally contradicted the Words above cited
(...) of A. p. 26. looking as if there were some weighty Argument in them: I
must inform my Reader, that they are subjoined to those, wherein you recommend
the use of Force in (...) of (...), by the Gain those that are punished shall
make by it, though it be misapplied by the Magistrate to bring them to a wrong
Religion. So that these Words of yours, all the Hurt that comes to them by it,
is all the (...) that comes to Men by a (...) of the Magistrate's Power, when
being of a (...) Religion he uses Force to bring Men to it. And then your
Proposition stands thus, That the suffering what you call tolerable
Inconveniences for their following the Light of their own Reasons, and the
Dictates of their own Consciences, is no such Mischief to Mankind as to make it
more eligible, that there should be no Power vested in the Magistrate to use
Force to bring Men to the true Religion, though the Magistrates misapply this
Power, i. e. use it to bring Men to their own Religion when false.

This is the Sum of what you say, if it has any coherent Meaning in it: For it
being to show the Usefulness of such a Power, vested in the Magistrate, under
the Miscarriages and Misapplications it is in common Practice observed to be
liable to, can have no other Sense. But I having proved, that if such a Power
be by the Law of Nature vested in the Magistrate, every Magistrate is obliged
to use it for the promoting of his Religion as far as he believes it to be
true, shall not much trouble my self, if like a Man of Art you should use your
Skill to give it another Sense: for such is your natural Talent or great
Caution, that you love to speak indesinitely, and as seldom as may be leave
your self accountable for any Propositions of a clear determined Sense; but
under Words of doubtful, but (...) plausible Signification, conceal a meaning,
which plainly expressed would at first Sight appear to contradict your own
Positions, or common Sense: Instances whereof more than one we have here in
this Sentence of yours. For, 1. the Words tolerable Inconveniences carry a very
fair Show of some very (...) Matter; and yet when we come to examine them, may
comprehend any of those Severities lately used in France. For these tolerable
Inconveniences are the same you in this very Page and elsewhere call convenient
Penalties. Convenient for what? In this very Place they must (...) (...), as
may keep Men from following their own groundless (...), unaccountable Humors,
and (...) (...). And you tell us, the Magistrate may require P. 48.
Men under convenient Penalties to forsake their false Religions, and embrace
the true. Who now must be Judge, in these Cases, what are convenient Penalties?
Common Sense will tell us, the Magistrate that uses them: but besides we have
your Word for it, that the P. 50.
Magistrate's Prudence and Experience inables him to judge best what Penalties
do agree with your Rule of Moderation, which as I have show is no Rule at all.
So that at last your tolerable Inconveni^^ces are such as the Magistrate shall
judge convenient to oppose to Men's Prejudices, Humors, and to Seducers; such as
he shall think convenient to bring Men from their false Religions, or to punish
their rejecting the true; which whether they will not reach Men's Estates and
Liberties, or go as far as any the King of France has used, is more than you
can be Security for. 2. Another Set of good Words we have here, which at first
hearing are apt to engage Men's Concern, as if too much could not be done to
recover Men from so perilous a State as they seem to describe; and those are
Men following their own groundless Prejudices, unaccountable Humors, or crafty
Seducers. Are not these Expressions to set forth a deplorable Condition, and to
move Pity in all that hear them? Enough to make the unattentive Reader ready to
cry out, Help for the Lord's sake; do any thing rather than suffer such poor
prejudiced seduced People to be eternally lost. Whereas he that examines what
Persons these Words can in your Scheme describe, will find they are only such
as any where dissent from those Articles of Faith and Ceremonies of outward
Worship, which the Magistrate, or at least you his Director approve of. For
whilst you talk thus of the true Religion in general, (and that so general,
that you cannot allow your self to descend so near to Particulars, as to
recommend the Searching and Study of the Scriptures to find it) and that the
Power in the Magistrates Hands to use Force, is to bring Men to the true
Religion; I ask, whether you do not think, either he or you must be Judge, which
is the true Religion, before he can exercise that Power? and then he must use
his Force upon all those who dissent from it, who are then the prejudiced,
humoursom, and seduced you here speak of. Unless this be so, and the Magistrate
be Judge, I ask, Who shall resolve which is the prejudiced Person, the Prince
with his Politics, or he that suffers for his Religion? Which the more
dangerous Seducer, Lewis the XLVth with his Dragoons, or Mr. Claud with his
Sermons? It will be no small Difficulty to sind out the Persons who are guilty
of following groundless Prejudices, unaccountable Humors, or crafty Seducers,
unless in those Places where you shall be graciously pleased to decide the
Question; and out of the Plenitude of your Power and Infallibility to declare
which of the Civil Sovereigns now in being do, and which do not espouse the one
only true Religion, and then we shall certainly know that those who dissent
from the Religion of those Magistrates, are these prejudiced, humourso^,
seduced Persons.

But truly as you put it here, you leave the Matter very perplexed, when you
defend the Eligibleness of vesting a Power in the Magistrates Hands, to remedy
by Penalty Men's following their own groundless Prejudices, unaccountable
Humors, and cra^y Seducers, when in the same Sentence you suppose the
Magistrate who is vested with this Power, may inslict those Penalties on Men,
for their following the Light of their own Reason, and the Dictates of their
own Consciences; which when you have considered, perhaps you will not think my
Answer so wholly besides the matter, though it showed you but that one
Absurdity, without a formal Contradiction to so loose and undetermined a
Proposition, that it required more Pains to unravel the Sense of what was
covered under deceitful Expressions, than the Weight of the Matter contained in
them was worth.

For besides what is already said to it: How is it possible for any one (who
had the greatest Mind in the World to Contradiction) to deny it to be more
eligible that such a Power should be vested in the Magistrate, till he knows,
to whom you affirm it to be more eligible? Is it more eligible to those who
suffer by it, for following the Light of their own Reason, and the Dictates of
their own Consciences? for these you know are Gainers by it, for they know
better than they did before where the Truth does lie. Is it more eligible to
those who have no other Thoughts of Religion, but to be of that of their
Country without any farther Examination? Or is it more eligible to those who
think it their Duty to examine Matters of Religion, and to follow that which
upon Examination appears to them the Truth? The former of these two make, I
think, the greater part of Mankind, though the latter be the better advised:
but upon what Grounds it should be more eligible to either of them, that the
Magistrate should, than that he should not have a Power vested in him to use
Force to bring Men to the true Religion, when it cannot be employed but to
bring Men to that which he thinks the true, i. e. to his own Religion, is not
easy to guess. Or is it more eligible to the Priests and Ministers of National
Religions everywhere, that the Magistrate should be vested with this Power?
who being sure to be Orthodox, will have Right to claim the Assistance of the
Magistrate's Power to bring those whom their Arguments, or no Arguments can
prevail on, to embrace their true Religion, and to worship God in decent ways
prese^d by those to whom God has left the ordering of such Matters. Or last of
all, Is it more eligible to all Mankind? And are the Magistrates of the World
so careful or so lucky in the choice of their Reli^ion, that it would be an
Advantage to Mankind, that they should have a Right to do what in them lies, i.
e. to use all the Force they have, if they think convenient, to bring Men to
the Religion they think true? When you have told us to which of these or what
other, it is more eligible; I suppose the Reader will without my contradicting
it, see how little Truth there is in it, or how little to your Purpose.

If you will pardon me for not having contradicted that Passage of yours we
have been considering, I will endeavor to make you amends in what you say in
Reply to my Answer to it, and tell you that, notwithstanding all you say to the
contrary, such a Power as you would have to be vested in the Magistrate, takes
away the Care of Men's Souls from themselves, and places it in the Magistrate,
rather than in themselves. For if when Men have examined, and upon Examination
embrace what appears to them the true Religion, the Magistrate has a Right to
treat them as misled by Prejudice, Humor, or Seducers; if he may use what
Force, and inslict what Punishments he shall think convenient till they conform
to the Religion the Magistrate judges the true; I think you will scarce deny,
but that the Care of their Souls is by such a Power placed rather in the
Magistrate than in themselves, and taken as much from them as by Force and
Authority it can be. This, whatever you pretend, is the Power which your System
places in the Magistrate. Nor can he upon your Principles exercise it
otherwise, as I imagine I have showed.

You speak here, as if this Power, which you would have to be vested in the
Magistrate, did not at all discharge, but assist the Care every one has or
ought to have of his own Soul. I grant, were the Power you would place in the
Magistrate such as every Man has to take Care of his Neighbor's Soul, which is
to express it self only by Counsel, Arguments and Persuasion; it left him still
the free Liberty of judging for himself; and so the Care of his Soul remained
still in his own Hands. But if Men be persuaded, that the wise and good God has
vested a Power in the Magistrate, to be so far Judge for them, what is the true
Religion, as to punish them for rejecting the Religion which the Magistrate
thinks the true, when offered with such Evidence as he judges sufficient to
convince them; and to punish them on till they consider so as to embrace it;
what remains, but that they render themselves to the Care and Conduct of a
Guide that God in his Goodness has appointed them, who having Authority and
Commission from God to be Judge for them, which is the true Religion, and what
are Arguments proper and sufficient to convince any one of it; and he himself
being convinced of it, why should they be so foolish, as to suffer Punishments
in Opposition to a Power which is in the right, and they ought to submit to? To
what Purpose should they, under the Weight of Penalties waste Time and Pains in
examining, since whatever they should judge upon Examination, the Magistrate
judging the Arguments and Reasons he offers for the Truth of his Religion,
proper and sufficient to convince them, they must still lie under the
Punishment the Magistrate shall think convenient till they do comply?

Besides, when they are thus punished by their Magistrate for not conforming,
what need they examine? Since you tell them, It is not strictly necessary to
Salvation, that all that are of the true Religion should understand the Grounds
of it. The Magistrate being of the one only true Religion, knows it to be so^
and he knows that that Religion was tendered to them with sufficient Evidence,
and therefore is obliged to punish them for rejecting it. This is that which
Men must upon your Scheme suppose; for it is, what you your self must suppose,
before the Magistrate can exercise that Power you contend to be vested in him,
as is evident to any one, who will put your System together, P. 48.
and particularly weigh what you say.

When therefore Men are put into such a State as this, that the Magistrate may
judge which is the true Religion; the Magistrate may judge what is sufficient
Evidence of its Truth; the Magistrate may be Judge to whom it is tendered with
sufficient Evidence, and punish them that reject it so proposed with such
Penalties as he also shall judge convenient, and all this by God's Appointment,
and an Authority received from the wise and benign Governor of all things, I
ask, whether the Care of Men's Souls are not taken out of their own Hands, and
put into the Magistrates? Whether in such a State they can or will think there
is any need, or that it is to any purpose for them to examine? And whether this
be a Cure for the natural Aversion that is in Men to consider and weigh Matters
of Religion; and the way to force, or so much as encourage them to examine?

But, say you, the Salvation of all Men's Souls is better provided P. 78.
for, if besides the Obligation that every Man has to take Care of his own
Soul, the Magistrate also be entrusted and obliged to see that no Man neglect
his own Soul, than it would be if every Man were left to himself in that
matter. Whatever Ground another may have to say this, you can have none: You
who give so good Reason P. 64.
why Conformists, though never so ignorant and negligent in examining Matters
of Religion, cannot yet be punished to make them consider, must acknowledge that
ALL Men's Salvation is not the better provided for by a Power vested in the
Magistrate, which cannot reach the far greatest part of Men, which are
everywhere the Conformist to the National Religion. You that plead so well for
the Magistrates not examining whether P. 22.
those that conform, do it upon Reason and Conviction, but say it is ordinary
presumable they do so; Wherein I beseech you do you put this Care of Men's
Salvation that is placed in the Magistrate? even in bringing them to outward
Conformity to the National Religion, and there leaving them. And are the Souls
of all Mankind the better provided for, if the Magistrates of the World are
vested with a Power to use Force to bring Men to an outward Profession of what
they think the true Religion, without any other Care of their Salvation? For
^hither, and no farther, reaches their Use of Force in your way of applying it.

Give me leave therefore to trifle with you once again, and to desire you to
lay your Hand upon your Heart, and tell me what Mankind shall gain by the
Change? For I hope by this time it is not so much a Paradox to you, that if the
Magistrate be commissioned by God to take Care of Men's Souls, in your way it
takes away the Care of Men's Souls from themselves in all those who have need of
this Assistance of the Magistrate, i. e. all those who neglect to consider, and
are averse to Examination.

One thing more give me leave to observe to you, and that is, that taking Care
of Men's Souls or taking Care that they neglect not their Souls, and laying
Penalties on them to bring them in outward Profession to the National Religion
are two very different things, though in this Place and elsewhere you confound
them, and would have Penal Laws, requiring Church-Conformity, pass under the
Name of Care of Men's Souls, for that is the utmost your way of applying Force
does or can reach to; and what Care is therein taken of Men's Souls, may be seen
by the Lives and Knowledge observable in not a few Conformists. This is not said
to lay any Blame on Conformity, but to show how improperly you speak, when you
call Penal Laws made to promote Conformity, and Force used to bring Men to it,
a Care of Men's Souls; when even the exactest Observers, and most zealous
Advancers of Conformity may be as irreligious, ignorant, and vicious as any
other Men.

In the first Treatise we heard not a Syllable of any other Use or End of Force
in Matters of Religion, but only to make Men consider. But in your second,
being forced to own barefaced the punishing of Men for their Religion, you
call it, a Vice to P. 13.
reject the true Faith, and to refuse to worship God in decent ways prescribed
by those to whom God has left the ordering of it; and tell us, that it is a
Fault which may justly be punished by the Magistrate, P. 20.
not to be of the National Religion, where the true is the National Religion.
To make this Doctrine of Persecution seem limited, and go down the better, to
your telling us it must be only where the National Religion is the true, and
that the Penalties must be moderate and convenient; both which Limitations
having no other Judge but the Magistrate, (as I have showed elsewhere) are no
Li^ at all, you in Words add a third, that in effect si^nifies just as much as
the other two: and that is, If there be s^fficient means of Instruction
provided for all P. 20.
for instructing them in the Truth of it; of which Provision the Magistrate
also being to be Judge, your Limitation^ leave him as free to punish all
Dissenters from his own Religion, as any Persecutor can wish: For what he will
think sufficient Means of Instruction, it will be hard for you to say.

In the mean time, as far as may be gathered from what you say in another
Place, we will examine what you think sufficient Provision for instructing Men,
which you have expressed in these Words; For if the Magistrate provides
sufficiently for the Instruction P. 63.
of all his Subjects in the true Religion, and then requires them all under
convenient Penalties to hearken to the Teachers and Ministers of it, and to
profess and exercise it with one Accord under their Direction in public
Assemblies. That which stumbles one at the first View of this your Method of
Instruction is, that you leave it uncertain, whether Dissenters must first be
instructed, and then profess; or else first profess, and then be instructed in
the National Religion. This you will do well to be a little more clear in the
next time; for you mentioning no Instruction but in public Assemblies, and
perhaps meaning it for a Country where there is little other Pains taken with
Dissenters but the Confutation and Condemnation of them in Assemblies, where
they are not, they must cease to be Dissenters before they can partake of this
sufficient means of Instruction.

And now for those who do with one Accord put themselves under the Direction of
the Ministers of the National, and hearken to these Teachers of the true
Religion. I ask whether one half of those whereof most of the Assemblies are
made up, do or can (so ignorant as they are) understand what they hear from the
Pulpit? And then whether if a Man did understand, what in many Assemblies
ordinarily is delivered once a Week there for his Instruction, he might not yet
at threescore Years End be ignorant of the Grounds and Principles of the
Christian Religion? Your having so often in your Letter mentioned sufficient
Provision of Instruction, has forced these two short Questions from me. But I
forbear to tell you what I have heard very sober People, even of the Church of
England, say upon this Occasion: For you have warned me already, that it shall
be interpreted to be a Quarrel to the Clergy in general, if any thing shall be
taken notice of in any of them worthy to be mended. I leave it to those whose
Profession it is to judge, whether Divinity be a Science wherein Men may be
instructed by an Harangue or two on^e a Week, upon any Subject at a Venture,
which has no Coherence with that which preceded, or that which is to follow,
and this made to People that are ignorant of the first Principles of it, and
are not capable of understanding such ways of Discourses. I am sure he that
should think this a sufficient Means of instructing People in any other
Science, would at the End of seven or twenty Years find them very little
advanced in it. And bating perhaps some Terms and Phrases belonging to it,
would be as far from all true and useful Knowledge of it as when they first
began. Whether it be so in Matter^ of Religion, those who have the Opportunity
to observe must judge. And if it appear that amongst those of the National
Church there be very many so ignorant, that there is nothing more frequent than
for the Ministers themselves to complain of it, it is manifest from those of
the National Church (whatever may be concluded from Dissenters) that the Means
of Instruction provided by the Law, are not sufficient, unless that be
sufficient Means of Instruction, which Men of sufficient Capacity for other
things, may live under many Years, and yet know very little by. If you say it
is for want of Consideration, must not your Remedy of Force be used to bring
them to it? Or how will the Magistrate answer for it, if he use Force to make
Dissenters consider, and let those of his own Church perish for want of it?

This being all one can well understand by your sufficient Means of
Instruction, as you there explain it, I do not see but Men who have no Aversion
to be instructed, may yet fail of it, notwithstanding such a Provision. Perhaps
by exercising the true Religion with one Accord under the Direction of the
Ministers of it in public Assemblies, you mean something farther; but that not
being an ordinary Phrase, will need your Explication to make it understood. ^


CHAP. II. Of the Magistrate's Commission to use Force in Matters of Religion.
Chap. 2.

THough in the foregoing Chapter our examining your Doctrine concerning the
Magistrates who may or may not use Force in Matters of Religion, we have in
several places happened to take notice of the Commission whereby you authorize
Magistrates to act; yet we shall in this Chapter more particularly consider
that Commission. You tell us, To use Force in Matters of Religion, is a Duty of
the Magistrate as old as P. 35.
the Law of Nature, in which the Magistrate's Commission lies: for the
Scripture does not properly give it him, but supposes it. And more P. 31.
at large you give us an account of the Magistrate's Commission in these Words:
^is true indeed, the Author and Finisher of our Faith has given the Magistrate
no new Power or Commission: nor was there any need that he should, (if himself
had any Temporal Power to give:) For he found him already, even by the Law of
Nature, the Minister of God to the People for Good, and bearing the Sword not
in vain, i. e. invested with coactive Power, and obliged to use it for all the
good Purposes which it might serve, and for which it should be found needful;
even for the restraining of false and corrupt Religion: as Job long before
(perhaps before any part of the Scriptures were written) acknowledged, when he
said, that the worshipping the Sun or Job XXI. 26, 27, 28.
the Moon, was an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge. But though our Savior
has given the Magistrates no new Power, yet being King of Kings, he expects and
requires that they should submit themselves to his Sc^pter, and use the Power
which always belonged to them, for his Service, and for the advancing his
spiritual Kingdom in the World. And even that Charity which our great Master so
earnestly recommends, and so strictly requires of all his Disciples, as it
obliges all Men to seck and promote the Good of others, as well as their own,
especially their spiritual and eternal Good, by such Means as their several
Places and Relations enable them to use; so does it especially oblige the
Magistrate to do it as a Magistrate, i. e. by that Power which enables him to
do it above the rate of other Men.

So far therefore is the Christian Magistrate, when he gives his helping-Hand
to the furtherance of the Gospel, by laying convenient Penalties upon such as
reject it, or any part of it, from using any other means for the Salvation of
Men's Souls, than what the Author and Finisher of our Faith has directed, that
he does no more than his Duty to God, to his Redeemer, and to his Subjects,
requires of him.

Christ, you say, has given. no new Power or Commission to the Magistrate: and
for this you give several Reasons. 1. There was no need that he should; yet it
seems strange that the Christian Magistrates alone should have an exercise of
coa^ve Power in Matters of Religion, and yet our Savior should say nothing of
it, but leave them to that Commission which was common to them with all other
Magistrates. The Christian Religion in cases of less moment is not wanting in
its Rules; and I know not whether you will not charge the New Testament with a
great Defect, if that Law alone which teaches the only true Religion, that Law
which all Magistrates who are of the true Religion, receive and embrace, should
say nothing at all of so necessary and important a Duty to those who alone are
in a Capacity to discharge it, but leave them only to that general Law of
Nature, which others who are not qualified to use this Force, have in common
with them.

This at least seems needful, if a new Commission does not, that the Christian
Magistrates should have been instructed what Degree of Force they should use,
and been limited to your moderate Penalties; since for above these 1200 Years,
though they have readily enough found out your Commission to use Force, they
never found out your moderate use of it, which is that alone which you assure
us is useful and necessary.

2. You say, If our Savior had any Temporal Power to give; whereby you seem to
give this as a reason why he gave not the Civil Magistrate Power to use Force
in Matters of Religion, that he had it not to give. You tell us in the same
Paragraph, that he is King of Kings; and he tells us himself, That all Power is
given Matthew. XXVIII. 18.
unto him in Heaven and in Earth: So that he could have given what Power, to
whom, and to what Purpose he had pleased: and concerning this there needs no if.

3. For he found him already by the Law of Nature invested with coactive Power,
and obliged to use it for all the good Purposes which it might serve, and for
which it should be found needful. He found also Fathers, Husbands, Masters,
invested with their distinct Powers by the same Law, and under the same
Obligation; and yet he thought it needsul to prescribe to them in the use of
those Powers: But there was no need he should do so to the Civil Magistrates in
the use of their Power in Matters of Religion; because tho Fathers, Husbands,
Masters, were liable to Excess in the use of theirs, ye^ Christian Magistrates
were not, as appears by their having always kept to those moderate Measures,
which you assure us to be the only necessary and useful.

And what at last is their Commission? Even that of Charity, which obliges all
Men to seek and promote the Good of others, especially their spiritual and
eternal Good, by such means as their several Places and Relations enable them
to use, especially Magistrates as Magistrates. This Duty of Charity is well
discharged by the Magistrate as Magistrate, is it not? in bringing Men to an
outward Profession of any, even of the true Religion, and leaving them there?
But, Sir, I ask you who must be Judge, what is for the spiritual and eternal
Good of his Subjects, the Magistrate himself or no? If not he himself, who for
him? Or can it be done without any one's judging at all? If he, the Magistrate,
must judge everywhere himself what is for the spiritual and eternal Good of his
Subjects, as I see no help for it^ if the Magistrate be everywhere by the Law
of Nature obliged to promote their spiritual and eternal Good, is not the true
Religion like to find great Advantage in the World by the use of Force in the
Magistrates Hands? And is not this a plain demonstration that God has by the
Law of Nature given Commission to the Magistrate to use Force for the promoting
the true Religion, since (as it is evident) the execution of such a Commission
will do so much more Harm than Good?

To show that your indirect and at a distance Usefulness, with a general
necessity of Force, authorizes the Civil Power in the use of it, you use the
following Words; That Force does some service P. 17.
toward the making of Scholars and Artists, I suppose you will easily grant.
Give me leave therefore to ask, how it does it? I suppose you will say, not by
its direct and proper Efficacy, (for Force is no more capable to work Learning
or Arts, than the belief of the true Religion in Men by its direct and proper
Efficacy;) but by prevailing upon those who are designed for Scholars or
Artists, to receive Instruction, and to apply themselves to the use of those
Means and Helps which are proper to make them what they are designed to be:
that is, it does it indirectly, and at a distance. Well then, if all the
Usefulness of the Force toward the bringing Scholars or Apprentices to the
Learning or Skill they are designed to attain, be only an indirect and at a
distance Usefulness; I pray what is it that warrants and authorizes
Schoolmasters, Tutors or Masters, to use Force upon their Scholars or
Apprentices, to bring them to Learning, or the Skill of their Arts and Trades,
if such an indirect and at a distance Usefulness of Force, together with that
Necessity of it which Experience discovers, will not do it? I believe you will
acknowledge that even such an Usefulness, together with that Necessity, will
serve the turn in these cases. But then I would fain know, why the same kind of
Usefulness, joined with the like Necessity, will not as well do it in the case
before us? I confess I see no reason why it should not; nor do I believe you
can assign any. You ask here, what authorizes Schoolmasters or Masters to use
Force on their Scholars and Apprentices, if such an indirect and at a distance
Usefulness, together with Necessity, does not do it? I answer, neither your
indirect and at a distance Usefulness, nor the Necessity you suppose of it. For
I do not think you will say, that any Schoolmaster has a power to teach, much
less to use Force on any one's Child, without the Consent and Authority of the
Father: but a Father, you will say, has a power to use Force to correct his
Child to bring him to Learning or Skill in that Trade he is designed to; and to
this the Father is authorized by the Usefulness and Necessity of Force. This I
deny, that the meer-supposed Usefulness and Necessity of Force authorizes the
Father to use it; for then whenever he judged it useful and necessary for his
Son, to prevail with him to apply himself to any Trade, he might use Force upon
him to that purpose; which I think neither you nor any body else will say, a
Father has a right to do on his idle and perhaps married Son at 30 or 40 Years
old.

There is then something else in the case; and whatever it be that authorizes
the Father to use Force upon his Child, to make him a Prosicient in it,
authorizes him also to choose that Trade, A^t or Science he would have him a
Proficient in: for the Father can no longer use Force upon his Son, to make him
attain any Art or Trade, than he can pres^ribe to him the Art or Trade he is to
attain. Put your Parallel now if you please: The Father by the Usefulness and
N^sity of Force is authorized to use it upon his Child, to make him attain any
Art or Science; therefore the Magistrate is authorized to use Force to bring
Men to the true Religion, because it is useful and necessary. Thus far you have
used it, and you think it does well. But let us go on with the Parallel: This
Usefulness and Necessity of Force authorizes the Father to use it, to make his
Son apply himself to the use of the Means and Helps which are proper to make
him what he is designed to be, no longer than it authorizes the Father to
design what his Son shall be, and to choose for him the Art or Trade he shall be
of: and so the Usefulness and Necessity you suppose in Force to bring Men to
any Church, cannot authorize the Magistrate to use Force any farther, than he
has a right to choose for any one what Church or Religion he shall be of. So
that if you will stick to this Argument, and allow the Parallel between a
Magistrate and a Father, and the right they have to use Force for the
instructing of their Subjects in Religion, and Children in Arts, you must
either allow the Magistrate to have power to choose what Religion his Subjects
shall be of, which you have denied, or else that he has no power to use Force
to make them use Means to be of it.

A Father being entrusted with the Care and Provision for his Child, is as well
bound in Duty, as fitted by natural Love and Tenderness, to supply the Defects
of his tender Age. When it is born, the Child cannot move it self for the ease
and help of natural Necessities, the Parents Hands must supply that Inability,
and feed, cleanse and swaddle it. Age having given more Strength, and the
exercise of the Limbs, the Parents are discharged from the trouble of putting
Meat into the Mouth of the Child, clothing or unclothing, or carrying him in
their Arms. The same Duty and Affection which required such kind of Helps to
the Infant, makes them extend their Thoughts to other Cares for him when he is
grown a little bigger; it is not only a present Support, but a future
comfortable Subsistence begins to be thought on: to this some Art or Science is
necessary, but the Child's Ignorance and want of Prospect makes him unable to
choose. And hence the Father has a power to choose for him, that the flexible and
docile part of Life may not be squandred away, and the time of Instruction and
Improvement be lost for want of Direction. The Trade or Art being chosen by the
Father, it is the Exercise and Industry of the Child must acquire it to himself:
but Industry usually wanting in Children, the Spur which Reason and Fore^ght
gives to the Endeavors of grown Men, the Father's Rod and Correction is fain
to supply that Want, to make him apply himself to the use of those Means and
Helps which are proper to make him what he is designed to be. But when the
Child is once come to the State of Manhood, and to be the Possessor and free
Disposer of his Goods and Estate, he is then discharged from this Discipline of
his Parents, and they have no longer any right to choose any Art, Science, or
Course of Life for him, or by Force to make him apply himself to the use of
those Means which are proper to make him be what he designs to be. Thus the
want of knowledge to choose a sit Calling, and want of knowledge of the necessity
of Pains and Industry to attain Skill in it, puts a Power into the Parents
hands to use Force where it is necessary to procure the Application and
Diligence of their Children in that, which their Parents have thought fit to
set them to; but it gives this Power to the Parents only, and to no other
whilst they live; and if they die whilst their Children need it, to their
Substitutes; and there it is safely placed: for since their want of Knowledge
during their Nonage, makes them want Direction; and want of Reason often makes
them need Punishment and Force to excite their Endeavors, and keep them intent
to the use of those Means that lead to the End they are directed to, the
Tenderness and Love of Parents will engage them to use it only for their Good,
and generally to quit it too, when by the Title of Manhood they come to be
above the Direction and Discipline of Children. But how does this prove that
the Magistrate has any right to force Men to apply themselves to the use of
those Means and Helps which are proper to make them of any Religion, more than
it proves that the Magistrate has a right to choose for them what Religion they
shall be of?

To your Question therefore, What is it that warrants and authorizes
Schoolmasters, Tutors and Masters to use Force upon their Scholars or
Apprentices? I answer, A Commission from the Father or Mother, or those who
supply their Places; for without that no indirect or at a distance Usefulness,
or supposed Necessity, could authorize them.

But then you will ask, Is it not this Usefulness and Necessity that gives this
Power to the Father and Mother? I grant it. I would fain know then, say you,
why the same Usefulness joined wit^ the like Necessity, will as well do in the
Case before us? And I, Sir, will as readily tell you: Because the Understanding
of the Parents is to supply the want of it in the Minority of their Children;
and therefore they have a right not only to use Force to make their Children
apply themselves to the means of acquiring any Art or Trade, but to choose also
the Trade or Calling they shall be of. But when being come out of the State of
Minority, they are supposed of Years of Discretion to choose what they will
design themselves to be, they are also at liberty to judge what Application and
Industry they will use for the attaining of it; and then how negligent soever
they are in the use of the Means, how averse soever to Instruction or
Application, they are past the Correction of a Schoolmaster, and their Parents
can no longer choose or design for them what they shall be, nor use Force to
prevail with them to apply themselves to the use of those Means and Helps which
are proper to make them what they are designed to be. He that imagines a Father
or Tutor may send his Son to School at thirty or forty Years old, and order him
to be whipped there, or that any indirect and at a distance Usefulness will
authorize him to be so used, will be thought fitter to be sent thither himself,
and there to receive due Correction.

When you have considered it is otherwise in the case of the Magistrate using
Force your way in Matters of Religion; that there his Understanding is not to
supply the defect of Understanding in his Subjects, and that only for a time;
that he cannot choose for any of his Subjects what Religion he shall be of, as
you your self confess; and that this Power of the Magistrate, if it be (as is
claimed by you) over Men of all Ages, Parts and Endowments, you will perhaps
see some reason why it should not do in the Case before us, as well as in that
of Schoolmasters and Tutors, though you believe I cannot assign any. But, Sir,
will your indirect and at a distance Usefulness, together with your supposed
Necessity, authorize the Master of the Shoe-makers Company to take any one who
comes in his Hands, and punish him for not being of the Shoe-makers Company,
and not coming to their Guild, when he, who has a right to choose of what Trade
and Company he will be, thinks it not his Interest to be a Shoemaker? Nor can
he or any body else imagine that this Force, this Punishment is used to make
him a good Shoemaker, when it is seen and avowed that the Punishments cease,
and they are free from it who enter themselves of the Company, whether they are
really Shoe-makers, or in earnest apply themselves to be so or no. How much it
differs from this, that the Magistrate should punish Men for not being of his
Church, who choose not to be of it, and when they are once entered into the
Communion of it, are punished no more, though they are as ignorant, unskilful,
and unpractised in the Religion of it as before: how much, I say, this differs
from the Case I proposed, I leave you to consider. For after all your Pretenses
of using Force for the Salvation of Souls, and consequently to make Men really
Christians, you are fain to allow, and you give Reasons for it, that Force is
used only to those who are out of your Church: but whoever are once in it, are
free from Force, whether they be really Christians, and apply themselves to
those things which are for the Salvation of their Souls, or no.

As to what you say, That whether they choose it or no, they ought to choose it;
for your Magistrate's Religion is the true Religion, that is the Question
between you and them: but be that as it will, if Force be to be used in the
case, I have proved that be the Magistrate's Religion true or false, he, whilst
he believes it to be true, is under an obligation to use Force, as if it were
true.

But since you think your Instance of Children so weighty and pressing, give me
leave to return you your Question: I ask you then, Are not Parents as much
authorized to teach their Children their Religion, as they are to teach them
their Trade, when they have designed them to it? May they not as lawfully
correct them to make them learn their Catechize, or the Principles of their
Religion, as they may to make them learn Clenard's Grammar? Or may they not use
Force to make them go to Mass, or whatever they believe to be the Worship of
the true Religion, as to go to School, or to learn any Art or Trade? If they
may, as I think you will not deny, unless you will say, that none but Orthodox
Parents may teach their Children any Religion: If they may, I say then, pray
tell me a Reason (if your Argumen^ from the Discipline of Children be good) why
the Magistrate may not use Force to bring Men to his Religion, as well as
Parents may use Force to instruct Children, and bring them up in theirs? When
you have considered this, you will perhaps find some difference between the
State of Children and grown Men, betwixt those under Tutelage, and those who
are free and at their own disposal; and be inclined to think that those Reasons
which subject Children in their Nonage to the use of Force, may not, nor do
concern Men at Years of Discretion.

You tell us farther, That Commonwealths are instituted for the A. p. 18.
attaining of all the Benefits which Political Government can yield: and
therefore if the spiritual and eternal Interests of Men may any way be procured
or advanced by Political Government, the procuring and advancing those
Interests must in all reason be received amongst the Ends of Civil Society, and
so consequently fall within the compass of the Magistrate's Jurisdiction.
Concerning the extent of the Magistrate's Jurisdiction, and the Ends of Civil
Society, whether the Author or you have begged the Question, which is the chief
business of your 56th, and two or three following Pages, I shall leave it to
the Readers to judge, and bring the matter, if you please, to a shorter I^ue.
The Question is, Whether the Magistrate has any Power to interpose Force in
Matters of Religion, or for the Salvation of Souls? The Argument against it is,
That Civil Societies are not constituted for that End, and the Magistrate
cannot use Force for Ends for which the Commonwealth was not constituted.

The End of a Commonwealth constituted can be supposed no other, than what Men
in the Constitution of, and entering into it proposed; and that could be nothing
but Protection from such Injuries from other Men, which they desiring to avoid,
nothing but Force could prevent or remedy: all things but this being as well
attainable by Men living in Neighborhood without the Bonds of a Commonwealth,
they could propose to themselves no other thing but this in quitting their
Natural Liberty, and putting themselves under the Umpirage of a Civil
Sovereign, who therefore had the Force of all the Members of the Commonwealth
put into his Hands, to make his Decrees to this end be obeyed. Now since no
Man, or Society of Men can by their Opinions in Religion, or Ways of Worship,
do any Man who differed from them any Injury, which he could not avoid or
redress, if he desired it, without the help of Force; the punishing any Opinion
in Religion, or Ways of Worship by the Force given the Magistrate, could not be
intended by those who constituted, or entered into the Commonwealth, and so
could be no End of it, but quite the contrary. For Force from a stronger Hand
to bring a Man to a Religion, which another thinks the true, being an Injury
which in the State of Nature every one would avoid, Protection from such Injury
is one of the Ends of a Commonwealth, and so every Man has a right to
Toleration.

If you will say, that Commonwealths are not voluntary Societies constituted by
Men, and by Men freely entered into, I shall desire you to prove it.

In the mean time allowing it you for good, that Commonwealths are constituted
by God for Ends which he has appointed, without the consent and contrivance of
Men. If you say, that one of those Ends is the Propagation of the true
Religion, and the Salvation of Men's Souls; I shall desire you to show me any
such End expressly appointed by God in Revelation; which since, as you confess,
you cannot do, you have recourse to the general Law of Nature, and what is
that? The Law of Reason, whereby every one is commissioned to do Good. And the
propagating the true Religion for the Salvation of Men's Souls, being doing
Good, you say, the Civil Sovereigns are commissioned and required by that Law
to use their Force for those Ends. But since by this Law all Civil Sovereigns
are commissioned and obliged alike to use their co^ive Power for the
propagating the true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls; and it is not
possible for them to execute such a Commission, or obey that Law, but by using
Force to bring Men to that Religion which they judge the true; by which use of
Force much more Harm than Good would be done toward the propagating the true
Religion in the World, as I have showed elsewhere: therefore no such
Commission, whose Execution would do more Harm than Good, more hinder than
promote the End for which it is supposed given, can be a Commission from God by
the Law of Nature. And this I suppose may satisfy you about the End of Civil
Societies or Commonwealths, and answer what you say concerning the Ends
attainable by them.

But that you may not think the great Position of yours, which is so often
ushered in with doubtless, (for which you imagine you have sufficient Warrant
in a misapplied School-Maxim) is past over too slightly, and is not
sufficiently answered; I shall give you that farther Satisfaction.

You say, Civil Societies are instituted for the attaining all the Benefits
which Civil Society or Political Government can yield; and p. 58.
the Reason you give for it, because it has hitherto been universally
acknowledged that no Power is given in vain: and therefore if I except any of
those Benefits, I shall be obliged to admit that the Power of attaining them
was given in vain. And if I do admit it, no harm will follow in humane Affairs:
or if I may borrow an elegant Expression of yours out of the foregoing Leaf,
The Fortune of Europe does not turn upon it. In the voluntary Institution and
bestowing of Power, there is no Absurdity or Inconvenience at all, that Power,
sufficient for several Ends, should be limited by those that give the Power
only to one or some part of them. The Power which a General, commanding a
potent Army, has, may be enough to take more Towns than one from the Enemy; or
to suppress a domestic Sedition, and yet the Power of attaining those
Benefits, which is in his Hand, will not authorize him to employ the Force of
the Army therein, if he be commissioned only to besiege and take one certain
Place. So it is in a Commonwealth. The Power that is in the Civil Sovereign is
the Force of all the Subjects of the Commonwealth, which supposing it
sufficient for other Ends, then the preserving the Members of the Commonwealth
in Peace from Injury and Violence: yet if those who gave him that Power,
limited the Application of it to that sole End, no Opinion of any other
Benefits attainable by it can authorize him to use it otherwise.

Our Savior tells us expressly, that all Power was given him in Matthew. XXVIII.
18.
Heaven and Earth. By which Power I imagine you will not say, that the
spiritual and eternal Interest of those Men whom you think need the Help of
Political Force, and of all other Men too, could not any way be procured or
advanced; and yet if you will hear him in another Place, you will find this
Power (which being all Power, could certainly have wrought on all Men) limited
to a certain number: He says, Thou have given him [i. e. Joh. XVII. 2.
thy Son] Power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as
thou have given him. Whether your universally acknowledged Maxim of Logic be
true enough to authorize you to say, that any part of this Power was given him
in vain, and to enable you to draw Consequences from it, you were best see.

But were your Maxim so true that it proved, that si^ce it might indirectly and
at a Distance do some Service toward the procuring or advancing the spiritual
Interest of some few Subjects of a Commonwealth, therefore Force was to be
employed to that End; yet that will searce make good this Doctrine of yours; P.
56.
Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining all those Benefits
which Political Government can yield; therefore if the spiritual and eternal
Interests of Men may any way be procured or advanced by Political Government,
the procuring and advancing those Interests must in all Reason be reckoned
among the Ends of Civil Societies, and so consequently fall within the Compass
of the Magistrate's Jurisdiction. For granting it true that Commonwealths are
instituted for the attaining all those Benefits which Political Government can
yield, it does not follow that the procuring and advancing the spiritual and
eternal Interest of some few Members of the Commonwealth by an Application of
Power, which indirectly and at a Distance, or by Accident may do some Service
that way, whilst at the same time it prejudices a far greater Number in their
Civil Interests, can with Reason be reckoned amongst the Ends of Civil Society.

That Commonwealths are instituted for these Ends, viz. for the procuring,
preserving and advancing Men's Civil Interests, you say, No Man will deny. To
sacrifice therefore these Civil Interests of P. 55.
a great Number of People, which are the allowed Ends of the Commonwealths, to
the uncertain Expectation of some Service to be done indirectly and at Distance
to a far less Number, as Experience has always showed those really converted to
the true Religion by Force to be, if any at all cannot be one of the Ends of
the Commonwealth. Though the advancing of the spiritual and eternal Interest be
of insinite Advantage to the Persons who receive that Benefit, yet if it can be
thought a Benefit to the Commonwealth when it is procured them with the
diminishing or destroying the Civil Interests of great Numbers of their
Fellow-Citizens, then the ravaging of an Enemy, the Plague, or a Famine may be
said to bring a Benefit to the Commonwealth: for either of these may indirectly
and at a Distance do some Service toward the advancing or procuring the
spiritual and eternal Interest of some of those who suffer in it.

In the two latter Paragraphs, you except against my want of P. 57.
Exactness in setting down your Opinion I am arguing against. Had it been any
way to take off the Force of what you say, or that the Reader could have been
misled by my Words in any part of the Question I was arguing against, you had
h^d Reason to complain: if not, you had done better to have entertained the
Reader with a clearer Answer to my Argument, than spent your Ink and his Time
needlessly, to show such Niceness.

My Argument is as good against your Tenet in your own Words, as in mine, which
you except against: your Words are, Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for
the attaining all the A. p. 18.
Benefits which Political Government can yield; and therefore if the spiritual
and eternal Interest of Men may any way be procured (...) advanced by Political
Government, the procuring and advancing those Interests, must in all Reason be
reckoned amongst the Ends of Civil Societies.

To which I answered, That if this be so, Then this Position L. 2. p. 51.
must be true, viz. That all Societies whatsoever are instituted for the
attaining all the Benefits that they may any way yield; there being nothing
peculiar to Civil Society in the case, why that Society should be instituted
for the attaining all the Benefits it can any way yield, and other Societies
not. By which Argument it will follow, that all Societies are instituted for
one and the same End, i. e. for the attaining all the Benefits that they can
any way yield. By which Account there will be no Difference between Church and
State, a Commonwealth and an Army, or between a ^amily and the East India
Company; all which have hitherto been thought distinct sorts of Societies,
instituted ^or different Ends. If your Hypothesis hold good, o^e of the Ends of
the Family must be to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments; and one
Business of an Army to teach Languages, and propagate Religion; because these
are Benefits some way or other attainable by those Societies; unless you take
want of Commission and Authority to be a sufficient imp^diment: And that will
be so in other Cases. To which you reply, Nor will it follow from hence P. 58.
that all Societies are instituted for one and the same End, (as you imagine it
will) unless you suppose all Soci^s inab^d by the Power they are endued with to
attain the same and, which I believe no Man hitherto did ever affirm. And
therefore notwithstanding this Position, the^e may be still as great a
Difference as you please between Church an^ State, a Commonwealth and an Army,
or between a Family and the East-India-Company. Which ^veral Societies, as they
are instituted for different Ends, so are they likewise furnished with
d^fferent Powers proportionate to their respective Ends. In which the R^ason
you give to destroy my Inference, I am to thank you for, if you understood the
Force of it, it being the very same I bring to show that my Inference from your
way of arguing is good. I say, that from your way of reasonings about the Ends
of Government, `It would follow that all Societies were instituted for one and
the same End; unless you take want of Commission ` and Authority to be a
sufficient Imp^diment. And you tell me here it will not follow, unless I
suppose all Societies enabled by the Powers they are endued with, to attain the
same End; which in other Words is, unless I suppose all who have in their Hands
the Force of any Society, to have all of them the same Commission.

The natural Force of all the Members of any Society, or of those who by the
Society can be procured to assist it, is in one Sense called the Power of that
Society. This Power or Force is generally put into some one or few Persons
Hands with Direction and Authority how to use it, and this in another Sense is
called also the Power of the Society: And this is the Power you here speak of,
and in these following Words, viz. Several Societies as they are instituted for
different Ends; so likewise are they furnished with different Powers
proportionate to their respective Ends. The Power therefore of any Society in
this Sense, is nothing but the Authority and Direction given to those that have
the Management of the Force or natural Power of the Society, how and to what
Ends to use it, by which Commission the Ends of Societies are known and
distinguished: so that all Societies wherein those who are entrusted with the
Management of the Force or natural Power of the Society, have Commission and
Authority to use the Force or natural Power of the Society to attain the same
Benefits, are instituted for the same End. And therefore if in all Societies
those who have the Management of the Force or natural Power of the Society, are
commissioned or authorized to use that Force to attain all the Benefits
attainable by it, all Societies are instituted to the same End: And so what I
said will still be true, viz. `That a Family and P. 51.
an Army, a Commonwealth and a Church, have all the same End. And if your
Hypothesis hold good, one of the Ends of a Family must be to preach the Gospel,
and administer the Sacraments; and one Business of an Army to teach Languages,
and propagate Religion because these are Benefits some way or other attainable
by those Societies; unless you take want of Commission and Authority to be a
sufficient Impediment: And ` that will be so too in other Cases. To which you
have said nothing but what does confirm it, which you will a little better see,
when you have considered that any Benefit attainable by Force or natural Power
of a Society, does not pro^e the Society to be instituted for that End, till
you also show, that those to whom the Management of the Force of the Society is
entrusted, are comm^ion to use it to that End.

And therefore to your next Paragraph, I shall think it Answer P. 58.
enough to print here Side by Side with it, that Paragraph of mine to which you
intended it as an Answer.

L. 2. p. 51. It Is a Benefit to have true Knowledge and Philosophy embraced and
assented to, in any Ci^il Society or Government. But will you say therefore,
that it is a Benefit to the Society, or one of the Ends of Government, that all
who are not (...) should be punished, to make Men find out the Truth, and pro^s
it? This indeed might be thought a sit way to make some Men embrace the
Peripatetick Philosophy, but not a proper way to find the Truth. For, perhaps
the Peripatetick Philosophy may not be true; perh^ps a great many have not
time, nor Parts to study it; perhaps a great many who have studied it, cannot
be con^inced of the Truth of it: And therefore it cannot be a Benefit to the
Commonwealth, nor one of the Ends of it, that these Members of the Society
should be disturbed, and diseased to no purpose, when they are guilty of no
Fault. For just the same Reason, it cannot be a Benefit to Civil Society, that
Men should be punished in Denmark for not being Lutherans; in Geneva for not
being Calvinists; and in Vienna for not being Papists; as a means to make them
find out the true Religion. For so, upon your Grounds, Men must be treated in
those Places, as well as in England for not being of the Church of England. And
then, I beseech you, consider the great Benefit will accrue to Men in Society
by this Method; and I suppose it will be a hard thing for you to prove, That
ever Civil Governments were instituted to punish Men for not being of this or
that Sect in Religion; however by Accident, indirectly, and at a distance, it
may be an occasion to one perhaps of a thousand, or an hundred, to ^udy that
Controversy, which is all you expect from it. If it be a (...), pray tell me
what Benefit it is. A Civil Benefit it cannot be. For Men's Civil Interests are
disturbed, injured, and impaired by it. And what Spiritual Benefit that can be
to any Multitude of Men, to be punished for Dissenting from a false or
erroneous Profession, I would have you find out: unless it be a Spiritual
Benefit to be in danger to be driven into a wrong way. For if in all differing
Sects, one is in the wrong, it is a hundred to one but that from which any one
Dissents, and is punished for Dissenting from, is the wrong.

L. 3. p. 58. To your next Paragraph, after what has already been said, I think
it may ^ffice to say as follows. Though perhaps the Perip^tetick ^hilosophy may
not be true, (and perhaps it is no great matter, if it be not) yet the true
Religion is undoub^dly true. And though perhaps a great many have not time, nor
Parts to study that Philosophy, (and perhaps it may be no great matter neither,
if they have not) yet all that have the true Religion duly tendered them, have
time, and all, but Idiots and Madmen, have Parts likewise to study it, as much
as it is necessary for them to study it. And though perhaps a great many who
have studied that Philosophy, cannot be convinced of the Truth of it, (which
perhaps is no great Wonder) yet no Man ^ver studied the true Religion with such
Care and Diligence as he might and ought to use, and with an honest Mind, but
he was convinced of the Truth of it. And that those who cannot otherwise be
brought to do this, should be a little disturbed and diseased to bring them to
it, I take to be the Interest, not only of those particular Persons who by this
means may be brought into the way of Salvation, but of the Commonwealth
likewise, upon these two Accounts.

1. Because the true Religion, which this Method propagates, makes good Men;
and good Men are always the best Subjects, or Members of a Commonwealth; not
only as they do more sincerely and zealously promote the Public Good, than
other Men; but likewise in regard of the Favor of God, which they often
procure to the Societies of which they are Members. And,

2. Because this Care in any comm^ealth, of God's Honor and Men's Salvation,
entitles (...) (...) his special Protection and Blessing. So that where this
Method is used, it proves both a Spiritual and a Civil Benefit to the
Commonwealth.

You tell us, the true Religion is undoubtedly true. If you had told us too,
who is undoubtedly Judge of it, you had put all past doubt: but till you will be
pleased to determine that, it will be undoubtedly true, that the King of
Denmark is as undoubtedly Judge of it at Copenhagen, and the Emperor at Vienna,
as the King of England in this Island: I do not say they judge as right, but
they are by as much Right Judges, and therefore have as much Right to punish
those who dissent from Lutheranism and Popery in those Countries, as any other
Civil Magistrate has to punish any Dissenters from the National Religion any
where else. And who can deny but these Briars and Thorns laid in their way by
the Penal Laws of those Countries, may do some Service indirectly and at a
Distance, to bring Men there severely and impartially to examine Matters of
Religion, and so to embrace the Truth that must save them, which the bare
outward Profession of any Religion in the World will not do?

This true Religion which is undoubtedly true, you tell us too, never any body
studied with such Care and Diligence as he might and ought to use, and with an
honest Mind, but he was convinced of the Truth of it.

If you will resolve it in your short circular way, and tell me such Diligence
as one ought to use, is such Diligence as brings one to be convinced, it is a
Question too easy to be asked. If I should desire to know plainly what is to be
understood by it, it would be a Question too hard for you to answer, and
therefore I shall not trouble you with demanding what this Diligence which a
Man may and ought to use, is; nor what you mean by an honest Mind. I only ask
you, whether Force, your way applied, be able to produce them? that so the
Commonwealth may have the Benefits you propose from Men's being convinced of,
and consequently embracing the true Religion, which you say no Body can miss,
who is brought to that Diligence, and that honest Mind.

The Benefits to the Commonwealth are, 1. That the true Religion that this
Method propagates, makes good Men, and good Men are always the best Subjects,
and often procure the Favor of God to the Society they are Members of. Being
forward enough to grant that nothing contributes so much to the Benefit of a
Society, as that it be made up of good Men, I began presently to give into your
Method, which promises so sure a way to make Men so study the true Religion,
that they cannot miss the being convinced of the Truth of it, and so hardly
avoid being really of the true Religion, and consequently good Men. But that I
might not mistake in a thing of that consequence, I began to look about in
those Countries where Force had been made use of to propagate what you allowed
to be the true Religion, and found Complaints of as great a Scarcity of good
Men there, as in other places. A Friend whom I discoursed on this Point, said,
It might possibly be that the World had not yet had the benefit of your Method:
because Lawmakers had not yet been able to find that just Temper of Penalties
on which your Propagation of the true Religion was built; and that therefore it
was great pity you had not yet discovered this great Secret, but 'twas to be
hoped you would. Another, who stood by, said, he did not see how your Method
could make Men it wrought on, and brought to Conformity, better than others,
unless corrupt Nature with Impunity were like to produce better Men in one
outward Profession than in another. To which I replied, That we did not look on
Conformists through a due Medium; for if we did with you allow it presumable
that all who consormed did it upon Conviction, there could be no just Complaint
of the Scarcity of good Men: And so we got over that Difficulty.

The second Benefit you say your use of Force brings to the Commonwealth, is,
That this Care in any Commonwealth of God's Honor and Men's Salvation, entitles
it to his special Protection and Blessing. Then certainly all Commonwealths
that have any regard to the Protection and Blessing of God, will not neglect to
entitle themselves to it, by using of Force to promote that Religion they
believe to be true. But I beseech you what Care is this of the Honor of God,
and Men's Salvation, you speak of? Is it, as you have owned it, a Care by
Penalties to make Men outwardly conform, and without any farther Care or
Inquiry to presume that they do it upon Conviction, and with a sincere
embracing of, and Obedience to the Truth? But if the Honor of God and Men's
Salvation, consists not in an outward Conformity to any Religion, but in
something farther, what Blessing they may expect whose Care goes so far, and
then presume the rest, which is the hardest part, and therefore least to be
presumed, the Prophet Jeremy will tell you, who says, Cursed be he that does
the Work of Chap. XLVIII. 10.
the Lord negligently: which those who think it is the Magistrate's business to
use Force to bring Men heartily to embrace the Truth that must save them, were
best seriously to consider.

Your next Paragraph containing nothing but Positions of P. 59.
yours, which you suppose elsewhere proved, and I elsewhere examined, it is not
fit the Reader should be troubled any farther about them.

I once knew a Gentleman, who having crak'd himself with an ungovernable
Ambition, could never afterward hear the Place he aimed at mentioned, without
showing marks of his Distemper. I know not what the matter is, that when there
comes in your way but the mention of Secular Power in your or Ecclesiastics
Hands, you cannot contain your self: We have Instances of it in other parts of
your Letter; and here again you fall into a Fit, which since it produces rather
marks of your P. 60.
Breeding, than Arguments for your Canse, I shall leave them as they are to the
Reader, if you can make them go down with him for Reasons from a grave Man, or
for a sober Answer to what I say in that and the following Paragraph.

Much-what of the same size is your ingenious Reply to what P. 61.
I say in the next Paragraph, viz. That Commonwealths, or Civil Societies and
Governments, if you will believe the Judiciou^ Mr. Hooker, are, as St. Peter
calls them, (...) 1 Pet. II. 13
the Contrivance and Institution of Man. To which you smartly reply, for your
Choler was up, `^is well for St. Peter that he had the Judicious Mr. Hooker on
his side. And it would have been well for you too to have seen that Mr.
Hooker's Authority was made use of not to confirm the Authority of St. Peter,
but to confirm that Sense I gave of St. Peter's Words, which is not so clear in
our Translation, but that there are those who, as I doubt not but you know, do
not allow of it. But this being said when Passion it seems rather employed your
^it than your Judgment, though nothing to the purpose, may yet perhaps
indirectly and at a distance do some service.

And now, Sir, if you can but imagine that Men in the corrupt State of Nature
might be authorized and required by Reason, the Law of Nature, to avoid the
Inconveniences of that State, and to that purpose to put the Power of governing
them into some one or more Men's Hands, in such Forms, and under such Agreements
as they should think sit: which Governors so set over them for a good End by
their own choice, though they received all their Power from those, who by the
Law of Nature had a Power to confer it on them, may very ^tly be called Powers
ordained of God, being chosen and (...) by those who had Authority from God so
to do. For he that recei^es Commission (limited according to the (...) of him
that gives it) from another who had Authority from his Prince so to do, may
truly be said, so far as his Commission reaches, to be appointed or ordained by
the Prince himself. Which may serve as an Answer to your two next Paragrap^,
and to show that there is no Opposition or Difficulty in all (...) St. Peter,
St. Paul, or the Judicious Mr. Hooker says; nor any thing, in what either of
them says, to your purpose. And tho it be true, those Powers that are, are
ordained of God; yet it may nevertheless be true, that the Power any one has,
and the Ends for which he has it, may be by the Contrivance and Appointment of
Men.

To my saying, The Ends of Commonwealths appointed by the Institutors of them,
could not be their spiritual and eternal Interest, because they could not
stipulate about those one with another, nor submit this Interest to the Power
of the Society, or any Sovereign they should set over them. You reply, Very
true, Sir; but they can submit to be punished in their Temporal P. 62.
Interest, if they de^ise or neglect those greater Interests. How they can
submit to be punished by any Men in their Temporal Interest, for that which
they cannot submit to be judged by any Man, when you can show, I shall admire
your Politics. Besides, if the Compact about Matters of Religion be, that
those should be punished in their Temporal, who neglect or despise their
Eternal Interest, who I beseech you is by this Agreement rather to be punished,
a sober Dissenter, who appears concerned for Religion and his Salvation, or an
irreligious profane or debauched Conformist? By such as despise or neglect
those gr^ate Interests, you here mean only Dissenters from the National
Religion: for those only you punish, though you represent them under such a
Description as belongs not peculiarly to them; but that matter^ not, so long as
it best suits your Occasion.

In your next Paragraph you wonder at my News from the West Indies, I suppose
because you sound it not in your Books of Europe or Asia. But whatever you may
think, I assure you all the World is not ^ile End. But that you may be no more
surprised with News, let me ask you, Whether it be not possible that Men, to
whom the Rivers and Woods a^orded the spontaneous Provisions of Life, and so
with no private possessions of Land, had no enlarged Desires after R^hes or
Power, should live together in Society, make on^ Peo^e of one Language under
one Chieftain, who shall have no oth^ Power but to command them in time of War
agai^t (...) (...) Enemies, without any municipal Laws, Judges, (...) any ^rson
with Superiority establish^d amongst them, but (...) all their private
Differences, if any a^ose, by the extempory Determination of their Neighbors,
or of Arbitrators (...) by the Partie^. I ask you whether in such a
Commonwealth, the Chiestain who was the only Man of Authority amongst them, had
any Power to use the Force of the Commonwealth to any other End but the Defense
of it against an Enemy, though other Benefits were attainable by it?

The Paragraph of mine to which you mean your next for an Answer, shall answer
for it self.

L. 2. p. 56. You quote the Author's Argument, L. 3. p. 63. As to your next
Paragraph, I think I might now wholly pass it over. I shall only tell you, that
as I have often heard, so I hope I shall always hear of Religion established by
Law. For though the (...) Authority can add no Force or Sanction to any
Religion, whether true or f^lse, nor any thing to the Truth or Validity of his
own, or any Religion whatsoever; yet I think it may do much toward the
upholding and preserving the true Religion within his (...); and in that
respect may properly enough be said to establish it.
which he brings to prove that the Care of Souls is not committed to the
Magistrate, in these Words: It is not committed to him by God because it
appears not God has ever given any such Authority to one Man over another, as
to compel any one to his Religion. This, when first I read it, I confess I
thought a good Argument. But you say, this is quite besides the business; and
the Reason you give, is; For the Authority of the Magistrate is not an
Authority to compel any one to his Religion, but only an Authority to procure
all his Subjects the means of discovering the way of Salvation, and to pr^cure
withal, as much as in him lies, that (...) ^emain ignorant of it, etc. I f^r,
Sir, you forget your self. The Author was not writing against your new
Hypothesis, before it was known in the World. He may be excused, if he had not
the Gift of Prophecy, to argue against a Notion which was not yet started. He
had in view only the Laws hitherto made, and the Punishments (in Matters of
Religion) in use in the World. The Penalties, as I take it, are laid on Men for
being of different Ways of Religion: which, what is it other but to compel them
to relinquish their own, and to conform themselves to that from which they
differ? If this be not to compel them to the Magistrate's Religion, pray tell
us what is? This must be necessarily so understood; unless it can be supposed
that the Law intends not to have that done, which with Penalties it commands to
be done; or that Punishments are not Compulsion, not that Compulsion the Author
complains of. The Law says, Do this, and live; embrace this Doctrine, conform
to this way of Worship, and be at ease, and free; or else be fined, imprisoned,
banished, burnt. If you can show among the Laws that have been made in England
concerning Religion, (and I think I may say any where else) any one that
punishes Men for not having impartially examined the Religion they have
embraced or refused, I think I may yield you the Cause. Lawmakers have been
generally wiser than to make Laws that could not be executed: and therefore
their Laws were against Nonconformists, which could be known; and not for
impartial Examination, which could not. 'Twas not then besides the Author's
Business, to bring an Argument against the Persecutions here in fashion. He did
not know that any one, who was so free as to acknowledge that the Magistrate has
not an Authority to compel any one to his Religion, and thereby at once (as you
have done) give up all the Laws now in force against Dissenters, had yet Rods
in store for them, and by a new Trick would bring them under the lash of the
Law, when the old Pretenses were too much exploded to serve any longer. Have
you never heard of such a thing as the Religion established by Law? which is it
seems the Lawful Religion of a Country, and to be complied with as such. There
being such Things, such Notions yet in the World, it was not quite besides the
Author's business to alledg, that God never gave such Authority to one Man over
another, as to compel any one to his Religion. I will grant, if you please,
Religion established by Law is a pretty odd way of speaking in the Mouth of a
Christian, (and yet it is much in fashion) as if the Magistrate's Authority
could add any Force or Sanction to any Religion, whether true or false. I am
glad to find you have so far considered the Magistrate's Authority, that you
agree with the Author, that he has none to compel Men to his Religion: Much
less can he, by any Establishment of Law, add any thing to the Truth or
Validity of his own, or any Religion whatsoever.

That above-annexed is all the Answer you think this Paragraph of mine
deserves. But yet in that little you say, you must give me leave to take
notice, that if, as you say, the Magistrate's Authority may do much toward the
upholding and preserving the true Religion within his Jurisdiction; so also may
it do much toward the upholding and preserving of a false Religion, and in
that respect, if you say true, may be said to establish it. For I think I need
not mind you here again, that it must unavoidably depend upon his Opinion, what
shall be established for true, or rejected as false.

And thus you have my Thoughts concerning the most material of what you say
touching the Magistrate's Commission to use Force in Matters of Religion,
together with some incident Places in your Answer, which I have taken notice of
as they have come in my way.

CHAP. III. Who are to be punished by your Scheme. Chap. 3.

TO justify the largeness of the Author's Toleration, who would not have Jews,
Mahometans and Pagans excluded from the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth,
because of their Religion; I said, I feared it will hardly be believed, L. 2.
p. 2.
that we pray in earnest for their Conversion, if we exclude them from the
ordinary and probable Means of it, either by driving them from us, or
persecuting them when they are among us. You reply; Now I confess I thought Men
might live P. 2.
quietly enough among us, and enjoy the Protection of the Government against
all Violence and Injuries, without being endenizon'd, or made Members of the
Commonwealth; which alone can entitle them to the Civil Rights and Privileges
of it. But as to Jews, Mahometans and Pagans, if any of them do not care to
live among us, unless they may be admitted to the Rights and Privileges of the
Commonwealth; the refusing them that Favor is not, I suppose, to be looked
upon as driving them from us, or excluding them from the ordinary and probable
Means of Conversion; but as a just and necessary Caution in a Christian
Commonwealth, in respect to the Members of it: Who, if such as profess Judaism,
or Mahometanism, or Paganism, were permitted to enjoy the same Rights with
them, would be much the more in danger to be seduced by them; seeing they would
lose no worldly Advantage by such a Change of their Religion: Whereas if they
could not turn to any of those Religions, without forfeiting the Civil Rights
of the Commonwealth by doing it, it is likely they would consider well before
they did it, what ground there was to expect that they should get any thing by
the Exchange, which would countervail the Loss they should sustain by it. I
thought Protection and Impunity of Men, not offending in Civil Things, might
have been accounted the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth, which the Author
meant: but you, to make it seem more, add the word Privileges. Let it be so.
Live amongst you then Jews, Mahometans, and Pagans may; but endenizon'd they
must not be. But why? Are there not those who are Members of your Commonwealth,
who do not embrace the Truth that must save them, any more than they? What
think you of So^inians, Papists, Anabaptists, Quakers, Presbyterians? If they
do not reject the Truth necessary to Salvation, why do you punish them? Or if
some that are in the way to Perdition, may be Members of the Commonwealth, why
must these be excluded upon the account of Religion? For I think there is no
great odds, as to saving of Souls (which is the only End for which they are
punished) amongst those Religions, each whereof will make those who are of it
miss Salvation. Only if there be any fear of seducing those who are of the
National Church, the Danger is most from that Religion which comes nearest to
it, and most resembles it. However, this you think but a just and necessary
Caution in a Christian Commonwealth in respect of the Members of it. I suppose
(for you love to speak doubtfully) these Members of a Christian Commonwealth
you take such care of, are Members also of the National Church, whose Religion
is the true; and therefore you call them in the next Paragraph, Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom, to whom he has a special regard. For Dissenters, who are
punished to be made good Christians, to whom Force is used to bring them to the
true Religion, and to the Communion of the Church of God, it is plain are not in
your Opinion good Christians, or of the true Religion; unles, you punish them
to make them what they are already. The Dissenters therefore who are already
perverted, and reject the Truth that must save them, you are not, I suppose, so
careful of, lest they should be seduced. Those who have already the Plague,
need not be guarded from Infection: nor can you fear that Men so desperately
perverse, that Penalties and Punishments, joined to the Light and Strength of
the Truth, have not been able to bring from the Opinions they have espoused,
into the Communion of the Church, should be seduced to Judaism, (...), or
Paganism, neither of which has the advantage of Truth ^r Interest to prevail
by. It Is therefore those of the National Church, as I conclude also from the
close of this Paragraph, (where you speak of God's own peculiar People) wh^re
you think would be much the more in danger to be seduced by them, if they were
(...), since they would lose no worldly Advantage by such a change of their
Religion, i. e. by quitting the National Church, to turn Jews, Mahometans or
Pagans.

This shows, whatever you say of the sufficient means of Instruction provided
by the Law, how well you think the Members of the National Church are
instructed in the true Religion. It shows also, whatever you say of its being
presumable that they embrace it upon Conviction, how much you are satisfied
that the Members of the National Church are convinced of the Truth of the
Religion they profess, or rather herd with, since you think them in great
Danger to change it for Judaism, Mahometism, or Paganism it self upon equal
terms, and because they shall lose no worldly Advantage by such a Change. But
if the forseiting the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth, be the proper Remedy to
keep Men in the Communion of the Church, why is it used to keep Men from
Judaism or Paganism, and not from Phanaticism? Upon this Account why might not
Jews, Pagans and Mahometans be admitted to the Rights of the Commonwealth, as
far as Papists, Independents, and Quakers? But you distribute to every one
according to your good Pleasure; and doubtless are fully justified by these
following Words: And whether this be not a P. 3.
reasonable and necessary Caution, any Man may judge, who does but consider
within how few Ages after the Flood Superstition and Idolatry prevailed over
the World, and how apt even God's own peculiar People were to receive that
mortal Infection notwithstanding all that he did to keep them from it.

What the State of Religion was in the first Ages after the Flood, is so
imperfectly known now, that as I have showed you in another Place, you can make
little Advantage to your Cause from thence. And since it was the same
Corruption then, which as you own, withdraws Men now from the true Religion,
and hinders it from prevailing by its own ^ight, without the Assistance of
Force; and it is the same Corruption that keeps Dissenters, as well as Jews,
Mahometuns and Pagans, from embracing of the Truth: why differ^nt Degrees of
Punishments should be used to them, till there be sound in them disserent
Degrees of (...), would need some better Reason. Why this common Pravity of
(...) Nature should make (...), (...) or Paganism more catching than any sort
of Nonconformity, which ^inders (...) from embracing the true Religion; ^o that
Jews, (...) and Pagans must, for ^ear of infe^ting others, be shut out from ^he
Commonwealth, when others are not, I would (...) know (...) Whatever it was
that so disposed the Jews to Idolatry before the Captivity, sure it is, they
firmly resisted it, and refused to change, not only where they might have done
it on equal terms, but have had great Advantage to boot; and therefore it is
possible that there is something in this matter, which neither you nor I do
fully comprehend, and may with a becoming Humility sit down and confess, that
in this, as well as other Parts of his Providence, God's Ways are past finding
out. But this we may be certain from this Instance of the Jews, that it is not
reasonable to conclude, that because they were once inclined to Idolatry, that
therefore they, or any other People are in Danger to turn Pagans, whenever they
shall lose no worldly Advantage by such a Change. But if we may oppose nearer
and known Instances to more remote and uncertain, look into the World, and tell
me, since Jesus Christ brought Life and Immortality to light through the
Gospel, where the Christian Religion meeting Judaism, Mahometism or Paganism
upon equal terms, lost so plainly by it, that you have Reason to suspect the
Members of a Christian Commonwealth would be in Danger to be seduced to either
of them, if they should lose no worldly Advantage by such a Change of their
Religion, rather than likely to increase among them? Till you can find then
some better Reason for excluding Jews, etc. from the Rights of the
Commonwealth, you must give us leave to look on this as a bare Pretense.
Besides, I think you are under a Mistake, which shows your Pretense against
admitting Jews, Mahometans and Pagans, to the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth,
is ill grounded; for what Law I pray is there in England, that they who turn to
any of those Religions, forfeit the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth by doing
it? Such a Law I desire you to show me; and if you cannot, all this Pretense is
out of doors, and Men of your Church, since on that Account they would lose no
worldly Advantage by the Change, are in as much Danger to be seduced, whether
Jews, Mahometans and Pagans, are indenizon'd or no.

But that you may not be thought too gracious, you tell us, That as to Pagans
particularly you are so far from thinking that they P. 3.
ought not to be excluded from the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth, because of
their Religion, that you cannot see how their Religion can be suffered by any
Commonwealth that knows and worships the only true God, if they would be
thought to retain any Jealousy for his Honor, or even for that of humane
Nature. Thus then you order the matter; Jews and Mahometans may be permitted to
live in a Christian Commonwealth with the Exercise of their Religion, but not
be endenizon'd: Pagans may also be permitted to live there, but not to have the
Exercise of their Religion, nor be endenizon'd.

This according to the best of my Apprehension is the Sense of your Words; for
the Clearness of your Thoughts, or your Cause does not always suffer you to
speak plainly and directly; as here, having been speaking a whole Page before
what Usage the Persons of Jews, Mahometans and Pagans were to have, you on a
sudden tell us their Religion is not to be suffered, but say not what must be
done with their Persons. For do you think it reasonable that Men who have any
Religion, should live amongst you without the Exercise of that Religion, in
order to their Conversion? which is no other but to make them downright
irreligious, and render the very Notion of a Deity insignificant, and of no
Influence to them in order to their Conversion: It being less dangerous to
Religion in general, to have Men ignorant of a Deity, and so without any
Religion; than to have them acknowledge a superior Being, but yet to teach or
allow them to neglect or refuse worshipping him in that way, that they believe
he requires, to render them acceptable to him: It being a great deal less Fault
(and that which we were every one of us once guilty of) to be ignorant of him,
than acknowledging a God, and not to pay him the Honor which we think due to
him. I do not see therefore how those who retain any Jealousy for the Honor of
God, can permit Men to live amongst them in order to their Conversion, and
require of them not to honor God according to the best of their Knowledge:
unless you think it a Preparation to your true Religion, to require Men
sensibly P. 62.
and knowingly to affront the Deity; and to persuade them that the Religion you
would bring them to, can allow Men to make bold with the Sense they have of
him, and to refuse him the Honor which in their Consciences they are persuaded
is due to him, which must to them and every Body else appear inconsistent with
all Religion. Since therefore to admit their Persons without the Exercise of
their Religion, cannot be reasonable, nor conducing to their Conversion; if the
Exercise of their Religion, as you say, be not to be suffered among us till
they are converted, I do not see how their Persons can be suffered among us, if
that Exception must be added, till they are converted; and whether then they
are not excluded from the ordinary means of Conversion, I leave you to consider.

I wonder this Necessity had not made you think on another way of their having
the ordinary means of Conversion, without their living amongst us, that way by
which in the beginning of Christianity it was brought to the Heathen World by
the Travels and Preaching of the Apostles. But the Successors of the Apostles
are not, it seems, Successors to this part of the Commission, Go and teach all
Nations. And indeed it is one thing to be an Ambassador from God to People that
are already converted, and have provided good Benefices, another to be an
Ambassador from Heaven in a Country where you have neither the Countenance of
the Magistrate, nor the devout Obedience of the People. And who sees not how
one is bound to be zealous for the propagating of the true Religion, and the
convincing, converting and saving of Souls, in a Country where it is
established by Law? who can doubt but that there those who talk so much of it,
are in earnest? Though yet some Men will hardly forbear doubting, that those
Men, however they pray for it, are not much concerned for the Conversion of
Pagans, who will neither go to them to instruct them, nor suffer them to come
to us for the means of Conversion.

It Is true what you say, what Pagans call Religion is Abomination to the
Almighty. But if that requires any thing from those who retain any Jealousy for
the Honor of God, it is something more than barely about the Place where those
Abominations shall be committed. The true Concern for the Honor of God is not,
that Idolatry should be shut out of England, but that it should be lessened
every where, and by the Light and Preaching of the Gospel be banished out of
the World. If Pagans and Idolaters are, as you say, the greatest Dishonor
conceivable to God Almighty, they are as much so on the other side of Tweed, or
the Sea, as on this; for he from his Throne equally beholds all the Dwellers
^on Earth. Those therefore who are truly jealous for the Honor of God will
not, upon the Account of his Honor, be concerned for their being in this or in
that Place, while there are Idolaters in the World; but that the Number of
those who are such a Dishonor to him, should every Day be as much as possible
diminished, and they be brought to give him his due Tribute of Honor and
Praise in a right way of Worship. It Is in this that a Jealousy, which is in
earnest for God's Honor, truly shows it self, in wishing and endeavoring to
abate the Abomination, and drive Idolatry out of the World, not in driving
Idolaters out of any one Country, or sending them away to Places and Company,
where they shall find more Encouragement to it. It Is a strange Jealousy for the
Honor of God, that looks not beyond such a Mountain or River as divides a
Christian and Pagan Country. Wherever Idolatry is committed, there God's
Honor is concerned; and thither Men's Jealousy for his Honor, if it be sincere
indeed, will extend, and be in Pain to lessen and take away the Provocation.
But the Place God is provoked and dishonored in, which is a narrow
Consideration in respect of the Lord of all the Earth, will no otherwise employ
their Zeal, who are in earnest, than as it may more or less conduce to the
Conversion of the Offenders.

But if your Jealousy for the Honor of God, ingages you so far against Men's
committing Idolatry in certain Places, that you think those ought to be
excluded from the Rights of the Commonwealth, and not to be suffered to be
Denizons, who according to that Place in the Romans brought by you, are without
Excuse, because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became
vain in their Imaginations, and changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into
an Image made like to corruptible Man. I shall only change some of the Words in
the Text you cite out of Isaiah; I have baked part thereof on the Coals, and
eaten it, and shall I make the residue thereof a God? shall I fall down to that
which comes of a Plant? And so leave them with you to consider whether your
Jealousy in earnest carries you so far as you talk of; and whether when you
have looked about you, you are still of the Mind, that those who do such things
should be disfranchised and sent away, and the Exercise of no such Religion be
any where permitted amongst us? for those things are no less an Ahomination to
God under a Christian than Pagan Name. One Word more I have to say to your
Jealousy for the Honor of God, that if it be any thing more than in Talk, it
will set it self no less earnestly against other Abominations, and the
Practisers of them than against that of Idolatry.

As to that in Job XXXI. 26, 27, 28. where he says Idolatry is to be punished
by the Judge; this Place alone, were there no other, is sufficient to confirm
their Opinion, who conclude that Book to be writ by a Jew. And how little the
punishing of Idolatry in that Commonwealth concerns our present Case, I refer
you for Information to the Author's Letter. But how does your Jealousy for the
Honor of God, carry you to an Exclusion of the Pagan Religion from amongst
you, but yet admit of the Jewish and Mohammedan? Or is not the Honor of God
concerned in their denying our Savior?

You go on, But as to the converting Jews, Mahometans and (...). 4.
Pagans to Christianity, I fear there will be no great Progress made in it,
till Christians come to a better Agreement and Union among themselves. I am
sure our Savior prayed that all that should believe in him, might be one in
the Father and him, (i. e. I suppose in that holy Religion which he taught them
from the Father) that the World might believe that the Father had sent him: And
therefore when he comes to make Inquisition, why no more ^ews, M^hometans and
Pagans have been converted to his Religion; I very much fear that a great part
of the Blame will be found to l^e upon the Authors and Promoters of Sects and
Divisions among the Professors of it: which therefore, I think, all that are
guilty, and all that would not be guilty, ought well to consider.

I easily grant that our Savior prayed that all might be one in that holy
Religion which he taught them, and in that very Prayer teaches what that
Religion is, This is Life eternal, that they might (...). XVII. (...)
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have (...). But must
it be expected, that therefore they should all be of one Mind in things not
necessary to Salvation? For whatever Unity it was our Savior prayed for here,
it is certain the Apostles themselves did not all of them agree in every thing:
but even the chief of them have had Differences amongst them in Matters of
Religion, as appears, Gal. II. 11.

An Agreement in Truths necessary to Salvation, and the maintaining of Charity
and brotherly Kindness with the Diversity of Opinions in other things, is that
which will very well consist with Christian Unity, and is all possibly to be
had in this World, in such an incurable Weakness and Difference of Men's
Understandings. This probably would contribute more to the Conversion of Jews,
Mahometans and Pagans, if there were proposed to them and others, for their
Admittance into the Church, only the plain and simple Truths of the Gospel
necessary to Salvation, than all the fruitless Pudder and Talk about uniting
Christians in Matters of less Moment, according to the Draught and Prescription
of a certain set of Men any where.

What Blame will lie on the Authors and Promoters of Sects and Divisions, and
(let me add) Animosities amongst Christians, when Christ comes to make
Inquisition why no more Jews, Mahometans and Pagans were converted, they who
are concerned ought certainly well to consider. And to abate in great measure
this Mischief for the future, they who talk so much of Sects and Divisions,
would do well to consider too, whether those are not most Authors and Promoters
of Sects and Divisions, who impose Creeds, Ceremonies and Articles of Men's
making; and make things not necessary to Salvation, the necessary terms of
Communion. Excluding and driving from them such as out of Conscience and
Persuasion cannot assent and submit to them; and treating them as if they were
utter Aliens from the Church of God, and such as were deservedly shut out as
unfit to be Members of it: who narrow Christianity within Bounds of their own
making, and which the Gospel knows nothing of; and often for things by
themselves confessed indifferent, thrust Men out of their Communion, and then
punish them for not being of it.

Who sees not, but the Bond of Unity might be preserved, in the different
Persuasions of Men concerning things not necessary to Salvation, if they were
not made necessary to Church Communion? What two thinking Men of the Church of
England are there, who differ not one from the other in several material Points
of Religion? who nevertheless are Members of the same Church, and in Unity one
with another. Make but one of those Points the Shibboleth of a Party, and erect
it into an Article of the National Church, and they are presently divided; and
he of the two, whose Judgment happens not to agree with National Orthodoxy, is
immediately cut off from Communion. Who I beseech you is it in this Case that
makes the Sect? Is it not those who contract the Church of Christ within Limits
of their own Contrivance? who by Articles and Ceremonies of their own forming,
separate from their Communion all that have not Persuasions which just jump
with their Model?

It Is frivolous here to pretend Authority. No Man has or can have Authority to
shut any one out of the Church of Christ, for that for which Christ himself
will not shut him out of Heaven. Whosoever does so, is truly the Author and
Promoter of S^hism and Division, sets up a Sect, and tears in Pieces the Church
of Christ, of which every one who believes, and practices what is necessary to
Salvation, is a Part and Member; and cannot, without the Guilt of Schism, be
separated from, or kept out of its external Communion. In this lording it over
the Heritage of God, and thus overseeing by Imposition on the unwilling, and
not consenting, which seems to be the meaning of 1 Pet. V. (...), 3.
St. Peter, most of the lasting Sects which so mangle Christianity, had their
Original, and continue to have their Support: and were it not for these
established Sects under the specious Names of National Churches, which by their
contracted and arbitrary Limits of Communion, justify against themselves the
Separation and like Narrowness of others, the Difference of Opinions which do
not so much begin to be, as to appear and be owned under Toleration, would
either make no Sect nor Division; or else if they were so extravagant as to be
opposite to what is necessary to Salvation, and so necessitate a Separation,
the clear Light of the Gospel, joined with a strict Discipline of Manners,
would quickly chase them out of the World. But whilst needless Impositions, and
moot Points in Divinity are established by the Penal Laws of Kingdoms, and the
specious Pretenses of Authority, what Hopes is there that there should be such
an Union amongst Christians any where, as might invite a rational Turk or
Infidel to embrace a Religion, whereof he is told they have a Revelation from
God, which yet in some Places he is not suffered to read, and in no Place shall
he be permitted to understand for himself, or to follow according to the best
of his Understanding, when it shall at all thwart (though in things confessed
not necessary to Salvation) any of those select Points of Doctrine, Discipline,
or outward Worship, whereof the National Church has been pleased to make up its
Articles, Polity, and Ceremonies? And I ask, what a sober sensible Heathen must
think of the Divisions amongst Christians not owing to Toleration, if he should
find in an Island, where Christianity seems to be in its greatest Purity, the
South and North Parts establishing Churches upon the Differences of only
whether fewer or more, thus and thus chosen, should govern; tho the Revelation
they both pretend be their Rule, say nothing directly one way or ^other: each
contending with so much Eagerness, that they deny each other to be Churches of
Christ, that is, in effect, to be true Christians? To which if one should add
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, Real Presence, Articles and Distinctions
set up by Men without Authority from Scripture, and other less Differences,
(which good Christians may dissent about without endangering their Salvations)
established by Law in the several Parts of Christendom: I ask, Whether the
Magistrates interposing in Matters of Religion, and establishing National
Churches by the Force and Penalties of Civil Laws, with their distinct (and at
home reputed necessary) Confessions and Ceremonies, do not by Law and Power
authorize and perpetuate Sects among Christians, to the great Prejudice of
Christianity, and Scandal to Insidels, more than any thing that can arise from
a mutual Toleration, with Charity and a good Life?

Those who have so much in their Mouths, the Authors of Sects and Divisions,
with so little advantage to their Cause, I shall desire to consider, whether
National Churches established as now they are, are not as much Sects and
Divisions in Christianity, as smaller Collections, under the name of distinct
Churches, are in respect of the National? only with this difference, that these
Subdivisions and discountenanced Sects, wanting Power to enforce their peculiar
Doctrines and Discipline, usually live more friendly like Christians, and seem
only to demand Christian Liberty; whereby there is less appearance of
Unchristian Division among them: Whereas those National Sects, being backed by
the Civil Power, which they never fail to make use of, at least as a pretense
of Authority over their Brethren, usually breath out nothing but Force and
Persecution, to the great Reproach, Shame, and Dishonor of the Christian
Religion.

I said, That if the Magistrates would severely and impartially L. 2. p. 2.
set themselves against Vice in whomsoever it is found, and leave Men to their
own Consciences in their Articles of Faith, and Ways of Worship, true Religion
would spread wider, and be more fruitful in the Lives of its Professors, than
ever hitherto it has done by the imposing of Creeds and Ceremonies. Here I call
only Immorality of Manners, Vice; you on the contrary, in your Answer, give the
Name of Vice to Errors in Opinion, and P. 13.
Difference in Ways of Worship from the National Church: for this is the Matter
in question between us, express it as you please. This being a Contest only
about the signification of a short Syllable in the English Tongue, we must
leave to the Masters of that Language to judge which of these two is the proper
use of it. But yet from my using the word Vice, you conclude presently, (taking
it in your Sense, not mine) that the Magistrate has a Power in England (for
England we are speaking of) to punish Dissenters from the National Religion,
because it is a Vice. I will, if you please, in what I said, change the word
Vice into that I meant by it, and say thus, [If the Magistrates will severely
and impartially set themselves against the Dishonesty and Debauchery of Men's
Lives, and such Immoralities as I contra-distinguish from Errors in speculative
Opinions of Religion, and Ways of Worship:] and then pray see how your Answer
will look, for thus it runs; It seems then with you the rejecting the true
Religion, and refusing to worship God in decent Ways prescribed by those to
whom God has left the ordering of those Matters, are not comprehended in the
name Vice. But you tell me, If I except these things, and will not allow them
to be called by the name of Vice, perhaps other Men may think it as reasonable
to except some other things, [ i. e. from being called Vices] which they have a
kindness for: For instance, some may perhaps except arbitrary Divorce,
Polygamy, Concubinage, simple Fornication, or Marrying within Degrees thought
forbidden. Let them except these, and if you will, Drunkenness, Theft, and
Murder too, from the name of Vice; nay, call them Virtues: Will they by their
calling them so, be exempt from the Magistrate's Power of punishing them? Or
can they claim an Impunity by what I have said? Will these Immoralities by the
Names any one shall give, or forbear to give to them, become Articles of Faith,
or Ways of Worship? Which is all, as I expressly say in the Words you here cite
of mine, that I would have the Magistrates leave Men to their own Consciences
in. But, Sir, you have, for me, Liberty of Conscience to use Words in what
sense you please; only I think, where another is concerned, it favors more of
Ingenuity and love of Truth, rather to mind the Sense of him that speaks, than
to make a dust and noise with a mistaken Word, if any such Advantage were given
you.

You say, That some Men would through Carelessness never acquaint themselves
with the Truth which must save them, without being forced to do it, which ( you
suppose) may be very true, notwithstanding P. 23.
that (as I say) some are called at the third Hour, some at the ninth, and some
at the eleventh Hour; and whenever they are called, they embrace all the Truths
necessary to Salvation. At least I do not show why it may not: And therefore
this may be no Slip for any thing I have said to prove it to be one. This I
take not to be an Answer to my Argument, which was, That since some are not
called till the eleventh Hour, no body can know who those are, who would never
acquaint themselves with those Truths that must save them, without Force, which
is therefore necessary, and may indirectly and at a distance do them some
service. Whether that was my Argument or no, I leave the Read^r to judge: but
that you may not mistake it now again, I tell you here it is so, and needs
another Answer.

Your way of using Punishments in short is this, That all that conform not to
the National Church, where it is true, as in England, should be punished; What
for? To make them consider. This I told you had something of Impracticable. To
which you reply, That you used the word only in another Sense, P. 24.
which I mistook: Whether I mistook your meaning in the use of that Word or no,
or whether it was natural so to take it, or whether that Opinion which I
charged on you by that Mistake, when you tell us, That not examining, is indeed
the next end for P. 45
which they are punished, be not your Opinion, let us leave to the Reader: for
when you have that Word in what s^nse you please, what I said will be
nevertheless true, ( viz.) `That to punish Dissenters, as Dissenters, to make
them consider, has something impracticable in it, unless not to be of the
National ` Religion, and not to consider, be the same thing. These Words you
answer nothing to, having as you thought a great advantage of talking about my
mistake of your word only. Bu^ unless you will suppose, not to be of the
National Church, and not to consider, be the same thing, it will follow, that
to punish Dissenters, as Dissenters, to make them consider, has something of
Impracticable in it.

The Law punishes all Dissenters: For what? To make them all conform, that is
evident; To what end? To make them all consider, say you: That cannot be, for
it says nothing of it; nor is it certain that all Dissenters have not
considered; nor is there any care taken by the Law to enquire whether they have
considered, when they do conform; yet this was the End intended by the
Magistrate. So then with you it is practicable and allowable in making Laws,
for the Legislator to lay Punishments by Law on Men, for an End which they may
be ignorant of, for he says nothing of it; on Men, whom he never takes care to
enquire, whether they have done it or no, before he relax the Punishment, which
had no other next End, but to make them do it. But though he says nothing of
considering in laying on the Penalties, nor asks any thing about it, when he
takes them off; yet every body must understand that he so meant it. Sir, Sancho
Pancha in the Government of his Island, did not expect that Men should
understand his meaning by his gaping: but in another Island it seems, if you
had the Management, you would not think it to have any thing of Impracticable
or Impolitick in it. For how far the provision of Means of Instruction takes
this off, we shall see in another place. And lastly, to lay Punishments on Men
for an End which is already attained, (for some among the Dissenters may have
considered) is what other Lawmakers look on as impracticable, or at least
unjust. But to this you answer in your usual way of Circle, That if I suppose
P. 24:
you are for punishing Dissenters whether they consider or no, I am in a great
mistake; for the Dissenters (which is my Word, not yours) whom you are for
punishing, are only such as reject the true Religion proposed to them with
Reasons and Arguments sufficient to convince them of the Truth of it, who
therefore can never be supposed to consider those Reasons and Arguments as they
ought, whilst they persist in rejecting that Religion, or (in my Language)
continue Dissenters; for if they did so consider them, they would not continue
Dissenters. Of the Fault for which Men were to be punished, distinguished from
the End for which they were to be punished, we heard nothing, as I remember, in
the first Draught of your Scheme, which we had in The Argument considered, etc.
But I doubt not but in some of your general Terms you will be able to find it,
or what else you please: for now having spoken out, that Men, who are of a
different Religion from the true, which has been tendered them with sufficient
Evidence, (and who are they whom the wise and benign Disposer and Governor of
all things has not furnished with competent Means of Salvation) are Criminals,
and are by the Magistrate to be punished as such, it is necessary your Scheme
should be completed; and whither that will carry you, it is easy to see.

But pray, Sir, are there no Conformists that so reject the ^ue Religion? and
would you have them punished too, as you here profess? Make that practicable by
your Scheme, and you have done something to persuade us that your End in
earnest in the Use of Force, is to make Men consider, understand, and be of the
True Religion; and that the rejecting the true Religion tendered with
sufficient Evidence, is the Crime which bona fide you would have punished; and
till you do this, all that you may say concerning punishing Men to make them
consider as they ought, to make them receive the true Religion, to make them
embrace the Truth that must save them, etc. will with all sober, judicious and
unbiassed Readers, pass only for the Mark of great Zeal, if it escape amongst
Men as warm and as sagacious as you are, a harsher Name: whilst those
Conformists who neglect Matters of Religion, who reject the saving Truths of
the Gospel, as visibly and as certainly as any Dissenters, have yet no
Penalties laid upon them.

You talk much of considering and not considering as one ought; of embracing
and rejecting the true Religion, and abundance more to this purpose, which all,
however very good and savoury Words, that look very well, when you come to the
Application of Force, to procure that End expressed in them, amount to no more
but Conformity and Nonconformity. If you see not this, I pity you; for I would
fain think you a fair Man, who means well, though you have not light upon the
right way to the End you propose: But if you see it, and persist in your Use of
these good Expressions to lead Men into a Mistake in this Matter; consider what
my Pagans and Mahometans could do worse to serve a bad Cause.

Whatever you may imagine, I write so in this Argument, as I have before my
Eyes the Account, I shall one Day render for my Intention, and Regard to Truth
in the Management of it. I look on my self as liable to Error as others: but
this I am sure of, I would neither impose on you, my self, nor any body; and
should be very glad to have the Truth in this Point clearly established: and
therefore it is, I desire you again to examine, whether all the Ends you name
to be intended by your Use of Force, do in effect, when Force is to be your way
put in Practice, reach any farther than bare outward Conformity? Pray consider
whether it be not that which makes you so shy of the term Dissenters, which you
tell me is mine not your Word. Since none are by your Scheme to be punished,
but those who do not conform to the National Religion, Diffenters, I think, is
the proper Name to call them by: and I can see no reason you have to boggle at
it, unless your Opinion has something in it you are unwilling should be spoke
out, and called by its right Name: But whether you like it or no, Persecution,
and Persecution of Dissenters, are Names that belong to it as it stands now.

And now I think I may leave you your Question, wherein you ask, But cannot
Dissenters be punished for not being of the National P. 24.
Religion, as the Fault, and yet only to make them consider, as the End for
which they are punished? To be answered by your self, or to be used again,
where you think there is any need of so nice a Distinction, as between the
Fault for which Men are punished by Laws, and the End for which they are
punished: For to me I confess it is hard to find any other immediate End of
Punishment in the Intention of humane Laws, but the Amendment of the Fault
punished; though it may be subordinate to other and remoter Ends. If the Law be
only to punish Nonconformity, one may truly say, to cure that Fault, or to
produce Conformity, is the End of that Law; and there i^ nothing else
immediately aimed at by that Law, but Conformity; and whatever else it tends to
as an End, must be only as a Consequence of Conformity, whither it be
Edisication, Increase of Charity, or saving of Souls, or whatever else may be
thought a Consequence of Conformity. So that in a Law, which with Penalties
requires Conformity, and nothing else; o^e cannot say (properly I think) that
Consideration is the End of that Law, unless Consideration be a Cons^quence of
Conformity, to which Conformity is subordinate, and does naturally conduce, or
else is necessary to it.

To my arguing that it is u^just as well as impracticable, you reply, Where the
National Church is the true Church of God, ^o P. 24.
which all Men ought to join themselves, and sufficient Evidence is offered to
convince Men that it (...) so: There it is a Fault to be out of the National
Church, because it is a Fault not to be convinced that the National Church is
that true Church of God. And therefore since there Men's not being so convinced,
can only be imputed to their not considering as they ought, the Evidence which
is ^ffered to convince them; it cannot be unjust to punish them to make them so
to consider it. Pray tell me, which is a Man's Duty, to be of the National
Church (...); or to be ^onvinced first, that its Religion is ^ue, and then to
be of it? If it be his Duty to be convinced (...), why then do you punish him
for not being of it, when it is his Duty to be ^onvinced of the Truth of its
Religion, before it is his Duty to be of it? If you say it is his Duty to be of
it first; why then is not ^orce used to him afterward, though he be still
ignorant and unconvinced? But you answer, It is his Fault not to be convinced.
What, every one's Fault every where? No, you ^imit it to Places where
sufficient Evidence is offered to convince Men that the National Church is the
true Church of God. To which pray let me add, the National Church is so the
true Church of God, that no body out of its Communion can embrace the Truth
that must save him, or be in the way to Salvation. For if a Man may be in the
way to Salvation out of the National Church, he is enough in the true Church,
and needs no Force to bring him into any other: For when a Man is in the way to
Salvation, there is no Necessity of Force to bring him into any Church of any
Denomination, in order to his Salvation. So that not to be of the National
Church, though true, will not be a Fault which the Magistrate has a right to
punish, until sufficient Evidence is offered to prove that a Man cannot be
saved out of it. Now since you tell us, that by sufficient Evidence you mean
such P. 51.
as will certainly win Assent; when you have offered such Evidence to convince
Men, that the National Church, any where, is so the true Church, that Men
cannot be saved out of its Communion, I think I may allow them to be so faulty
as to deserve what Punishment you shall think sit. If you hope to mend the
matter by the following Words, where you say, that where P. 25.
such Evidence is offered there Men's not being convinced, can only be imputed
to Men's not considering as they ought, they will not help you. For to consider
as they ought, being by your own Interpretation, to consider so as not to
reject; then your Answer amounts to P. 40.
just thus much, That it is a Fault not to be convinced that the National
Church is the true Church of God, where sufficient Evidence is offered to
convince Men that it is so. Sufficient Evidence is such as will certainly gain
Assent with th^se who consider as they ought, i. e. who consider so as not to
reject or to be moved heartily to embrace, which I think is to be convinced.
Who can have the Heart now to deny any of this? Can there be any thing surer,
than that Men's not being convinced, is to be imputed to them if they are not
convinced, where such Evidence is offered to them as does convince them? And to
punish all such you have my free Consent.

Whether all you say have any thing more in it than this, I appeal to my
Readers; and should willingly do it to you, did not I fear, that the jumbling
of those good and plausible Words in your Head, of sufficient Evidence,
consider as one ought, etc. might a little jargogle your Thoughts, and lead you
hoodwinked the round of your own beaten Circle. This is a Danger those are much
exposed to, who accustom themselves to relative and doubtful terms, and so put
together, that though asunder they signify something, yet when their meaning
comes to be cast up as they are placed, it amounts to just nothing.

You go on, What Justice it would be for the Magistrate to punish P. 25.
one for not being a Cartesian, it will be time enough to consider when I have
proved it to be as necessary for Men to be Cartesians, as it is to be
Christians, or Members of God's Church. This will be a much better Answer to
what I said, when you have proved that to be a Christian or a Member of God's
Church, it is necessary for a Dissenter to be of the Church of England. If it
be not Justice to punish a Man for not being a Cartesian, because it is not as
necessary to be a Cartesian, as to be a Christian; I fear the same Argument
will hold against punishing a Man for not using the Cross in Baptism, or not
kneeling at the Lord's Supper; and it will lie on you to prove, that it is as
necessary to use the Cross in Baptism, or kneeling at the Lord's Supper, as it
is to be a Christian: For if they are not as necessary as it is to be a
Christian, you cannot by your own Rule, without Injustice, punish Men for not
conforming to a Church wherein they are made an indispensible Part of
Conformity; and by this Rule it will be Injustice to punish any Man for not
being of that Church wherein any thing is required not necessary to Salvation;
for that, I think, is the Necessity of being a Christian.

To show the Unreasonableness of punishing Dissenters to make them examine, I
said, that so they were punished for not having (...). 2. p. 24.
offended against a Law; for there is no Law of the Land that requires them to
examine. Your Reply is, That you think the contrary is plain enough: For where
the Laws provide sufficient means of Instruction in the true Religion, and then
require all Men to embrace P. 45.
that Religion; you think the most natural Construction of those Laws is, that
they require Men to embrace it upon Instruction and Conviction, as it cannot be
expected they should do without examining the Grounds upon which it stands.
Your Answer were very true, if they could not embrace without examining and
Conviction. But since there is a shorter way to embracing, which cost no more
Pains than walking as far as the Church, your Answer no more proves, that the
Law requires examining, than if a Man at Harwich being subpena'd to appear in
Westminster Hall next Term, you should say the Subpena required him to come by
Sea, because there was sufficient means provided for his Passage in the
ordinary Boat that by Appointment goes constantly from Harwich to London: But
he taking it to be more for his Ease and Dispatch, goes the shorter way by
Land, and finds that having made his Appearance in Court as was required, the
Law is satisfied, and there is no Inquiry made, what way he came thither.

If therefore Men can embrace so as to satisfy the Law without examining, and
it be true that they so fly from the means of right Information, are so
negligent in, and averse to examining, that there is need of Penalties to make
them do it, as you tell us at large; A. p 6, etc
How is it a natural Construction of those Laws, that they require Men to
examine, which having provided sufficient means of Instruction, require Men
only to conform, without saying any thing of examining? especially when the
Cause assigned by you of Men's neglecting to examine, is not want of means of
Instruction, but want of Penalties to overbalance their Aversion to the P.
(...).
using those means; which you your self con^s, where you say, When the best
Provision is made that can be, for the Instruction of the People, you fear a
great part of them will still need Penalties to bring them to hear and receive
Instruction: And therefore perhaps the Remainder of tha^ Paragraph, when you
have considered it L. 2. p. 46.
again, will not appear so impertinent a Declamation as you are pleased to
think it: For it charged your Method (as it then stood) of punishing Men for
not considering and exami^ing with these Absurdities. That it punished Men for
not doing that which the Law did not require of them, nor declare the Neglect
of to be a Fault, contrary to the Ends of all Laws, contrary to the common
Sense of Mankind, and the Practice of all Lawmakers, who always first declared
the Fault, and then denounced Penalties against those who after a time set,
should be found guilty of it. It charged your Method, that it allows not
Impunity to the Innocent, but punishes whole Tribes together, the Innocent with
the Guilty; and that the thing deligned in the Law was not mentioned in it, but
left to the People (whose Fault was want of Consideration) to be by
Consideration found out.

To avoid these Absurdities, you have reformed your Scheme, and now in your
Reply own with the frankest Persecutors, that you punish Men downright for
their Religion, and that to be a Dissenter from the true Religion, is a Fault
to be punished by the Magistrate. This indeed i^ plain dealing, and clears your
Method from these Absurdities as long as you keep to it: but where ever you
tell us, that your Laws are to make Men hear, to make Men consider, to make Men
examine; whilst the Laws themselves say nothing of hearing, considering and
examining, there you are still chargeable with all these Absurdities: Nor will
the Distinction, which without any Difference you would set up, between the
Fault for which Men are to be punished, and the End for which they are to be
punished, do you any Service herein, as I have showed you in another Place.

To what I said L. 2. from p. 25, to p. 32. concerning those who by your Scheme
are to be punished, you having thought sit not to answer any thing, I shall
here again offer it to your Consideration.

Let us inquire, First, Who it is you would have be punished. In the Place
above cited, they are those who are got into a wrong way, and are deaf to all
Persuasions. If these are the Men to be punished, let a Law be made against
them: you have my Consent; and that is the proper Course to have Offenders
punished. For you do not, I hope, intend to punish any Fault by a Law, which
you do not name in the Law; nor make a Law against any Fault you would not have
punished. And now, if you are sincere, and in earnest, and are (as a fair Man
should be) for what your Words plainly signify, and nothing else; what will
such a Law serve for? Men in the wrong Way are to be punished: but who are in
the wrong Way, is the Question. You have no more reason to determine it against
one, who differs from you, than he has to conclude against you, who differ from
him: No, not tho you have the Magistrate and the National Church on your side.
For if to differ from them be to be in the wrong Way; you who are in the right
Way in England, will be in the wrong Way in France. Every one here must be Judge
for himself: And your Law will reach no body, till you have convinced him he is
in the wrong Way: and then there will be no need of Punishment to make him
consider; unless you will affirm again what you have denied, and have Men
punished for embracing the Religion they believe to be true, when it differs
from yours or the Public.

Besides being in the wrong Way, those who you would have punished, must be
such as are deaf to all Persuasions. But any such, I suppose, you will hardly
sind, who hearken to no body, not to those of their own Way. If you mean by
deaf to all Persuasions, all Persuasions of a contrary Party, or of a different
Church; such, I suppose, you may abundantly find in your own Church, as well as
elsewhere; and I presume to them you are so charitable, that you would not
have them punished for not lending an Ear to Seducers. For Constancy in the
Truth, and Perseverance in the Faith, is (I hope) rather to be encouraged, than
by any Penalties checked in the Orthodox. And your Church doubtless, as well as
all others, is Orthodox to it self in all its Tenets. If you mean by all
Persuasion, all your Persuasion, or all Persuasion of those of your Communion;
you do but beg the Question, and suppose you have a right to punish those who
differ from, and will not comply with you.

Your next Words are, When Men fly from the means of a right Information, and
will not so much as consider how reasonable it is thoroughly and impartially to
examine a Religion, which they embraced upon such Inducements as ought to have
no sway at all in the matter, and therefore with little or no Examination of
the proper Grounds of it; What humane Method can be used to bring them to act
like Men, in an Affair of such consequence, and to make a wiser and more
rational Choice, but that of laying such Penalties upon them, as may balance
the weight of those Prejudices which inclined them to prefer a false Way before
the true, and recover them to so much Sobriety and Ref^ction, as seriously to
put the question to themselves, Whether it be really worth the while to undergo
such Inconveniences for adhering to a Religion, which, for any thing they know,
may be false, or for rejecting another (if that be the case) which, for any
thing they know, may be true, till they have brought it to the Bar of Reason,
and given it a fair trial there? Here you again bring in such as prefer a false
Way before a true: to which having answered already, I shall here say no more,
but, That since our Church will not allow those to be in a false Way who are
out of the Church of Rome, because the Church of Rome (which pretends
Infallibility) declares hers to be the only true Way; certainly no one of our
Church (nor any other, which claims not Infallibility) can require any one to
take the Testimony of any Church, as a sufficient Proof of the Truth of her own
Doctrine. So that true and false (as it commonly happens, when we suppose them
for our selves, or our Party) in effect, signify just nothing, or nothing to
the purpose; unless we can think that true or false in England, which will not
be so at Rome or Geneva; and Vice versa. As for the rest of the description of
those, on whom you are here laying Penalties; I beseech you consider whether it
will not belong to any of your Church, let it be what it will. Consider, I say,
if there be none in your Church who have embraced her Religion upon such
Inducements as ought to have no sway at all in the matter, and therefore with
little or no Examination of the proper Grounds of it; who have not been
inclined by Prejudices; who do not adhere to a Religion, which for any thing
they know may be false; and who have rejected another, which for any thing they
know may be true. If you have any such in your Communion, (and 'twill be an
admirable, though I fear but a little Flock that has none such in it) consider
well what you have done. You have prepared Rods for them, for which I imagine
they will con you no thanks. For to make any tolerable Sense of what you here
propose, it must be understood that you would have Men of all Religions
punished, to make them consider whether it be really worth the while to undergo
such Inconveniences for adhering to a Religion, which for any thing they know
may be false. If you hope to avoid that, by what you have said of true and
false; and pretend that the supposed Preference of the true Way in your Church,
ought to preserve its Members from your Punishment; you manifestly trifle. For
every Church's Testimony, that it has chosen the true Way, must be taken for it
self; and then none will be liable; and your new Invention of Punishment is
come to nothing: Or else the differing Churches Testimonies must be taken one
for another; and then they will be all out of the true Way, and your Church
need Penalties as well as the rest. So that, upon your Principles, they must
all or none be punished. Choose which you please; one of them, I think, you
cannot escape.

What you say in the next Words; Where Instruction is stiffly refused, and all
Admonitions and Persuasions prove vain and ineffectual; differs nothing but in
the way of expressing, from Deaf to all Persuasions: And so that is answered
already.

In another place, you give us another description of those you think ought to
be punished, in these Words; Those who refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and
submit to the Spiritual Government of the proper Ministers of Religion, who by
special Designation, are appointed to Exhort, Admonish, Reprove, etc. Here
then, those to be punished, are such who refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and
submit to the Government of the proper Ministers of Religion. Whereby we are as
much still at uncertainty as we were before, who those are who (by your Scheme,
and Laws suitable to it) are to be punished; since every Church has, as it
thinks, its proper Ministers of Religion: And if you mean those that refuse to
embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government of the Ministers of another
Church; then all Men will be guilty, and must be punished, even those of your
own Church as well as others. If you mean those who refuse, etc. the Ministers
of their own Church, very few will incur your Penalties: But if by these proper
Ministers of Religion, the Ministers of some particular Church are intended,
why do you not name it? Why are you so reserved in a Matter, wherein, if you
speak not out, all the rest that you say will be to no purpose? Are Men to be
punished for refusing to embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government of
the proper Ministers of the Church of Geneva? For this time (since you have
declared nothing to the contrary) let me suppose you of that Church; and then I
am sure, that is it that you would name: for of whatever Church you are, if you
think the Ministers of any one Church ought to be hear kned to, and obeyed, it
must be those of your own. There are Persons to be punished, you say: This you
contend for all through your Book, and lay so much stress on it, that you make
the Preservation and Propagation of Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, to
depend on it: and yet you describe them by so general and equivocal Marks,
that, unless it be upon Suppositions which no body will grant you, I dare say,
neither you nor any body else will be able to find one guilty. Pray find me, if
you can, a Man whom you can judicially prove (for he that is to be punished by
Law, must be fairly tried) is in a wrong way, in respect of his Faith; I mean,
who is deaf to all Persuasions, who flies from all means of a right
Information, who refuses to embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government
of the Spiritual Pastors. And when you have done that, I think I may allow you
what Power you please to punish him, without any prejudice to the Toleration
the Author of the Letter proposes.

But why, I pray, all this boggling, all this loose talking, as if you knew not
what you meant, or durst not speak it out? Would you be for punishing some
body, you know not whom? I do not think so ill of you. Let me then speak out
for you. The Evidence of the Argument has convinced you that Men ought not to
be persecuted for their Religion; That the Severities in use amongst Christians
cannot be defended; That the Magistrate has not Authority to compel any one to
his Religion. This you are forced to yield. But you would fain retain some
Power in the Magistrate's Hands to punish Dissenters, upon a new Pretense, viz.
not for having embraced the Doctrine and Worship they believe to be True and
Right, but for not having well considered their own and the Magistrate's
Religion. To show you that I do not speak wholly without book, give me leave to
mind you of one Passage of yours: the Words are, (...) to put them upon a
serious and impartial examination of the Controversy between the Magistrate and
them. Though these Words be not intended to tell us who you would have
punished, yet it may be plainly inferred from them. And they more clearly point
out whom you aim at, than all the foregoing Places, where you seem to (and
should) describe them. For they are such as between whom and the Magistrate
there is a Controversy; that is, in short, who differ from the Magistrate in
Religion. And now indeed you have given us a Note by which these you would have
punished may be known. We have, with much ado, found at last whom it is we may
presume you would have punished. Which in other Cases is usually not very
difficult: because there the Faults to be amended, easily design the Persons to
be corrected. But yours is a new Method, and unlike all that ever went before
it.

In the next place, let us see for what you would have them punished. You tell
us, and it will easily be granted you, that not to examine and weigh
impartially, and without Prejudice or Passion, (all which, for shortness sake,
we will express by this one word Consider) the Religion one embraces or
refuses, is a Fault very common, and very prejudicial to true Religion, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls. But Penalties and Punishments are very necessary, say
you, to remedy this Evil.

Let us now see how you apply this Remedy. Therefore, say you, let all
Dissenters be punished. Why? Have no Dissenters considered of Religion? Or have
all Conformists considered? That you your self will not say. Your Project
therefore is just as reasonable, as if a Lethargy growing Epidemical in
England, you should propose to have a Law made to blister and scarify and shave
the Heads of all who wear Gowns; tho it be certain that neither all who wear
Gowns are Lethargick, nor all who are Lethargick wear Gowns.

-- Dii te, Dama^ppe, Deaeque
V^um ob consilium donent tonsore.
For there could not be certainly a more Learned Advice, than that one Man
should be pulled by the Ears, because another is asleep. This, when you have
considered of it again, (for I find, according to your Principle, all Men have
now and then need to be jogged) you will, I guess, be convinced is not like a
fair Physician, to apply a Remedy to a Disease; but, like an engaged Enemy, to
'vent one's Spleen upon a Party. Common Sense, as well as Common Justice,
requires, that the Remedies of Laws and Penalties should be directed against
the Evil that is to be removed, wherever it be found. And if the Punishment
you think so necessary, be (as you pretend) to cure the Mischief you complain
of, you must let it pursue, and fall on the Guilty, and those only, in what
Company soever they are; and not, as you here propose, and is the highest
Injustice, punish the innocent considering Dissenter, with the Guilty; and, on
the other side, let the inconsiderate guilty Conformist escape, with the
Innocent. For one may rationally presume that the National Church has some, nay
more, in proportion of those who little consider or concern themselves about
Religion, than any Congregation of Dissenters. For Conscience, or the Care of
their Souls, being once laid aside; Interest, of course, leads Men into that
Society, where the Protection and Countenance of the Government, and hopes of
Preferment, bid fairest to all their remaining Desires. So that if careless,
negligent, inconsiderate Men in Matters of Religion, who, without being forced,
would not consider, are to be rouzed into a Care of their Souls, and a Search
after Truth, by Punishments; the National Religion, in all Countries, will
certainly have a right to the greatest share of those Punishments, at least,
not to be wholly exempt from them.

This is that which the Author of the Letter, as I remember, complains of, and
that justly, viz. That the pretended Care of Men's Souls always expresses it
self, in those who would have Force any way made use of to that End, in very
unequal Methods; some Persons being to be treated with Severity, whilst others,
guilty of the same Faults, are not to be so much as touched. Though you are got
pretty well out of the deep Mud, and renounce Punishments directly for
Religion; yet you stick still in this part of the Mire; whilst you would have
Dissenters punished to make them consider, but would not have any thing done to
Conformists, though never so negligent in this point of considering. The
Author's Letter pleased me, because it is equal to all Mankind, is direct, and
will, I think, hold everywhere; which I take to be a good Mark of Truth. For I
shall always suspect that neither to comport with the Truth of Religion, or the
Design of the Gospel, which is suited to only some one Country or Party. What is
True and Good in England, will be True and Good at Rome too, in China or
Geneva. But whether your great and only Method for the propagating of Truth, by
bringing the Inconsiderate by Punishments to consider, would (according to your
way of applying your Punishments only to Dissenters from the National Religion)
be of use in those Countries, or any where but where you suppose the Magistrate
to be in the right, judge you. Pray, Sir, consider a little, whether Prejudice
has not some share in your way of arguing. For this is your Position; Men are
generally negligent in examining the Grounds of their Religion. This I grant.
But could there be a more wild and incoherent Consequence drawn from it, than
this; Therefore Dissenters must be punished?

All this you are pleased to pass over without the least Notice: but perhaps
you think you have made me full Satisfaction in your Answer to my Demand, who
are to be punished? We will here therefore consider that as it stands, where
you tell us, Those P. 48.
who are to be punished according to the whole Tenor of your Answer, are no
other but such, as having sufficient Evidence tendered them of the true
Religion, do yet reject it: whether utterly refusing to consider that Evidence,
or not considering as they ought, viz. with such Care and Diligence as the
matter deserves and requires, and with honest and unbiassed Minds; and what
Difficulty there is in this, you say you cannot imagine. You promised you would
tell the World, who P. 46.
they were plainly and directly. And though you tell us, you cannot imagine
what Difficulty there is in this your Account of who are to be punished, yet
there are some things in it, that make it to my Apprehension not very plain and
direct. For first they must be only those who have the true Religion tendered
them with sufficient Evidence: Wherein there appears some Difficulty to me, who
shall be Judge what is the true Religion: and for that, in every Country it is
most probable the Magistrate will be. If you think of any other, pray tell us.
Next there seems some Difficulty to know, who shall be Judge what is sufficient
Evidence. For where a Man is to be punished by Law, he must be convicted of
being guilty; which since in this Case he cannot be, unless it be proved he has
had the true Religion tendered to him with sufficient Evidence, it is necessary
that some body there must be Judge what is the true Religion, and what is
sufficient Evidence; and others to prove it has been so tendered. If you were
to be of the Jury, we know what would be your Verdict concerning sufficient
Evidence, by these Words of yours, To say that a Man who has the true Religion
P. (...)
proposed to him with sufficient Evidence of its Truth, may consider it as he
ought, or do his utmost in considering, and yet not (...) the Truth of it, is
neither more nor less, than to say that sufficient Evidence is not sufficient:
For what does any Man mean by sufficient Evidence, but such as will certainly
win Assent wherever it is duly considered? Upon which his conforming, or not
conforming, would without any farther Questions determine the Point. But
whether the rest of the Jury could upon this be able ever to bring in any Man
guilty, and so liable to Punishment, is a Question. For if sufficient Evidence
be only that which certainly wins Assent, wherever a Man does his utmost in
considering, 'twill be very hard to prove that a Man who rejects the true
Religion, has had it tendered with sufficient Evidence, because it will be very
hard to prove he has not done his utmost in considering it. So that
notwithstanding all you have here said, to punish any Man by your Method is not
yet so very practicable.

But you clear all in your following Words, which say, There is nothing more
evident than that those who reject the true Religion, are culpable, and deserve
to be punished. By whom? By Men: That Is so far from being evident, as you talk,
that it will require better Proofs than I have yet seen for it. Next you say,
It Is easy enough to know when Men reject the true Religion. Yes, when the true
Religion is known, and agreed on what shall be taken to be so in Judicial
Proceedings, which can scarce be till it is agreed who shall determine what is
true Religion, and what not. Suppose a Penalty should in the University be laid
on those who rejected the true Peripatetick Doctrine, could that Law be
executed on any one, unless it were agreed who should be Judge what was the true
Peripatetick Doctrine? If you say it may be known out of Aristotle's Writings:
then I answer, that it would be a more reasonable Law to lay the Penalty on any
one, who rejected the Doctrine contained in the Books allowed to be
Aristotle's, and printed under his Name. You may apply this to the true
Religion, and the Books of the Scripture, if you please: though after all there
must be a Judge agreed on, to determine what Doctrines are contained in either
of those Writings, before the Law can be practicable.

But you go on to prove, that it is easy to know when Men reject P. 48.
the true Religion: for, say you, that requires no more than that we know that
that Religion was (...) to them with sufficient Evidence of the Truth of it.
And that it may be tendered to Men with such Evidence, and that it may be known
when it is so tendered, these things, you say, you take leave here to suppose.
You suppose then more than can be allowed you. For that it can be judicially
known that the true Religion has been tendered to any one with sufficient
Evidence, is what I deny, and that for Reasons above mentioned, which were
there no other Difficulty in it, were sufficient to show the Unpracticableness
of your Method.

You conclude this Paragraph thus, Which is all that needs be said upon this
Head to show the Consistency and Practicableness of this Method: And what do
you any where say against this? Whether I say any thing or no against it, I
will bring a Friend of yours that will say that Dissenters ought to be punished
for being out of the Communion of the Church of England. I will ask you now,
how it can be proved that such an one is guilty of rejecting the one only true
Religion? Perhaps it is because he (...) the Cross in Baptism, or Godfathers
and Godmothers as they are used, or kneeling at the Lord's Supper; perhaps it
is because he cannot pronounce all damned that believe not all (...)'s Creed,
or cannot join with some of those Repetitions in our Common Prayer, thinking
them to come within the Prohibition of our Savior, each of which shuts a Man
out from the Communion of the Church of England, as much as if he denied Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God. Now, Sir, I be^eech you, how can it be known, that
ever sufficient Evidence was tendered to such a Dissenter to prove, that what
he rejects is a part of that one only true Religion, which unless he be of, he
cannot be saved? Or indeed how can it be known, that any Dissenter rejects that
one only true Religion, when being punished barely for not conforming, he is
never asked, what part it is he dissents from or rejects? and so it may be some
of those things which I imagine will always want sufficient Evidence to prove
them to be Parts of that only one true Religion, without the hearty embracing
whereof no Man can be saved.

CHAP. IV. What Degrees of Punishment.
HOW much soever you have endeavored to reform the Doctrine of Persecution to
make it serve your turn, and give it the Color of Care and Zeal for the true
Religion in the Country where alone you are concerned it should be made use of;
yet you have labored in vain, and done no more, but given the old Engine a new
Varnish to set it off the better, and make it look less frightful: For by what
has been said in the foregoing Chapters, I think it will appear, that if any
Magistrate have Power to punish. Men in Matters of Religion, all have; and that
Dissenters from the National Religion must be punished every where or no where.
The horrid Cruelties that in all Ages, and of late in our View, have been
committed under the Name, and upon the Account of Religion, give so just an
Offense and Abhorrence to all who have any remains, not only of Religion, but
Humanity left, that the World is ashamed to own it. This Objection therefore,
as much as Words or Professions can do, you have labored to fence against; and
to exempt your Design from the Suspicion of any Severities, you take Care in
every Page almost to let us hear of moderate Force, moderate Penalties; but all
in vain: and I doubt not but when this part too is examined, it will appear,
that as you neither have, nor can limit the Power of punishing to any distinct
sort of Magistrates, nor exempt from Punishment the Dissenters from any
National Religion: So neither have, nor can you limit the Punishment to any
Degree short of the highest, if you will use Punishments at all in matters of
Religion. What you have done in this Point besides giving us good Words, I will
now examine.

You tell me, I have taken a Liberty which will need Pardon, because P. 1.
I say, `You have plainly yielded the Question by owning `those greater
Severities to be improper and unsit. But if I shall make it out, that those are
as proper and sit as your moderate Penalties; and that if you will use one, you
must come to the other, as will appear from what you your self say: whatever
you may think, I shall not imagine other Readers will conclude I have taken too
great a Liberty, or shall much need Pardon. For if as you say in the next Page,
Authority may P. 2.
reasonably and justly use some Degrees of Force where it is needful; I say
they may also use any Degree of Force where it is needful. Now upon your
Grounds, Fire and Sword, tormenting and undoing, and those other Punishments
which you condemn, will be needful, even to Torments of the highest Severity,
and be as necessary as those moderate Penalties which you will not name. For I
ask you, to what Purpose do you use any Degree of Force? Is it to prevail with
Men to do something that is in their Power, or that is not? The latter I
suppose you will not say, till your Love of Force is so increased, that you
shall think it necessary to be made use of to produce Impossibilities: If Force
then be to be used only to bring Men to do what is in their Power, what is the
Necessity you assign of it? only this, as I remember, viz. that when gentle
Admonitions and earnest Entreaties will not prevail, what other means is there
left but Force? And I upon the same Ground reply; If lesser Degrees of Force
will not prevail, what other means is there left but greater? If the lowest
Degree of Force be necessary where gentler means will not prevail, because
there is no other means left; higher Degrees of Force are necessary where lower
will not prevail, for the same Reason. Unless you will say all Degrees of Force
work alike; and that lower Penalties prevail as much on Men as greater, and
will equally bring them to do what is in their Power. If so a Phlip on the
Forehead, or a Farthing Mulct, may be Penalty enough to bring Men to what you
propose. But if you shall laugh at these, as being for their Smalness
insufficient, and therefore will think it necessary to increase them, I say,
wherever Experience shows any Degree of Force to be insufficient to prevail,
there will be still the same necessity to increase it. For wherever the End
is necessary, and Force is the means, the only means left to procure it, both
which you suppose in our Case, there it will be found always necessary to
increase the Degrees of Force, where the lower prove ineffectual, as well till
you come to the highest, as when you begin with the lowest. So that in your
present Case I do not wonder you use so many Shifts, as I shall show by and by
you do, to decline naming the highest Degree of what you call moderate. If any
Degree be necessary, you cannot assign any one ( condemn it in Words as much as
you please) which may not be so, and which you must not come to the Use of. If
there be no such Necessity of Force as will justify those higher Degrees of it,
which are Severities you condemn, neither will it justify the Use of your lower
Degrees.

If, as you tell us, false Religions prevail against the true, merely (...). 7.
by the Advantage they have in the Corruption and Pravity of humane Nature left
to it self unbridled by Authority. If the not receiving the true Religion be a
Mark and Effect merely of the Prevalency of the Corruption of humane Nature;
may not, nay, must not the Magistrate, if less will not do, use his ^most Force
to bring Men to the true Religion? his Force being given him to suppress that
Corruption; especially since you give it for a Measure of the Force to be used,
that it must be so much, as without which ordinarily they will not embrace the
Truth that must save them. What ordinarily signifies here to make any
determinate Measure is hard to guess; but signify it what it will, so much
Force must be used, as without which Men will not embrace the Truth; which, if
it signify any thing intelligible, requires, that where lower Degrees will not
do, greater must be used, till you come to what will ordinarily do; but what
that ordinarily is, no Man can tell. If one Man will not be wrought on by as
little Force as another, must not greater Degrees of Force be used to him?
Shall the Magistrate who is obliged to do what lies in him, be exeused, for
letting him be damned, without the Use of all the means was in his Power? And
will it be sufficient for him to plead, that though he did not all what lay in
him, yet he did what ordinarily prevailed, or what prevailed on several others.
Force, if that be the Remedy, must be proportioned to the Opposition. If the
Dose that has frequently wrought on others, will not purge a Man whose Life
lies on it, must it not therefore be made sufficient and effectual, because it
will be more than what is called ordinary? Or can any one say the Physician has
done his Duty, who lets his Patient in an extraordinary Case perish in the Use
of only moderate Remedies, and pronounces him incurable, before he has tried
the utmost he can with the powerfullest Remedies which are in his reach?

Having renounced loss of Estate, corporal Punishments, Imprisonment, and such
sort of Severities, as unfit to be used in Matters of Religion; you ask, Will
it follow from ^ence that the Magistrate P. 19.
has no right to use any Force at all? Yes, it will follow, till you give some
Answer to what I say in that place, viz. that if you give up Punishments of a
Man in his Person, Liberty and Estate, I think we need not stand with you for
any Punishments may be made use of. But this you pass by without any notice. I
doubt not but you will here think you have a ready Answer, by telling me, you
mean only depriving Men of their Estates, mai^ing them with corporal
Punishments, starving and tormenting them in no^som Prisons, and other such
Severities which you have by name P. (...).
excepted; but lower Penalties may yet be used, for Penalties is the word you
carefully use, and disclaim that of Punishment, as if you disowned the thing. I
wish you would tell us too by name, what those lower Penalties are you would
have used, as well as by name you tell us those Severities you disallow. They
may not maim a Man with corporal Punishments; May they use any corporal
Punishments at all? They may not starve and (...) them in noisome Prisons for
Religion, that you condemn as much as I: May they put them in any Prison at
all? They may not deprive Men of their Estates; I suppose you mean their whole
Estates: May they take away half, or a quarter, or an hundred^ part? It Is
strange you should be able to name the Degrees of Severity that will hinder
more than promote the Progress of Religion, and cannot name those Degrees that
will promote rather than hinder it; that those who would take their Measures by
you, and follow your Scheme, might know how to proceed so, as not to do more
Harm than Good: for since you are so certain, that there are Degrees of
Punishments or Penalties that will do Good, and other Degrees of them that will
do Harm; ought you not to have told us, what that true Degree is, or how it may
be known, without which all your goodly Scheme is of no use? For allowing all
you have said to be as true as you would have it, no Good can be done without
showing the just Measure of Punishment to be used.

If the Degree be too great, it will, you confess, do Harm: Can one then not
err on the other hand, by using too little? If you say so, we are agreed, and I
desire no better Tolera^on. If therefore too great will do Harm, and too
little, in your Opinion will do no Good, you ought to tell us the just mean.
This I pressed upon you; whereof that the Reader may be Judge, I shall here
trouble him with the Repetition.

There is a third Thing, that you are as tender and reserved L. 2. p. 40.
in, as either naming the Criminals to be punished, or positively telling us
the End for which they should be punished; and that is, with what sort of
Penalties, what degree of Punishment they should be forced. You are indeed so
gracious to them, that you renounce the Severities and Penalties hitherto made
use of. You tell us, they should be but moderate Penalties. A. p. 24.
But if we ask you what are moderate Penalties, you confess you cannot tell us:
so that by Moderate here, you yet mean nothing. You tell us, The outward Force
to be applied, A. p. 15.
should be duly tempered. But what that due Temper is, you do not, or cannot
say; and so in effect, it signifies just nothing. Yet if in this you are not
plain and direct, all the rest of your Design will signify nothing. For it
being to have some Men, and to some End, punished; yet if it cannot be found
what Punishment is to be used, it is (notwithstanding all you have said)
utterly useless. You tell us modestly, That to determine precisely the just
measure of the Punishment, will require some Consideration. A. p. 12.
If the Faults were precisely determined, and could be proved, it would require
no more Consideration to determine the Measure of the Punishment in this, than
it would in any other Case, where those were known. But where the Fault is
undesined, and the Guilt not to be proved, (as I suppose it will be found in
this present business of examining) it will without doubt require Consideration
to proportion the Force to the Design: just so much Consideration as it will
require to fit a Coat to the Moon, or proportion a Shoe to the Feet of those
who inhabit her. For to proportion a Punishment to a Fault that you do not
name, (and so we in Charity ought to think you do not yet know) and a Fault
that when you have named it, will be impossible to be proved who are or are not
guilty, of it; will I suppose require as much Consideration as to fit a Shoe to
Feet whose Size and Shape are not known.

However, you offer some Measures whereby to regulate your Punishments; which
when they are looked into, will be found to be just as good as none, they being
impossible to be any Rule in the case. The first is, So much Force, or such
Penalties A. p. 14.
as are ordinarily sufficient to prevail with Men of common Difere^on, and not
de^erately perverse and obstinate, to weigh Matters of Religion carefully and
impartially, and without which ordinarily they will not do this. Where it is to
be observed:

First, That who are these Men of common Discretion, is as hard to know, as to
know what is a fit degree of Punishment in the case; and so you do but regulate
one Uncertainty by another. Some Men will be apt to think, that he who will not
weigh Matters of Religion, which are of infinite concernment to him, without
Punishment, cannot in reason be thought a Man of common Discretion. Many Women
of common Discretion enough to manage the ordinary Affairs of their Families,
are not able to read a Page in an ordinary Author, or to understand and give an
account what it m^ans, when read to them. Many Men of common Discretion in
their Callings, are not able to judge when an Argument is conclusive or no; much
less to trace it through a long Train of Consequences. What Penalties shall be
sufficient to prevail with such (who upon examination, I fear, will not be
found to make the least part of Mankind) to examine and weigh Matters of
Religion carefully and impartially? The Law allows all to have common
Discretion, for whom it has not provided Guardians or Bedlam. So that, in
effect, your Men of common Discretion, are all Men, not judged Idiots or
Madmen: And Penalties sufficient to prevail with Men of common Discretion, are
Penalties sufficient to prevail with all Men but Idiots and Madmen. Which what
a Measure it is to regulate Penalties by, let all Men of common Discretion judge.

Secondly, You may be pleased to consider, that all Men of the same degree of
Discretion, are not apt to be moved by the same degree of Penalties. Some are
of a more yielding, some of a more stiff Temper; and what is sufficient to
prevail on one, is not half enough to move the other; though both Men of common
Discretion. So that common Discretion will be here of no use to determine the
Measure of Punishment: especially, when in the same Clause you except Men
desperately perverse and obstinate; who are as hard to be known, as what you
seek, viz. the just Proportions of Punishments necessary to prevail with Men to
consider, examine, and weigh Matters of Religion; wherein, if a Man tells you
he has considered, he has weighed, he has examined, and so goes on in his
former Course, it is impossible for you ever to know whether he has done his
Duty, or whether he be desperately perverse and obstinate. So that this
Exception signifies just nothing.

There are many things in your use of Force and Penalties, different from any I
ever met with elsewhere. One of them, this Clause of yours concerning the
Measure of Punishments, now under consideration, offers me; wherein you
proportion your Punishments only to the Yielding and Corrigible, not to the
Perverse and Obstinate; contrary to the common Discretion which has hitherto
made Laws in other cases, which levels the Punishments against refractory
Offenders, and never spares them because they are obstinate. This however I
will not blame as an Oversight in you. Your new Method, which aims at such
impracticable and inconsistent things as Laws cannot bear, nor Penalties be
useful to, forced you to it. The Uselesness, Ab^dity, and Unreasonableness of
great Severi^s, you had acknowledged in the foregoing Paragraphs: Dissenters
you would have brought to consider by moderate ^eties; they lie under them; but
whether they have considered or no, (for that you cannot tell) they still
continue Dissenters. What is to be done now? Why, the Incurable are to be left
to God, as you tell us. Your Punishments were not meant to prevail A. p. 12.
on the desperately Perverse and Obstinate, as you tell us here. And so
whatever be the Success, your Punishments are however justified.

The fullness of your Answer to my Question, With what Punishments, made you
possibly pass by these two or three Pages without making any particular Reply
to any thing I said in them: we will therefore examine that Answer of yours,
where you tell us, That having in your Answer declared that you take P. 49.
the Severities so often mentioned (which either destroy Men, or make them
miserable) to be utterly unapt and improper (for Reasons there given) to bring
Men to embrace the Truth that must save them: but just how far within those
Bounds that Force extends it self, which is really serviceable to that end, you
do not presume to determine. To determine how far moderate Force reaches, when
it is necessary to your business that it should be determined, is not
presuming: You might with more reason have called it presuming, to talk of
moderate Penalties, and not to be able to determine what you mean by them; or
to promise, as you do, That you will tell plainly and directly, with what
Punishments; and here to tell us, You do not presume to determine. But you give
a reason for this Modesty of yours, in what follows, where you tell me, I have
not shown any cause why you should. And yet you may find in what is above
repeated to you, these words, If in this you are not plain and direct, all the
rest of your Design will signify nothing. But had I failed in showing any cause
why you should; and your Charity would not enlighten us, unless driven by my
Reasons, I dare say yet, If I have not shown any cause why you should determine
in this Point, I can show a cause why you should not. For I will be answerable
to you, that you cannot name any Degree of Punishment, which will not be either
so great, as to come amongst those you condemn, and show what your Moderation,
what your Aversion to Persecution is; or else too little to attain those Ends
for which you propose it. But whatever you tell me, that I have shown no cause
why you should determine, I thought it might have passed for a cause why you
should determine more particularly, that (as you will find in those Pages) I
had proved that the Measures, you offer whereby to regulate your Punishments,
are just as good as none.

Your Measures in your Argument considered, and which you repeat here again,
are in these Words; So much Force, or such P. 49.
P^nalties as are ordinarily sufficient to prevail with Men of common
Discretion, and not desperately perverse, to weigh Matters of Religion
carefully and impartially, and without which ordinarily they will not do this;
so much Force, or such Penalties may fitly and reasonably be used for the
pr^moting true Religion in the World, and the Salvation of Souls. And what just
Exception this is liable to, you do not understand. Some of the Exceptions it
is liable to, you might have seen in what I have here again caused to be
reprinted, if you had thought them worth your notice. But you go on to tell us
here, That when you speak of Men of common Discretion, Ibid.
and not desperately perverse and obstinate, you think it is plain enough, that
by common Discretion you exclude not Idiots only, and such as we usually call
Madmen, but likewise the desperately Perverse and Obstinate, who perhaps may
well enough deserve that Name, though they be not wont to be sent to Bedlam.

Whether by this you have at all taken off the Difficulty, and shown your
Measure to be any at all in the use of Force, I leave the Reader to judge. I
asked, Since great ones are unfit, what Degrees of Punishment or Force are to
be used? You answer, So much Force, and such Penalties as are ordinarily
sufficient to prevail with Men of ordinary Discretion. I tell you it is as hard
to know who those Men of common Discretion are, as what Degree of Punishment
you would have used; unless we will take the Determination of the Law, which
allows all to have common Discretion, for whom it has not provided Guardians or
Bedlam: so that in effect, your Men of common Discretion are all Men not judged
Idiots or Madmen. To clear this, you tell us, When you speak of Men of common
Discretion, and not desperately perverse and obstinate, you think it is plain
enough, by common Discretion you exclude not Idiots only, and such as are
usually called Madmen, but likewise the desperately perverse and obstinate. It
may be you did, for you best know what you meant in writing: but if by Men of
common Discretion, you excluded the desperately perverse and obstinate, let us
put what you meant by the words, Men of common Discretion, in the place of
those Words themselves, and then according to your meaning, your Rule stands
thus; Penalties ordinarily sufficient to prevail with Men not desperately
perverse and obstinate, and with Men not desperately perverse and obstinate: so
that at last, by Men of common Discretion, either you excluded only Idiots and
Madmen; or if we must take your word for it, that by them you excluded
likewise the desperately pe^verse and obstinate, and so meant something else;
it is plain, you meant only a very useless and insignificant Tantology.

You go on, and tell us, If the Penalties you steak of, be intended P. 49.
for the curing Men's unreasonable Prejudices and Refractoriness against the
true Religion, then the reason why the desperately perverse and obstinate are
not to be regarded in measuring these Penalties, is very apparent. For as
Remedies are not provided for the Incurable, so in the preparing and tempering
them, regard is to be had only to those for whom they are designed. Which, true
or false, is nothing to the purpose, in a Place where you profess to inform us,
what Punishments are to be used. We are inquiring who are the desperately
perverse and obstinate, and not whether they are to be punished or no. You
pretend to give us a Rule to know what Degrees of Force are to be used, and
tell us, it is so much as is ordinarily sufficient to prevail with Men of
common Discretion, and not desperately perverse and obstinate. We again ask,
who are your Men of common (...)? You tell us, such as are not Madmen or
Idiots, or desperately perverse and obstinate. Very well; but who are those
desperately perverse and obstinate, how shall we know them? and to this you
t^ll us, they are not to be regarded in measuring these Penalties. Whereby
certainly we have got a plain Measure of your moderate P^nalties. No, not yet,
you go on in the next Paragraph to p^fect it, where you say, To prevent P. 50.
a little Cavil, it may be needf^l to note that there are Degrees of (...) and
Obstinacy, and that Men may be p^verse and obstinate without being d^sperately
so. So then now we have your Measure complete; and ^o deter^ine the just
Degrees of Punishments; and to clear up the Doubt, who are the desperately
perverse and obstinate, we need but be told that there are Degrees of
Perverseness and Obstinacy; and that Men may be perverse and obstinate without
being desperately so: And that therefore some perverse and obstinate Persons
may be thought curable, though such as are desperately so, cannot. But does all
this tell us who are the desperately perverse and obstinate? which is the thing
we want to be informed in; nor till you have told us that, have you removed the
Objection.

But if by desperately perverse and obstinate, you will tell us, you meant
those, that are not wrought upon by your moderate Penalties, as you seem to
intimate in your Reason why the desperately perverse and obstinate are not to
be regarded in measuring these Penalties: For, say you, as Remedies are not
provided for the P. 49.
incurable; so in preparing and tempering them, regard is to be had only to
those for whom they are designed. So that by the desperately perverse and
obstinate, you will perhaps say 'twas plain you meant the incurable; for you
ordinarily shift off the Doubtfulness of one Place, by appealing to as doubtful
an Expression in another. If you say then, that by desperately perverse and
obstinate, you mean incurable; I ask you again by what incurable? by your lower
Degrees of Force? For I hope where Force is proper to work, those who are not
wrought on by lower Degrees, may yet be by higher. If you mean so, then your
Answer will amount to thus much, Moderate Penalties are such as are sufficient
to prevail on those who are not desperately perverse and obstinate. The
desperately perverse and obstinate are those who are incu^ble, and the
Incurable are those on whom moderate Penalties are not sufficient to prevail:
Whereby at last we have got a sure Measure of what are moderate Penalties; just
such an one, as if having a Sovereign Universal Medicine put into your Hand,
which will never fail, if you can hit the right Dose, which the Inventer tells
you must be moderate: You should ask him what was the moderate Quantity it is
to be given in? and he should answer, In such a Quantity as was ordinarily
sufficient to work on common Constitutions, and not desperately perverse and
obstinate. And to you asking again, who were of desperately perverse and
obstinate Constitutions? It should be answered, Those that were incurable. And
who were incurable? Those whom a moderate Quantity would not work on. And thus
to your Satisfaction, you know the moderate Dose by the desperately perverse
and obstinate; and the desperately perverse and obstinate by being incurable;
and the Incurable by the moderate Dose. For if, as you say, Remedies are not
provided for the incurable, and none but moderate Penalties are to be provided,
is it not plain, that you mean, that all that will not be wrought on by your
moderate Penalties, are in your Sense incurable?

To ease you, Sir, of justifying your self, and showing that I have mistaken
you, do but tell us positively what in Penalties is the highest Degree of
moderate; who are desperately perverse and obstinate; or who are incurable,
without this relative and circular way of defining one by the other; and I will
yield my self to have mistaken you, as much as you please.

If by incurable you mean such as no Penalties, no Punishments, no Force is
sufficient to work on; then your Measure of moderate Penalties will be this,
that they are such, as are sufficient to prevail with Men not incurable, i. e.
who cannot be prevailed on by any Punishments, any Force whatsoever; which will
be a Measure of moderate Punishments, which (whatsoever you do) some will be
very apt to approve of.

But let us suppose by these Marks (since you will afford us no better) that we
can find who are desperately perverse and obstinate, we are yet as far as ever
from finding the Measures of your moderate Punishments, till it can be known,
what Degree of Force it is, that is ordinarily sufficient to prev^il with all
that are Men of common Discretion, and not desperately perverse and obstinate;
for you are told, that all Men of the same Degree of Discretion are not apt to
be moved with the same Degree of Penalties: But to this too you answer nothing,
and so we are still without any Rule or Means of knowing how to adjust your
Punishments, that being ordinarily sufficient to prevail upon one, the double
whereof is not ordinarily sufficient to prevail on another.

I tell you in the same Place, That you have given us in another L. 2. p. (...).
Place, something like another Boundary to your m^derate P^nalties: But when
examined, it proves just like the rest, amusing us only with good Words, so put
together as to have no direct meaning; an Art very much in use amongst some
sort o^ learned Men: The Words are these; Such Penalties as may not tempt
Persons who have any Concern for their Eternal Salvation (and those who have
none, ought not to be considered) to renounce a Religion which they believe to
be true, or profess one which they do not believe to be so. If by any Concern,
you mean such as Men ought to have for their Eternal Salvation; by this Rule
you may make your Punishments as great as you please; and all the Severities
you have disclaimed may be brought in Play again: For none of those will be
able to make a Man, who is truly concerned for his eternal Salvation, renounce
a Religion he believes to be true, or profess one he does not believe to be so.
If by those who have any Concern, you mean such, who have some faint Wishes for
Happiness hereafter, and would be glad to have things go well with them in the
other World, but will venture nothing in this World for it; these the
moderatest Punishments you can imagine will make to change their Religion. If
by any Concern, you mean whatever may be between these two; the Degrees are so
infinite, that to Proportion your Punishments by that, is to have no measure of
them at all. To which all the Reply I can find is only this, That there are
Degrees of Carelessness P. 50.
in Men of their Salvation, as well as of Concern for it. So that such as have
some Concern for their Salvation, may yet be careless of it to a great Degree.
And therefore if those who have any Concern for their Salvation, deserve Regard
and Pity; then so may some careless Persons: though those who have no Concern
for their Salvation, deserve not to be considered, which spoils a little
Harangue you give us, P. 43. If you think this to be an Answer to what I said,
or that it can satisfy any one concerning the way of knowing what Degrees of
Punishment are to be used, pray tell us so. The Enquiry is, what Degrees of
Punishment will tempt a Man, who has any Concern for his Eternal Salv^ion, to
renounce a Religion he believes to be true? And it is answered, There are
Degrees of Carelessness in Men of their Salvation, as well as Concern for it. A
happy Discovery: What Is the Use of it? So that such as have some Concern for
their Salvation, may yet be careless of it to a great Degree. Very true: By
this we may know what Degree of Force is to be used. No, not a Word of that,
but the Inference is, And therefore if those who have any Concern for their
Salvation, deserve Regard and Pity, then so may some careless Persons; though
those who have no Concern for their Salvation, deserve not to be considered.
And by this time we know what Degree of Force will make a Man, who has any
Concern for his Salvation, renounce a Religion he believes true, and profess
one he does not believe to be so. This might do well at cross Questions: but
you are satisfied with what you have done, and what that is, you tell me in the
next Words, which spoils a little Harangue of yours given us, P. 43. The
Harangue I suppose is contained in these Words.

One thing I cannot but take notice of in this Passage before L. 2. p. 43.
I leave it: and that is, that you say here, Those who have no Concern for
their Salvation, deserve not to be considered. In other Parts of your Letter
you pretend to have Compassion on the careless, and provide Remedies for them:
But here of a sudden your Charity fails you, and you give them up to eternal
Perdition, without the least Regard, the least Pity, and say, They deserve not
to be considered. Our Savior's Rule was, the sick and not the whole need a
Physician: Your Rule here is; Those that are careless, are not to be
considered, but are to be lest to themselves. This, would seem strange, if one
did not observe what drew you to it. You perceived that if the Magistrate was
to use no Punishments, but such as would make no body change their Religion, he
was to use none at all: For the careless would be brought to the National
Church with any slight Punishments; and when they are once there, you are it
seems satisfied, and look no farther after them. So that by your own Measu^e if
the careless, and those who have no Concern for their Eternal Salvation, are to
be regarded and taken Care of, if the Salvation of their Souls is to be
promoted, there is to be no Punishments to be used at all: And therefore you
leave them out as not to be considered.

What you have said is so far from spoiling that Harangue, as you are pleased
to call it, that you having nothing else to say to it, allows what is laid to
your Charge in it.

You wind up all concerning the Measures of your Force in these Words; And as
those Medicines are thought safe and advisable, which do ordinarily cure,
though not always (as none do;) so those P. 50.
Penalties or Punishments, which are ordinarily found sufficient (as well as
necessary) for the Ends for which they are designed, may fitly and reasonably
be used for the compassing these Ends. Here your ordinarily comes to your Help
again; and here one would think that you meant such as cure sometimes, not
always; some, though not all: And in this Sense will not the utmost Severities
come within your Rule? For can you say, if Punishments are to be used to
prevail on any, that the greater will (where lower fail) prevail on none? at
least can you be sure of it till they have been tried for the compassing these
End? which as we shall see in another Place, you have assigned various e^ough.
I shall only take notice of two or three often repeated by you, and those are
to make Men hear, to make Men consider, to make Men consider as they ought, i.
e. as you explain it, to make Men consider so, as not to reject. The Greatness
of the Force then, according to this Measure, must be sufficient to make Men
hear, sufficient to make Men consider, and sufficient to make Men embrace the
true Religion.

And now the Magistrate has all your Rules about the Measures of Punishments to
be used, and may considently and safely go to work to establish it by a Law:
for he having these Marks to guide him, that they must be great enough
ordinarily to prevail with those who are not Idiots or Madmen, nor desperately
perverse and obstinate, great enough ordinarily to prevail with Men to hear,
consider and embrace the true Religion, and yet not so great as might tempt
Persons, who have any Concern for their eternal Salvation, to renounce a
Religion which they believe to be true, or profess one which they do not
believe to be so: Do you not think you have sufficiently inst^ucted him in your
meaning, and enabled him to find the just Temper of his Punishments according
to your Scheme, neither too much nor too little? But however you may be
satisfied with them, I suppose others, when it comes to be put in Practice,
will by these Measures (which are all I can find in your Scheme) be scarce able
to find, what are the Punishments you would have used.

In Eutopia there is a Medicine called Hiera Pi^ra, which it is supposed would
^ure a troublesome Disease of that Country: but it is not to be given, but in
the Dose prescribed by the Law, and in adjusting the Dose lies all the Skill:
For if you give too much, it heightens the Distemper, and sp^eads the mortal
Contagion; and if too little, it does no good at all With this Difficulty the
Lawmakers have been perpl^xed these many Ages, and could not light on the
right Dose, that would work the Cure, till lately there came an Undertak^, who
would show them how they could not mistake. He bid them then prescribe so much,
as would ordinarily be effectual upon all that were not Idiots or Madmen, o^
in whom ^e Humor was not (...) perverse and (...), to produce the End for
which it was designed; but not so much as would make a (...) Health, who had
any Concern for b^ Life, fall into a mort^ Disease. These were good Words, and
he was rewarded for them: but when by them they came to ^ix the (...), t^y
could not tell whether it ought to be a G^ain, a (...) or an Ounce, or a whole
Pound, any more than before; and so the (...) of their Hiera Picra,
notwithstanding this Gentleman's ^in is a uncertain, and that sovereign Remedy
as (...) as ever it was.

In the next Paragraph you tell us, You do not see what more P. 50.
can be required to justify the Rule here given So qui^k a Sight needs no
Spectacles. For if I demand that it should (...) what Penalties particularly
are such as it says may fitly and reasonably be used; this I must give you
leave to tell me is a very unreasonable Demand. It is an unreasonable D^mand,
if your Rule be such, that by it I may know without any more ado the par^icular
Penalties that are sit; otherwise it is not unreasonable to demand them by
Name, if your Marks be not sufficient to know them by. But let us hear your
Reason, For what Rule is there that expresses the Particulars that agree with
it? And it is an admirable Rule with which one can find no Particulars that
agree; for I challenge you to instance in one: A Rule, you say, is intended for
a common Measure by which Particulars are to be examined, and therefore must
necessarily be general. So general, loose, and inconsistent, that no
Particulars can be examined by it: for again I challenge you, or any Man
living, to measure out any Punishment by this your common Measure, and
establish it by a Law. You go on; And those to whom it is given, are supposed
to be able to apply it, and to judge of Particulars by it. Nay it is often seen
that they are better able to do this than those who give it: and so it is in
the present Case, the Rule hereby laid down is that by which you suppose
Governors and Lawgivers ought to examine the Penalties they use for the
promoting the true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls. Such a Rule it ought
to be I grant, and such an one is desired: but that yours is such a Rule as
Magistrates can take any Measure by, for the Punishments they are to settle by
Law, is denied, and you are again desired to show. You proceed; P. 50.
But certainly no Man doubts but their Prudence and Experience inables them to
use and apply it better than other Men, and to judge more exactly what Penalties
do agree with it, and what do not; and therefore you think I must excuse you if
you do not take upon you to teach them what it becomes you rather to learn for
them. If we are not to doubt but their Prudence and Experience inables
Magistrates to judge best what Penalties are fit. You have indeed given us at
last a way to know the Measure of Punishments to be used: but it is such an one
as puts an End to your Distinction of moderate Penalties: For no Magistrates
that I know, when they once began to use Force to bring Men to their Religion,
ever stopped till they came to some of those Severities you condemn; and if you
pretend to teach them Moderation for the future, with Hopes to succeed, you
ought to have showed them the just Bounds, beyond which they ought not to go,
in a Model so wholly new, and besides all Experience. But if it be to be
determined by their Prudence and Experience, whatever Degrees of Force they
shall use, will always be the right.

Lawmakers and Governors however are beholden to you for your good Opinion of
their Prudence and Experience; yet have no Reason to thank you for your
Complement, by giving such an Exercise to their Prudence and Experience, as to
put it upon them to find out the just Measures of Punishments, by Rules you
give them, which are such, that neither your self, nor any body else can find
out any Measures by. The other part of your Complement will be suspected not to
be so much out of your ab^ndant Respect to Lawmakers and Governors, as out of
the great Regard you have to your self; for you in vain pretend you forbear to
name any particular Punishments, because you will not take upon you to teach
Governors and Lawmakers, when you your self own in the same Breath, that you
are laying down Rules by which they are to proceed in the Use of Penalties for
promoting Religion, which is little different from teaching: and your whole
Book is nothing else but about the Magistrate's Power and Duty. I excuse you
therefore for your own sake from naming any particular Punishments by your
Rules: for you have a right to it, as all Men have a right to be ex^used from
doing what is imposs^ble to be done.

Since therefore you grant that those Severities y^u have named, are more apt
to hinder than promote true Religion; and you cannot assign any Measures of
Punishment (short of those great ones you have condemned) which are ^it to
promote it, I think it Argument enough to prove against you, that no
Punishments are fit, till you have showed some others, either by Name, or such
Marks as they may certainly be known by, which are fit to promote the true
Religion: and therefore nothing you have said there, or any where else, will
serve to show that it is with little reason, as you tell me, that I say, that if
your indirect and at a P. 19.
distance Serviceableness may authorize the Magistrate to use Force in
Religion, all the Cruelties used by the Heathens against Christians, by Papists
against Protestants, and all the Persecuting of Christians one amongst another,
are all justifiable. To which you add, Not to take notice at present how oddly
it sounds, that that which authorizes the Magistrates to use moderate Penalties
to promote the true Religion, should justify all the Cruelties that ever were
used to promote Heathenism or Popery.

As oddly as it sounds to you, it will be evidently true, as long as that which
authorizes one, authorizes all Magistrates of any Religion, which they believe
to be true, to use Force to premote it; and as long as you cannot assign any
Bounds to your moderate Punishments, short of those great ones; which you
therefore are not able to do, because your Principles, whatever your Words
deny, will carry you to those Degrees of Severity, which in Profession you
condemn: and this, whatever you do, I dare say every considering Reader besides
you will plainly see. So that this Imputation is not so unreasonable, since it
is evident, that you must either renounce all Punishments whatsoever in
Religion, or make use of those you condemn: for in the next Page you tell us,
That all who have ^fficient means of Instruc^ion P. 20.
provided for them, may justly be punished for not being of the National
Religion, where the True is the National Religion; because it is a Fault in all
such not to be of the National Religi^ In England then, for example, not to be
of the National (...) is a Fault, and a Fault to be punished by the Magistrate.
The Magistrate, to cure this Fault, lays, on those who dissent, a lower degree
of Penalties, a Fine of 1 d. per Month. This proving insufficient, what is the
Magistrate to do? If he be obliged, as you say, to amend this Fault by
Penalties, and that low one of 1 d. per Month be not sufficient to procure its
Amendment, is he not to increase the Penalty? He therefore doubles the Fine to
2 d. per Month. This too proves ineffectual, and therefore it is still for the
same reason doubled, till it come to 1 s. 5 s. 10 l. 100 l. 1000 l. None of
these Penalties working, but yet by being constantly levied, leaving the
Delinquents no longer able to pay, Imprisonment and other corporal Punishments
follow to enforce an Obedience, till at last this gradual Increase of Penalties
and Force, each Degree whereof wrought on some few, rises to the highest
Severities against those who stand out. For the Magistrate, who is obliged to
correct this Vice, as you call it, and to do what in him lies to cure this
Fault, which opposes their Salvation; and who (if I mistake not, you tell us)
is answerable for P. 8.
all that may follow from his neglect, had no reason to raise the Fine from 1
d. to 2 d. but because the first was ineffectual: and if that were a sufficient
reason for raising from the first to the second Degree, why is it not as
sufficient to proceed from the second to the third, and so gradually on? I
would fain have any one show me, where, and upon what ground, such a gradual
increase of Force can stop, till it come to the utmost Extremities. If
therefore dissenting from the Church of England be a Fault to be punished by
the Magistrate, I desire you to tell me, where he shall hold his Hand; to name
the Sort or Degree of Punishment, beyond which he ought not to go in the use of
Force, to cure them of that Fault, and bring them to Conformity. Till you have
done that, you might have spared that Paragraph, where P. 19.
you say, With what Ingenuity I draw you in to condemn Force in general, only
because you acknowledge the ill Effects of prosecuting Men with Fire and Sword,
etc. you may leave every Man to judge. And I leave whom you will to judge,
whether from your own Principles it does not unavoidably follow, that if you
condemn any Penalties, you must condemn all, as I have shown; if you will
retain any, you must retain all; you must either take or leave all together.
For, as I have said, and you deny not, `Where there P. 10.
` is no Fault, there no Punishment is moderate, so I add, Where there is a
Fault to be corrected by the Magistrate's Force, there no Degree of Force,
which is ineffectual, and not sufficient to amend it, can be immoderate;
especially if it be a Fault of great moment in its Consequences, as certainly
that must be, which draws after it the loss of Men's Eternal Happiness.

You will, it is likely, be ready to say here again, (for a good Subterfuge is
never to be forsaken) that you except the desperately perverse and obstinate. I
desire to know for what reason you except them? Is it because they cease to be
faulty? Next I ask you, Who are in your sense the desperately perverse and
obstinate? Those that 1 s. or 5 s. or 5 l. or 100 l. or no Fine will work upon?
Those who can bear loss of Estate, but not loss of Liberty? or loss of Liberty
and Estate, but not corporal Pains and Torments? or all this, but not loss of
Life? For to these Degrees do Men differently stand out. And since there are
Men wrought on by the Approaches of Fire and Faggot, which other Degrees of
Severity could not prevail with, where will you bound your desperately perverse
and obstinate? The King of France, though you will allow him not to have Truth
of his side, yet when he came to Dragooning, found sew so desperately perverse
and obstinate, as not to be wrought on. And why should Truth, which in your
Opinion wants Force, and nothing but Force, to help it, not have the assistance
of those Degrees of Force, (when less will not do to make it prevail) which are
able to bring Men over to false Religions, which have no Light and Strength of
their own to help them? You will do well therefore to consider whether your
Name of Severities, in opposition to the moderate Punishments you speak of, has
or can do you any service; whether the distinction between compelling and
coactive Power be of any use or difference at all. For you deny the P. 41. P.
27.
Magistrate to have Power to compel: And you contend for his use of his
coactive Power; which will then be a good Distinction, when you can find a way
to use coactive, or, which is the same, compelling Power without Compulsion. I
desire you also to consider, if in Matters of Religion, Punishments are to be
employed, because they may be useful, whether you can stop at any Degree that
is ineffectual to the End which you propose, let that End be what it will. If
it be barely to gain a hearing, as in some places you seem to say, I think for
that small Punishments will generally prevail, and you do well to put that and
moderate Penalties together. If it be to make Men consider, as in other places
you speak, you cannot tell when you have obtained that End. But if your End be,
which you seem most to insist on, to make Men consider as they ought, i. e.
till they embrace, there are many on whom all your moderate Penalties, all
under those Severities you condemn, are too weak to prevail. So that you must
either consess, not considering so as to embrace the true Religion, i. e. not
considering as one ought, is no Fault to be punished by the coactive Force of
the Magistrate; or else you must resume those Severities which you have
renounced: choose you whether of the two you please.

Therefore 'twas not so much at random that I said, That L. 2. p. 11.
thither at last Persecution must come. Indeed from what you had said of
falling under the Stroke of the Sword, which was nothing A. p. 13.
to the purpose, I added, That is by that you meant any thing to the business
in hand, you seem to have a reserve for greater Punishments, when less are not
sufficient to bring Men to be convinced. Which has produced this warm Reply of
yours; And will you ever pretend to Conscience or Modesty P. 21.
after this? For I beseech you, Sir, what Words could I have used more express
or effectual to signify, that in my Opinion no Dissenters from the true
Religion ought to be punished with the Sword, but such as choose rather to
rebel against the Magistrate, than to submit to lesser Penalties? (For how any
should refuse to submit to those Penalties, but by rebelling against the
Magistrate, I suppose you will not undertake to tell me.) 'Twas for this very
purpose that I used those Words to prevent Cavils, (as I was then so simple as
to think I might:) And I dare appeal to any Man of common Sense and common
Honesty whether they are capable of any other meaning. And yet the very thing
which I so plainly disclaim in them, you pretend (without so much as offering
to show how) to collect from them. Thither, you say, at last, ( viz. to the
taking away Men's Lives for the saving of their Souls) Persecution must come: As
you fear, notwithstanding m^ talk of moderate Punishments, I my self intimate
in those Words: And if I mean any thing in them to the business in hand, I seem
to have a reserve for greater Punishments, when lesser are not sufficient to
bring Men to be convinced. Sir, I should expect fairer dealing from one of your
Pagans or Mahometans. But I shall only add, that I would never wish that any
Man who has undertaken a bad Cause, should more plainly confess it than by
serving it, as here (and not here only) you serve yours. Good Sir, be not so
angry, lest to observing Men you increase the Suspicion. One may, without
forfeiture of Modesty or Conscience, fear what Men's Principles threaten, though
their Words disclaim it. Nonconformity to the National, when it is the true
Religion, as in England, is a Fault, a Vice, say you, to be corrected by the
coactive Power of the Magistrate. If so, and Force be the proper Remedy, he
must increase it, till it be strong enough to work the Cure; and must not
neglect his Duty (for so you make it) when he has Force enough in his Hand to
make this Remedy more powerful. For wherever Force is proper to work on Men,
and bring them to a Compliance, it is not producing that Effect can only be
imputed to its being too little: And if so, whither at last must it come, but
to the late Methods of procuring Conformity (and as his most Christian Majesty
called it, of saving of Souls) in France, or Severities like them, when more
moderate ones cannot produce it? For to continue inefficacious Penalties,
insufficient upon trial to master the Fault they are applied to, is
unjustifiable Cruelty; and that which no body can have a right to use, it
serving only to disease and harm People, P. 44.
without amending them: for you tell us, they should be such Penalties as
should make them uneasy.

He that should vex and pain a Sore you had, with frequent dressing it with
some moderate, painful, but inefficacious Plaster, that promoted not the Cure,
would justly be thought, not only an ignorant, but a dishonest Surgeon. If you
are in the Surgeon's hands, and his Help is requisite, and the Cure that way to
be wrought, Corrosives and Fire are the most merciful, as well as only
justifiable way of Cure, when the Case needs them. And therefore I hope I may
still pretend to Modesty and Conscience, though I should have thought you so
rational a Man, as to be led by your own Principles; and so honest, charitable,
and zealous for the Salvation of Men's Souls, as not to vex and disease them
with inefficacious Remedies to no purpose, and let them miss of Salvation, for
want of more vigorous Prosecutions. For if Conformity to the Church of England
be necessary to Salvation, (for elfe what Necessity can you pretend of
punishing Men at all to bring them to it?) it is Cruelty to their Souls (if you
have Authority for any such Means) to use some, and not to use sufficient Force
to bring them to conform. And I dare say you are satsf^d that the French
Discipline of Dragooning would have made many in England Conformists, whom your
lower Penalties will not prevail on to be so.

But to inform you that my Apprehensions were not so wholly out of the way, I
beseech you to read here what you have writ in these Words; For how confidently
soever you tell me here, that it P. 34.
is more than I can say for my Political Punishments, that they were ever
useful for the promoting true Religion; I appeal to all observing Persons,
whether wherever true Religion or sound Christianity has been Nationally
received and established by moderate Penal Laws, it has not always lost ground
by the Relaxation of those Laws: Whether Sects and Heresies, (even the wildest
and most absurd) and even Epicurism and Atheism, have not continually thereupon
spread themselves; and whether the very Spirit and Life of Christianity has not
sensibly decayed, as well as the number of sound Professors of it been daily
lessened upon it: Not to speak of what at this time our Eyes cannot but see,
for fear of giving offense; though I hope it will be none to any that have a
just concern for Truth and Piety, to take notice of the Books and Pamphlets
which now fly so thick about this Kingdom, manifestly tending to the
multiplying of Sects and Divisions, and even to the promoting of Skepticism in
Religion among us. Here you bemoan the decaying State of Religion amongst us at
present, by reason of taking off the Penalties from Protestant Dissenters: And
I beseech you what Penalties were they? Such whereby many have been ruined in
their Fortunes; such whereby many have lost their Liberties, and some their
Lives in Prisons; such as have sent some into Banishment, stripped of all they
had. These were the Penal Laws by which the National Religion was established
in England; and these you call moderate: for you say, Wherever true Religion
or sound Christianity has been Nationally received and established by moderate
Penal Laws; and I hope you do not here exclude England from having its Religion
so established by Law, which we so often hear of; or if to serve the present
occasion, you should, would you also deny, that in the following Words you
speak of the present Relaxation in England? where after your Appeal to all
observing People for the dismal Consequences, which you suppose to have
everywhere followed from such Relaxations, you add these pathetical Words, Not
to speak of what at this time our Eyes cannot but see, for fear of giving
offense: so heavy does the present Relaxation sit on your Mind; which since it
is of Penal Laws you call moderate, I shall show you what they are.

In the first Year of Q. Elizabeth, there was a Penalty of 1 s. a Sunday and
Holiday laid upon every one, who came not to the Common Prayer then
established. This Penalty of 1 s. a time not prevailing, as was desired, in the
twenty thi^d Year of her Reign was increased to 20 l. a Month and Imprisonment
for Non-payment within three Months after judgment given. In the twenty ninth
Year of Eliz. to draw this yet closer, and make it more sorcible, 'twas
enacted, That whoever upon one Conviction did not continue to pay on the 20 l.
per Month, without any other (...) or Proceedings against him till he submitted
and conformed, should forf^t all his Goods, and two Thirds of his Land for his
Life. But this being not yet thought sufficient, it was in the 35th Year of
that Queen c^mpleated, and the moderate Penal Laws upon which our National
Religion was established and whose Relaxation you cannot bear, but from thence
date the Decay of the very Spirit and Life of Christianity, were brought to
perfection: (...) then going to Conve (...), or a Month's Absence from Church,
was to be punished with Imprisonment, till the Offender (...), and i^ (...)
cn^formed not within three Months, then he was to abjure the Realm, and forfeit
all his Goods and Chattels for ever, and his Lands and Tenements during his
Life: And if ^e would not abjure, or abjuring, did not depart the Realm within
a ti^e (...), or returned again, he was to suffer Death as a Felon. And thus
your moderate Penal Laws stood for the established Religion, till their
Penalties were in respect of Protestant Dissenters, lately taken off. And now
let the Reader judge whether your pretense to moderate Punishments, or my
Suspicion of what a Man of your Principles might have in store for Dissenters,
have more of Modesty or Conscience in it; since you op^nly de^lare your regret
for the taking away such an Establishment, as by the gradual increase of
Penalties reached Men's Estates, Liberties and Lives; and which you must be
presumed to allow and approve of, till you tell us plainly, where, according to
your Measures, those Penalties should; or, according to your Principles, they
could have stopped.

You tell us, That where this only true Religion, viz. of the Church of
England, is received, other Religions ought to be discouraged in some measure.
A pretty Expression for Undoing, Imprisonment, P. 11.
Banishment, for those have been some of the Discouragements given to
Dissenters here in England. You will again no doubt, cry aloud, that you tell
me you condemn these as much as I do: If you heartily condemn them, I wonder
you should say so little to discourage them; I wonder you are so silent in
representing to the Magistrate the Unlawfulness and Danger of using them in a
Discourse where you are treating of the Magistrate's Power and Duty in Matters
of Religion: Especially this being the side on which, as far as we may guess by
Experience, their Prudence is aptest to err: but your Modesty you know leaves
all to the Magistrate's Prudence and Experience on that side, though you over
and over again encourage them not to neglect their Duty in the Use of Force, to
which you set no Bounds.

You tell us, Certainly no Man doubts but the Prudence and Experience P. 50.
of Governors and Lawgivers inables them to use and apply it, viz. your Rule
for the Measure of Punishments, which I have showed to be no Rule at all; And
to judge more exactly what Penalties do agree with it: and therefore you must be
excused if you do not take upon you to teach them what it becomes you rather to
learn from them. If your Modesty be such, and you then did what became you, you
could not but learn from your Governors and Lawgivers, and so be satisfied
till within this Year or two, that those Penalties which they measured out for
the Establishment of true Religion, though they rea^h'd to Men's Estates,
Liberties and Lives, were such as were sit. But what you have learned of your
Lawmakers and Governors since the Relaxation, or what Opinion you have of
their Experience and Prudence now, is not so easy to say.

Perhaps you will say again, that you have in express Words declared against
Fire and Sword, Loss of Estate, maiming with corporal Punishments, starving and
tormenting in noisome Prisons; and one cannot either in Modesty or Conscience
disbelieve you: Yet in the same Letter you with Sorrow and Regret speak of the
Relaxation of such Penalties laid on Nonconformity, by which Men have lost
their Estates, Liberties and Lives too in noisome Prisons, and in this too must
we not believe you? I dare say there are very few who read that Passage of
yours, so feelingly it is penned, who want Modesty or Conscience to believe P.
34.
you therein to be in earnest; and the rather, because what drops from Men by
chance, when they are not upon their Guard, is always thought the best
Interpretation of their Thoughts.

You name Loss of Estate, of Liberty, and tormenting, which is corporal
Punishment, as if you were against them: Certainly you know what you meant by
these Words, when you said, you condemned them; was it any Degree of Loss of
Liberty or Estate, any Degree of corporal Punishment that you condemned, or
only the utmost, or some Degree between these? unless you had then some
meaning, and unless you please to tell us, what that meaning was; where it is,
that in your Opinion the Magistrate ought to stop, who can believe you are in
earnest? This I think you may and ought to do for our Information in your
System, without any Apprehension that Governors and Lawgivers will deem
themselves much taught by you, which your Modesty makes you so cautious of.
Whilst you refuse to do this, and keep your self under the Mask of moderate,
convenient and sufficient Force and Penalties, and other suchlike uncertain
and undetermined Punishments, I think a conscientious and sober Dissenter might
expect fairer dealing from one of my Pagans or Mahometans, as you please to
call them, than from one, who so professes Moderation, that what Degrees of
Force, what kind of Punishments will satisfy him, he either knows not, or will
not declare. For your moderate and convenient may, when you come to interpret
them, signify what Punishments you please: for the Cure being to be wrought by
Force, that will be convenient, which the Stubbornness of the Evil requires;
and that moderate, which is but enough to work the Cure. And therefore I shall
return your own Complement, That I would never wish that any Man who has
undertaken a bad Cause, should more plainly confess it than by serving it, as
here (and not here only) you serve yours. I should beg your Pardon for this
sort of Language were it not your own. And what Right you have to it, the Skill
you show in the Management of general and doubtful Words and Expressions, of
uncertain and undetermined Signification, will, I doubt not, abundantly
convince the Reader. An Instance we have in the Argument before us: For I
appeal to any sober Man, who shall carefully read what you write, P. 49.
where you pretend to tell the World plainly and directly what Punishments are
to be used by your Scheme, whether after having weighed all you say concerning
that matter, he can tell, what a Nonconformist is to expect from you, or find
any thing but such Acuteness and Strength as lies in the Uncertainty and
Reserve of your way of talking; which whether it be any way suited to your
Modesty and Conscience, where you have undertaken to tell us what the
Punishments are, whereby you would have Men brought to embrace the true
Religion, I leave you to consider.

If having said, Wherever true Religion or sound Christianity P. 34.
has been Nationally received and established by moderate Penal Laws; you shall
for your Defense of the Establishment of the Religion in England by Law, say,
which is all is left you to say, that though such severe Laws were made, yet it
was only by the Execution of moderate Penal Laws, that it was established and
supported: but that those severe Laws that touched Men's Estates, Liberties and
Lives, were never put in Execution. Why then do you so s^riously bemoan the
loss of them? But I advise you not to make use of that Plea, for there are
Examples in the Memory of hundreds now living, of every one of those Laws of
Queen Elizabeth being put in Execution; and pray remember, if by denying it you
require this Truth to be made good, it is you that force the publishing of a
Catalogue of Men that have lost their Estates, Liberties and Lives in Prison,
which it would be more for the Advantage of the Religion established by Law,
should be forgotten.

But to conclude this great Accusation of yours: If you were not conscious to
your self of some Tendency that way, why such an Out^ry? Why was Modesty and
Conscience called in Question? Why was it less fair dealing than you could have
expected from a Pagan or Mohammedan, for me to say, if in those Words you meant
any thing to the Business in hand, you seemed to have a Reserve for greater
Punishments? Your Business there being to prove, that there was a Power vested
in the Magistrate to use Force in Matters of Religion, what could be more
besides the Business in hand, than to tell us, as you interpret your meaning
here, that the Magistrate had a Power to use Force against those who rebelled
(for who ever denied that) whether (...) or not Dissenters? Where was it
questioned by the Author or me, that whoever rebelled, were to fall under the
Stroke of the Magistrate's Sword? And therefore without Breach of Modesty or
Conscience, I might say, what I again here repeat, That if in those Words you
meant any thing to the Business in hand, you seemed to have a R^serve for
greater Punishments.

One thing more give me leave to add in Defense of my Modesty and Conscience,
or rather to justify my self from having guessed so wholly b^side the matter,
if I should have said, (which I did not) that I feared you had a Reserve for
greater Punishments. For I having brought the Instances of Ananias L. 2. p. 21.
and Sapphira, to show that the Apostles wanted not Power to P. 38.
punish, if they sound it necessary to use it; you inser, that therefore
Punishment may be sometimes necessary. What Punishments I beseech you, for
theirs cost them their Lives? He that, as you do, concludes from thence, that
therefore Punishments may be sometimes necessary, will hardly avoid (whatever
he says) to conclude capital Punishments necessary: And when they are
necessary, it is you know the Magistrate's Duty to use them. You see how
natural it is for Men to go whither their Principles lead them, though at first
Sight perhaps they thought it too far.

If to avoid this, you now say you meant it of the Punishment of the incestuous
Corinthian, whom I also mentioned in the same Place; I think, supposing your
self to lie under the Imputation of a Reserve of greater Punishments; you ought
in Prudence to have said so there. Next you know not what Punishment it was the
incestuous Corinthian under-went, but it being for the Destruction of the
Flesh, it seems to be no very light one: And if you will take your Friend St.
Austin's Word for it, as he in the very Epistle you quote tells you, it was a
very severe one, making as much Difference between it, and the Severities Men
usually suffer in Prison, as there is between the Cruelty of the Devil, and
that of the most barbarous Jailer: so that if your moderate Punishments will
reach to that laid on the incestuous Corinthian for the Destruction of the
Flesh, we may presume them to be, what other People call Severities.

CHAP. V. How long your Punishments are to continue. Chap. 5.

THE Measure of Punishments being to be estimated as well by the Length of
their Duration, as the Intenseness of their Degrees, it is fit we take a View
also of your Scheme in this Part.

I told you that moderate Punishments that are continued, that L. 2. p. 43.
Men find no End of, know no way out of, sit heavy, and become immoderately
uneasy. Dissenters you would have punished, to make them consider. Your
Penalties have had the Effect on them you intended; they have made them
consider; and they have done their utmost in considering. What now must be done
with them? They must be punished on, for they are still Dissenters. If it were
just, and you had Reason at first to punish a Dissenter, to make him consider,
when you did not know but that he had considered already; it is as just, and
you have as much Reason to punish him on, even when he has performed what your
Punishment was designed for, and has considered, but yet remains a Dissenter.
For I may justly suppose, and you must grant, that a Man may remain a Dissenter
after all the Consideration your moderate Penalties can bring him to; when we
see great Punishments, even those Severities you disown as too great, are not
able to make Men consider so far as to be convinced, and brought over to the
National Church. If your Punishments may not be (...) on Men, to make them
consider, who have or may have considered already, for ought you know; then
Dissenters are never to be once punished, no more than any other sort of Men.
If Dissenters are to be punished, to make them consider, whether they have
considered or no; then their Punishments, though they do consider, must never
cease as long as they are Dissenters, which whether it be to punish them only
to bring them to consider, let all Men judge. This I am sure; Punishments in
your Method, must either never begin upon Dissenters, or never cease. And so
pretend Moderation if you please, the Punishments which your Method requires,
must be either very immoderate, or none at all. But to this you say nothing,
only for the adjusting the Length of your Punishments, and therein vindicating
the Consistency and Practicableness of your Scheme, you tell us, That as long
as Men P. 51.
reject the true Religion duly proposed to them, so long they offend and
deserve Punishment, and therefore it is but just that so long they should be
left liable to it. You promised to answer to this Question, P. 46.
amongst others, plainly and directly. The Question is, How long they are to be
punished? And your Answer is, It is but just that so long they should be liable
to Punishment. This extraordinary Caution in speaking out, if it were not very
natural to you, would be apt to make one suspect, it was accommodated more to
some Difficulties of your Scheme, than to your Promise of answering plainly and
directly; or possibly you thought, it would not agree to that Character of
Moderation you assume, to own, that all the Penal Laws which were lately here
in Force, and whose Relaxation you bemoan, should be constantly put in
Execution. But your Moderation in this Point comes too late. For as your
Charity, as you tell us in the next Paragraph, requires that they be kept
subject to Penalties: So the watchful Charity of others in this Age has found
out ways to encourage Informers, and put it out of the Magistrate's Moderation
to stop the Execution of the Law against Dissenters, if he should be inclined
to it.

We will therefore take it for granted, that if Penal Laws be made concerning
Religion, (for more Zeal usually animates them than others) they will be put in
Execution: and indeed I have heard it argued to be very absurd, to make or
continue Laws, that are not constantly put in Execution. And now to show you
how well your Answer consists with other Parts of your Scheme, I shall need
only to mind you, that if Men must be punished as long as they reject the true
Religion, those who punish them, must be Judges what is the true Religion. But
this Objection, with some other, to which this P^rt of your Answer is
obnoxious, having been made to you more at large elsewhere, I shall here omit,
and proceed to other Parts of your Answer.

You begin with your Reason for the Answer you afterward P. 50.
give us in the Words I last quoted: Your Reason runs thus; For certainly
nothing is more reasonable than that Men should be subject to Punishment as
long as they continue to off^nd. And as long as Men reject the true Religion
tendered them with sufficient Evidence of the Truth of it, so long it is certain
they offend. It is certainly very reasonable, that Men should be subject to
Punishment from those they offend as long as they continue to offend: But it
will not from hence follow, that those who offend God, are always subject to
Punishment from Men. For if they be, why does not the Magistrate punish Envy,
Hatred, and Malice, and all Uncharitableness? If you answer, because they are
not capable of Judicial Proofs: I think I may say it is as easy to prove a Man
guilty of Envy, Hatred or Uncharitableness, as it is to prove him guilty of
rejecting the true Religion tendered him with sufficient Evidence of the Truth
of it. But if it be his Duty to punish all Offenses against God, why does the
Magistrate never punish Lying, which is an Offense against God, and is an
Offense capable of being judicially proved? It is plain therefore that it is
not the Sense of all Mankind, that it is the Magistrate's Duty to punish all
Offenses against God; and where it is not his Duty to use Force, you will grant
the Magistrate is not to use it in Matters of Religion, because where it is
necessary, it is his Duty to use it; but where it is not necessary, you your
self say it is not lawful. It would be convenient therefore for you to reform
your Proposition from that loose Generality it now is in, and then prove it
before it can be allowed you to be to your Purpose; though it be never so true,
that you know not a greater Crime a Man can be guilty of, than rejecting the
true Religion.

You go on with your Proof, that so long as Men reject the P. 51.
true Religion, etc. so long they offend, and consequently may justly be
punished; Because, say you, it is impossible for any Man, innocently to reject
the true Religion, so tendered to him. For whoever rejects that Religion so
tendered, does either apprehend and perceive the Truth of it, or he does not.
If he does, I know not what greater Crime any Man can be guilty of. If he does
not perceive the Truth of it, there is no Account to be given of that, but
either that he shuts his Eyes against the Evidence which is offered him, and
will not at all consider it; or that he does not consider it as he ought, viz.
with such Care as is requisite, and with a sincere Desire to learn the Truth;
either of which does manifestly involve him in Guilt.

To say here that a Man who has the true Religion proposed to him with
sufficient Evidence of its Truth, may consider it as he ought, or do his utmost
in considering, and yet not perceive the Truth of it; is neither more nor less,
than to say, that sufficient Evidence is not sufficient Evidence. For what does
any Man mean by sufficient Evidence, but such as will certainly win Assent
wherever it is duly considered?

I shall not trouble my self here to examine when requisite care, duly
considered, and such other Words, which bring one back to the same Place from
whence one set out, are cast up, whether all this fine Reasoning will amount to
any thing, but begging what is in the Question: But shall only tell you, that
what you say here and in other Places about sufficient Evidence, is built upon
this, that the Evidence wherewith a Man proposes the true Religion, he may know
to be such, as will not fail to gain the Assent of whosoever does what lies in
him in considering it. This is the Supposition, without which all your Talk of
sufficient Evidence will do you no Service, try it where you will. But it is a
Supposition that is far enough from carrying with it sufficient Evidence to
make it be admitted without Proof.

Whatever gains any Man's Assent, one may be sure had sufficient Evidence in
respect of that Man: But that is far enough from proving it Evidence sufficient
to prevail on another, let him consider it as long and as much as he can. The
Tempers of Men's Minds; the Principles settled there by Time and Education,
beyond the Power of the Man himself to alter them; the different Capacities of
Men's Understandings; and the strange Ideas they are often silled with, are so
various and uncertain, that it is impossible to find that Evidence (especially
in things of a mixed Disquisition, depending on so long a T^ain of
Consequences, as some Points of the true Religion may) which one can
considently say will be sufficient for all Men. '^is Demonstration that 3 1876
is the Product of 9467172 divided by 297, and yet I challenge you to find one
Man of a thousand, to whom you can tender this Proposition with demonstrative
or sufficient Evidence to convince him of the Truth of it in a dark Room; or
ever to make this Evidence appear to a Man, that cannot write and read, so as
to make him embrace it as a Truth, if another whom he has more Confidence in,
tells him it is not so. All the demonstrative Evidence the thing has, all the
Tender you can make of it, all the Consideration he can employ about it, will
never be able to discover to him that Evidence which small convince him it is
true, unless you will at threescore and ten (for that may be the Case) have him
neglect his Calling, go to School, and learn to write and read, and cast
Account, which he may never be able to attain to.

You speak more than once of Men's being brought to lay aside their Prejudices
to make them consider as they ought, and judge right of Matters in Religion; and
I grant without doing so they cannot: But it is impossible for Force to make
them do it, unless it could show them, which are Prejudices in their Minds, and
distinguish them from the Truths there. Who is there almost that has not
Prejudices, that he does not know to be so; and what can Force do in that Case?
It can no more remove them, to make way for Truth, than it can remove one Truth
to make way for another; or rather remove an established Truth, or that which
is looked on as an unquestionable Principle (for so are often Men's Prejudices)
to make way for a Truth not yet known, nor appearing to be one. It Is not every
one knows, or can bring himself to Des Carte^ way of doubting, and strip his
Thoughts of all Opinions, till he brings them to self-evident Principles, and
then upon them builds all his future Tenants.

Do not think all the World, who are not of your Church, abandon themselves to
an utter Carelessness of their future State. You cannot but allow there are many
Turks who sincerely seek Truth, to whom yet you could never bring Evidence
sufficient to convince them of the Truth of the Christian Religion, whilst they
looked on it as a Principle not to be questioned, that the Alcoran was of
Divine Revelation. This possibly you will tell me is a Prejudice, and so it is;
but yet if this Man shall tell you it is no more a Prejudice in him, than it is
a Prejudice in any one amongst Christians, who having not examined it, lays it
down as an unquestionable Principle of his Religion, that the Scripture is the
Word of God; what will you answer to him? And yet it would shake a great many
Christians in their Religion, if they should lay by that Prejudice, and suspend
their Judgment of it, until they had made it out to themselves with Evidence
sufficient to convince one who is not prejudiced in Favor of it; and it would
require more Time, Books, Languages, Learning and Skill, than falls to most
(...) (...) to establish them therein, if you will not allow them, in this so
(...) and fundamental a Point, to rely on the Learning, Knowledge and Judgment
of some Persons whom they have in Reverence or Admiration. This though you
blame it as an ill way, yet you can allow in one of your own Religion, even to
that Degree, that he may P. 42.
be ignorant of the Grounds of his Religion. And why then may you not allow it
to a Turk, not as a good way, or as having led him to the Truth; but as a way,
as sit for him, as for one of your Church to acquiesce in; and as sit to exempt
him from your Force, as to exempt any one of your Church from it?

To prevent your commenting on this, in which you have shown so much Dexterity,
give me leave to tell you, that for all this I do not think all Religions
equally true or equally certain. But this, I say, is impossible for you, or me,
or any Man, to know, whether another has done his Duty in examining the
Evidence on both sides, when he embraces that side of the Question, which we
(perhaps upon other Views) judge false: and therefore we can have no Right to
punish or persecute him for it. In this, whether and how far any one is faulty,
must be left to the Searcher of Hearts? the great and righteous Judge of all
Men, who knows all their Circumstances, all the Powers and Workings of their
Minds; where it is they sincerely follow, and by what Default they at any time
miss Truth: And he, we are sure, will judge uprightly.

But when one Man shall think himself a competent Judge, that the true Religion
is proposed with Evidence sufficient for another; and thence shall take upon
him to punish him as an Offender, because he embraces not (upon Evidence that
he the Proposer judges sufficient) the Religion that he judges true, had need
be able to look into the Thoughts of Men, and know their several Abilities:
unless he will make his own Understanding and Faculties to be the Measure of
those of all Mankind, which if they be no higher elevated, no larger in their
Comprehension, no more discerning, than those of some Men, he will not only be
unsit to be a Judge in that, but in almost any Case what soever.

But since, 1. You make it a Condition to the making a Man an Offender in not
being of the true Religion, that it has been tendered him with sufficient
Evidence. 2. Since you think it so easy for Men to determine when the true
Religion has been tendered to any one with sufficient Evidence. And, 3. Since
you pronounce it Impiety to say, that God has not furnished Mankind with
competent Means for the promoting his own Honor in the World, and A. p. 16.
the Good of Souls. Give me leave to ask you a Question or two. 1. Can any one
be saved without embracing the one only true Religion? 2. Were any of the
Americans of that one only true Religion, when the Europeans first came amongst
them? 3. Whether any of the Americans, before the Christians came amongst them,
had offended in rejecting the true Religion tendered with sufficient Evidence?
When you have thought upon, and fairly answered these Questions, you will be
sitter to determine, how competent a Judge Man is, what is sufficient Evidence;
who do offend in not being of the true Religion; and what Punishments they are
liable to for it.

But methinks here, where you spend almost a whole Page upon the Crime of
rejecting the true Religion duly tendered, and the Punishment that is justly due
to it from the Magistrate, you forget your self, and the Foundation of your
Plea for Force; which is, that it is necessary: which you are so far from
proving it to be in this case of punishing the Offense of rejecting the true
Religion, that in this very page you distinguished it from what is necessary;
where you tell us, Your Design does rather oblige you to consider how long Men
may need Punishment, than how long it may be just to punish them. So that
though they offend, yet if they do not need Punishment, the Magistrate cannot
use it, if you ground, as you say you do, the Lawfulness of Force for promoting
the true Religion upon the Necessity of it. Nor can you say, that by his
Commission, from the Law of Nature, of doing Good, the Magistrate, besides
reducing his wandering Subjects out of the wrong into the right Way, is
appointed also to be the Avenger of God's Wrath on Unbelievers, or those that
err in Matters of Religion. This at least you thought not fit to own in the
first Draught of your Scheme; for I do not remember in all your Argument
considered, one word of Crime or Punishment: nay, in writing this second
Treatise, you were so shy of owning any thing of Punishment, that to my
remembrance, you scrupulously avoided the use of that word, till you came to
this place; and always where the repeating my Words did not oblige you to it,
carefully used the term of Penalties for it, as any one may observe, who reads
the preceding part of this Letter of yours, which I am now examining. And you
were so nice in the point, that three or four Leaves backwards, where I say, By
your Rule Dissenters must be punished, you mend it, and say, Or if I please,
subjected to moderate Penalties. But here when the Inquiry, How long Force was
to be continued on Men, showed the Absurdity of that Pretense, that they were
to be punished on without end, to make them consider; rather than part with
your beloved Force, you open the matter a little father, and profess directly
the punishing Men for their Religion. For tho you do all you can to cover it
under the name of rejecting the true Religion duly proposed; yet it is in truth
no more but being of a Religion different from yours, that you would have them
punished for: for all that the Author pleads for, and you can oppose in writing
against him, is Toleration of Religion. Your Scheme therefore being thus
mended, your Hypothesis enlarged, being of a different Religion from the
National found criminal, and Punishments found justly to belong to it, it is to
be hoped, that in good time your Punishments may grow too, and be advanced to
all those Degrees you in the beginning condemned; when having considered a
little farther, you cannot miss finding, that the Obstinacy of the Criminals
does not lessen their Crime, and therefore Justice will require severer
Execution to be done upon them.

But you tell us here, Because your Design does rather oblige you P. 51.
to consider how long Men may need Punishment, than how long it may be just to
punish them; therefore you shall add, That as long as Men refuse to embrace the
true Religion, so long Penalties are necessary for them to dispose them to
consider and embrace it: And that therefore as Justice allows, so Charity
requires, that they be kept subject to Penalties, till they embrace the true
Religion. Let us therefore see the Consistency of this with other parts of your
Hypothesis, and examine it a little by them.

Your Doctrine is, That where Entreaties and Admonitions upon trial do not
prevail, Punishments are to be used; but they must be moderate. Moderate
Punishments have been tried, and they prevail not; What now is to be done? Are
not greater to be used? No: For what reason? Because those whom moderate
Penalties will not prevail on, being desperately perverse and obstinate,
Remedies are not to be provided for the Incurable, as you tell us in the Page
immediately preceding.

Moderate Punishments have been tried upon a Man once, and again, and a third
time, but prevail not at all, make no Impression; they are repeated as many
times more, but are still found ineffectual: Pray tell me a reason why such a
Man is concluded so desperately perverse and obstinate, that greater Degrees
will not work upon him, but yet not so desperately perverse and obstinate, but
that the same Degrees repeated may work upon him? I will not urge here, that
this is to pretend to know the just Degree of Punishment that will or will not
work on any one, which I should imagine a pretty intricate Business: But this I
have to say, that if you can think it reasonable and useful to continue a Man
several Years, nay his whole Life, under the same repeated Punishments, without
going any higher, though they work not at all; because it is possible sometime
or other they may work on him; why is it not as reasonable and useful (I am
sure it is much more justifiable and charitable) to leave him all his Life
under the Means, which all agree God has appointed, without going any higher,
because it is not impossible that some time or other Preaching, and a Word
spoken in due season, may work upon him? For why you should despair of the
Success of Preaching and Persuasion upon a fruitless Trial, and thereupon think
your self authorized to use Force; and yet not so despair of the Success of
moderate Force, as after Years of fruitless Trial, to continue it on, and not
to proceed to higher Degrees of Punishment, you are concerned for the
vindication of your System to show a Reason.

I mention the Trial of Preaching and Persuasion, to show the Unreasonableness
of your Hypothesis, supposing such a Trial made: not that in yours, or the
common Method, there is or can be a fair Trial made what Preaching and
Persuasion can do. For care is taken by Punishments and ill Treatment, to
indispose and turn away Men's Minds, and to add Aversion to their Scruples; an
excellent way to soften Men's Inclinations, and temper them for the Impression
of Arguments and Entreaties; though these too are only talked of: For I cannot
but wonder to find you mention, as you do, giving ear to Admonitions,
Entreaties and Persuasions, when these are seldom, if ever made use of, but in
Places, where those, who are to be wrought on by them, are known to be out of
hearing; nor can be expected to come there, till by such Means they have been
wrought on.

It Is not without reason therefore you cannot part with your Chap. 6.
Penalties, and would have no end put to your Punishments, but continue them
on; since you leave so much to their Operation, and make so little use of other
Means to work upon Dissenters.

CHAP. VI. Of the End for which Force is to be used.
HE that should read the beginning of your Argument considered, would think it
in earnest to be your Design to have Force employed to make Men seriously
consider, and nothing else: but he that shall look a little farther into it,
and to that add also your defense of it, will find by the variety of Ends you
design your Force for, that either you know not well what you would have it
for, or else, whatever 'twas you aimed at, you called it still by that Name
which best fitted the Occasision, and would serve best in that place to
recommend the Use of it.

You ask me, Whether the Mildness and Gentleness of the Gospel P. 27.
destroys the coactive Power of the Magistrate? I answer, as you supposed, No:
upon which you infer, Then it seems the Magistrate may use his coactive Power,
without offending against the Mildness and Gentleness of the Gospel. Yes, where
he has Commission and Authority to use it. And so, say you, it will consist
well enough with the Mildness and Gentleness of the Gospel for the Magistrate
to use his coactive Power to procure them [I suppose you mean the Ministers and
Preachers of the National Religion] a hearing where their Prayers and
Entreaties will not do it. No, it will not consist with the gentle and mild
Method of the Gospel, unless the Gospel has directed it, or something else to
supply its want, till it could be had. As for Miracles, which you pretend to
have supplied the want of Force in the first Ages of Christianity, you will
find that considered in another place. But, Sir, show me a Country where the
Ministers and Teachers of the National and True Religion go about with Prayers
and Entreaties to procure a Hearing, and cannot obtain it, and there I think I
need not stand with you for the Magistrate to use Force to procure it them; but
that I fear will not serve your turn.

To show the Inconsistency and Unpracticableness of your Method, I had said,

Let us now see to what end they must be L. 2. p. 30.
punished: Sometimes it is, To bring them to consider those Reasons A. p. 5.
and Arguments which are proper and sufficient to convince them: Of what? That
it is not easy to set Grant^ani Steeple upon Paul's Church? Whatever it be you
would have them convinced of, you are not willing to tell us; and so it may be
any thing. Sometimes it is, To incline them to lend an Ear to those who tell A.
p. 10.
them they have mistaken their Way, and offer to show them the right. Which is,
to lend an Ear to all who differ from them in Religion, as well crafty
Seducers, as others. Whether this be for A. p. 27.
the procuring the Salvation of their Souls, the End for which you A. p. 23.
say this Force is to be used, judge you. But this I am sure, Whoever will lend
an Ear to all who will tell them they are out of the Way, will not have much
time for any other Business.

Sometimes it is, To recover Men to so much Sobriety and Reflection, A. p. 11.
as seriously to put the Question to themselves, Whether it be really worth
their while to undergo such Inconveniences, for adhering to a Religion which,
for any thing they know, may be false; or for rejecting another (if that be the
case) which, for ought they know, may be true, till they have brought it to the
Bar of Reason, and given it a fair Trial there. Which in short amounts to thus
much, viz. To make them examine whether their Religion be true, and so worth
the holding, under those Penalties that are annexed to it. Dissenters are
indebted to you for your great care of their Souls. But what, I beseech you,
shall become of those of the National Church, every where (which make far the
greater part of Mankind) who have no such Punishments to make them consider;
who have not this only Remedy provided for them, but are left in that
deplorable Condition, you mention, of being suffered quietly, and without
molestation, to take no care at A. p. 27.
all of their Souls, or in doing of it to follow their own Prejudices, Humors,
or some crafty Seducers? Need not those of the National Church, as well as
others, bring their Religion to the Bar of Reason, and give it a fair Trial
there? And if they need to do so, (as they must, if all National Religions
cannot be supposed true) they will always need that which you say is the only
A. p. 12.
Means to make them do so. So that if you are sure, as you tell us, that there
is need of your Method; I am sure, there is as much need of it in National
Churches, as any other. And so, for ought I can see, you must either punish
them, or let others alone; unless you think it reasonable that the far greater
part of Mankind should constantly be without that Sovereign and only Remedy,
which they stand in need of equally with other People.

Sometimes the End for which Men must be punished is, to A. p. 13.
dispose them to submit to Instruction, and to give a fair hearing to the
Reasons are offered for the inlightning their Minds, and discovering the Truth
to them. If their own Words may be taken for it, there are as few Dissenters as
Conformists, in any Country, who will not profess they have done, and do this.
And if their own Words may not be taken; who, I pray must be Judge? you and your
Magistrates? If so, then it is plain you punish them not to dispose them to
submit to Instruction, but to your Instruction; not to dispose them to give a
fair hearing to Reasons offered for the inlightning their Minds, but to give an
obedient hearing to your Reasons. If you mean this, it had been fairer and
shorter to have spoken out plainly, than thus in fair Words, of indefinite
Signification, to say that which amounts to nothing. For what Sense is it, to
punish a Man to dispose him to submit to Instruction, and give a fair hearing
to Reasons offered for the inlightning his Mind, and discovering Truth to him,
who goes two or three times a Week several Miles on purpose to do it, and that
with the Hazard of his Liberty or Purse; unless you mean your Instructions,
your Reasons, your Truth? Which brings us but back to what you have disclaimed,
plain Persecution for differing in Religion.

Sometimes this is to be done, To prevail with Men to weigh A. p. 14.
Matters of Religion carefully and impartially. Discountenance and Punishment
put into one Scale, with Impunity and Hopes of Preferment put into the other,
is as sure a way to make a Man weigh impartially, as it would be for a Prince
to bribe and threaten a Judge to make him judge uprightly.

Sometimes it is, To make Men bethink themselves, and put it A. p. 20.
out of the Power of any foolish Humor, or unreasonable Prejudice, to alienate
them from Truth and their own Happiness. Add but this, to put it out of the
Power of any Humor or Prejudice of their own, or other Men's; and I grant the
End is good, if you can find the means to procure it. But why it should not be
put out of the Power of other Men's Humor or Prejudice, as well as their own,
wants (and will always want) a Reason to prove. Would it not, I beseech you, to
an indifferent Bystander, appear Humor or Prejudice, or something as bad; to
see Men, who profess a Religion revealed from Heaven, and which they own
contains all in it necessary to Salvation, exclude Men from their Communion,
and persecute them with the Penalties of the Civil Law, for not joining in the
Use of Ceremonies which are no where to be found in that revealed Religion?
Would it not appear Humor or Prejudice, or some such thing, to a sober
impartial Heathen; to see Christians exclude and persecute one of the same
Faith, for things which they themselves confess to be indifferent, and not
worth the contending for? Prejudice, Humor, Passion, Lusts, Impressions A. p.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
of Education, Reverence and Admiration of Persons, worldly Respects, Love of
their own Choice, and the like, (to which you justly impute many Men's taking up
and persisting in their Religion) are indeed good Words; and so, on the other
side, are these following, Truth, the right Way, Inlightning, Reason, sound
Judgment; but they signify nothing at all to your purpose, till you can
evidently and unquestionably show the World that the latter (viz. Truth and the
right way, etc.) are always, and in all Countries, to be found only in the
National Church; and the former (viz. Passion and Prejudice, etc.) only amongst
the Dissenters. But to go on:

Sometimes it is, To bring Men to take such Care as they ought A. p. 22.
of their Salvation. What Care is such as Men ought to take, whilst they are
out of your Church, will be hard for you to tell me. But you endeavor to
explain your self, in the following words; that they may not blindly leave it
to the choice neither of any other Person, nor yet of their own (...) and
Passions, to prescribe to them what Faith or Worship they shall imb^ce. You do
well to make use of Punishment to shut Passion out of the choice; because you
know fear of suffering is no Passion. But let that pass. You would have Men
punished, to bring them to take such Care of their Salvation, that they may not
blindly leave it to the Choice of any other Person to prescribe to them. Are
you sincere? Are you in earnest? Tell me then truly: Did the Magistrate or the
National Church, any where, or yours in particular, ever punish any Man, to
bring him to have this Care, which you say, he ought to take of his Salvation?
Did you ever punish any Man, that he might not blindly leave it to the choice
of his Parish Priest, or Bishop, or the Convocation, what Faith or Worship he
should embrace? 'Twill be suspected Care of a Party, or any thing else rather
than Care of the Salvation of Men's Souls; if, having found out so useful, so
necessary a Remedy, the only Method there is Room left for, you will apply it
but partially, A. p. 12.
and make Trial of it only on those who you have truly least Kindness for. This
will, unavoidably, give one Reason to imagine, you do not think so well of your
Remedy as you pretend, who are so sparing of it to your Friends; but are very
free of it to Strangers, who in other things are used very much like Enemies.
But your Remedy is like the Helleboraster, that grew in the Woman's Garden, for
the Cure of Worms in her Neighbors Children: For truly it wrought too roughly,
to give it to any of her own. Methinks your Charity, in your present
Persecution, is much-what as prudent, as justifiable, as that good Woman's. I
hope I have done you no Injury, that I here suppose you of the Church of
England: If I have, I beg your Pardon. It is no Offense of Malice, I assure
you: For I suppose no worse of you, than I confess of my self.

Sometimes this Punishment that you contend for, is, to bring A. p. 22.
Men to act according to Reason and sound Judgment.

Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato.
This is Reformation indeed. If you can help us to it, you will deserve Statues
to be erected to you, as to the Restorer of decayed Religion. But if all Men
have not Reason and sound Judgment, will Punishment put it into them? Besides,
concerning this matter Mankind is so divided, that he acts according to Reason
and sound Judgment at Auspurg, who would be judged to do the quite contrary at
Edinburgh. Will Punishment make Men know what is Reason and sound Judgment? If
it will not, it is impossible it should make them act according to it. Reason
and sound Judgment are the Elixir it self, the universal Remedy: And you may as
reasonably punish Men to bring them to have the Philosopher's Stone, as to
bring them, to act according to Reason and sound Judgment.

Sometimes it is, To put Men upon a serious and impartial Examination of the
Controversy between the Magistrate and them, which is the way sor them to come
to the Knowledge of the Truth. A. p. 26.
But what if the Truth be on neither side (as I am apt to imagine you will
think it is not, where neither the Magistrate nor the Dissenter is either of
them of your Church) how will the examining the Controversy between the
Magistrate and him be the way to come to the Knowledge of the Truth? Suppose the
Controversy between a Lutheran and a Papist; or, if you please, between a
Presbyterian Magistrate and a Quaker Subject. Will the examining the
Controversy between the Magistrate and the Dissenting Subject, in this case,
bring him to the Knowledge of the Truth? If you say, Yes, then you grant one of
these to have the Truth on his side. For the examining the Controversy between
a Presbyterian and a Quaker, leaves the Controversy either of them has with the
Church of England, or any other Church, untouched. And so one, at least, of
those being already come to the Knowledge of the Truth, ought not to be put
under your Discipline of Punishment; which is only to bring him to the Truth.
If you say, No, and that the examining the Controversy between the Magistrate
and the Dissenter, in this case, will not bring him to the Knowledge of the
Truth; you consess your Rule to be false, and your Method to no purpose.

To conclude, your System is, in short, this. You would have all Men (laying
aside Prejudice, Humor, Passion, etc.) examine the Grounds of their Religion,
and search for the Truth. This, I consess, is heartily to be wished. The means
that you propose to make Men do this, is, that Dissenters should be punished,
to make them do so. It is as if you had said, Men generally are guilty of a
Fault; therefore let one Sect, who have the ill luck to be of an Opinion
different from the Magistrate, be punished. This at first Sight shocks any one
who has the least Spark of Sense, Reason, or Justice. But having spoken of this
already, and concluding that upon second Thoughts, you your self will be
ashamed of it; let us consider it put so as to be consistent with common Sense,
and with all the Advantage it can bear; and then let us see what you can make
of it. Men are negligent in examining the Religions they embrace, refuse, or
persist in; therefore it is fit they should be punished to make them do it.
This is a Consequence indeed which may, without Defiance to common Sense, be
drawn from it. This is the Use, the only Use, which you think Punishment can
indirectly and at a distance have in matters of Religion. You would have Men by
Punishments driven to examine. What? Religion. To what end? To bring them to
the Knowledge of the Truth. But I answer.

First, Every one has not the Ability to do this.

Secondly, Every one has not the Opportunity to do it.

Would you have every poor Protestant, for example, in the Palatinate, examine
thoroughly whether the Pope be infallible, or Head of the Church; whether there
be a Purgatory; whether Saints are to be prayed to, or the Dead prayed for;
whether the Scripture be the only Rule of Faith; whether there be no Salvation
out of the Church; and whether there be no Church without Bishops; and an
hundred other Questions in Controversy between the Papists and those
Protestants: and when he had mastered these, go on to fortify himself against
the Opinions and Objections of other Churches he differs from? This, which is
no small Task, must be done, before a Man can have brought his Religion to the
Bar of Reason, and given it fair Trial there. And if you will punish Men till
this be done, the Countryman must leave off plowing and sowing, and betake
himself to the Study of Greek and Latin; and the Artisan must sell his Tools,
to buy Fathers and Schoolmen, and leave his Family to starve. If something
less than this will satisfy you, pray tell me what is enough. Have they
considered and examined enough, if they are satisfied themselves where the
Truth lies? If this be the Limits of their Examination, you will find few to
punish; unless you will punish them to make them do what they have done
already. For, however he came by his Religion, there is scarce any one to be
found who does not own himself satisfied that he is in the right. Or else, must
they be punished to make them consider and examine till they embrace that which
you choose for Truth? If this be so, what do you but in effect choose for them,
when yet you would have Men punished, To bring them to such a A. p. 22.
Care of their Souls that no other Person might choose for them? If it be Truth
in general you would have them by Punishments driven to seek; that is to offer
matter of Dispute, and not a Rule of Discipline. For to punish any one to make
him seek till he find Truth, without a Judge of Truth, is to punish for you know
not what; and is all one as if you should whip a Scholar to make him find out
the square Root of a Number you do not know. I wonder not therefore that you
could not resolve with your self what degree of Severity you would have used,
nor how long continued; when you dare not speak out directly whom you would
have punished, and are far from being clear to what end they should be under
Penalties.

Consonant to this Uncertainty, of whom, or what, to be punished; you tell us,
That there is no Question of the Success of A. p. 12.
this Method. Force will certainly do, if duly proportioned to the Design of it.

What, I pray, is the Design of it? I challenge you, or any Man living, out of
what you have said in your Book, to tell me directly what it is. In all other
Punishments that ever I heard of yet, till now that you have taught the World a
new Method, the Design of them has been to cure the Crime they are denounced
against; and so I think it ought to be here. What I beseech you is the Crime
here? Dissenting? That you say not, any where, is a Fault. Besides you tell us,
That the Magistrate has not an Authority to compel any one A. p. 21.
to his Religion: And that you do not require that Men should A. p. 25.
have no Rule but the Religion of the Country. And the Power you ascribe to the
Magistrate is given him to bring Men, not to A. p. 26.
his own, but to the true Religion. If Dissenting be not the Fault; is it that
a Man does not examine his own Religion, and the Grounds of it? Is that the
Crime your Punishments are designed to cure? Neither that dare you say, lest
you displease more than you satisfy with your new Discipline. And then again,
(as I said before) you must tell us how far you would have them examine, before
you punish them for not doing it. And I imagine, if that were all we required
of you, it would be long enough before you would trouble us with a Law, that
should prescribe to every one how far he was to examine Matters of Religion;
wherein if he failed and came short, he was to be punished; if he performed and
went in his Examination to the Bounds set by the Law, he was acquitted and
free. Sir, when you consider it again, you will perhaps think this a Case
reserved to the Great Day, when the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open.
For I imagine it is beyond the Power or Judgment of Man, in that Variety of
Circumstances, in respect of Parts, Tempers, Opportunities, Helps, etc. Men are
in, in this World, to determine what is every one's Duty in this great Business
of Search, Inquiry, Examination, or to know when any one has done it. That
which makes me believe you will be of this Mind, is, that where you undertake
for the success of this Method, if rightly used, it is with a Limitation, upon
A. p. 12.
such as are not altogether incurable. So that when your Remedy is prepared
according to Art, (which Art is yet unknown) and rightly applied, and given in
a due Dose, (all which are Secrets) it will then infallibly cure. Whom? All
that are not incurable by it. And so will a Pippin-Posset, eating Fish in Lent,
or a Presbyterian Lecture, certainly cure all that are not incurable by them.
For I am sure you do not mean it will cure all, but those who are absolutely
incurable; Because you your self allow one Means left of Cure, when yours will
not do, viz. The Grace of God. Your Words are, What Means is there A. p. 10.
left (except the Grace of God) to reduce them, but to l^y Thorns and Briars in
their Way. And here also, in the Place we were considering, you tell us, The
Incurable are to be lest to God. A. p. 12.
Whereby, if you mean they are to be left to those Means he has ordained for
Men's Conversion and Salvation, yours must never be made use of: For he indeed
has prescribed Preaching and Hearing of his Word; but as for those who will not
hear, I do not find any where that he has commanded they should be compelled or
beaten to it.

I must beg my Reader's Pardon sor so long a Repetition, which I was forced to,
that he might be Judge whether what I there said, either deserves no Answer, or
be fully answered in that Paragraph, where you undertake to vindicate your
Method P. 48.
from all Impracticableness and Inconsistency chargeable upon it, in reference
to the End for which you would have Men punished. Your Words are. For what. By
which, you say, you perceive I mean ^vo things: For sometimes I speak of the
Fault, and sometimes of the End for which Men are to be punished, (and
sometimes I plainly confound them.) Now if it be inquired, For what Fault Men
are to be punished? you answer, For rejecting the true Religion after
sufficient Evidence tendered them of the Truth of it: Which certainly is a
Fault, and deserves Punishment. But if I inquire for what End such as do reject
the True Religion, are to be punished; you say, To bring them to embrace the
True Religion; and in order to that to bring them to consider, and that
carefully and impartially, the Evidence which is offered to convince them of
the Truth of it: Which are undeniably just and excellent Ends; and which,
through God's Blessing, have often been procured, and may yet be procured by
convenient Penalties inflicted for that purpose. Nor do you know of any thing I
say against any part of this, which is not already answered. Whether I in this
confound two things distinct, or you distinguish where there is no difference,
the Reader may judge by what I have said elsewhere. I shall here only consider
the Ends of Punishing, you here again in your Reply to me assign; and those, as
I find them scattered, are these.

Sometimes you speak of this End, as if it were barely to gain P. 27.
a hearing to those who by Prayers and Entreaty cannot: and those may be the
Preachers of any Religion. But I suppose you mean the Preachers of the True
Religion. And who I beseech you must be Judge of that?

Where the Law provides sufficient Means of Instruction for all, as P. 28.
well as Punishment for Dissenters, it is plain to all concerned, that the
Punishment is intended to make them consider. What? The Means the Law provides
for their Instruction. Who then is Judge of what they are to be instructed in,
and the Means of Instruction; but the Lawmakers?

It is to bring Men to hearken to Instruction. From whom? From P. 37.
any body? And to consider and examine Matters of Religion as they ought to do,
and to bring those who are out of the right Way, to hear, consider and embrace
the Truth. When is this End attained, and the Penalties which are the Means to
this End taken off? When a Man conforms to the National Church. And who then is
Judge of what is the Truth to be embraced, but the Magistrate?

It is to bring Men to consider those Reasons and Arguments which P. 26:
are proper and sufficient to convince them; but which, without being forced,
they would not consider. And when have they done this? When they have once
conformed: for after that there is no Force used to make them consider farther.

It is to make Men consider as they ought; and that you tell us, P. 40.
is so to consider, as to be moved heartily to embrace, and not to reject P. 28.
Truth necessary to Salvation. And when is the Magistrate, that has the care of
Men's Souls, and does all this for their Salvation, satisfied that they have so
considered? As soon as they outwardly join in Communion with the National
Church.

It is to bring Men to consider and examine those Controversies P. 2.
which they are bound to consider and examine, i. e. those wherein they cannot
err without dishonouring God, and indangering their own and other Men's
Salvations. And to study the True Religion with such P. 58.
Care and Diligence as they might and ought to use, and with an honest Mind.
And when, in your Opinion, is it presumable that any Man has done all this?
Even when he is in the Communion of your Church.

It is to cure Men's unreasonable Prejudices and Refractoriness against, P. 53.
and Aversion to the True Religion. Whereof none retain the least Tincture or
Suspicion who are once got within the Pale of your Church.

It is to bring Men into the right Way, into the Way of Salvation, P. 30, 58.
which Force does when it has conducted them within the Church Porch, and there
leaves them.

It is to bring Men to embrace the Truth that must save them. And P. 26.
here, in the Paragraph wherein you pretend to tell us for what Force is to be
used, you say, It is to bring Men to embrace the P. 49.
true Religion, and in order to that to bring them to consider, and that
carefully and impartially, the Evidence which is offered to convince them of
the Truth of it, which, as you say, are undeniable, just and excellent Ends;
but yet such as Force in your Method can never practically be made a Means to,
without supposing what you say P. 47.
you have no need to suppose, viz. that your Religion is the true; unless you
had rather every where to leave it to the Magistrate to judge which is the right
Way, what is the true Religion; which Supposition I imagine will less
accommodate you than the other. But take which of them you will, you must add
this other Supposition to it, harder to be granted you than either of the
former, viz. That those who conform to your Church here, (if you make your self
the Judge) or to the National Church any where, (if you make the Magistrate Judge
of the Truth that must save Men) and those only have attained these Ends.

The Magistrate, you say, is obliged to do what in him lies to bring all his
Subjects to examine carefully and impartially Matters of Religion, and to
consider them as they ought, i. e. so as to imbroce the Truth that must save
them. The proper and necessary Means, Chap. 7.
you say, to attain these Ends is Force. And your Method of using this Force is
to punish all the Dissenters from the National Religion, and none of those who
outwardly conform to it. Make this practicable now in any Country in the World,
without allowing the Magistrate to be Judge what is the Truth that must save
them, and without supposing also, that whoever do embrace the outward
Profession of the National Religion, do in their Hearts embrace, i. e. believe
and obey the Truth that must save them; and then I think nothing in Government
can be too hard for your undertaking.

You conclude this Paragraph in telling me, You do not know P. 49.
of any thing I say against any part of this, which is not already answered.
Pray tell me where it is you have answered those Objections I made to those
several Ends which you assigned in your Argument considered, and for which you
would have Force used, and which I have here reprinted again, because I do not
find you so much as take notice of them: and therefore the Reader must judge
whether they needed any Answer or no.

But to show that you have not here, where you promise and pretend to do it,
clearly and directly told us for what Force and Penalties are to be used, I
shall in the next Chapter examine what you mean by bringing Men to embrace the
True Religion.

CHAP. VII. Of your bringing Men to the True Religion.
TRue Religion is on all hands acknowledged to be so much the Concern and
Interest of all Mankind, that nothing can be named, which so much effectually
bespeak^ the Approbation and Favor of the Public. The very intitling one's
self to that, sets a Man on the right side. Who dares question such a Cause, or
oppose what is offered for the promoting the True Religion? This Advantage you
have secured to your self from unattentive Readers, as much as by the
often-repeated mention of the True Religion, is possible, there being scarce a
Page wherein the True Religion does not appear, as if you had nothing else in
your Thoughts, but the bringing Men to it for the Salvation of their Souls.
Whether it be so in earnest, we will now see.

You tell us, Whatever Hardships some false Religions may impose, P. 7.
it will however always be easier to carnal and worldly minded Men, to give
even the firstborn for their Transgressions, than to mortify the Lusts from
which they spring, which no Religion but the True requires of them. Upon this
you ground the Ne^essity of Force to bring Men to the True Religion, and charge
it on the Magistrate as his Duty to use it to that End. What now in appearance
can express greater Care to bring Men to the True Religion? But let us see what
you say in p. 64. and we shall sind that in your Scheme nothing less is meant:
there you tell us, The Magistrate inflicts the Penalties only upon them that
break the Law^ And that Law requiring nothing but Conformity to the National
Religion, no^ but Nonconformists are punished. So that unless an outward
Profession of the National Religion be by the Mortification of Men's Lusts
harder than their giving their Firstborn for their Transgression, all the
Penalties you contend sor concern not, ^nor can be intended to bring Men
effectually to the True Religion; since they leave them before they come to the
Difficulty, which is to mortify their Lusts, as the True Religion requires. So
that your bringing Men to the True Religion, being to bring them to Conformity
to the National, for then you have done with Force, how far that outward
Consormity is from being heartily of the True Religion, may be known by the
distance there is between the easiest and the hardest thing in the World. For
there is nothing easier, than to profess in Words; nothing harder, than to
subdue the Heart, and bring Thoughts and Deeds into Obedience of the Truth: The
latter is what is required to be of the True Religion; the other all that is
required by Penalties your way applied. If you say, Conformists to the National
Religion are required by the Law Civil and Ecclesiastical, to lead good Lives,
which is the difficult part of the True Religion: I answer, These are not the
Laws we are here speaking of, nor those which the Defenders of Toleration
complain of, but the Laws that put a distinction between outward Conformists
and Nonconformists: and those they say, whatever may be talked of the True
Religion, can never be meant to bring Men really to the True Religion, as long
as the True Religion is, and is confessed to be a thing of so much greater
difficulty than outward Conformity.

Miracles, say you, supplied the want of Force in the beginning of
Christianity; and therefore so far as they supplied that Want, they must be
subservient to the same End. The End then was to bring Men into the Christian
Church, into which they were admitted and received as Brethren, when they
acknowledged that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of God. Will that serve the
turn? No: Force must be used to make Men embrace Creeds and Ceremonies, i. e.
outwardly conform to the Doctrine and Worship of your Church. Nothing more than
that is required by your Penalties; nothing less than that will excuse from
Punishment; that, and nothing but that, will serve the turn; that therefore,
and only that, is what you mean by the True Religion you would have Force used
to bring Men to.

When I tell you, You have a very ill Opinion of the Religion L. 2. p 4.
on of the Church of England, and must own it can only be propagated and
supported by Force, if you do not think it would be a Gainer by a general
Toleration all the World over: You ask, Why you may not have as good an Opinion
of the Church of England's, P. 10.
as you have of Noah's Religion, notwithstanding you think it cannot now be
propagated or supported without using some kinds or degrees of Force. When you
have proved that Noah's Religion, that from eight Persons spread and continued
in the World till the Apostles Times, as I have proved in another place, was
propagated and supported all that while by your kinds or degrees of Force, you
may have some reason to think as well of the Religion of the Church of England,
as you have of Noah's Religion, though you think it cannot be propagated and
supported without some kinds or degrees of Force. But till you can prove that,
you cannot upon that ground say you have reason to have so good an Opinion of
it.

You tell me, If I will take your Word for it, you assure me you P. 11.
think there are many other Countries in the World besides England, where my
Toleration would be as little useful to Truth as in England. If you will name
those Countries, which will be no great pains, I will take your word for it,
that you believe Toleration there would be prejudicial to Truth: but if you
will not do that, neither I nor any body else can believe you. I will give you
a Reason why I say so, and that is, Because no body can believe that, upon your
Principles, you can allow any National Religion, differing from that of the
Church of England, to be true; and where the National Reli^ion is not true, we
have already your Consent, as in Spain and Italy, etc. for Toleration. Now that
you cannot, without renouncing your own Principles, allow any National
Religion, differing from that established here by Law, to be true, is evident:
For why do you punish Nonconformists here? To bring them, say you, to the True
Religion. But what if they hold nothing, but what that other differing National
Church does, shall they be nevertheless punished if they conform not? You will
certainly say, Yes: and if so, then you must either say, they are not of the
True Religion, or else you must own you punish those, to bring them to the True
Religion, whom you allow to be of the True Religion already.

You tell me, If I own with our Author, that there is but one True P. 11.
Religion, and I owning my self to be of the Church of England, you cannot see
how I can avoid supposing, that the National Religion now in England, backed by
the public Authority of the Law, is the only True Religion. If I own, as I do,
all that you here expect from me, yet it will not serve to draw that Conclusion
from it, which you do, viz. That the National Religion now in England is the
only True Religion; taking the True Religion in the Sense that I do, and you
ought to take it. I grant that there is but one True Religion in the World,
which is that whose Doctrine and Worship are necessary to Salvation. I grant
too that the True Religion, necessary to Salvation, is taught and professed in
the Church of England: and yet it will not follow from hence, that the Religion
of the Church of England, as established by Law, is the only True Religion; if
there be any thing established in the Church of England by Law, and made part
of its Religion, which is not necessary to Salvation, and which any other
Church, teaching and professing all that is necessary to Salvation, does not
receive.

If the National Religion now in England, backed by the Authority of the Law,
be, as you would have it, the only true Religion; so the only true Religion,
that a Man cannot be saved without being of it. Pray reconcile this, with what
you say in the immediately preceding Paragraph, viz. That there are many other
Countries in the World where my Toleration would be as little useful as in
England. For if there be other National Religions differing from that of
England, which you allow to be true, and wherein Men may be saved, the National
Religion of England, as now established by Law, is not the only true Religion,
and Men may be saved without being of it. And then the Magistrate can upon your
Principles have no Authority to use Force to bring Men to be of it. For you
tell us, Force is not lawful, unless it be necessary; and therefore the
Magistrate can never lawfully use it, but to bring Men to believe and practice
what is necessary to Salvation. You must therefore either hold, that there is
nothing in the Doctrine, Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as
it is established by Law, but what is necessary to Salvation: Or else you must
reform your Terms of Communion, before the Magistrate upon your Principles can
use Penalties to make Men consider till they conform; or you can say that the
National Religion of England is the only true Religion, though it contain the
only true Religion in it; as possibly most, if not all, the differing Christian
Churches now in the World do.

You tell us farther in the next Paragraph, That wherever this P. 11.
only true Religion, i. e. the National Religion now in England, is received,
all other Religions ought to be discouraged. Why I beseech you discouraged, if
they be true any of them? For if they be true, what Pretense is there for Force
to bring Men who are of them to the true Religion? If you say all other
Religions, varying at all from that of the Church of England, are false; we
know then your measure of the one only true Religion. But that your Care is
only of Conformity to the Church of England, and that by the true Religion you
mean nothing else, appears too from your way of expressing your self in thi^
Passage, where you own that you suppose that as this only true Religion (to
Ibid.
wit, the National Religion now in England, backed with the public Authority
of Law) ought to be received wherever it is preached; so wherever it is
received all other Religions ought to be discouraged in some measure by the
Civil Powers. If the Religion established by Law in England, be the only true
Religion, ought it not be preached and received every where, and all other
Religions discouraged throughout the World? and ought not the Magistrates of
all Countries to take Care that it should be so? But you only say, wherever
it is preached, it ought to be received; and wherever it is received, other
Religions ought to be discouraged, which is well suited to your Scheme for
enforcing Conformity in England, but could scarce drop from a Man whose
Thoughts were on the true Religion, and the promoting of it in other Parts' of
the World.

Force then must be used in England, and Penalties laid on Dissenters there.
For what? to bring them to the true Religion, whereby it is plain you mean not
only the Doctrine but Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and
make them a part of the only true Religion: Why else do you punish all
Dissenters for rejecting the true Religion, and use Force to bring them to it?
When yet a great, if not the greatest part of Dissenters in England own and
profess the Doctrine of the Church of England, as firmly as those in the
Communion of the Church of England. They therefore, though they believe the
same Religion with you, are excluded from the true Church of God, that you
would have Men brought to, and are amongst those who reject the true Religion.

I ask whether they are not in your Opinion out of the way of Salvation, who
are not joined in Communion with the true Church? and whether there can be any
true Church without Bishops? If so, all but Conformists in England that are of
any Church in Europe besides the Lutherans and Papists, are out of the way of
Salvation, and so according to your System have need of Force to be brought
into it: and these too, one for their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the other
for that of Consubstantiation, (to omit other things vastly differing from the
Church of England) you will not, I suppose, allow to be of the true Religion:
And who then are left of the true Religion but the Church of England? For the
Abyssines have too wide a Difference in many Points for me to imagine, that is
one of those Places you mean where Toleration would do harm as well as in
England. And I think the Religion of the Greek Church can ^carce be supposed by
you to be the true. For if it should, it would be a strong Instance against
your Assertion, that the true Religion cannot subsist, but would quickly be
effectually extirpated without the Assistance of Authority, since this has
subsisted without any such Assistance now above 200 Years. I take it then for
granted, (and others with me cannot but do the same, till you tell us, what
other Religion there is of any Church, but that of England, which you allow to
be the true Religion) that all you say of bringing Men to the true Religion, is
only bringing them to the Religion of the Church of England. If I do you an
Injury in this, it will be capable of a very easy Vindication: for it is but
naming that other Church differing from that of England, which you allow to
have the true Religion, and I shall yield my self convinced, and shall allow
these Words, viz. The National Religion now in England, backed by P. 27.
the public Authority of Law, being the only true Religion, only as a little
hasty Sally of your Zeal. In the mean time I shall argue with you about the Use
of Force to bring Men to the Religion of the Church of England, as established
by Law: since it is more easy to know what that is, than what you mean by the
true Religion, if you mean any thing else.

To proceed therefore; in the next place I tell you, by using Force your way to
bring Men to the Religion of the Church of England, you mean only to bring them
to an outward Profession of that Religion; and that, as I have told you
elsewhere, because Force used your way, being applied only to Dissenters, and
ceasing as soon as they conform, (whether it be intended by the Lawmakers for
any thing more or no, which we have examined in another Place) cannot be to
bring Men to any thing mo^e than outward Conformity. For if Force be used to
Dissenters, and them only, to bring Men to the true Religion, and always as
soon as it has brought Men to Conformity, it be taken off, and laid aside, as
having done all is expected from it; it is plain, that by bringing Men to the
true Religion, and bringing them to outward Conformity, you mean the same
thing. You use and continue Force upon Dissenters, because you expect some
Effect from it: when you take it off, it has wrought that Effect, or else being
in your Power, why do you not continue it on? The Effect then that you talk of,
being the embracing the true Religion, and the thing you are satisfied with
without any farther Punishment, Expectation, or Inquiry, being outward
Conformity, it is plain embracing the true Religion and outward Conformity with
you, are the same things.

Neither can you say it is presumable that those who outwardly conform do
really understand, and inwardly in their Hearts embrace with a lively Faith and
a sincere Obedience, the Truth that must save them. 1. Because it being, as you
tell us, the Magistrate's Duty to do all that in him lies for the Salvation of
all his Subjects, and it being in his Power to examine, whether they know and
live suitable to the Truth that must save them, as well as conform, he can or
ought no more to presume, that they do so, without taking an Account of their
Knowledge and Lives, than he can or ought to presume that they conform, without
taking any Account of their Coming to Church. Would you think that Physician
discharged his Duty, and had (as was pretended) a Care of Men's Lives, who
having got them into his Hands, and knowing no more of them, but that they come
once or twice a Week to the Apothecary's Shop, to hear what is prescribed them,
and sit there a while, should say it was presumable they were recovered,
without ever examining whether his Prescriptions had any Effect, or what Estate
their Health was in?

2. It cannot be presumable, where there are so many visible Instances to the
contrary. He must pass for an admirable Presumer, who will seriously affirm
that it is presumable that all those who conform to the National Religion where
it is true, do so understand, believe and practice it, as to be in the way of
Salvation.

3. It cannot be presumable, that Men have parted with their Corruption and
Lusts to avoid Force, when they fly to Conformity, which can shelter them from
Force without quitting their Lusts. That which is dearer to Men than their
Firstborn, is, you tell us, their Lusts; that which is harder than the
Hardships P. 7.
of false Religions, is the mortifying those Lusts: here lies the Difficulty of
the true Religion, that it requires the mortifying of those Lusts; and till
that be done, Men are not of the true Religion, nor in the way of Salvation:
And it is upon this Account only that you pretend Force to be needful. Force is
used to make them hear; it prevails, Men hear: but that is not enough, because
the Difficulty lies not in that; they may hear Arguments for the Truth, and yet
retain their Corruption. They must do more, they must consider those Arguments.
Who requires it of them? The Law that insticts the Punishment, does not; but
this we may be sure their Love of their Lusts, and their Hatred of Punishment
requires of them, and will bring them to, viz. to consider how to retain their
beloved Lusts, and yet avoid the Uneasiness of the Punishment they lie under;
this is presumable they do; therefore they go one easy Step farther, they
conform, and then they are safe from Force, and may still retain their
Corruption. Is it therefore presumable they have parted with their Corruption,
because Force has driven them to take Sanctuary against Punishment in
Conformity, where Force is no longer to molest them, or pull them from their
darling Inclinations? The Difficulty in Religion is, you say, for Men to part
with their Lusts; this makes Force, necessary: Men find out a way by consorming
to avoid Force without parting with their Lusts, therefore it is presumable
when they con^orm, that Force which they can avoid without quitting their
Lusts, has made them part with them, which is indeed not to part with their
Lusts, because of Force, but to part with them gratis; which if you can say is
presumable, the Foundation of your need of Force (which you place in the
Prevalency of Corruption, and Men's adhering to their Lusts) will be gone, and
so there will be no need of Force at all. If the great Difficulty in Religion
be for Men to part with or mortify their Lusts, and the only Counter-ballance
in the other Scale, to assist the true Religion, to prevail against their
Lusts, be Force; which I beseech you is presumable, if they can avoid Force,
and retain their Lusts, that they should quit their Lusts, and heartily embrace
the true Religion, which i^ incompatible with them; or else that they should
avoid the Force, and retain their Lusts? To say the former of these, is to say
that it is presumable, that they will quit their Lusts, and heartily embrace
the true Religion for its own sake: for he that heartily embraces the true
Religion, because of a Force which he knows he can avoid at Pleasure, without
quitting his Lusts, cannot be said so to embrace it, because of that Force:
Since a Force he can avoid without quitting his Lusts, cannot be said to assist
Truth in making him quit them: For in this Truth has no Assistance from it at
all. So that this i^ to say there is no need of Force at all in the Case.

Take a co^tous Wretch, whose Heart is so set upon Money, that he would give
his Firstborn to save his Bags; who is pursued by the Force of the Magistrate
to an Arrest, and compelled to hear what is alleged against him; and the
Prosecution of the Law threatening Imprisonment or other Punishment, if he do
not pay the just Debt which is demanded of him: If he enters himself in ^he
Ki^g's Bench, where he can enjoy his Freedom without paying the Debt, and
parting with his Money; will you say that it is presumable he did it to pay the
D^bt, and not to avoid the Force of the Law? The Lust of the Flesh and Pride of
Life are as strong and prevalent as the Lust of the Eye: And if you will
deliberately say again, that it is presumable, that Men are driven by Force to
consider, so as to part with their Lusts, when no more is known of them, but
that they do what discharges them from the Force, without any Necessity of
parting with their Lusts; I think I shall have occasion to send you to my
Pagans and Mahometans, but shall have no need to say any thing more to you of
this matter my self.

I agree with you, that there is but one only true Religion; I agree too that
that one only true Religion is professed and held in the Church of England; and
yet I deny, if Force may be used to bring Men to that true Religion, that upon
your Principles it can lawfully be used to bring Men to the National Religion
in England as established by Law; because Force, according to your own Rule,
being only lawful because it is necessary, and P. 30.
therefore unfit to be used where not necessary, i. e. necessary to bring Men
to Salvation, it can never be lawful to be used to bring a Man to any thing,
that is not necessary to Salvation, as I have more fully shown in another
Place. If therefore in the National Religion of England, there be any thing put
in as necessary to Communion, that is, though true, yet not necessary to
Salvation, Force cannot be lawfully used to bring Men to that Communion, though
the thing so required in it self may perhaps be true.

There be a great many Truths contained in Scripture, which a Man may be
ignorant of, and consequently not believe, without any Danger to his Salvation,
or else very few would be capable of Salvation: for I think I may truly say,
there was never any one, but he that was the Wisdom of the Father, who was not
ignorant of some, and mistaken in others of them. To bring Men therefore to
embrace such Truths, the Use of Force by your own Rule cannot be lawful:
because the Belief or Knowledge of those Truths themselves not being necessary
to Salvation, there can be no Necessity Men should be brought to embrace them,
and so no Necessity to use Force to bring Men to embrace them.

The only true Religion which is necessary to Salvation, may in one National
Church have that joined with it, which in it self is manifestly false and
repugnant to Salvation; in such a Communion no Man can join without quitting
the way of Salvation. In another National Church, with this only true Religion
may be joined, what is neither repugnant nor necessary to Salvation; and of
such there may be several Churches differing one from another in Confessions,
Ceremonies and Discipline, which are usually called different Religions, with
either or each of which a good Man (if satisfied in his own Mind) may
communicate without Danger, whilst another not satisfied in Conscience
concerning something in the Doctrine, Discipline or Worship, cannot safely, nor
without Sin, communicate with this or that of them. Nor can Force be lawfully
used on your Principles to bring any Man to either of them, because such things
are required to their Communion, which not being requisite to Salvation, Men
may seriously and conscientiously differ, and be in doubt about, without
indangering their Souls.

That which here raises a Noise, and gives a Credit to it, whereby many are
misled into an unwarrantable Zeal, is, that these are called different
Religions; and every one thinking his own the true, the only true, condemns all
the rest as false Religions. Whereas those who hold all things necessary to
Salvation, and add not thereto any thing in Doctrine, Discipline or Worship,
inconsistent with Salvation, are of one and the same Religion, though divided
into different Societies or Churches, under different Forms: which whether the
Passion and Polity of designing; or the sober and pious Intention of
well-meaning Men, set up, they are no other, than the Contrivances of Men, and
such they ought to be esteemed in whatsoever is required in them, which God has
not made necessary to Salvation, however in its own Nature it may be
indifferent lawful or true. For none of the Articles or Confessions of any
Church, that I know, containing in them all the Truths of Religion, though they
contain some that are not necessary to Salvation, to garble thus the Truths of
Religion, and by their own Authority take some not necessary to Salvation, and
make them the terms of Communion; and leave out others as necessary to be known
and believed, is purely the Contrivance of Men: God never having appointed any
such distinguishing System; nor, as I have showed, can Force, upon your
Principles, lawfully be used to bring Men to embrace it.

Concerning Ceremonies, I shall here only ask you whether you think Kneeling at
the Lord's Supper, or the Cross in Baptism, are necessary to Salvation? I
mention these as having been matter of great Scr^ple: if you will not say they
are, how can you say that Force can be lawfully used to bring Men into a
Communion, to which these are made necessary? If you say, Kneeling is necessary
to a decent Uniformity, (for of the Cross in Baptism I have spoken elsewhere)
though that should be true yet it is an Argument you cannot use for it, if you
are of the Church of England: for, if a decent Uniformity may be well enough
preserved without kneeling at Prayer, where Decency requires it at least as
much as at receiving the Sacrament, why may it not well enough be preserved
without kneeling at the Sacrament? Now that Uniformity is thought sufficiently
preserved without kneeling at Prayer, is evident by the various Postures Men
are at liberty to use, and may be generally observed, in all our Congregations,
during the Minister's Prayer in the Pulpit before and after his Sermon, which
it seems can consist well enough with Decency and Uniformity; tho it be at
Prayer addressed to the great God of Heaven and Earth, to whose Majesty it is
that the Reverence to be expressed in our Gestures is due, when we put up
Petitions to him, who is invariably the same, in what or whose Words soever we
address our selves to him.

The Preface to the Book of Common Prayer tells us, That the Ri^es and
Ceremonies appointed to be used in Divine Worship, are things in their own
Nature indifferent and alterable. Here I ask you, whether any humane Power can
make any thing, in its own nature indifferent, necessary to Salvation? If it
cannot, then neither can any Humane Power be justified in the use of Force, to
bring Men to Conformity in the use of such things. If you think Men have
Authority to make any thing, in it self indifferent, a necessary part of God's
Worship, I shall desire you to consider what our Author says of this Matter,
which has not yet deserved your notice.

The misapplying his Power, you say, is a Sin in the Magistrate, (...). 72^
and lays him open to Divine Vengeance. And is it not a misapplying of his
Power, and a Sin in him to use Force to bring Men to such a Compliance in an
indifferent thing, which in Religious Worship may be a Sin to them? Force, you
say, may be used to punish those who dissent from the Communion of the Church
of England. Let us suppose now all its Doctrines not only true, but necessary
to Salvation; but that there is put into the Terms of its Communion some
indifferent Action which God has not enjoined, nor made a part of his Worship,
which any Man is persuaded in his Conscience not to be lawful; suppose kneeling
at the Sacrament, which having been superstitiously used in Adoration of the
Bread as the real Body of Christ, may give occasion of scruple to some now, as
well as eating of Flesh offered to Idols did to others in the Apostles time;
which though lawful in it self, yet the Apostle said, he would eat no 1 Cor.
VIII. 13.
Flesh while the World stands, rather than make his weak Brother offend. And
if to lead, by Example, the Scrupulous into any Action, in it self indifferent,
which they thought unlawful, be a Sin, as appears at large, Romans XIV. how much
more is it to add Force to our Example, and to compel Men by Punishments to
that, which, though indifferent in it self, they cannot join in without
sinning? I desire you to show me how Force can be necessary in such a Case,
without which you acknowledge it not to be lawful. Not to kneel at the Lord's
Supper, God not having ordained it, is not a Sin; and the Apostles receiving it
in the Posture of sitting or lying, which was then used at Meat, is an Evidence
it may be received not kneeling. But to him that thinks Kneeling is unlawful,
it is certainly a Sin. And for this you may take the Authority of a very
Judicious and Reverend Prelate of our Church, in these Words; Where a Man is
Discourse of Conscience, p. 18.
mistaken in his Judgment, even in that Case it is always a Sin to act against
it; by so doing, he wilfully acts against the best Light which at present he
has for the direction of his Actions. I need not here repeat his Reasons,
having already quoted him above more at large; though the whole Passage, writ
(as he uses) with great Strength and Clearness, deserves to be read and
considered. If therefore the Magistrate enjoins such an unnecessary Ceremony,
and uses Force to bring any Man to a sinful Communion with our Church in it,
let me ask you, Does he sin, or misapply his Power or no?

True and false Religions are Names that easily engage Men's Affections on the
hearing of them; the one being the Aversion, the other the Desire (at least as
they persuade themselves) of all Mankind. This makes Men forwardly give into
these Names, wherever they meet with them; and when mention is made of
bringing Men from false to the true Religion (very often without knowing what
is meant by those Names) they think nothing can be done too much in such a
Business, to which they entitle God's Honor, and the Salvation of Men's Souls.

I shall therefore desire of you, if you are that fair and sincere Lover of
Truth you profess, when you write again, to tell us what you mean by true, and
what by a false Religion, that we may know which in your sense are so: for as
you now have used these Words in your Treatise, one of them seems to stand only
for the Religion of the Church of England, and the other for that of all other
Churches. I expect here you should make the same Outcries against me, as you
have in your former Letter, for imposing a Sense upon your Words contrary to
your Meaning; and for this you will appeal to your own Words in some other
Places: but of this I shall leave the Reader Judge, and tell him, this is a Way
very easy and very usual for Men, who having not clear and consistent Notions,
keep themselves as much as they can under the shelter of general and variously
applicable Terms, that they may save themselves from the Absurdities or
Consequences of one Place, by a help from some general or contrary Expression
in another: Whether it be a desire of Victory, or a little too warm Zeal for a
Cause you have been hitherto persuaded of, which has led you into this way of
writing; I shall only mind you, that the Cause of God requires nothing, but
what may be spoken out plainly in a clear determined Sense, without any reserve
or cover. In the mean time this I shall leave with you as evident, That Force
upon your ground cannot be lawfully used to bring Men to the Communion of the
Church of England, (that being all that I can find you clearly mean by the True
Religion) till you have proved that all that is required of one in that
Communion, is necessary to Salvation.

However therefore you tell us, That convenient Force used to P. 21.
bring Men to the true Religion, is all that you contend for, and all P. 17, 18.
that you allow. That it is for promoting the true Religion. That P. 28, 29.
it is to bring Men to consider, so as not to reject the Truth necessary to P.
26.
Salvation.... To bring Men to embrace the Truth that must save them. And
abundance more to this purpose. Yet all this Talk of the true Religion
amounting to no more, but the National Religion established by Law in England;
and your bringing Men to it, to no more than bringing them to an outward
Profession of it; it would better have suited that Condition, ( viz. without
Prejudice, and with an honest Mind) which you require in others, to have spoke
plainly what you aimed at, rather than prepossess Men's Minds in favor of your
Cause, by the Impressions of a Name that in truth did not properly belong to it.

It was not therefore without ground that I said, I suspected L. 2. p. 4.
you built all on this lurking Supposition, that the National Religion now in
England, backed by the public Authority of the Law, is the only true Religion,
and therefore no other is to be tolerated: which being a Supposition equally
unavoidable, and equally just in other Countries; unless that we can imagine
that everywhere but in England, Men believe what at the same time they think
to be a Lie, etc. Here you erect your Plumes, and to this your triumphant
Logic gives you not Patience to answer, without an Air of Victory in the
entrance: P. 11.
How, Sir, is this Supposition equally unavoidable, and equally just in other
Countries, where false Religions are the National? (for that you must mean, or
nothing to the purpose.) Hold, Sir, you go too fast; take your own System with
you, and you will perceive it will be enough to my purpose, if I mean those
Religions which you take to be false: for if there be any other National
Churches, which agreeing with the Church of England in what is necessary to
Salvation, yet have established Ceremonies different from those of the Church
of England; should not any one who dissented here from the Church of England
upon that account, as preferring that to our Way of Worship, be justly
punished? If so, then Punishment in Matters of Religion being only to bring Men
to the true Religion, you must suppose him not to be yet of it, and so the
National Church he approves of, not to be of the true Religion. And yet is it
not equally unavoidable, and equally just, that that Church should suppose its
Religion the only true Religion, as it is that yours should do so, it agrecing
with yours in things necessary to Salvation, and having made some things, in
their own nature indifferent, requisite to Conformity for Decency and Order, as
you have done? So that my saying, It is equally unavoidable, and equally just
in other Countries, will hold good, without meaning what you charge on me, that
that Supposition is equally unavoidable, and equally just, where the National
Religion is absolutely false.

But in that large Sense too, what I said will hold good; and you would have
spared your useless Subtilties against it, if you had been as willing to take
my Meaning, and answered my Argument, as you were to turn what I said to a
Sense which the Words themselves show I never intended. My Argument in short
was this, That granting Force to be useful to propagate and support Religion,
yet it would be no Advantage to the true Religion, that you a Member of the
Church of England, supposing yours to be the true Religion, should thereby
claim a Right to use Force, since such a Supposition to those who were Members
of other Churches, and believed other Religions, was equally unavoidable, and
equally just. And the Reason I annexed, shows both this to be my Meaning, and
my Assertion to be true: My Words are, Unless we can imagin^ that everywhere
but in England, Men believe what at the sam^ time they think to be a Lie.
Having therefore never said, nor thought that it is equally unavoidable, or
equally just, that Men in every Country should believe the National Religion of
the Country; but that it is equally unavoidable, and equally just, that Men
believing the National Religion of their Country, be it true or false, should
suppose it to be true; and let me here add also, should endeavor to propagate
it: you however go on thus to reply; If so, then I fear it will be equally true
too, and equally rational: for otherwise I see not how it can be equally
unavoidable, or equally just: for if it be not equally true, it cannot be
equally just; and if it be not equally rational, it cannot be equally
unavoidable. But if it be equally true, and equally rational, then either all
Religions are true, or none is true: for if they be all equally true, and one
of them be not true, then none of them can be true. I challenge any one to put
these four good Words, unavoidable, just, rational and true, more equally
together, or to make a better-wrought Deduction: but after all, my Argument
will nevertheless be good, that it is no Advantage to your Cause, for you or
any one of it, to suppose yours to be the only true Religion; since it is
equally unavoidable, and equally just for any one, who believes any other
Religion, to suppose the same thing. And this will always be so, till you can
show, that Men cannot receive false Religions upon Arguments that appear to
them to be good; or that having received Falsehood under the appearance of
Truth, they can, whilst it so appears, do otherwise than value it, and be acted
by it, as if it were true. For the Equality that is here in question, depends
not upon the Truth of the Opinion embraced, but on this, that the Light and
Persuasion a Man has at present, is the Guide which he ought to follow, and
which in his Judgment of Truth he cannot avoid to be governed by. And therefore
the terrible Consequences you dilate on in the following part of that Page, I
leave you for your private Use on some sitter Occasion.

You therefore who are so apt without cause to complain of want of Ingenuity in
others, will do well hereafter to consult your own, and another time change
your Style; and not under the undesined Name of the true Religion, because that
is of more Advantage to your Argument, mean only the Religion established by
Law in England, shutting out all other Religions now professed in the World.
Though when you have defined what is the true Religion, which you would have
supported and propagated by Force; and have told us it is to be found in the
Liturgy and thirty nine Articles of the Church of England; and it be agreed to
you, that that is the only true Religion, your Argument (for Force as necessary
to Men's Salvation) from the want of Light and Strength enough in the true
Religion to prevail against Men's Lusts, and the Corruption of their Nature,
will not hold; because your bringing Men by Force, your way applied, to the
true Religion, be it what you will, is but bringing them to an outward
Conformity to the National Church. But the bringing them so far, and no
farther, having no opposition to their Lusts, no Inconsistency with their
corrupt Nature, is not on that account at all necessary, nor does at all help,
where only, on your grounds, you say, there is need of the Assistance of Force
toward their Salvation.

CHAP. VIII. Of Salvation to be procured by Force your way.
THere cannot be imagined a more laudable Design than the promoting the
Salvation of Men's Souls, by any one who shall undertake it. But if it be a
Pretense made use of to cover some other By-Interest, nothing can be more
odious to Men, nothing more provoking to the great God of Heaven and Earth,
nothing more misbecoming the Name and Character of a Christian. With what
Intention you took your P^n in hand to defend and encourage the use of Force in
the business of Men's Salvation, it is sit in Charity we take your Word; but what
your Scheme, as you have delivered it, is guilty of, it is my business to take
notice of, and represent to you.

To my saying, that if Persecution, as is pretended, were for L. 2. p. 11.
the Salvation of Men's Souls, bare Conformity would not serve the turn, but Men
would be examined whether they do it upon Reason and Conviction: You answer,
Who they be that pretend P. 22.
that Persecution is for the Salvation of Men's Souls, you know not. Whatever
you know not, I know one, who in the Letter under consideration pleads for
Force, as useful for the promoting the Salvation P. 17.
of Men's Souls: and that the use of Force is no other Means P. 31.
for the Salvation of Men's Souls, than what the Author and Finisher of our
Faith has directed. That so far is the Magistrate, when he P. 32.
gives his helping- Hand to the furtherance of the Gospel, by laying convenient
Penalties upon such as reject it, or any part of it, from using any other Means
for the Salvation of Men's Souls, than what the Author and Finisher of our Faith
has directed, that he does no more than his Duty for promoting the Salvation of
Souls. And as the Means by which Men may be brought into the Way of Salvation.
Ay, but where P. 58.
do you say that Persecution is for the Salvation of Souls? I thought you had
been arguing against my Meaning, and against the things I say, and not against
my Words in your Meaning, which is not against me. That I used the word
Persecution for what you call Force and Penalties, you knew: for in page 21.
that immediately precedes this, you take notice of it, with some little kind of
Wonder, in these Words; Persecution, so it seems you call all Punishments for
Religion. That I do so then, (whether properly or improperly) you could not be
ignorant; and then I beseech you apply your Answer here to what I say: My Words
are; `I^ Persecution (as is pretended) were for the Salvation of Men's Souls,
Men that conform would be examined whether `they did so upon Reason and
Conviction. Change my word Persecution into Punishment for Religion, and then
consider the Truth or Ingenuity of your Answer: for in that sense of the word
Persecution, do you know no body that pretends Persecution is for the Salvation
of Men's Souls? So much for your Ingenuity, and the Arts you allow your self to
serve a good Cause. What do you think of one of my Pagans or Mahometans? Could
he have done better? For I shall often have occasion to mind you of them. Now
to your Argument I said, That I thought those who make Laws, and use Force, to
bring Men to Church-Conformity in Religion; seek only the Compliance, but
concern themselves not for the Conviction of those they punish, and so never
use Force to convince. For pray tell me, When any Dissenter conforms, and
enters into the Church Communion, is he ever examined to see whether he does it
upon Reason and Conviction, and such Grounds as would become a Christian
concerned for Religion? If Persecution (as i^ pr^tended) were for the Salvation
of Men's Souls, this would be done, and Men not driven to take the Sacrament to
keep their Places, or obtain Licenses to s^ll Ale, (for so low have these holy
things been P. 22.
prostituted.) To this you here reply; As to those Magistrates, who having
provided sufficiently for the Instruction of all under their Care, in the true
Religion, do make Laws, and use moderate Penalties to bring Men to the
Communion of the Church of God, and Conformity to the Rules and Orders of it, I
think their Behavior does plainly enough speak them to seek and concern
themselves for the Conviction of those wh^m they punish, and for their
Compliance only as the Fruit of their Conviction. If Means of Instruction were
all, that is necessary to convince People, the providing sufficiently for
Instruction would be an Evidence, that those that did so, did seek and concern
themselves for Men's Conviction: but if there be something as necessary for
Conviction as the Means of Instruction, and without which those Means will
signify nothing, and that be severe and impartial Examination; and if Force be,
as you say, so necessary to make Men thus examine, that they can by no other
way but Force be brought to do it: If Magistrates do not lay their Penalties on
Non-examination, as well as provide Means of Instruction, whatever you may say
you think, few People will sind reason to believe you think those Magistrates
seek and concern themselves much for the Conviction of those they punish, when
that Punishment is not levelled at that, which is a hindrance to their
Conviction, i. e. against their Aversion to severe and impartial Examination.
To that Aversion no Punishment can be pretended to be a Remedy, which does not
reach and combat the Aversion; which '(...) plain no Punishment does, which may
be avoided without parting with, or abating the Prevalency of that Aversion.
This is the Case, where Men undergo Punishments for not conforming, which they
may be rid of, without (...) and impartially examining Matters of Religion.

To show that what I mentioned was no Sign of Unconcernedness in the Magistrate
for Men's Conviction; You add, Nor does the contrary appear from the not
examining Dissenters when they conform, P. 22.
t^ see whether they do it upon Reason and Conviction: For where sufficient
Instruction is provided, it is ordinarily presumable that when Dissenters
conform, they do it upon Reason and Conviction. Here if ordinarily signifies
any thing, (for it is a Word you make much use of, whether to express or cover
your Sense, let the Reader judge) then you suppose there are Cases wherein it is
not presumable; and I a^k you whether in those, or any Cases it be examined
whether Dissenters when they conform, do it upon Reason and Conviction? At best
that it is ordinarily pr^sumable, is but gra^is dictum, especially since you
suppose, that it is the Corruption of their Nature that hinders them from
considering as they ought, so as upon Reason and. Conviction to embrace the
Truth: Which Corruption of Nature, that they may retain with Conformity I think
is very presumable. But be that as it will, this I am fure is ordinarily and
always presumable, that if those who use Force, were as intent upon Men's
Conviction, as they are on their Conformity, they would not wholly content
themselves with the one, without ever examining and looking into the other.

Another Excuse you make for this Neglect, is, That as to irreligious Ibid.
Persons who only seek their s^chlar Advantage, how easy it is for them to
pretend Conviction, and to offer such Grounds (if that were required) as would
become a Christian concerned for Religion, that is, what no Care of Man can
certainly prevent. This is an admirable Justification of your Hypothesis. Men
are to be punished: To what end? To make them severely and impartially consider
Matters of Religion, that they may be convinced, and thereupon sincerely
embrace the Truth. But what need of Force or Punishment for this? Because their
Lusts and Corruptions will otherwise keep them both from considering as they
ought, and embracing the true Religion; and therefore they must lie under
Penalties till they have considered as they ought, which is when they have upon
Conviction embraced. But how shall the Magistrate know when they upon
Conviction embrace, that he may then take off their Penalties? That indeed
cannot be known, and ought not to be inquired after, because irreligious
Persons who only seek their secular Advantage, or in other Words, all those who
desire at their ease to retain their beloved Lusts and Corruptions, may easily
pretend Conviction, and offer such Grounds (if it were required) as would
become a Christian concerned for Religion: This is what no Care of Man can
certainly prevent. Which is Reason enough, why no busy Forwardness in Man to
disease his Brother should use Force upon Pretense of prevalling against Man's
Corruptions, that hinder their considering and embracing the Truth upon
Conviction, when it is confessed, it cannot be known, whether they have
considered, are convinced, or have really embraced the true Religion or no? And
thus you have shown us your admirable Remedy, which is not it seems for the
irreligious (for it is easy, you say, for them to pretend Conviction, and so
avoid Punishment) but for those who would be religious without it.

But here in this Case, as to the Intention of the Magistrate, how can it be
said, that the Force he uses is designed by subduing Men's Corruptions, to make
way for considering and embracing the Tr^th, when it is so applied, that it is
confessed here, that a Man may get rid of the Penalties without parting with
the Corruptions, they are pretended to be used against? But you have a ready
Answer, This is what no Care of Man can certainly prevent; which is but in
other Words to proclaim the Ridiculousness of your Use of Force, and to avow
that your Method can do nothing. If by not certainly, you mean it may any way,
or to any degree prevent, why is it not so done? If not, why is a Word that
signifies nothing put in, unless it be for a Shelter on Occasion? A Benefit you
know how to draw from this way of writing: But this here taken how you please,
will only serve to lay Blame on the Magistrate, or your Hypothesis, choose you
whether. I for my part have a better Opinion of the Ability and Management of
the Magistrate: What he aimed at in his Laws, that I believe he mentions in
them, and as wise Men do in Bu^nes, fpoke out plainly what he had a Mind should
be done. But c^inly there cannot a more ridiculous Character be put on
Lawmakers, than to tell the World they intended to make Men consider, examine,
etc. but yet neither required nor named any thing in their Laws but Conformity.
Though yet when Men are certainly to be punished for not really embracing the
true Religion, there ought to be certain Matters of Fact, whereby those that
do, and those that do not so embrace the Truth, should be distinguished; and
for that you have, it is true, a clear and established Criterion, i. e.
Conformity and Nonconformity: which do very certainly distinguish the Innocent
from the Guilty; those that really and sincerely do embrace the Truth that must
save them, from those that do not.

But, Sir, to resolve the Question, whether the Conviction of Men's
Understandings, and the Salvation of their Souls, be the Business and Aim of
those who use Force to bring Men into the Profession of the National Religion;
I ask, whether if that were so, there could be so many as there are, not only
in most Country-Parishes, but, I think I may say, may be found in all Parts of
England, grossly ignorant in the Doctrines and Principles of the Christian
Religion, if a strict Inquiry were made into it? If Force be necessary to be
used to bring Men to Salvation, certainly some part of it would (...) out some
of the ignorant and unconsidering that are in the National Church, as well as
it does so diligently all the Nonconformists out of it, whether they have
considered, or are knowing or no. But to this you give a very ready Answer;
Would you have the Magistrate P. 64.
punish all indifferently, those who obey the Law as well as them that do not?
What is the Obedience the Law requires? That you tell us in these Words, If the
Magistrate provides (...) P. 63.
(...) the Instruction of all his Subjects in the true Religion, and then
requires them all under convenient Penalties to (...) to the Teachers and
Ministers of it, and to profess and exercise it with one Accord under their
Direction in public Assemblies: Which in other Words is but Conformity, which
here you express a little plainer in these Words; But as those Magistrates who
having provided P. 22.
sufficiently for the Instruction of all under their Care in the true Religion
do make Laws, and use moderate Penalties to bring Men to the Communion of the
Church of God, and to conform to the Rules and Orders of it. You add, Is there
any Pretense to say that in so doing, he [the Magistrate] applies Force only to
a part of his (...), when the Law is general, and excepts none? There is no
Pretense, I confess, to say that in so doing he applies Force only to a part of
his Subjects, to make them Conformists, from that it is plain the Law excepts
none. But if Conformists may be ignorant, grossly ignorant of the Principles and
Doctrines of Christianity; if there be no (...) used to make them consider as
they ought, so as to understand, be convinced of, believe and obey the Truths
of the Gospel, are not they exempt from that Force which you say is to make Men
consider and examine Matters (...). 37.
of Religion as they ought to do? Force is applied to all indeed to make them
Conformists: But if being Conformists once, and frequenting the Places of
public Worship, and there showing an outward Compliance with the Ceremonies
prescribed, (for that is all the Law requires of all, call it how you please)
they are exempt from all Force and Penalties, though they are never so
ignorant, never so far from understanding, believing, receiving the Truths of
the (...); I think it is evident that then Force is not applied to all to (...)
the Conviction of the P. 16.
Understanding. To bring Men to consider those Reasons and Arguments P. 26.
which are proper to convince the Mind, and which without being forced, they
would not consider. To bring Men to that Consideration, P. 29.
which nothing else but Force (besides the extraordinary Grace of God) would
bring them to. To make Men good Christians. To P. 23.
make Men receive Instruction. To cure their Aversion to the true P. 43.
Religion. To bring Men to consider and examine the Controversies P. 58.
which they are bound to consider and examine, i. e. those wherein they P. 2.
cannot err without dishonouring God, and endangering their own and other Men's
eternal Salvation. To weigh Matters of Religion carefully P. 16.
and impartially. To bring Men to the true Religion and to Salvation. P. 13.
That then Force is not applied to all the Subjects for these Ends, I think you
will not deny. These are the Ends for which you tell us in the Places quoted,
that Force is to be used in Matters of Religion: It Is by its Usefulness and
Necessity to those Ends, that you tell us, the Magistrate is authorized and
obliged to use Force in Matters of (...). Now if all these Ends be not attained
by a bare (...), and yet if by a bare Conformity Men are wholly exempt from all
Force and Penalties in Matters of Religion, will you say that for these Ends
Force is applied to all the Magistrate's Subjects? If you will, I must send you
to my Pagans and (...) for a little Conscience and Modesty. If you (...) Force
(...) not (...) to all for these Ends, notwithstanding any Laws obliging all to
Conformity, you must also confess, (...) what you say concerning the Laws being
general, is nothing to the Purpose; since all that are under Penalties for not
(...) are not under any Penalties for Ignorance, Irreligion, or the want of
those Ends for which you say Penalties are useful and necessary.

You go on, And therefore if such Persons profane the Sacrament P. 22.
to keep their Places, or to obtain Licenses to sell Ale, this is an horrible
Wickedness. I (...) them not. But it is their own, and they alone must answer
for it. Yes, and those who threatened poor ignorant and irreligious Ale-sellers,
whose Livelihood it was, to take away their Licenses, if they did not conform
and receive the Sacrament, may be thought perhaps to have something to answer
for. You add, But it is very unjust to impute it to those P. 23.
who make such Laws, and use such Force, or to say that they prostitute holy
things, and drive Men to profane them. Nor is it just to insinuate in your
Answer, as if that had been said which was not. But if it be true that a poor
ignorant loose irreligious Wretch should be threatened to be turned out of his
Calling and Livelihood, if he would not take the Sacrament: May it not be said
these holy things have been so low prostituted? And if this be not profaning
them, pray tell me what is?

This I think may be said without Injustice to any body, that it does not
appear, that those who make strict Laws for Conformity, and take no Care to
have it examined upon what Grounds Men conform, are not very much concerned,
that Men's Understandings should be convinced: And though you go on to say, that
they design by their Laws to do what lies in them to make Men good Christians:
That will scarce be believed, if what you say be true, that Force is necessary
to bring those who cannot be P. 58.
otherwise brought to it, to study the true Religion, with such Care and
Diligence as they might and ought to use, and with an honest Mind. And yet we
see a great part, or any of those who are ignorant in the true Religion, have
no such Force applied to them, especially since you tell us, in the same Place,
that no Man ever studied the true Religion with such Care and Diligence as he
might and ought Ibid.
to use, and with an honest Mind, but he was convinced of the Truth of it. If
then Force and Penalties can produce that Study, Care, Diligence and honest
Mind, which will produce Knowledge and Conviction (and that as you say in the
following Words) make good Men; I ask you, if there be found in the Communion
of the Church, exempt from Force upon the Account of Religion, ignorant,
irreligious, ill Men; and that to speak moderately, not in great Disproportion
fewer than amongst the Nonconformists, will you believe your self, when you say
the Magistrates do by their Laws all that in them lies to make them good
Christians; when they use not that Force to them which you, not I, say is
necessary; and that they are, where it is necessary, obliged to use? And
therefore I give you leave to repeat again the Words you subjoin here, But if
after all they [ i. e. the Magistrates] can do, wicked and godless Men will
still resolve to be so, they will be so, and I know not who but God Almighty
can help it. But this being P. 23.
spoken of Conformists, on whom the Magistrates lay no Penalties, use no Force
for Religion, give me leave to mind you of the Ingenuity of one of my Pagans or
Mahometans.

You tell us, That the Usefulness of Force to make Scholars learn, authorizes
Schoolmasters to use it. And would you not think a Schoolmaster discharged his
Duty well, and had a great Care of their Learning, who used his Rod only to
bring Boys to School; but if they come there once a Week, whether they slept,
or only minded their Play, never examined what Proficiency they made, or used
the Rod to make them study and learn, tho they would not apply themselves
without it?

But to show you how much you your self are in earnest for the Salvation of
Souls in this your Method, I shall set down what I said, p. 61. of my Letter on
that Subject, and what you answer, p. 68. of yours.

L. 2. p. 61. You speak of it here as the most deplorable Condition imaginable,
that Men should be left to themselves, and not be forced to consider and
examine the Grounds of their Religion, and search impartially and diligently
after the Truth. This you make the great Miscarriage of Mankind; and for this
you seem solicitous, all through your Treatise, to find out a Remedy; and there
is scarce a Leaf wherein you do not offer yours. But what if after all, now you
should be found to prevaricate? Men have contrived to themselves, say you, a
great Variety of Religions: It Is granted. They seek not the Truth in this
matter with that Application of Mind, and that freedom of Judgment which is
requisite: It Is confessed. All the false Religions now on foot in the World,
have taken their rise from the slight and partial Consideration, which Men have
contented themselves with in searching after the true; and Men take them up,
and persist in them for want of due Examination: Be it so. There is need of a
Remedy for this; and I have found one whose Success cannot be questioned: Very
well. What is it? Let us hear it. Why, Dissenters must be punished. Can any
body that hears you say so, believe you in earnest; and that want of
Examination is the thing you would have amended, when want of Examination is
not the thing you would have punished? If want of Examination be the Fault,
want of Examination must be punished; if you are, as you pretend, fully
satisfied that Punishment is the proper and only Means to remedy it. But if in
all your Treatise you can show me one Place, where you say that the Ignorant,
the Careless, the Inconsiderate, the Negligent in examining thoroughly the Truth
of their own and others Religion, etc. are to be punished, I will allow your
Remedy for a good one. But you have not said any thing like this; and which is
more, I tell you beforehand, you dare not say it. And whilst you do not, the
World has reason to judge, that however want of Examination be a general Fault,
which you with great Vehemence have exaggerated; yet you use it only for a
pretense to punish Dissenters; and either distrust your Remedy, that it will
not cure this Evil, or else care not to have it generally cured. This evidently
appears from your whole Management of the Argument. And he that reads your
Treatise with attention, will be more confirmed in this Opinion, when he shall
find, that you (who are so earnest to have Men punished, to bring them to
consider and examine, that so they may discover the Way to Salvation) have not
said one word of considering, searching, and harkening to the Scripture; which
had been as good a Rule for a Christian to have sent them to, as to Reasons and
Arguments proper to convince them, of you know not what; As to the Instruction
and Government of the proper Ministers of Religion, which who they are, Men are
yet far from being agreed; Or as to the Information of those, who tell them
they have mistaken their Way, and offer to show them the right; and to the like
uncertain and dangerous Guides; which were not those that our Savior and the
Apostles sent Men to, bat to the Scriptures. Search the Scriptures, for in them
you think you have eternal Life, says our Savior to the unbelieving Joh. V. 39.
persecuting Jews. And it is the Scriptures which St. Paul says, 2 Timothy III. 15.
are able to make wise unto Salvation.

Talk no more therefore, if you have any care of your Reputation, how much it
is every Man's Interest not to be left to himself, without Molestation, without
Punishment in Matters of Religion. Talk not of bringing Men to embrace the
Truth that must save them, by putting them upon Examination. Talk no more of
Force and Punishment, as the only way lest to bring Men to examine. It Is evident
you mean nothing less: For tho want of Examination be the only Fault you
complain of, and Punishment be in your Opinion the only way to bring Men to it;
and this the whole Design of your Book; yet you have not once proposed in it,
that those who do not impartially examine, should be forced to it. And that you
may not think I talk at random, when I say you dare not; I will, if you please,
give you some Reasons for my saying so.

First, Because if you propose that all should be punished, who are ignorant,
who have not used such Consideration as is apt and proper to manifest the
Truth; but have been determined in the choice of their Religion by Impressions
of Education, Admiration of Persons, worldly Respects, Prejudices, and the like
incompetent Motives; and have taken up their Religion, without examining it as
they ought; you will propose to have several of your own Church (be it what it
will) punished; which would be a Proposition too apt to offend too many of it,
for you to venture on. For whatever need there be of Reformation, every one
will not thank you sor proposing such an one as must begin at (or at least
reach to) the House of God.

Secondly, Because if you should propose that all those who are ignorant,
careless, and negligent in examining, should be punished, you would have little
to say in this Question of Toleration: For if the Laws of the State were made
as they ought to be, equal to all the Subjects, without distinction of Men of
different Professions in Religion; and the Faults to be amended by Punishments,
were impartially punished in all who are guilty of them; this would immediately
produce a perfect Toleration, or show the Uselesness of Force in Matters of
Religion. Is therefore you think it so necessary, as you say, for the promoting
of true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, that Men should be punished to
make them examine; do but sind a way to apply Force to all that have not
thoroughly and impartially examined, and you have my Consent. For tho Force be
not the proper means of promoting Religion; yet there is no better way to show
the Uselesness of it, than the applying it equally to Miscarriage, in
whomsoever found, and not to distinct: Parties or Persuasions of Men, for the
Reformation of them alone, when others are equally faulty.

Thirdly, Because without being sor as large a Toleration as the Author
proposes, you cannot be truly and sincerely for a free and impartial
Examination. For whoever examines, must have the Liberty to judge, and follow
his Judgment; or else you put him upon Examination to no purpose. And whether
that will not as well lead Men from, as to your Church, is so much a Venture,
that by your way of Writing, it is evident enough you are loath to hazard it; and
if you are of the National Church, it is plain your Brethren will not bear with
you in the Allowance of such a Liberty. You must therefore either change your
Method; and if the want of Examination be that great and dangerous Fault you
would have corrected, you must equally punish all that are equally guilty of
any Neglect in this Matter, and then take your only means, your beloved Force,
and make the best of it; or else you must put off your Mask, and confess that
you design not your Punishments to bring Men to Examination, but to Conformity.
For the Fallacy you have used, is too gross to pass upon this Age.

L. 3. p. 68. Your next Paragraph runs high, and charges me with nothing less
than Prevarication. For whereas, as you tell me, I speak of it here as the most
deplorable Condition imaginable, that Men should be left to themselves, and not
be forced to consider and examine the Grounds of their Religion, and search
impartially and diligently after the Truth, etc. It seems all the Remedy I
offer, is no more than this, Dissenters must be punished. Upon which thus you
insult; Can any body that hears you say so, believe you in earnest, etc. Now
here I acknowledge, that though want or neglect of Examination be a general
Fault, yet the Method I propose for curing it, does not reach to all that are
guilty of it, but is limited to those who reject the true Religion, preposed to
them with sufficient Evidence. But then to let you see how little ground you
have to say that I prevaricate in this matter, I shall only desire you to
consider, what it is that the Author and my self were enquiring after: For it
is not, What Course is to be taken to confirm and establish those in the Truth,
who have already embraced it: nor, How they may be enabled to propagate it to
others, (for both which Purposes I have already acknowledged it very useful,
and a thing much to be desired, that all such Persons should, as far as they
are able, search into the Grounds upon which their Religion stands, and
challenges their Belief;) but the Subject of our Enquiry is only, What Method
is to be used, (...) bring Men to the true Religion. Now if this be the only
thing we were inquiring after, (as you cannot deny it to be) then every one
sees that in speaking to this Point, I had nothing to do with any who have
already embraced the true Religion; because they are not to be brought to that
Religion, but only to be confirmed and edified in it; but was only to consider
how those who reject it, may be brought to embrace it. So that how much soever
any of those who own the true Religion, may be guilty of neglect of
Examination; it is evident, I was only concerned to show how it may be cured in
those, who by reason of it, reject the true Religion, duly proposed or tendered
to them. And certainly to confine my self to this, is not to prevaricate,
unless to keep within the Bounds which the Question under debate prescribes me,
be to prevaricate.

In telling me therefore that I dare not say that the Ignorant, the Careless,
the Inconsiderate, the Negligent in examining, etc. (i. e. all that are such)
are to be punished, you only tell me that I dare not be impertinent. And
therefore I hope you will excuse me, if I take no notice of the three Reasons
you offer in your next Page for your saying so. And yet if I had had a mind to
talk impertinently, I know not why I might not have dared to do so, as well as
other Men.

There is one thing more in this Paragraph, which though nothing more pertinent
than the rest, I shall not wholly pass over. It lies in these Words; He that
reads your Treatise with Attention, will be more confirmed in this Opinion,
(viz. That I use want of Examination only for a Pretense to punish Dissenters,
etc.) when he shall find that you (who are so earnest to have Men punished, to
bring them to consider and examine, that so they may discover the Way of
Salvation) have not said one Word of considering, searching, and harkening to
the Scripture; which had been as good a Rule for a Christian to have sent them
to, as to Reasons and Arguments proper to convince them, of you know not what,
etc. How this confirms that Opinion, I do not see; nor have you thought fit to
instruct me. But as to the thing it self, viz. my not saying one Word of
considering, searching, and harkening to the Scripture; whatever Advantage a
captious Adversary may imagine he has in it, I hope it will not seem strange to
any indifferent and judicious Person, who shall but consider that throughout my
Treatise I speak of the true Religion only in general, i. e. not as limited to
any particular Dispensation, or to the Times of the Scriptures; but as reaching
from the Fall of Adam to the End of the World, and so comprehending the Times
which preceded the Scriptures; wherein yet God left not himself without
Witness, but furnished Mankind with sufficient Means of knowing Him and his
Will, in order to their eternal Salvation. For I appeal to all Men of Art,
whether, speaking of the True Religion under this Generality, I could be
allowed to descend to any such Rules of it, as belong only to some particular
Times, or Dispensations; such as you cannot but acknowledge the Old and New
Testaments to be.

In this your Answer you say, the Subject of our Inquiry is only what Method is
to be used to bring Men to the true Religion. He that reads what you say, again
and again, That the Magistrate P. 76, 77, 78.
is empowered and obliged to procure as much as in him lies, i. e. as far as by
Penalties it can be procured that NO MAN neglect his Soul, and shall remember
how many Pages you employ, A. p 6, etc. And here p. 6, etc. to show that it is
the Corruption of humane Nature which hinders Men from doing what they may and
ought for the Salvation of their Souls, and that therefore Penalties, no other
means being left, and Force were necessary to be used by the Magistrate to
remove these great Obstacles of L^sts and Corruptions, that none of his
Subjects might remain ignorant of the way of Salvation, or refuse to embrace
it. One would think your Inquiry had been after the means of CVRING MEN'S
Aversion to the true Religion, (which you tell us, p. 53. if not cured, is
certainly destructive of Men's Eternal Salvation) that so they might heartily
embrace it for their Salvation. But here you tell us, your Inquiry is only what
Method is to be used to bring Men to the true Religion: whereby you evidently
mean nothing but outward Conformity to that which you think the true Church, as
appears by the next following Words; Now if this be the only thing we were
inquiring after, then every one sees that in speaking to this Point, I had
nothing to do with any who have already embraced the true Religion. And also
every one sees that since amongst those with whom (having already embraced the
true Religion) you and your Penalties have nothing to do; there are those who
have not considered and examined Matters of Religion as they ought, whose Lusts
and corrupt Natures keep them as far alienated from believing, and as averse to
a real obeying the Truth that must save them, as any other Men; it is manifest
that embracing the true Religion in your Sense is only embracing the outward
Profession of it, which is nothing but outward Conformity. And that being the
furthest you would have your Penalties pursue Men, and there leave them with as
much of their Ignorance of the Truth, and Carelessness of their Souls as they
please, who can deny but that it would be impertinent in you to consider how
want of impartial Examination, or Aversion to the true Religion should in them
be cured? because they are none of those Subjects of the Commonwealth, whose
spiritual and eternal Interests are by political Government to be procured or
advanced, none of those Subjects whose Salvation the Magistrate is to take Care
of.

And therefore I excuse you, as you desire, for not taking notice of my three
Reasons; but whether the Reader will do so or no, is more than I can undertake.
I hope you too will excuse me for having used so harsh a Word as prevaricate,
and impute it to my want of Skill in the English Tongue. But when I find a Man
pretend to a great Concern for the Salvation of Men's Souls, and make it one of
the great Ends of Civil Government, that the Magistrate should make use of
Force to bring all his Subjects to consider, study and examine, believe and
embrace the Truth that must save them: when I shall have to do with a Man, who
to this Purpose has writ two Books to find out and desend the proper Remedies
for that general Backwardness and Aversion (which depraved humane Nature keeps
Men in) to an impartial Search after, and hearty embracing the true Religion;
and who talks of nothing less than Obligations on Sovereigns, both from their
particular Duty, as well as from common Charity, to take Care that none of
their Subjects should want the Assistance of this only means left for their
Salvation; nay, who has made it so necessary to Men's Salvation, that he talks
as if the Wisdom and Goodness of God would be brought in Question, if those who
needed it should be destitute of it; and yet notwithstanding all this Show of
Concern for Men's Salvation, contrives the Application of this sole Remedy so,
that a great many who lie under the Disease, should be out of the Reach and
Benefit of his Cure, and never have this only Remedy applied to them: When this
I say is so manifestly in his Thoughts all the while, that he is forced to
confess that though Want or Neglect of Examination be a general Fault, yet the
Method he proposes for curing it does not reach to all that are guilty of it;
but frankly owns, that he was not concerned to show how the Neglect of
Examination might be cured in those who conform, but only in those who by
reason of it reject the true Religion duly proposed to them: which rejecting
the true Religion will require a Man of Art to show to be here any thing but
Nonconformity to the National Religion. When, I say, I meet with a Man another
time that does this, who is so much a Man of Art, as to talk of all, and mean
but some; talk of hearty embracing the true Religion, and mean nothing but
Conformity to the National; pretend one thing, and mean another; if you please
to tell me what Name I shall give it, I shall not fail: for who knows how soon
again I may have an occasion sor it.

If I would punish Men for Nonconformity without owning of it, I could not use
a better Pretense than to say it was to make them hearken to Reasons and
Arguments proper to convince them, or to make them submit to the Instruction
and Government of the proper Ministers of Religion, without any thing else,
supposing still at the bottom the Arguments for, and the Ministers of my
Religion to be these, that till they outwardly complied with, they were to be
punished. But if (instead of outward Conformity to my Religion covered under
these indesinite terms) I should tell them, they were to examine the Scripture,
which was the sixed Rule for them and me, not examining could not give me a
Pretense to punish them, unless I would also punish Conformists as ignorant and
unversed in the Scripture as they, which would not do my Business.

But what need I use Arguments to show, that your punishing to make Men examine
is designed only against Dissenters, when in your Answer to this very Paragraph
of mine, you in plain Words acknowledge, that though want of Examination be a
general P. 68.
Fault, yet the Method you propose for curing does not reach to all that are
guilty of it? To which if you please to add what you tell us, That when
Dissenters conform, the Magistrate cannot know, P. 22.
and therefore never examins whether they do it upon Reason and Conviction or
no, though it be certain that upon conforming, Penalties, the necessary Means,
cease, it will be obvious, that whatever be talked, Conformity is all that is
aimed at, and that want of Examination is but the Pretense to punish Dissenters.

And this I told you, any one must be convinced of, who L. 2. p. 62.
observes that you (who are so earnest to have Men punished to bring them to
consider and examine that so they may discover the way of Salvation) have not
said one Word of considering, searching, and harkening to the Scripture, which,
you were told, was as good a Rule for a Christian to have sent Men to, as to
the Instruction and Government of the proper Ministers of Religion, or to the
Information of those who tell them they have mistaken 'their way, and offer to
show them the right. For this p^ssing by the Scripture you give us this Reason,
that throughout your Trea^se you speak of the true Religion only in general, i.
e. not as limited P. 69.
to any particular Dispensation, or to the times of the Scriptures, but as
reaching from the Fall of Adam to the End of the World, etc. And then you
appeal to all Men of Art, whether speaking of the true Religion under this
Generality, you could be allowed to descend to any such Rules of it as belong
only to some particular Times or Dispensations, such as I cannot but acknowledge
the Old and New Testaments to be.

The Author that you write against, making it his Business (as no body can
doubt who reads but the first Page of his Letter) to show that it is the Duty
of Christians to tolerate both Christians and others who differ from them in
Religion, it is pretty strange (in asserting against him that the Magistrate
might and ought to use Force to bring Men to the true Religion) you should mean
any other Magistrate than the Christian Magistrate; or any other Religion than
the Christian Religion. But it seems you took so little notice of the Design of
your Adversary, which was to prove, that Christians were not to use Force to
bring any one to the true Christian Religion; that you would prove, that
Christians now were to use Force, not only to bring Men to the Christian, but
also to the Jewish Religion; or that of the true Church before the Law, or to
some true Religion so general that it is none of these. For, say you,
throughout your Treatise you speak of the true Religion only in general, i. e.
not as limited to any particular Dispensation: Though one that were not a Man
of Art would suspect you to be of another Mind your self, when you told P. 3.
us, the shuting out of the Jews from the Rights of the Commonwealth, is a just
and necessary Caution in a Christian Commonwealth; which you say to justify
your Exception in the beginning of your A -- against the Largeness of the
Author's Toleration, who would not have Jews excluded. But speak of the true
Religion only in general as much as you please, if your true Religion be that
by which Men must be saved, can you send a Man to any better Guide to that true
Religion now than the Scripture?

If when you were in your Altitudes, writing the first Book, your Men of Art
could not allow you to descend to any such Rule as the Scripture, (though even
there you acknowledge the Severities A. p. 13.
spoken against, are such as are used to make Men Christians) because there (by
an Art proper to your self) you were to speak of true Religion under a
Generality, which had nothing to do with the Duty of Christians, in reference
to Toleration. Yet when here in your second Book, where you condescend all
along to speak of the CHRISTIAN RELIGION, and tell us, that the Magistrates
have Authority to make Laws for promoting the Christian RELIGION, and do by
their Laws design to contribute what in them lies to make Men good CHRISTIANS;
and complain of Toleration as the very Bane of the Life and Spirit of
CHRISTIANITY, etc. and have vouchsafed particularly to mention the Gospel; why
here, having been called upon for it, you could not send Men to the Scriptures,
and tell them directly, that those they were to study diligently, those they
were impartially and carefully to examine, to bring them to the true Religion,
and into the way of Salvation; rather than talk to them as you do, of receiving
Instruction, and considering Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to
convince them; rather than propose, as you do all along, such Objects of
Examination and Enquiry in general terms, as are as hard to be found, as the
thing it self, for which they are to be examined: Why I say you have here again
avoided sending Men to examine the Scriptures, is just matter of Inquiry. And
for this you must apply your self again to your Men of Art, to furnish you with
some other Reason.

If you will but cast your Eyes back to your next Page, you will there find
that you build upon this, that the Subject of your and the Author's I^quiry is
only what Method is to be used to bring Men to the true Religion. If this be
so, your Men of Art, who cannot allow you to descend to any such Rule as the
Scriptures, because you speak of the true Religion in general, i. e. not as
limited to any particular Dispensation, or to the times of the Scriptures, must
allow, that you deserve to be Head of their College; since you are so strict an
Observer of their Rules, that though your Inquiry be, What Method is to be used
to bring Men to the true Religion (now under the particular Dispensation of the
Gospel, and under Scripture-times) you think it an unpardonable Fault to recede
so far from your Generality, as to admit the Study and Examination of the
Scripture into your Method; for fear, it is like, your Method would be too
particular, if it would not now serve to bring Men to the true Religion, who
lived before the Flood. But had you had as good a Memory, as is generally
thought needful to a Man of Art, it is believed you would have spared this
Reason, for your being so backward in putting Men upon Examination of the
Scripture. And any one, but a Man of Art, who shall read what you tell us the
Magistrate's Duty is; and P. 31.
will but consider how convenient it would be, that Men should receive no
Instruction but from the Ministry, that you there tell us the Magistrate
assists; examine no Arguments, hear nothing of the Gospel, receive no other
Sense of the Scripture, but what that Ministry proposes; who if they had but
the coactive Power, (you think them as capable of as other Men) might assist
themselves; He, I say, who reflects but on these things, may perhaps find a
Reason that may better satisfy the Ignorant and Unlearned, who have not had the
good luck to arrive at being of the Number of these Men of Art, why you cannot
descend to propose to Men the studying of the Scripture.

Let me for once suppose you in holy Orders, (for we that are not of the
Adepti, may be allowed to be ignorant of the Punctilio's in Writing observed by
the Men of Art:) And let me then ask what Art is this, whose Rules are of that
Authority; that One, who has received Commission from Heaven to preach the
Gospel in Season and out of Season, for the Salvation of Souls, may not allow
himself to propose the reading, studying, examining of the Scripture, which has
for at least these sixteen hundred Years contained the only true Religion in
the World; for fear (...) (...) Proposal should offend against the Rules of
this Art by being too particular and consined to the Gospel Dispensation; And
therefore could not pass muster, nor find Admittance, in a Treatise wherein the
Author professes it his only Business to inquire what Method is to be used to
bring Men to the true Religion? Do you expect any other Dispensation; that you
are so afraid of being too particular, if you should recommend the Use and
Study of the Scripture, to bring Men to the true Religion now in the times of
the Gospel? Why might you not as well send them to the Scriptures, as to the
Ministers and Teachers of the true Religion? Have those Ministers any other
Religion to teach, than what is contained in the Scriptures? But perhaps you do
this out of Kindness and Care, because possibly the Scriptures could not be
found; but who were the Ministers of the true Religion, Men could not possibly
miss. Indeed you have allowed your self to descend to what belongs only to some
particular Times and Dispensations, for their sakes, when you speak of the
Ministers of the Gospel. But whether it be as fully agreed on amongst
Christians, who are the Ministers of the Gospel that Men must hearken to, and
be guided by; as which are the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, that
(if studied) will instruct them in the way to Heaven; is more than you or your
Men of Art can be positive in. Where are the Canons of this overruling Art to
be found, to which you pay such Reverence? May a Man of no distinguishing
Character be admitted to the Privilege of them? For I see it may be of notable
Use at a dead-lift, and bring a Man off with flying Colors, when Truth and
Reason can do him but little Service. The strong Guard you have in the Powers
you write for; And when you have engaged a little too far, the safe Retreat you
have always at hand in an Appeal to these Men of Art, made me almost at a
stand, whether I were not best make a Truce with one who had such Auxiliaries.
A Friend of mine finding me talk thus, replied briskly; it is a Matter of
Religion, which requires not Men of Art; and the Assistance of such Art as
savours so little of the Simplicity of the Gospel, both shows and makes the
Cause the weaker. And so I went on to your two next Paragraphs.

In them, to vindicate a pretty strange Argument for the Magistrate's Use of
Force, you think it convenient to repeat it out of your A. p. 26. And so, in
Compliance with you, shall I do here again. There you tell us, The Power you
ascribe to the Magistrate is given him to bring Men, not to his own, but to the
true Religion: And though (as our Author puts us in mind) the Religion of every
Prince is Orthodox to himself; yet if this Power keep within its bounds, it can
serve the Interest of no other Religion but the true, among such as have any
Concern for their Eternal Salvation; (and those that have none, deserve not to
be considered) because the Penalties it inables him that has it to instict, are
not such as may tempt such Persons either to renounce a Religion which they
believe to be true, or to profess one which they do not believe to be so; but
only such as are apt to put them upon a serious and impartial Examination of
the Controversy between the Magistrate and them, which is the way for them to
come to the Knowledge of the Truth. And if, upon such Examination of the Matter,
they chance to sind that the Truth does not lie on the Magistrate's side, they
have gained thus much however, even by the Magistrate's misapplying his Power,
that they know better than they did before, where the Truth does lie: And all
the hurt that comes to them by it, is only the suffering some tolerable
Inconveniences for their following the Light of their own Reason, and the
Dictates of their own Consciences; which, certainly, is no such Mischief to
Mankind as to make it more eligible that there should be no such Power vested
in the Magistrate, but the Care of every Man's Soul should be left to himself
alone, (as this Author demands it should be.)

To this I tell you, That here, out of abundant Kindness, L. 2. p. 64.
when Dissenters have their Heads (without any cause) broken, you provide them
a Plaster. For, say you, if upon such Examination of the Matter ( i. e.
brought to it by the Magistrate's Punishment) they chance to find that the
Truth does not lie on the Magistrate's side; they have gained thus much
however, even by the Magistrate's misapplying his Power, that they know better
than they did before, where the Truth does lie. Which is as true as if you
should say; Upon Examination I find such an one is out of the way to York,
therefore I know better than I did before that I am in the right. For neither
of you may be in the right. This were true indeed, if there were but two ways
in all, a Right and a Wrong. To this you reply here; That whoever shall
consider the Penalties, will, you persuade your self, find no Heads broken, and
so but little need of a Plaster. The Penalties, as you say, are to be such as
will not tempt such as have any concern for their Eternal Salvation, either to
renounce a Religion which they believe to be true, or profess one which they
believe not to be so, but only such as (being weighed in Gold-Scales) are just
enough, or as you express it, are apt to put them upon a serious and impartial
Examination of the Controversy between the Magistrate and them. If you had been
pleased to have told us what Penalties those were, we might have been able to
guess whether there would have been broken Heads or no. But since you have not
vouchsafed to do it, and if I mistake not, will again appeal to your Men of Art
for another Dispensation rather than ever do it; I fear no body can be sure
these Penalties will not reach to something worse than a broken Head:
Especially if the Magistrate shall observe that you impute the Rise P. 7.
and Growth of salse Religions (which it is the Magistrate's Duty to hinder) to
the Pravity of humane Nature, unbridled by Authority; which, by what follows,
he may have reason to think P. 8.
is to use Force sufficient to counterballance the Folly, Perverseness and
Wickedness of Men: And whether then he may not lay on Penalties sufficient, if
not to break Men's Heads, yet to ruin them in their Estates and Liberties, will
be more than you can undertake. And since you acknowledge here, that the
Magistrate may err so far in the Use of this his Power, as to mistake the
Persons that he lays his Penalties on; will you be Security that he shall not
also mistake in the Proportion of them, and lay on such as Men would willingly
exchange for a broken Head? All the Assurance you give us of this, is; If this
Power keep within its bounds; i. e. as you here explain it, If the Penalties
the Magistrate makes use of to promote a false Religion, do not exceed the
Measure of those which he may warrantably use for the promoting the True. The
Magistrate may notwithstanding any thing you have said, or can say, use any
sort of Penalties, any degree of Punishment; you having neither showed the
Measure of them, nor will be ever able to show the utmost Measure which may not
be exceeded, if any may be used.

But what is this I find here? If the Penalties the Magistrate makes use of to
promote a FALSE RELIGION. Is it possible that the Magistrate can make use of
Penalties to promote a false Religion; Of whom you told us but three Pages
back, That it may always be said of him, (what St. Paul said of himself) that
he can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth? By that one would have
thought you had undertaken to us, that the Magistrate could no more use Force
to promote a false Religion, than St. Paul could preach to promote a false
Religion. If you say, the Magistrate has no Commission to promote a false
Religion, and therefore it may always be said of him, what St. Paul said of
himself etc. I say, no Minister was ever commissioned to preach Falsehood; and
therefore it may always be said of every Minister, (what St. Paul said of
himself) that he can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth: Whereby
we shall very commodiously have an infallible Guide in every Parish, as well as
one in every Commonwealth. But if you thus use Scripture, I imagine you will
have reason to appeal again to your Men of Art; whether, though you may not be
allowed to recommend to others the Examination and Use of Scripture, to find
the true Religion, yet you your self may not use the Scripture to what Purpose,
and in what Sense you please, for the defense of your Cause.

To the remainder of what I said in that Paragraph, your Answer is nothing but
an Exception to an Inference I made. The Argument you were upon, was to justify
the Magistrate's inflicting Penalties to bring Men to a false Religion, by the
Gain those that suffered them would receive.

Their Gain was this; That they would know better than they did L. 2. p. 64.
before, where the Truth does lie. To which I replied, Which is as true, as if
you should say, upon Examination I find such an one is out of the Way to York;
therefore I know better than I did before, that I am in the right. This
Consequence you find fault with, and say it should be thus; Therefore I know
better than I did before, where the right Way lies. This, you tell me, would
have been true; which was not for my Purpose. These Consequences, one or
the other, are much-what alike true. For he that of an hundred Ways, amongst
which there is but one right, shuts out one that he discovers certainly to be
wrong, knows as much better than he did before, that he is in the right, as he
knows better than before, where the right Way lies. For before 'twas 99 to one
he was not in the right; and now he knows it is but 98 to one that he is not in
the right; and therefore knows so much better than before, that he is in the
right, just as much as he knows better than he did before, where the right Way
lies. For let him, upon your Supposition, proceed on; and every Day, upon
examination of a Controversy with some one in one of the remaining Ways,
discover him to be in the wrong; he will every Day know better than he did
before, equally, where the right Way lies, and that he is in it; till at last
he will come to discover the right Way it self, and himself in it. And
therefore your Inference, whatever you think, is as much as the other for my
Purpose; which was to show what a notable Gain a Man made in the variety of
false Opinions and Religions in the World, by discovering that the Magistrate
had not the Truth on his side; and what Thanks he owed the Magistrate, for
inslicting Penalties upon him so much for his Improvement, and for affording
him so much Knowledge at so cheap a rate. And should not a Man have reason to
boast of his Purchase, if he should by Penalties be driven to hear and examine
all the Arguments can be proposed by those in Power for all their foolish and
false Religions? And yet this Gain is what you propose, as a Justification of
Magistrates inslicting Penalties for the promoting their false Religions. And
an impartial Examination of the Controversy between them and the Magistrate,
you tell us here, is the P. 70.
way for such as have any concern for their eternal Salvation, to come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

To my saying, `He that is punished may have examined before, ` and then I am
sure he gains nothing: You reply, But neither does he lose much, if it be true,
which you there add, that all P. 71.
the Hurt that befalls him, is only the suffering some tolerable Inconvenience
for his following the Light of his own Reason, and the Dictates of his
Conscience. So it is therefore you would have a Man rewarded for being an
honest Man; (for so is he who follows the Light of his own Reason, and the
Dictates of his Conscience;) only with the suffering some tolerable
Inconveniences. And yet those tolerable Inconveniences are such as are to
counterballance Men's Lusts, and the Corruption of depraved Nature; which you
know any slight Penalty is sufficient to master. But that the Magistrate's
Discipline shall stop at those your tolerable Inconveniences, is what you are
loath to be Guarantee for: For all the Security you dare give of it, is, If it
be true which you there add. But if it should be otherwise, the Hurt may be
more I see than you are willing to answer for.

L. 2. p. 64. However, you think you do well to encourage the Magistrate in
punishing, and comfort the Man who has suffered un^stly, by showing what he
shall gain by it. Whereas, on the contrary, in a Discourse of this Nature,
where the Bounds of Right and Wrong are enquired into, and should be
established, the Magistrate was to be showed the Bounds of his Authority, and
warned of the Injury he did when he misapplies his Power, and punished any Man
who deserved it not; and not be soothed into Injustice, by consideration of
Gain that might thence accrue to the Sufferer. Shall we do Evil, that Good may
come of it? There are a sort of People who are very wary of touching upon the
Magistrate's Duty, and tender of showing the bounds of his Power, and the
Injustice and ill Consequences of his misapplying (...); at least, so long as
it is misapplied in favor of them, and their Party. I know not whether you are
of their number; But this I am sure, you have the misfortune here to fall into
their Mistake. The Magistrate, you confess, may in this case misapply his
Power: And instead of representing to him the Injustice of it, and the Account
he must give to his Sovereign one day of this great Trust put into his Hands,
for the equal Protection of all his Subjects, you pretend Advantages which the
Sufferer may receive from it: And so instead of disheartning from, you give
encouragement to the Mischief. Which, upon your Principle, joined to the
natural thirst in Man after Arbitrary Power, may be carried to all manner of
Exorbitancy, with some pretense of Right.

L. 3. p. 71. As to what you say here of the nature of my Discourse, I shall
only put you in mind that the Question there debated is; Whether the Magistrate
has any Right or Authority to use Force for the promoting the true Religion.
Which plainly supposes the Unlawfulness and Injustice of using Force to promote
a false Religion, as granted on both sides. So that I could no way be obliged
to take notice of it in my Discourse, but only as occasion should be offered.

And whether I have not showed the bounds of the Magistrate's Authority, as far
as I was any way obliged to do it, let any indifferent Person judge. But to talk
here of a sort of People who are very wary of touching upon the Magistrate's
Duty, and tender of showing the bounds of his Power, where I tell the
Magistrate that the Power I ascribe to him in reference to Religion, is given
him to bring Men, not to his own, but to the true Religion; and that he
misapplies it, when he endeavors to promote a false Religion by it, is,
methinks, at least a little unseasonable.

Nor am I any more concerned in what you say of the Magistrate's misapplying
his Power in favor of a Party. For as you have not yet proved that his
applying his Power to the promoting the true Religion, (which is all that I
contend for) is misapplying it; so much less can you prove it to be misapplying
it in favor of a Party.

But that I encourage the Magistrate in punishing Men to bring them to a false
Religion, (for that is the punishing we here speak of) and sooth him into
Injustice, by showing what those who suffer unjustly shall gain by it, when in
the very same breath I tell him that by so punishing, he misapplies his Power,
is a Discovery which I believe none but your self could have made. When I say
that the Magistrate misapplies his Power by so punishing; I suppose all other
Men understand me to say, that he sins in doing it, and lays himself open to
divine Vengeance by it. And can he be encouraged to this, by hearing what
others may gain by what (without Repentance) must cost him so dear?

Here your Men of Art will do well to be at hand again. For it may be
seasonable for you to appeal to them, whether the nature of your Discourse will
allow you to descend to show ` the Magistrate the bounds of his Authority, and
warn him of ` the Injury he does, if he misapplies his Power.

You say, the Question there debated, is, Whether the Magistrate has any Right
or Authority to use Force for promoting the True Religion; which plainly
supposes the Unlawfulness and Injustice of using Force to promote a (...)
Religion, as granted on both sides. Neither is that the Question in debate; nor
if it were, does it suppose what you pretend. But the Question in debate is, as
you put it, Whether any body has a Right to use Force in Matters of Religion?
P. 78.
You say indeed, The Magistrate has, to bring Men to the True Religion. If
thereupon, you think the Magistrate has none to bring Men to a false Religion,
whatever your Men of Art may think, it is probable other Men would not have
thought it to have been besides the nature of your Discourse, to have warned
the Magistrate, that he should consider well, and impartially examine the
Grounds of his Religion before he use any Force to bring Men to it. This is of
such moment to Men's temporal and eternal Interests, that it might well deserve
some particular (...) addressed to the Magistrate; who might as much need to be
put in mind of impartial Examination as other People. And it might, whatever
your Men of Art may allow, be justly expected from you; who think it no
Derivation from the Rules of Art, to tell the Subjects that they must submit to
the Penalties laid on them, or else fall under the Sword of the Magistrate;
which how true soever, will hardly by any body be sound to be much more to your
purpose in this Discourse, than it would have been to have told the Magistrate
of what ill consequence it would be to him and his People, if he misused his
Power, and warned him to be cautious in the Use of it. But not a word that way.
Nay even where you mention the account he shall give for so doing, it is still
to satisfy the Subjects that they are well provided for, and not left
unfurnished of the Means of Salvation, by the right God has put into the
Magistrate's hands to use his Power to bring them to the True Religion; and
therefore, they ought to be well content, because if the Magistrate misapply
it, the Great Judge will punish him for it. Look, Sir, and see whether what you
say, any where, of the Magistrate's misuse of his Power, have any other
Tendency: And then I appeal to the sober Reader, whether if you had been as
much concerned for the Bounding, as for the Exercise of Force in the
Magistrates hands, you would not have spoke of it (...) another manner.

The next thing you say, is, that the Question (being, Whether the Magistrate
has any Right to use Force to bring Men to the True Religion,) supposes the
Unlawfulness of using Force to promote a False Religion as granted on both
sides; which is so far from true, that I suppose quite the contrary, viz. That
if the Magistrate has a Right to use Force to promote the True, he must have a
Right to use Force to promote his own Religion; and that for Reasons I have
given you elsewhere. But the Supposition of a Supposition serves to excuse you
from speaking any thing directly of setting Bounds to the Magistrate's Power,
or telling him his Duty in that point; though you are very frequent in
mentioning the Obligation he is under, that Men should not want the Assistance
of his Force; and how answerable he is, if any body miscarry for want of it;
though there be not the least Whisper of any care to be taken, that no body be
(...) by it. And now I recollect my self; I think your Method would not allow
it: For if you should have put the Magistrate upon Examining, it would have
supposed him as liable to Error as other Men; whereas, to secure the
Magistrate's acting right, upon your Foundation of never using Force but for
the True Religion, I see no help for it, but either he or you (who are to
license him) must be got past the State of Examination, into that of certain
Knowledge and Infallibility.

Indeed, as you say, you tell the Magistrate that the Power you ascribe to him
in reference to Religion, is given him to bring Men not to his own, but to the
True Religion. But do you put him upon a severe and impartial Examination;
Which, amongst the many False, is the one only True Religion he must use Force
to bring his Subjects to; that he may not mistake and misapply his Power in a
Business of that Consequence? Not a Syllable of this. Do you then tell him
which it is he must take, without Examination, and promote with Force; whether
that of England, France or Denmark? This, methinks, is as much as the Pope,
with all his Infallibility, could require of Princes. And yet, what is it less
than this you do; when you suppose the Religion of the Church of England to be
the only True; and upon this your Supposition, tell the Magistrate it is his
Duty, by Force, to bring Men to it; without ever putting him upon Examining, or
suffering him or any body else to question, whether it be the only True
Religion or no? For if you will stick to what you in another place say, That it
is enough to suppose that there is one True Religion, and but one, and that
that Religion may be known by those who profess it; What Authority will this
Knowableness of the True Religion, give to the King of England more than to the
King of France, to use Force, if he does not actually know the Religion he
professes to be the True; or to the Magistrate more than the Subject, if he has
not examined the Grounds of his Religion? But if He believes you when you tell
him, your Religion is the True, all is well; he has Authority enough to use
Force, and he need not examine any farther. If this were not the case; why you
should not be careful to prepare a little Advice to make the Magistrate
examine, as well as you are sollicitous to provide Force to make the Subject
examine, will require the Skill of a Man of Art to discover.

Whether you are not of the Number of those Men I there mentioned, (for that
there have been such Men in the World, Instances might be given) one may doubt
srom your Principles. For if upon a Supposition that yours is the True
Religion, you can give Authority to the Magistrate to (...) Penalties on all
his Subjects that dissent from the Communion of the National Church, without
examining whether theirs too may not be that only True Religion which is
necessary to Salvation; Is not this to demand, that the Magistrate's Power
should be applied only in favor of a Party? And can any one avoid being
confirmed in this Suspicion, when he reads that broad Insinuation of yours, P.
34. as if Our Magistrates were not concerned for Truth (...) Piety, because
they granted a Relaxation of those Penalties, which you would have imploid in
favor of your Party: For so it must be called, and not the Church of God,
exclusive of others; unless you will say Men cannot be saved out of the
Communion of your particular Church, let it be National where you please.

You do not, you say, encourage the Magistrate to misapply his Power; because
in the very same Breath you tell him he misapplies his Power. I answer, Let all
Men understand you, as much as you please, to say that he sins in doing it;
That will not excuse you from encouraging him there; unless it be impossible
that a Man may be encouraged to Sin. If your telling the Magistrate that his
Subjects gain by his misapplying of Force, be not an Encouragement to him to
misapply it, the doing good to others must cease to be an Encouragement to any
Action. And whether it be not a great Encouragement in this case to the
Magistrate, to go on in the use of (...), without impartially examining whether
his or his Subjects be the True Religion; when he is told that (be his Religion
true or false,) his Subjects, who suffer, will be sure to be Gainers by it, let
any one judge. For the Encouragement is not (as you put it) to the Magistrate to
use Force to bring Men to what he thinks a false Religion; but it is an
Encouragement to the Magistrate, who presumes his to be the True Religion, to
punish his Dissenting Subjects; without due and impartial Examination on which
side the Truth lies. For having never told the Magistrate, that neglect of
Examination is a Sin in him; if you should tell him a thousand times, that he
who uses his Power to bring Men to a False Religion misapplies it; he would not
understand by it that he sinned, whilst he thought his the True; and so it
would be no restraint to the misapplying his Power.

And thus we have some Prospect of this admirable Machin you have (...) up for
the Salvation of Souls.

The Magistrate is to use Force to bring Men to the True Religion. But what if
he misapplies it to bring Men to a False Religion? It Is well still for his
Subjects: They are Gainers by it. But this may encourage him to a
Misapplication of it. No; You tell him that he that uses it to bring Men to a
False Religion, misapplies it; And therefore he cannot but understand that you
say he sins, and lays himself open to Divine Vengeance. No; He believes himself
in the right; and thinks as St. Paul, whilst a Persecutor, that he does God
good Service. And you assure him here, he makes his suffering. Subjects
Gainers; and so he goes on as comfortably as St. Paul did. Is there no Remedy
for this? Yes, a very ready one, and that is, that the one only True Religion
may be known by those who profess it to be the only True Religion.

To which, if we add how you moderate as well as direct the Magistrate's Hand
in punishing; by making the last Regulation of your convenient Penalties to lie
in the Prudence and Experience of Magistrates themselves; we shall find the
Advantages of your Method. For are not your necessary Means of Salvation, which
lie in moderate Penalties used to bring Men to the True Religion, brought to an
happy State; when that which is to guide the Magistrate in the Knowledge of the
True Religion, is, that the True Religion may be known by those who profess it
to be the only True Religion; and the convenient Penalties to be used for the
promoting of it, are such as the Magistrate shall in his Prudence think fit;
and that whether the Magistrate applies it right or wrong, the Subject will be
a Gainer by it? If in either of your Discourses, you have given the Magistrate
any better Direction than this to know the True Religion by, which he is by
Force to promote; or any other intelligible Measure to moderate his Penalties
by; or any other Caution to restrain the misuse of his Power; I desire you to
show it me: And then I shall think I have reason to believe, that in this
Debate you have had more Care of the True Religion, and the Salvation of Souls,
than to encourage the Magistrate to use the Power he has, by your Direction,
and without Examination, and to what degree he shall think sit, in favor of a
Party. For the Matter thus stated, if I mistake not, will serve any Magistrate,
to use any degree of Force, against any that dissent from his National Religion.

Having recommended to the Subjects the Magistrate's (...) by a show of Gain,
which will accrue to them by it, you do well to bring in the Example of Julian;
who whatever he did to the Christians, would (no more than you) own that it was
Persecution, but for their Advantage in the other World. But whether his
pretending Gain to them, upon Grounds which he did not believe; or your
pretending Gain to them, which no body can believe to be one; be a greater
Mockery; you were best look. This seems reasonable; That his talk of
Philanthropy, and yours of Moderation, should be bound up together. For till
you speak and tell them plainly what they may trust to; the Advantage the
Persecuted are to receive from your Clemency, may, I imagine, make a second
Part to what the Christians of that Age (...) from his. But you are solicitous
for the Salvation of Souls, and Dissenters shall find the Benefit of it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Usefulness of Force in Matters of Religion.
YOU having granted that in all Pleas for any thing, because P. 10.
of its Usefulness, it is not enough to say that it may be serviceable; but it
must be considered, not only what it may, but what it is likely to produce; and
the greater Good or Harm likely to come from it ought to determine the use of
it; I think there need nothing more to be said to show the Uselesness of Force
in the Magistrate's Hands for promoting the true Religion, after it has been
proved that, if any, then all Magistrates, who believe their Religion to be
true, are under an Obligation to use it. But since the usefulness and necessity
of Force is the main Foundation on which you build your Hypothesis, we will in
the two remaining Chapters examine particularly what you say for them.

To the Author's saying, That Truth seldom has received, and he fears never
will receive much assistance from the Power of Great Men, to whom she is but
rarely known, and more rarely welcome, You answer, And yet God himself foretold
and P. 10.
promised that Kings should be Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers to
his Church. If we may judge of this Prophecy by what is past or present, we
shall have reason to think it concerns not our Days; or if it does, that God
intended not that the Church should have many such Nursing Fathers and Nursing
Mothers, that were to nurse them up with moderate Penalties, if those were to
be the Swadling-Clouts of this Nursery. Perhaps, if you read that Chapter, you
will think you have little reason to build much on this Promise, till the
restoring of Israel: And when you see the Gentiles bring Thy ( i. e. (...) the
style of the Chapter seems to import the Sons of the Israelites) Sons in their
Arms, and thy Daughters be carried upon their Shoulders, as is promised in the
immediately preceding Words; you may conclude that then Kings shall be thy, (i.
e. Isreal's) Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing Mothers. This seems to me
to be the (...) (...) by that Prophecy, and I guess to a great many others,
upon an attentive reading that Chapter in Isaiah. And to all such this Text
will do you little Service, till you make out the meaning of it better than by
barely quoting of it; which will scarce ever prove, that God has promised that
so many Princes shall be Friends to the true Religion, that it will be better
for the true Religion that Princes should use Force for the imposing or
propagating of their Religions, than not. For unless it prove that, it answers
not the Author's Argument, as an indifferent Reader must needs see. For he says
not Truth never, but she seldom (...) received, and he fears never will receive
(not any, but) much assistance from the Power of Great Men to whom she is BUT
RARELY KNOWN, and more RARELY WELCOME. And therefore to this of Isaiah pray
join that of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
Not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble.

But supposing many Kings were to be Nursing Fathers to the Church, and that
this Prophecy were to be fulfilled in this Age, and the Church were now to be
their Nursery; It Is I think more proper to understand this figurative Promise,
that their Pains and Discipline was to be employed on these in the Church, and
that they should feed and cherish them, rather than that these Words meant that
they should whip those that were out of it. And therefore this Text will, I
suppose, upon a just consideration of it, signify very little against the known
matter of Fact which the Author urges; Unless you can find a Country where the
Cudgel and the Scourge are more the Badges and Instruments of a good Nurse than
the Breast and the (...); and that she is counted a good Nurse of her own
Child, who (...) her self in whiping Children not hers, (...) belonging to her
Nursery.

The (...) which give you (...) (...) (...) to hope for any advantage from the
Authors Toleration, which almost all but the Church of England enjoyed in the
Times of the Blessed Reformation, as it was called, you tell us, were Sects and
Heresies. Here your Zeal hangs P. 13.
a little in your Light. It is not the Author's Toleration which here you
accuse. That, you know, is universal: And the universality of it is that which
a little before you wondered at, and complained of. Had it been the Author's
Toleration, it could not have been almost all but the Church of England; but it
had been the Church of England and all others. But let us take it, that Sects
and (...) were, or will be the Fruits of a free Toleration. i. e. (...) are
divided in their opinions and ways of Worship. Differences in ways of Worship,
wherein there is nothing mixed inconsistent with the true Religion, will not
hinder Men from Salvation, who sincerely follow the best Light they have; which
they are as likely to do under Toleration as Force. And as for (...) of
Opinions, speculative Opinions in Religion, I think I may safely say, that
there are (...) any where three considering Men (for it is want of Consideration
you would punish) who are in their Opinions throughout of the same Mind. Thus
far then, if Charity be preserved, (which it is likelier to be where there is
Toleration, than where there is Persecution) though without Uniformity, I see
no great reason to complain of those ill Fruits of Toleration.

But Men will run, as they did in the late Times, into dangerous and
destructive Errors, and extravagant ways of Worship. As to Errors in Opinion;
If Men upon Toleration be so apt to vary in Opinions, and run so wide one from
another, it is evident they are not so averse to thinking as you complain. For
it is hard for Men, not under Force, to quit one Opinion and embrace another,
without thinking of them. But if there be danger of that; It is most likely the
National Religion should sweep and draw to its self the loose and unthinking
part of Men; who without Thought, as well as without any contest with their
corrupt Nature, may embrace the Profession of the countenanced Religion, and
join in outward Communion with the great and ruling Men of the Nation. For he
that troubles not his Head at all about Religion, what other can so well suit
(...) as the National, with which the Cry and Preferments go; And where (it
being, as you say, presumable that he makes that his Profession upon
Conviction, and that he is in earnest,) he is sure to be Orthodox without the
pains of examining, and has the Law and Government on his side to make it good
that he is in the right?

But Seducers, if they be tolerated, will be ready at hand, and diligent; and
Men will hearken to them. Seducers surely have no Force on their side, to make
People hearken. And if this be so, there is a Remedy at hand, (...) than Force,
if you and your Friends will use it, which cannot but prevail; And that is, let
the Ministers of Truth be as diligent; And they bringing Truth with them, Truth
obvious and easy to be understand (as you say, what is necessary to Salvation
is) cannot but prevail. P. 29.


But Seducers are hearkened to, because they teach Opinions favorable to Men's
Lusts. Let the Magistrate, as is his Duty, hinder the Practices which their
Lusts would carry them to, and the Advantage will be still on the side of Truth.

After all, Sir, If, as the Apostle tells the Corinthians, (1 Cor. 12. 19.)
There must be Heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest; which, I beseech you, is best for the Salvation of Men's Souls; that
they should enquire, hear, examine, consider, and then have the Liberty to
profess what they are persuaded of; or, that having considered, they should be
forced not to own nor follow their Persuasions; or else, that being of the
National Religion, they should go ignorantly on without any Consideration at
all? In one case, if your Penalties prevail, Men are forced to act contrary to
their Consciences, which is not the way to Salvation; and if the Penalties
prevail not, you have the same Fruits, Sects and Heresies, as under Toleration:
In the other, it is true, those ignorant, loose, unthinking Conformists, do not
break company with those who embrace the Truth that will save them; but I fear
can no more be said to have any share in it, than those who openly dissent from
it. For it is not being in the Company, but having on the Wedding Garment, that
keeps Men from being bound Hand and Foot, and cast into the dreadful and
eternal Prison.

You tell us, Force has a proper Efficacy to procure the Enlightening P. 16.
of the Understanding, and the Production of Belief, viz. by making Men
consider. But you ascribing Men's Aversion to examine Matters of Religion, to
the Corruption of their Nature; Force your way applied, ( i. e. so that Men
avoid the Penalties by an outward Conformity) cannot have any proper Efficacy
to procure Consideration; since Men may outwardly conform, and retain their
Corruption, and Aversion to Consideration; and upon this account, Force, your
way applied, is absolutely impertinent.

But further; If Force has such a proper Efficacy to procure the Production of
Belief, it will do more harm than good, imploid by any but Orthodox
Magistrates. But how to put it only into Orthodox Hands, is the Difficulty. For
I think I have proved, that if Orthodox Magistrates may, and ought to use
Force, for the promoting their Religion, all that think themselves Orthodox are
obliged to use it too. And this may serve for an Answer to all you have said,
P. 16.

I having said, Whatever indirect Efficacy there be in Force L. 2. p. 30
applied by the Magistrate your way, it makes against you; Force used by the
Magistrate, to bring Men to consider those Reasons and Arguments, which are
proper and sufficient to convince them, but which without being forced, they
would not consider; may, say you, be serviceable indirectly and at a distance,
to make Men embrace the Truth which must save them. ` And thus, say I, it may
be serviceable to bring Men to receive and embrace Falsehood, which ` will
destroy them. To this you with great Triumph reply. How, P. 25.
Sir, may Force used by the Magistrate, to bring Men to consider those Reasons
and Arguments which are proper and sufficient to convince them, be serviceable
to bring Men to embrace Falsehood, such Falsehood as will destroy them? It seems
then, there are Reasons and Arguments which are proper and sufficient to
convince Men of the truth of Falsehood, which will destroy them. Which is
certainly a very extraordinary Discovery, though such as no Man can have any
reason to thank you for.

In the first place, let me ask you; Where did you find, or from what Words of
mine do you infer that notable Proposition, That there are Reasons and
Arguments proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth of Falsehood? If a
Magistrate of the True Religion may use Force to make Men consider Reasons and
Arguments proper to convince Men of the Truth of his Religion; may not a Prince
of a False Religion use Force to make Men consider Reasons and Arguments proper
and sufficient to convince them of what he believes to be true? And may not
Force thus be serviceable to bring Men to receive and embrace Falsehood?

In the next place; Did you, who argue with so much School-Subtilty as if you
drank it in at the very Fountain, never hear of such an ill way of Arguing as a
conjunctis ad divisa? There are no Arguments proper and sufficient to bring a
Man into the ^elief of what is in itself fals^, whilst he knows or believes it
to be false; therefore there are no Arguments proper and sufficient to bring a
Man into the Belief of what is in itself false, which he neither knows nor
believes to be so. A Senior Sophister would be laughed at for such Logic. And
yet this is all you say in that Sentence you erect for a Trophy, to convince
M^n of the Truth of Falsehood; which though not my Words, but such as you in
your way supply from what I said, you are exceedingly pleased with, and think
their very repeating a Triumph. But though there are no Arguments proper and
sufficient to convince Men of the Truth of Falsehood, as Falsehood; yet I hope
you will allow that there are Arguments proper and sufficient to make Men
receive Falsehoods for Truths; why else do you complain of (...)? And those who
embrace Falsehoods for Truths, do it under the Appearance of Truth, misled by
those Arguments which make it appear so, and so convince them. And that
Magistrates who take their Religion to be true, though it be not so, may with
Force urge such Arguments, you will, I think, grant.

But you talk as if no body could have Arguments proper and sufficient to
convince another, but he that was of your way, or your Church. This indeed is a
new and very extraordinary discav^y, and such as your Brethren, if you can
convince them of it, will have reason to thank you for. For if any one was ever
by Arguments and Reasons brought off, or seduced from your Church, to be a
Dissenter, there were then I think Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient
to convince him. I will not name to you again Mr. Reynolds, because you have
charity enough to question his Sincerity. Though his leaving his Country,
Friends, and Acquaintance, may be presumed as great a Mark of his being
convinced and in earnest, as it is for one to write for a National Religion in
a Country where it is uppermost. I will not yet deny but that, in you, it may
be pure Zeal for the True Re^gion, which you would have assisted with the
Magi^ratos Force. And since you seem so much concerned for your Sincerity in
the Argument, it must be granted you deserve the Character of a well-meaning
Man, who own your Sincerity in a way so little advantageous to your Judgment.

But if Mr. Reynolds, in your Opinion, was misled by corrupt Ends, or secular
Interest; what do you think of a Prince now living? Will you doubt his
Sincerity, or that he was convinced of the Truth of the Religion he professed,
who ventured Three Crowns for it? What do you think of Mr. Chillingworth when
he left the Church of England for the Romish Profession? Did he do it without
being convinced that that was the right? Or was he convinced with Reasons and
Arguments, not proper or sufficient to convince him?

But certainly this could not be true, because, as you say, p. 25. the
Scripture does not teach any thing of it. Or perhaps those that leave your
Communion do it always without being convinced, and only think they are
convinced when they are not; or are convinced with Arguments not proper and
sufficient to convince them. If no body can convince another, but he that has
Truth on his side, you do more honor to the first and second Letter concerning
Toleration, than is for the Advantage of your Cause, when you impute to them
the Increase of Sects and Heresies amongst us. And there are some, even of the
Church of England, have professed themselves so fully satisfied by the Reasons
and Arguments in the first of them, that though I dare not be positive to you,
whose Privilege it is to convince Men, that they are convinced; yet I may say,
it is as presumable they are convinced, having owned it, as it is presumable
that all that are Conformists are made so upon Reason and Conviction.

This, I suppose, may serve for an Answer to your next words, P. 25.
That God in his just Judgment will send such as receive not the Love of Truth,
that they may be saved, but reject it for the Pleasure they have in
Unrighteousness, (...), strong Delusion, i. e. such Reasons and Arguments as
will prevail with Men, so disposed, to believe a Lie, that they may be damned;
This you confess the Scripture plainly teaches us. But that there are any such
Reasons or Arguments as are proper and sufficient to convince or satisfy any,
but such resolute and obdurate Sinners, of the Truth of such Falsehood as will
destroy them, is a Position which you are sure the Scripture does not (...) us;
and which, you tell me, when I have better considered it, you hope I will not
undertake to maintain. And yet if it be not maintainable, what I say here is to
no purpose: For if there be no such Reasons and Arguments as here we speak of,
it is in vain to talk of the Magistrate's using Force to make Men consider them.

But if you are still of the mind, that no Magistrate but those who are of the
True Religion, can have Arguments backed with Force, proper and sufficient to
convince; and that in England none but resolute obdurate Sinners ever forsook
or forbore the Communion of the Church of England, upon Reasons and Arguments
that satisfy or convince them; I shall leave you to enjoy so charitable an
Opinion.

But as to the Usefulness of Force, your way applied, I shall lay you down
again the same Argument I used before; though in Words less sitted for your Way
of Reasoning on them, now I know your Talent. If there be any Efficacy in Force
to bring Men to any Persuasion, it will, your Way applied, bring more Men to
Error than to Truth. Your Way of using it is only to punish Men for not being
of the National Religion; which is the only Way you do or can apply Force,
without a Toleration. Nonconformity is the Fault that is punished; which Fault,
when it ceases, the Punishment ceases. But yet to make them consider, is the
end for which they are punished; but whether it be or be not intended to make
Men consider, it alters nothing in the case. Now I say, that since all
Magistrates who believe their Religion to be true, are as much obliged to use
Force to bring their Subjects to it, as if it were true; and since most of the
National Religions of the World are erroneous; if Force made use of to bring
Men to the National Religion, by punishing Dissenters, have any Efficacy, (let
it be what it will, indirect and at a distance, if you please) it is like to do
twenty times more harm than good; because of the National Religions of the
World, to speak much within compass, there are above 20 wrong for one that is
right.

Indeed, could Force be directed to drive all Men indifferently, who are
negligent and backward in it, to study, examine, and consider seriously Matters
of Religion, and search out the Truth; And if Men were, upon their Study and
Examination, permitted to follow what appears to them to be right; you might
have some pretense for Force, as serviceable to Truth in making Men consider.
But this is impossible, but under a Toleration. And I doubt whether, even
there, Force can be so applied, as to make Men consider and impartially examine
what is true in the professed Religions of the World, and to embrace it. This
at least is certain, that where Punishments pursue Men like outlying Deer, only
to the Pale of the National Church; and when once they are within that, leaves
them free there, and at ease; it can do no Service to the True Religion, even
in a Country where the National is the true. For the Penalties ceasing as soon
as Men are got within the Pale and Communion of the Church, they help not Men
at all against that which you assign as the great Hindrance to the True
Religion, and which therefore, in your Opinion, makes Force necessary to assist
it.

For there being no necessity that Men should leave either their Vices or
Corruption, or so much as their Ignorance, to get within the Pale of the
Church; Force, your way applied, serves only to bring them (even in the few
Christian and Orthodox Countries) to the Profession, not to the Knowledge,
Belief or Practice, of the True Religion.

You say corrupt Nature inclines Men from the True Religion to false ones; and
moderate Force is requisite to make such Men consider. But such Men as, out of
corrupt Nature, and for their Ease and carnal Pleasures, choose an erroneous
Religion without considering, will again, as soon as they can find their Choice
incommoded by those Penalties, consult the same corrupt Nature and carnal
Appetites, and without considering any thing further, conform to that Religion
where they can best enjoy themselves. It Is only the conscientious part of
Dissenters, such as dissent not out of Indulgence to corrupt Nature, but out of
Persuasion, who will not conform without considering as they ought. And
therefore your Argument from corrupt Nature, is out of doors. If moderate
Penalties serve only to work on those who are led by corrupt Nature, they are
of no use but to fill the Church with Hypocrites; that is, to make those Men
worse Hypocrites than they were before, by a new Act of Hypocrisy, and to
corrupt the Manners of the rest of the Church, by their converse with these.
And whether this be for the Salvation of Souls, as is pretended, or for some
other End, that the Priests of all Religions have generally so earnestly
contended for it, I leave to be considered. For as for those who dissent out of
Persuasion, I suspect your moderate Penalties will have little effect upon
them. For such Men being awed by the Fear of Hellfire, if that Fear will not
make them consider better than they have done, moderate Penalties will be too
weak to work upon them. It Is well if Dragooning and Martyring can do it.

But you add, May it not be true nevertheless, that Force your way P. 26.
applied may be serviceable indirectly, and at a distance, to bring Men to
embrace the Truth which may save them? which is all you are concerned here to
make good. So that if it may possibly happen that it should ever bring two Men
to embrace the Truth, you have gained your Point, and overthrown Toleration, by
the usefulness and necessity there is of Force. For without being forced these
two Men would never have considered: Which is more yet than you know, unless
you are of his private Council, who only can tell when the Season of Grace is
past, and the time come that Preaching, Entreaty, Instruction and Persuasion
shall never after prevail upon a Man. But whatever you are here concerned to
make P. 18.
good, are you not also concerned to remember what you say; where declaring
against the Magistrates having a power to use what may any way, at any time,
upon any Person, by any Accident, be useful toward the promoting the true
Religion, you say, Who sees not that however such means might chance to hit
right in some few Cases, yet, upon the whole matter, they would certainly do a
great deal more harm than good; And in all Pleas, (making use of my Words) for
any thing because of its usefulness, it is not enough to say that it may be
serviceable, but it must be considered, not only what it may, but what it is
likely to produce; and the greater good or harm like to come from it, ought to
determine the use of it?

You proceed and tell me, That I, not content to say that Force P. 26.
your way applied (i. e. to bring Men to embrace the Truth which must save
them) may be serviceable to bring Men to embrace Falsehood which will destroy
them; and so is proper to do as much harm as good, (which seems strange
enough;) I add (to increase the Wonder) that in your indirect way it is much
more proper, and likely to make Men receive and embrace Error, than the Truth:
And that, 1. Because Men out of the right Way are as apt, and I think I may say
apter, to use Force than others; Which is, doubtless, an irrefragable
demonstration, that Force used by the Magistrate to bring Men to receive and
embrace the Truth which must save them, is much more proper and likely to make
Men receive Error than the Truth. And then you ask me, How we come to talk here
of what Men out of the right way are apt to do, to bring others into their, (i.
e. a wrong) way; where we are only inquiring, what may be done to bring Men to
the right way. For you must put me in Mind, you say, that that is our question,
viz. Whether the Magistrate has any right to use Force, to bring Men to the
true Religion. Whether the Magistrate has aright to use Force in matters of
Religion, as you more truly state it, ( P. 78.) is the main Question between
us, I confess. But the Question here between us is about the usefulness of
Force your way applied; which being to punish Dissenters as Dissenters, to make
them consider, I showed would do more harm than good. And to this, you were
here answering. Whereby, I suppose, it is plain that the Question here is about
the Usefulness of Force, so applied. And I doubt not but my Readers, who are
not concerned, when the Question in debate will not serve your turn, to have
another substituted, will take this for a regular and natural way of Arguing,
viz. `That Force, your way applied, is more proper and likely to make Men
embrace Error than the Truth; because Men out of the right Way are as apt, I
think I may say ` apter, to use Force than others. You need not then ask as you
do, How we come to talk here of Men out of the right Way. You see how. If you
do not, I know not what help there is for your Eyes. And I must content my self
that any other Reader that has Eyes, will not miss it. And I wonder that you
should: since you know I have on several Occasions argued against the Use of
Force in Matters of Religion; upon a Supposition, that if any one, then all
Magistrates have a just Pretense and Right to use it; which has served you in
some Places for Matter of great Reproof, and in others of Sport and Diversion.
But because so plain a thing as that was so strange to you, that you thought it
a ridiculous Paradox to say, That for all Magistrates to suppose the Religion
they believed to be true, was equally just and reasonable; And because you took
no notice of the Words adjoin'd that proved it, viz. Unless we can imagine
every where but in England, [or where the National Religion is the true] Men
believe what at the same time they think to be a Lie; I have taken the pains to
prove it to you more at large in another place, and therefore shall make bold
to use it here as an Argument against Force, viz. That if it have any Efficacy
it will do more harm than good; Because Men out of the right Way are as apt, or
apter to use it: And I shall think it a good one, till you have answered it.

It is a good and a sure way, and shows a Zeal to the Cause, still to hold fast
the Conclusion, and whatever be in debate, return still to one' old Position. I
arguing against what you say for the Use of Force, viz. That Force used not to
convince by its A. p. 5.
own proper Efficacy, but only to make Men consider, might indirectly and at a
distance do some Service toward the bringing Men to embrace the Truth; After
other Arguments against it, I say, that whatever Efficacy there is in Force,
your way applied, ( i. e. To L. 2. p. 12.
punish all, and none but, Dissenters from the National Church) makes against
you: And the first Reason I give for it, is in these Words; Because Men out of
the right Way are as apt or apter L. 2. p. 14.
to use Force than others. Which is what you are here answering. And what can
be done better to answer it, than to the Words I have above cited, to subjoin
these following? Now P. 26.
whereas our Author says, that Penalties or Force is absolutely impertinent in
this case, because it is not proper to convince the Mind; To which, you answer,
that though Force be not proper to convince the Mind, yet it is not absolutely
impertinent in this case, because it may however, do some Service toward the
bringing Men to embrace the Truth which must save them, by bringing them to
consider those Reasons and Arguments which are proper to convince the Mind; and
which, without being fo^ed, they would not consider. Here I tell you, No, but
it is much more proper and likely to make Men receive and embrace Error than
Truth; because Men out of the right Way are as apt, and perhaps apter, to use
Force than others. Which you tell me, is as good a Proof you believe as the
thing would admit: For otherwise, you suppose I would have given you a better.
And thus you have certainly gained the Cause. For I having proved that Force,
your way applied, whatever Efficacy it had, would do more harm than good, have
not sufficiently proved that it cannot do some s^rvice toward the bringing Men
to embrace the Truth; And therefore it is not absolutely impertinent. But since
you think this not enough to prove the Use of Force in Matters of Religion
impertin^nt, I shall fa^ther show you that Force, applied your way to make
People consider, and so to make them embrace the Truth, is impertinent.

Your Way is to lay Penalties on Men for Nonconformity, as you say, to make Men
consider: Now here let me ask any one but you, Whether it be not utterly
impertinent so to lay Penalties on Men, to make them consider, when they can
avoid those Penalties without considering? But because it is not enough to
prove Force, your way applied, utterly impertinent, I shall show you in the
next place, that were a Law made to punish not barely Nonconformity, but
Non-consideration, those Penalties laid on not considering, would be utterly
impertinent; because it could never be proved that a Man had not considered the
Arguments offered him. And therefore all Lawmakers till you, in all their
Penal Laws about Religion, laid all their Penalties upon not embracing; and
'twas against that, that our Author was arguing when he said Penalties, in this
case are absolutely impernent; because they are not proper to convince the
Mind. For in that case, when Penalties are laid on Men for not embracing, it is
plain they are used as a means to make Men embrace: which, since those who are
careless in Matters of Religion can do without considering, and those who are
conscientious cannot do without Conviction; and since Penalties can in no wise
convince; this Use of them is absolutely impertinent, and will always be so
till you can show a way how they can be used in Religion, not as Motives to
embrace, but as Motives barely to make Men consider. For if you punish them on
when they tell you they have considered your Arguments, but are not convinced
by them, and you judge of their having not considered by nothing but their not
embracing, it is plain you use Penalties instead of Arguments to convince them;
since without Conviction, those who our Author pleads for, cannot embrace; and
those who do embrace without Conviction, it is all one as if they did not
embrace at all, they being not one jot the more in the Way of Salvation; and so
Penalties are absolutely impertinent. But Embracing in the Sense of the Law,
and yours too, when you say Men have not considered as they ought as long as
they reject, is nothing but outward Conformity, or an outward Profession of
Embracing, wherewith the Law is satisfied, and upon which the Penalties cease.
Now Penalties used to make Men in this Sense embrace, are absolutely
impertinent to bring Men to embrace in earnest, or, as the Author calls it,
believe: because an outward Profession, which in this case is the immediate end
to which Penalties are directed, and beyond which they do not reach, is no
proper means to produce in Men Consideration, Conviction, or Believing.

What can be more impertinent than to vex and disease People with the Use of
Force, to no purpose? and that Force must needs be to no purpose, which is so
applied as to leave the end for which it is pretended to be used, without the
means which is acknowledged necessary for its Attainment. That this is so in
your way of using Force, will easily appear from your Hypothesis. You tell us
at large in your Argument considered, that A. p. 6, (...) 12.
Men's Lusts hinder them from even impartial Consideration and Examination of
Matters in Religion, and therefore Force is necessary to remove this Hindrance.
You tell us likewise at large P, 6, -- 8.
in your Letter, that Men's corrupt Nature and beloved Lusts hinder them also
from embracing the True Religion, and that Force is necessary likewise to
remove this Obstacle. Now in your way of using Force, wherein Penalties are
laid on Men till, and no longer than till, they are made outwardly to conform,
Force is so applied, that notwithstanding the Intention of the Lawmakers (let
it be what it will) neither the Obstacle to impartial Examination, rising from
Men's Lusts, nor the Aversion to embracing the True Religion, rising from Men's
corrupt Nature, can be removed: unless they can be removed without that, which
you suppose necessary to their removal. For since a Man may conform, without
being under the necessity of impartial Examining or Embracing on the one hand,
or Suffering the Penalties on the other; it is unavoidable, that he should
neither impartially examine nor embrace, if Penalties are necessary to make him
do either; because Penalties, which are the necessary Remedies to remove those
Hindrances, were never applied to them; and so those Obstacles not being
removed for want of their necessary Remedy, must continue on to hinder both
Examining and Embracing. For Penalties cannot be used as a Means to any end, or
be applied to the procuring any Action to be done, which a Man from his Lusts
or any other cause, has an aversion to, but by putting them as it were in one
Scale as a Counter-ballance to that Aversion, and the Action in the other
Scale, and putting a Man under the necessity of choosing the one or the other:
where that is not done, the Penalty may be avoided, the Aversion or Obstacle
has nothing to remove it, and so the Action must remain undone. So that if
Penalties be necessary to make Men impartially examine and really embrace; if
Penalties are not so laid on Men as to make the Alternative to be either
suffering the Penalties or Conforming, it is impossible that Men, who without
Penalties would not impartially examine or really embrace the True Religion,
should ever do either; and then I beseech you consider whether Penalties, your
Way applied, be impertinent or no.

The necessity of Penalties is only where there is some inclination or byas in
a Man, whencesoever arising, that keeps him from doing something in his Power,
which he cannot be brought to without the Inconveniences of some Penal
Infliction. The Efficacy of Penalties lies in this, that the Inconvenience to
be suffered by the Penalties overbalance the Byas or Inclination which leans
the Man the other way, and so removes the Obstacle; And the Application of this
Remedy lies only in putting a Man under the necessary choice either of doing the
Action, or suffering the Penalty: So that in what ever case a Man has not been
put under that necessity, there Penalties have never been applied to the
procuring that Action; for the Obstacle or Aversion to it, has never had its
necessary Remedy.

Perhaps you will say it is not absolutely impertinent, because it may possibly
do some Service indirectly and at a distance, and be the occasion that some may
consider and embrace. If whatever may by accident contribute to any End, may be
used not impertinently as a Means to that End, nothing that I know can be
impertinent; and a Penalty of 12 d. a time laid on them for being drunk, may be
said, to be a pertinent means, to make Men Cartesians, or Conformists: because
it may indirectly and at a distance do some Service, by being an Occasion to
make some Men consider their mispending their time; whereby it may happen that
one may betake himself to the Study of Philosophy, where he may meet with
Arguments proper and fit to convince him of the Truth of that Philosophy; as
another betaking himself to the Study of Divinity, may consider Arguments
proper and fit to make him (whether it be in England, Holland or Denmark) of
the National Profession, which he was not of before.

Just thus, and no otherwise, does 12 d. a Sunday, or any other Penalty laid on
Nonconformity, make Men study and embrace the True Religion; and whatever you
will call the Service it does, direct or indirect, near or at a distance, it is
plain it produces that effect, and conduces to that end merely by accident; and
therefore must be allowed to be impertinent to be used to that purpose.

That your Way of using Force in Matters of Religion, even in a Country where
the Magistrate's is of the True Religion, is absolutely impertinent; I shall
further show you from your own Positions.

Here in the entrance give me leave to observe to you, that you confound two
things very different, viz. Your Way of applying Force, and the End for which
you pretend you use it. And this perhaps may be it which contributes to cast
that Mist about your Eyes, that you always return to the same place, and stick
to the same gross Mistake. For here you say, Force, your (...). 26.
Way applied, i. e. to bring Men to embrace the Truth which must save them:
but, Sir, to bring Men to embrace the Truth, is not your Way of applying Force,
but the End for which you pretend it is applied. Your Way is to punish Men (as
you say) moderately for being Dissenters from the National Religion; this is
your Way of using Force. Now if in this Way of using it, Force does Service
merely by accident, you will then, I suppose, allow it to be absolutely
impertinent. For you say, If by doing Service (...). 17.
by accident, I mean doing it but seldom, and beside the Intention of the
Agent, you assure me, that it is not the thing you mean when you say Force may
indirectly, and at a distance, do some Service. For in that use of Force, which
you defend, the Effect is both intended by him that uses it, and withal, you
doubt not, so often attained, as abundantly to manifest the Usefulness of it.
Whereby it is plain the two Marks, whereby you distinguished your indirect and
at a distance Usefulness, from that which is by accident, are that, that by
accident does Service but seldom, and besides the Intention of the Agent, but
yours the contrary.

First, as to the Intention, you tell us, in the use of Force, which ^bid.
you defend, the Effect is intended by him that uses it; that is, those who
made Laws to punish Nonconformists, designed those Penalties to make all Men,
under their Power, consider so as to be convinced of, and embrace the Truths
that should save them. If one should ask you how you knew it to be their
Intention, can you say they ever told you so? If they did not, then so far you
and ^know their ^ions alike. Did they, ever say so in those Laws? nor that
neither. Those versed then in the Interpretations of Laws, will tell you
nothing can be known to be the Intention of the Lawmakers in any Law, of which
the Law is wholly silent: That Way then you can not know it to have been their
Intention, if the Law says nothing of it. Whatever was the Intention of former
Lawmakers, if you had read with Attention the last Act of Uniformity of Car.
2. printed before the Common Prayer Book, I conclude you would have been better
satisfied about the Intention of the then Lawmakers in that Law; sor I think
nothing can be plainer to any one who will look into that Statute, than that
their only End in that Law was, what they have expressed in these Words, And to
the end that Uniformity in the Public Worship of God (which is so much
desired) may be speedily effected; which was driven with such speed, that if
all concerned had opportunity to get and peruse the then established Liturgy,
it is certain they had not overmuch time seriously and deliberately to consider
of all the Parts of it before the Day set for the Use of it.

But you think, they ought to have intended, and therefore they did: And I
think they neither ought, nor could, in making those Laws, intend so
unpracticable a thing; and therefore they did not. Which being as certain a way
of Knowledge as yours, if you know it by that way; it is possible you and I may
at the same time know contraries.

But you know it, by their having provided sufficient means of Instruction for
all under their Care in the true Religion; (of this sufficient Means, we have
something to say in another place.) Penalties laid expressly on one Fault, have
no Evidence that they were de-signed to mend another, though there are
sufficient Means provided of mending it, if Men would make a sufficient use of
them; unless those two Faults are so connected, as one cannot be mended without
the other. Now if Men cannot conform, without so considering as to be convinced
of, and embrace the Truth that must save them, you may know that Penalties laid
on Nonconformity, were intended to make Men so consider: but if Men may
conform; without so considering, one cannot know nor conclude those Penalties
were intended to make Men so consider, whatever Provision there is made of
Means of Instruction.

But you will say, it is evident that Penalties on Nonconformists, were
intended to make them use these Means of Instruction. because they are intended
for the bringing Men to Church, the place of Instruction, That they are
intended to bring Men to Church, the Place of Preaching, that I grant, but that
those Penalties that are laid on Men, for not coming to Church, can be known
thereby to be intended to make Men so consider, as to be convinced and embrace
the true Religion, that I deny: and it is utterly impossible it should be so,
if what you say be true, where you tell us, That the Magistrates concern
themselves for P. 22.
Compliance or Conformity, only as the fruit of their Conviction. If therefore
the Magistrates are concerned for Men's Conformity, only as the fruit of their
Conviction, and coming to Church be that Conformity; coming to Church cannot be
intended as a Means of their Conviction: unless it be intended they should be
convinced, before they are convinced.

But to show you, that you cannot pretend the Penalty of Laws for Conformity,
to proceed from a Care of the Souls of all under the Magistrates Power, and so
to be intended, to make them all consider, in any Sense. Can you, or any one
know, or suppose, that Penalties which are laid by the Law on Nonconformity,
are intended to make all Men consider; where it is known that a great Number,
under the Magistrates Power, are dispensed with, and privileged from those
Penalties? How many, omitting the Jews, are there; for example, in the King of
England's Dominions, under his Care and Power, of the Walloon, and French
Church; to whom Force is never applied, and they live in Security from it? How
many Pagans are there in the Plantations, many whereof born in His Dominions,
of whom there was never any care taken, that they should so much as come to
Church, or be in the least instructed in the Christian Religion? And yet must
we believe, or can you pretend, that the Magistrates use of Force, against
Nonconformists; is to make all his Subjects consider, so as to be convinced of,
and embrace the Truth that must save them? If you say, in your way you mean no
such Indulgence: I answer, the Question is not of yours but the Magistrates
Intention; though what your Intention is, who would have the want of
Consideration, or Knowledge, in Conformists, exempt from Force, is visible
enough.

Again, Those Penalties cannot be supposed, to be intended to make Men
consider; which are laid on those, who have, or may have already considered:
And such you must grant to be the Penalties laid in England, on Nonconformists;
unless you will deny, that any Nonconformist has, or can consider, so as to be
convinced, or believe, and embrace the Truth that must save him. So that you
cannot vouch the Intention of the Magistrate, where his Laws say nothing; much
less affirm, that Force is intended to produce a certain end in all his
Subjects, which is not applied to them all, and is applied to some who have
attained that end already: Unless you have a Privilege to affirm, against all
appearance whatsoever may serve your Cause. But to learn some Moderation in
this, I shall send you to my Pagans and Mahumetans. For whatever charitable
wishes Magistrates may sometimes have in their Thoughts (which I meddle not
with); no Body can say, that in making the Laws, or in the use of Force, we are
speaking of, they intended to m^ke Men consider and examine, so as to be
convinced of, and heartily to embrace the Truth, that must save them, but he
that gives himself the Liberty to say any thing.

The Service that Force does, indirectly, and at a distance; you P. (...)
tell us in the following Page, is to make People apply th^mselves to the use
of those Means, and Helps, which are proper to make them what they are designed
to be. In the Case before us, What are Men designed to be? Holy Believers of
the Gospel in this World, without which no Salvation, no seeing of God in the
next. Let us see now, whether Force, your way applied, can be suited to such a
Design, and so intended for that End.

You hold, That all out of the National Church, where the Religion of the
National Church is true, should be punished, and ought to have Force used to
them: And again, you grant That those who are in the Communion of the National
Church, ought P. 6^.
not to be punished, or be under the stroke of Force; nor indeed in your way
can they. If now the effect be to prevail with Men, to consider as they ought,
so that they may become what they are designed to be: How can any one think,
that you, and they who use Force thus, intend, in the use of it, that Men
should really be Christians, both in Persuasion and Practice, without which
there is no Salvation; if they leave off Force before they have attained that
effect? Or how can it be imagined, that they intend any thing but Conformity,
by their use of Force; if they leave off the use of it as soon as Men conform?
Unless you will say that an outward Conformity to the National Church, whose
Religion is the true Religion, is such an embracing of the Truth as is
sufficient to Salvation? Or that an outward Profession of the Christian
Religion, is the same with being really a Christian; which possibly you will
not be very forward to do, when you recollect, what you meet with in the
Sermons, and Printed Discourses, of Divines of the Church of England,
concerning the Ignorance and Irreligion of Conformists themselves. For
Penalties can never be thought, by any one (but he that can think against
common Sense, and what he pleases) to be intended for any End; which by that
Constitution, and Law whereby they are imposed, are to cease before that End be
attained. And will you say, that all who are conformable, have so well
considered, that they believe, and heartily embrace the Truths of the Gospel,
that must save them: When perhaps it will be found that a great many
Conformists, do not so much as understand them? But the Ignorance or
Irreligiousness to be found amongst Consormists, which your way of talking
forces me in some Places to take notice of, let me here tell you once for all I
lay not the blame of upon Conformity, but upon your use of Force to make Men
conform. For whatever the Religion be, true or false, it is natural for Force,
and Penalty, so applied, to bring the irreligious, and those who are careless,
and unconcerned for the true, into the National Profession: But whether it be
fitter for such to be kept out, rather than, by Force, to be driven into the
Communion of any Church, and owned as Members of it, those who have a due Care
and Respect for truly religious and pious Conformists, were best consider.

But farther, if, as you say, the opposition to the true Religion, lies only in
Men's Lusts; it having Light and Strength enough (were it not for that) to
prevail: and it is upon that account only that Force is necessary, there is no
necessity at all to use Force on Men, only till they conform, and no farther:
Since I think, you will not deny, but that the Corruption of Humane Nature is
as great in Consormists, as in Nonconformists; in the Professors of, as in the
Dissenters from, the National Religion. And therefore either Force was not
necessary before, or else it is necessary still, after Men are Conformists:
Unless you will say, that it is harder for a Man to be a Professor, than a
Christian indeed: And that the true Religion, by its own Light and Strength,
can, without the help of Force, prevail over a Man's Lusts, and the Corruption
of his Nature; but it has need of the help of Force, to make him a Conformist,
and an outward Professor. And so much for the Effect, which is intended by him
that uses it in that use of Force, which you defend.

The other Argument you bring to show, that your indirect and at a distance
Usefulness of Force your way applied, is not by accident, is the frequent
Success of it. Which I think is not the true Mark of what is not by accident:
for an Effect may not be by accident, though it has never been produced but
once; and is certainly as little by accident the first time, as when it has
been produced a thousand times. That then, by which any thing is excused from
being by accident, is not the Frequency of the Event, but that whereon the
Frequency of the Event depends, when frequent Trials are made; and that is the
proper, natural, direct Efficacy of the Cause or Means, which produces the
Effect. As in the Case before us, Penalties are the Cause or Means used to
produce an End; the proper and immediate Effect of Penalties, is to produce
some Pain or Inconvenience; and the natural Effect of that, is to make a Man,
who naturally flies from all Pain or Inconvenience, to endeavor to avoid it;
whereby it naturally and directly works upon the Will of Man, by proposing to
him this unavoidable Choice, of doing some Action, or enduring the Pain or
Inconvenience of the Penalty annexed to its Omission. When the Pain of doing
the Action is outweigh'd in the Sense of him that lies under the Penalty, the
Pain, that by the Law is annexed to the Omission, operates upon his Will, as
naturally, as thirteen Ounces in one Scale, laid against twelve Ounces in the
other, incline the Balance, and bring it down on that side. And this is by a
direct and natural Efficacy, wherein there is nothing of Chance.

Let us see this how far this will go in your indirect and at a distance
Usefulness. In your Method, the Action, you propose to be done, is Considering,
or a severe and impartial Examining Matters of Religion, which you tell us, Men
by their great Negligence or Aversion are kept from doing. What now is a proper
Means to produce this? Penalties, without which, you tell us, it will not be
done. How now is it applied in your Method? Conformity, and Men's Neglect or
Aversion to it, is laid in one Scale, and the Penalty joined to the Omission of
it, laid in the other; and in this Case, if the Inconvenience of the Penalty
overweighs the Pains of, or Aversion to Conformity, it does by a direct and
natural Efficacy produce Conformity: but if it produces a severe and impartial
Examination, that is merely by accident; because the Inconvenience of the
Penalty is not laid against Men's Aversion or Backwardness to examine
impartially, as a Counter-ballance to that, but against their Aversion or
Backwardness to conform; and so whatever it does, indirectly and at a distance,
it is certain its making Men sev^rely and impartially examine (if ever that
happens) is as much by accident, as it would be by accident, if a piece of Lead
laid in one Scale as a Counterpoise to Feathers in the opposite Scale, should
move or weigh done Gold that was put in the Scale of another Pair of Balances,
which had no Counterpoise laid against it. Unless you will say there is a
necessary Connection between Conformity, and a severe and impartial Examination.

But you will say perhaps, that though it be not possible that Penalties should
produce Examination but by mere accident, because Examination has no necessary
Connection with Conformity, or the Profession of any Religion; yet since there
are some who will not take up any Profession without a severe and impartial
Examination, Penalties for Nonconformity will, by a direct and natural
Efficacy, produce Examination in all such. To which I answer, That those are
(if we may believe what A. p. 6, etc.
you say) so very few, that this your Remedy, which you put into the
Magistrate's hands to bring all his Subjects to consider and examine, will not
work upon one in a thousand; nay, it can work on none at all, to make them
severely and impa^tially examine, but merely by accident. For if they are Men,
whom a slight and partial Examination (which upon your Principles you must say)
sufficed to make Non-conformists, a slight and partial Examination will as well
serve to make them Conformists; and so Penalties laid on them to make them
conform, can only by accident produce a severe and impartial Examination, in
such Men, who can take up the Profession of any Religion without a severe and
impartial Examination, no more than it can otherwise than by accident, produce
any Examination in those who, without any Examination, can take up the
Profession of any Religion.

And in those very few, who take not up the Profession of any Religion without
a severe and impartial Examination, that Penalties can do any Service, to bring
them either to the Truth that must save them, or so much as to outward
Conformity, but merely by accident, that also is evident. Because all such in a
Country, where they dissent from the National Religion, must necessarily have
severely and impartially examined already, or else you destroy the Supposition
this Argument is built on, viz. That they are Men who do severely and
impartially examine before they choos^. And if you lay, or continue your
Penalties on Men, that have so examined, it is plain you use them instead of
Reasons and Arguments; in which Use of them, you confess they have no proper
Efficacy, and therefore if they do any Service, it is merely by accident.

But now let us see the Success you boast of, and for that you tell us, that
you doubt not but it is so often attained, as abundantly P. 17.
to manifest the Usefulness of it. You speak here of it, as a thing tried, and
so known, that you doubt not. Pray tell us where your moderate (for great ones
you acknowledge to do harm, and to be useless) Penalties have been used, with
such Success, that we may be past doubt too. If you can show no such place, do
you not vouch Experience where you have none? and show a Willingness not to
doubt, where you have no Assurance? In all Countries, where any Force is used
to bring Men to the Profession of the National Religion, and to outward
Conformity, it is not to be doubted, but that Force joining with their natural
Corruption, in bringing them into the Way of Preferment, Countenance,
Protection, Ease and Impunity, should easily draw in all the Loose and Careless
in Matters of Religion, which are everywhere the far greater number: But is it
those you count upon, and will you produce them as Examples of what Force has
done to make Men consider, study and embrace the True Religion? Did the
Penalties laid on Nonconformity make you consider, so as to study, be
convinced, and embrace the True Religion? Or can you give an Instance of any
one, in whom it produced this Effect? If you cannot, you will have some reason
to doubt of what you have said, and not to be so consident that the Effect you
talk of, is so often attained. Not that I deny, but that God may sometimes have
made these Punishments the Occasions to Men of setting themselves seriously on
considering Religion, and thence they may have come into the National Religion
upon a real Conviction: but the Instances of it I believe to be so few, that
you will have reason to remember your own Words, where you speak of such things
as, Any Way, at any Time, upon any Person, by any Accident, may be useful
toward the promoting of True Religion: P. 18.
If Men should thence take occasion to apply such things generally, who see^
not that, however they might chance to hit right in some few Cases, yet upon
the whole matter, they would certainly do a great deal more harm than good. You
and I know a Country wherein, not long since, greater Severities were used than
you pretend to approve of. Were there not for all that, great Numbers of
several Professions stood out, who by your Rule, ought now to have your
moderate Penalties tried upon them? And can you think less degrees of Force can
work, and often, as you say, prevail where greater could not? But perhaps they
might prevail on many of those to return, who having been brought into the
Communion of the Church by former Penal Laws, have now upon the Relaxation left
it again. A manifest Demonstration, ^s it not? That their Compliance was the
fruit of their Conviction; and that the Magistrate was concerned for their
Compliance only as the fruit of their Conviction. When they as soon as any
Relaxation of those Laws took off the Penalties, left again the Communion of
the National Church? For the lessening the Number of Conformists, is, I
suppose, one of those things which you say your Eyes cannot but see at this
time; and which you, with concern, impute to the late Relaxation. A plain
Evidence how presumable it is, even in your own Opinion, that those who conform
do it upon real Conviction.

To conclude, these Proofs, though I do not pretend to bring as good as the
Thing will admit, will serve my turn to show, that Force, is impertinent; since
by your own Confession it has no direct Efficacy to convince Men, and by its
being indirect and at a distance useful, is not at all distinguished from being
barely so by accident: since you can neither prove it to be intended for that
end, nor frequently to succeed, which are the two Marks whereby you put a
Difference between indirect and at a distance, and by accident. This, I say, is
enough to show what the Author said, is true, that the Use of Force is wholly
impertinent. Which, whatever other^ do, you upon another reason, must be forced
to allow.

You profess your self of the Church of England, and, if I may guess are so far
of it, as to have subscribed the 39 Articles, which if you have done, and
assented to what you subscribed, you must necessarily allow that all Force,
used for the bringing Men to the True Religion, is absolutely impertinent; for
that must be absolutely impertinent to be used as a Means, which can contribute
nothing at all to the End for which it is used. The End here, is to make a Man
a true Christian, that he may be saved; and he is then, and then only, a true
Christian, and in the Way of Salvation, when he believes, and with Sincerity
obeys the Gospel. By the 13th Article of the Church of England, you hold, that
WORKS DONE BEFORE THE GRACE OF CHRIST, AND THE INSPIRATION OF HIS SPIRIT, ARE
NOT PLEASING TO GOD; FOR AS MUCH AS THEY SPRING NOT OF FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST,
NEITHER DO THEY MAKE MEN MEET TO RECEIVE GRACE, (OR AS THE SCHOOL - AUTHORS
SAY) DESERVE GRACE OF CONGRUITY; YEA RATHER, FOR THAT THEY ARE NOT DONE AS GOD
HAS WILLED AND COMMANDED THEM TO BE DONE, WE DOUBT NOT BUT THEY HAVE THE NATURE
OF SIN. Now if it be impertinent to use Force to make a Man do more than he
can, and a Man can do nothing to procure Grace, unless Sin can procure it; and
without Grace, a Man cannot b^live, or live so as to be a true Christian, it is
certainly wholly impertinent to use Force to bring a Man to be truly a
Christian. To hear and consider, is in Men's Power, you will say, and to that
Force may be pertinent; I grant to make Men hear, but not to make them consider
in your sense, which you tell us, is to consider so as to embrace; if you mean
by embracing any thing but outward Conformity. And that according to your
Article, contributes nothing to the attaining of Grace; because without Grace,
your Article says it is a Sin; and to conform to, and outwardly profess a
Religion which a Man does not understand and heartily believe, every one, I
think, judges to be a Sin, and no fit Means to procure the Grace of God.

But you tell us, That God denies his Grace to none who seriously ask P. (...).
it. If that be so, methinks Force should most properly and pertinently be used
to make Men seriously pray to God for Grace. But how, I beseech you, will this
stand with your 13th Article? For if you mean by seriously, so as will make his
Seeking acceptable to God, that cannot be, because he is supposed yet to want
Grace which alone can make it acceptable: and if his Asking has the Nature of
Sin, as in the Article you do not doubt but it has, can you expect that Sinning
should procure the Grace of God? You will I fear here, without some great help
in a very nice Distinction from the School-Authors, be forced either to
renounce your Article in the plain sense of it, and so become a Dissenter from
the Church of England, or else acknowledge Force to be wholly impertinent to the
business of True Religion and Salvation.

Another Reason I gave against the Usefulness of Force in Matters of Religion,
was, Because the Magistrates of the World, being few of them in the Right-way,
(not one of ten, take which side you will) perhaps not one of an hundred, being
of the True Religion: It Is likely your indirect Way of using Force would do an
hundred, or at least ten times as much Harm as Good. To which you reply, Which
would have been to the P. 27.
purpose, if you had asserted, that every Magistrate may use Force, your
indirect Way (or any Way) to bring Men to his own Religion, whatever that be.
But if you assert no such thing, ( as no Man you think but an Atheist will
assert it) then this is quite beside the Business. I think I have proved, that
if Magistrates of the True Religion may use Force to bring Men to their
Religion, every Magistrate may use Force to bring Men to his own Religion, when
he thinks it the True: And then do you look where the Atheism will light.

In the next Paragraph, having quoted these following Words of mine; where I
say, Under another Pretense, you put into the Magistrate's hands as much Power
to force Men to his Religion, as any the openest Persecutors can pretend to. I
ask what difference is there between punishing them to bring them to Mass, and
punishing them to bring them to consider those Reasons and Arguments which are
proper and sufficient to convince them that they ought to go to Mass? You
reply; A Question which you shall then think your self obliged to answer, when
P. 27.
I have produced those Reasons and Arguments which are proper and sufficient to
convince Men that they ought to go to Mass. But if you had not omitted the 3 or
4 immediately preceding Lines, (an Art to serve a good Cause, which puts me in
mind of my Pagans and Mahumetans) the Reader would have seen that your Reply
was nothing at all to my Argument: My Words were these.

Especially, if you consider, that as the Magistrate will certainly use it
[Force] to force Men to hearken to the proper Ministers of his Religion, let it
be what it will; so you having set no time nor bounds to this Consideration of
Arguments and Reasons short of being convinced, you under another, etc. My
Argument is to show of what advantage Force, your Way applied, is like to be to
the True Religion, since it puts as much Force into the Magistrate's hands as
the openest Persecutors can pretend to, which the Magistrates of wrong
Persuasions may and will use as well as those of the true; because your Way
sets no other Bounds to Considering short of Complying. And then I ask, What
Difference there is between punishing you to bring you to Mass, or punishing
you to consider those Reasons and Arguments which are proper and s^fficient to
convince you that you ought to go to Mass? To which you r^ply. That it is a
Question you shall then think your self obliged to answer when I have produced
those Reasons and Arguments that are pro^er and sufficient to convince Men that
they ought to go to Mass. Whereas, the Objection is the same, Whither there be
or be not, R^asons and Arguments proper to convince Men, that they ^t to go to
Mass; for Men m^st be pu^h on till they have so co^dered as to comply: And what
differnce is there then b^n punishing Men to bring them to Mass, and punishing
(...) to make them consider so as to go to Mass? But though I pre^d not to
produce any Reasons and Arguments proper and convi^e to convince you or all
Men, that they ought to go to Mass; yet do you think there are none proper and
sufficient to convince any Men? And that all the Papists in the World go to
Mass without believing it their Duty? And whosoever believes it to be his Duty,
does it upon Reasons and Arguments, proper and sufficient to convince him
(though perhaps not to convince an other) that it is so, or else I imagine he
would never believe it at all. What think you of those great Numbers of
Japaneses, that resisted all sorts of Torments, even to Death it self, for the
Romish Religion? And had you been in France some years since, who knows but the
Arguments the K. of France produced might have been proper and sufficient to
have convinced you that you ought to go to Mass? I do not by this, think you
less confident of the Truth of your Religion, than you profess to be. But
Arguments set on with Force, have a strange Efficacy upon humane Frailty; and
he must be well assured of his own Strength, who can peremptorily affirm, he is
sure he should have stood, what above a Million of People sunk under: amongst
which, it is great Confidence to say, there was not one so well persuaded of the
Truth of his Religion, as you are of yours; though some of them gave great
Proofs of their Persuasion in their Sufferings for it. But what the necessary
Method of Force may be able to do, to bring any one, in your sense, to any
Religion, i. e. to an outward Profession of it, he that thinks himself secure
against, must have a greater Assurance of himself, than the Weakness of decayed
and depraved Nature will well allow. If you have any Spell against the Force of
Arguments, driven with Penalties and Punishments, you will do well to teach it
the World; for it is the hard Luck of well-meaning People to be often misled by
them, and even the Confident themselves have not seldom fallen under them, and
betrayed their Weakness.

To my demanding, if you meant Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to
convince Men of the Truth, why did you not say so? You reply, As if it were
possible for any Man that reads P. 27.
your Answer, to think otherwise. Whoever reads that Passage in your A. p. 5.
cannot possibly think you meant to speak out, and possibly you found some
difficulty to add any thing to your Words (which are these, Force used to bring
Men to consider A. p. 5.
Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them) that might
determine their Sense. For if you had said, to convince them of Truth; then the
Magistrate must have made Laws, and used Force to make Men search after Truth
in general, and that would not have served your turn: If you had said to
convince them of the Truth of the Magistrate's Religion, that would too
manifestly have put the Power in every Magistrate's hands, which you tell us,
none but an Atheist will say. If you had said, to convince them of the Truth of
your Religion, that had looked too ridiculous to be owned, though it were the
thing you meant; and therefore in this strait, where nothing you could say,
would well sit your purpose, you wisely choose to leave the Sense imperfect,
and name nothing they were to be convinced of, but leave it to be collected by
your Reader out of your Discourse, rather than add three Words to make it good
Grammar, as well as intelligible Sense.

To my saying, That if you pretend it must be Arguments to convince Men of the
Truth, it would in this Case do you little Service; because the Mass in France
is as much supposed the Truth, as the Liturgy here. You reply, So that it
seems, P. 28.
that in your Opinion, whatsoever is supposed the Truth, is the Truth, for
otherwise this Reason of mine is none at all. If, in my Opinion, the
Supposition of Truth authorizes the Magistrate to use the same Means to bring
Men to it, as if it were true, my Argument will hold good, without taking all
to be true which some Men suppose true. According to this Answer of yours, to
suppose or believe his Religion the true, is not enough to authorize the
Mastrate to use Force, he must know, i. e. be infallibly certain, that his is
the True Religion. We will for once suppose you our Magistrate, with Force
promoting our National Religion. I will not ask you, whether you know that all
required of Conformists, is necessary to Salvation: But will suppose one of my
Pagans asking you, whether you know Christianity to be the True Religion? If
you say, Yes, he will ask you how you know it? and no doubt, but you will give
the Answer whereby our Savior proved his Mission, John V. 36. that the Works
which our Savior did bear witness of him, that the Father sent him. The
Miracles that Christ did, are a Proof of his being sent from God, and so his
Religion the True Religion. But then you will be asked again, Whether you know
that he did those Miracles, as well as those who saw them done? If you answer,
Yes; then it is plain that Miracles are not yet withdrawn, but do still
accompany the Christian Religion with all the Efficacy and Evidence, that they
had upon the Eyewitnesses of them, and then upon your own Grounds, there will
be no necessity of the Magistrate's Assistance, Miracles still supplying the
want of it. If you answer, that Matter of fact done out of your sight, at such
a distance of Time and Place, cannot be known to you as certainly, as it was to
the Eyewitnesses of it, but that you upon very good Grounds firmly believe it;
you are then come to believing, that yours is the True Religion, and if that be
sufficient to authorize you to use Force, it will authorize any other
Magistrate of any other Religion to use Force also. For whoever believes any
thing, takes it to be true, and as he thinks upon good Grounds; and those often
who believe on the weakest Grounds, have the strongest Confidence: and thus all
Magistrates who believe their Religion to be true, will be obliged to use Force
to promote it, as if it were the true.

To my saying that the Usefulness of Force, your Way applied, amounts to no
more but this, that it is not impossible but that it may be useful. You reply,
I leave it to be judged by what has been P. 28.
said; and I leave it to you your self to judge: Only, that you may not forget,
I shall here remind you in short of some of the R^sons I have to say so: 1. You
grant that Force has no direct E^cacy to bring Men to embrace the Truth. 2. You
distinguish the indirect and at a distance Usefulness of your Force, from that
which is barely by accident; by these two Marks, viz. 1st. That Punishment on
Dissenters for Nonconformity, is, by those that use it, intended to make Men
consider: and 2d. That your moderate Punishments, by Experience, are found
often successful; and yours having neither of these Marks, it must be concluded
to be useful only by accident: and such an Usefulness, as I said, One cannot
deny, to Auricular Confession, doing of Penance, going L. 2. p. 15.
Pilgrimages to Saints, and what not? Yet our Church does not think fit to ufe
them; though it cannot be denied but they may have some of your indirect and at
a distance Usefulness; that is, perhaps may do some Se^viceindirectly and by
accident. If the Intention of those that use them, and the Success they will
tell you they find in the use of them, be a Proof of doing Service more than by
accident; that cannot be denied to them more than to Penalties, your Way
applied. To which, let me add, that Niceness and Difficulty there is, to hit
that just Degree of Force; which according to your Hypothesis, must be neither
so much as to do harm, nor so little as to be ineffectual; for you your self
cannot determine it, makes its Usefulness yet more uncertain and accidential.
And after all, let its Efficacy to work upon Men's Minds, be what it will, great
or little, it being sure to be imploid ten, or possibly, an hundred times to
bring Men to Error, for once that it is imploid to bring Men to the Truth; and
where it chances to be imploid, on the side of Truth, it being liable to make
an hundred, or perhaps a thousand outward Conformists, for one true and sincere
Convert; I leave it also to be judged what Usefulness it is like to be of.

To show the Usefulness of Force, your way applied, I said, Where the Law
punished Dissenters without telling them it is to make them consider, they may
through Ignorance and Oversight neglect to do it. Your Answer is, But where the
Law provides sufficient means of Instruction for all, as well as Punishment for
Dissentors, it is so plain to all concerned, that the Punishment is intended P.
28.
to make them consider, that you see no danger of Men's neglecting to do it,
through Ignorance and Oversight. I hope you mean by consider, so to consider as
not only to embrace in an outward Profession (for then all you say is but a
poor Fallacy, for such a Considering amounts to no more but bare outward
Conformity;) but so to consider, study and examine Matters of Religion, as
really to embrace, what one is convinced to be the true, with Faith and
Obedience. If it be so plain and easy to understand, that a Law, that speaks
nothing of it, should yet be intended to make Men consider, search and study,
to sind out the Truth that must save them; I wish you had showed us this
Plainness. For I confess many of all degrees, that I have purposely asked about
it, did not ever see, or so much as dream, that the Act of Uniformity, or
against Conventicles, or the Penalties in either of them, were ever intended to
make Men seriously study Religion, and make it their business to find the Truth
which must save them; but barely to make Men conform. But perhaps you have met
with Handicrafts-Men, and Country-Farmers, Maidservants, and Day-Labourers,
who have quicker Understandings, and reason better about the Intention of the
Law, for these as well as others are concerned. If you have not, it is to be
feared, your saying it is so plain, that you see no danger of Men's neglecting
to do it, through Ignorance or Oversight, is more for its serving your purpose,
than from any Experience you have, that it is so.

When you will enquire into this Matter, you will, I guess, find the People so
ignorant amidst that great Plainness you speak of, that not one of twenty of
any degree, amongst Conformists or Nonconformists, ever understood the Penalty
of 12 d. a Sunday, or any other of our Penal Laws against Nonconformity, to be
intended to set Men upon studying the True Religion, and impartially examining
what is necessary to Salvation. And if you would come to Hudibras's Decision, I
believe he would have a good Wager of it, who should give you a Guinea for each
one who had thought so, and receive but a Shilling for every one who had not.
Indeed you do not say, it is plain everywhere, but only where the Law provides
sufficient means of Instruction for all, as well as Punishments for Dissenters.
From whence, I think it will follow, that that contributes nothing to make it
plain, or else that the Law has not provided sufficient means of Instruction in
England, where so very few find this to be so plain. If by this sufficient
Provision of means of Instruction for all; you mean, Persons maintained at the
Public Charge to preach, and officiate in the public Exercise of the National
Religion; I suppose you needed not this Restriction, there being sew Places
which have an established National Religion, where there is not such means of
Instruction provided: if you intend any other means of Instruction, I know none
the Law has provided in England but the 39 Articles, the Liturgy, and the
Scripture, and how either of them by it self, or these altogether, with a
National Clergy, make it plain, that the Penalties laid on Nonconformity, are
intended to make Men consider, study, and impartially examine Matters of
Religion, you would do well to show. For Magistrates usually know (and
therefore make their Laws accordingly) that the People seldom carry either
their Interpretation or Practice beyond what the express Letter of the Law
requires of them. You would do well also to show, that a sufficient provision
of means of Instruction, cannot but be understood to require an effectual Use
of them, which the Law that makes that provision says nothing of. But on the
contrary, contents it self with something very short of it: For Conformity or
Coming to Church, is at least as far from considering, studying and impartially
examining Matters of Religion, so as to embrace the Truth upon Conviction and
with an obedient Heart, as being present at a Discourse concerning
Mathematics, and studying Mathematics, so as to become a knowing
Mathematician, are different one from the other.

People generally think they have done their Duties abundantly, if they have
been at Church, whether they mind any thing done there or no: this they call
serving of God, as if it were their whole Duty; so backward are they to
understand more, though it be plain the Law of God expressly requires more. But
that they have fully satisfied the Law of the Land, no body doubts; nor is it
easy to answer what was are plied to me on this occasion, viz. If the
Magistrate intended any thing more in those Laws but Consormity, would he not
have said it? To which (...) me add, if the Magistrate intended Conformity as
the fruit of Conviction, would he not have taken some care to have them
instructed before they conformed, and examined when they did? but it is
presumable their Ignorance, Corruption and Lusts, all drop off in the
Church Porch, and that they become perfectly good Christians as soon as they
have taken (...) Seats in the Church.

If there be any whom your Example or Writing has inspired with A^uteness
enough to sind out this; I suspect the Vulgar who have scarce time and thought
enough to make Inferences from the Law, which scarce one or ten of them ever so
much as reads, or perhaps under^ands when read, are still, and will be ignorant
of it: And those who have the Time and Abilities to argue about it, will find
reason to think, that those Penalties were not intended to m^ke Men examine the
Doctrine and Ceremonies of Religion; since those who should examine, are
prohibited by those very Laws, to follow their own Judgments, (which is the
very End and Use of Examination) if they at all differ from the Religion
established by Law. Nor can it appear so plain to all concerned, that the
Punishment is intended to make them consider and examine, when they see the
Punishments you say are to make People consider, spare those who consider and
examine Matters of Religion, as little as any of the most ignorant and careless
Dissenters.

To my saying, Some Dissenters may have considered already, and then Force
imploid upon them must needs be useless; unless you can think it useful to
punish a Man to make him do that which he has done already. You reply, No Man
who P. 28.
rejects Truth necessary to his Salvation, has considered already as he ought
to consider. The words as he ought, are not, as I take it in the Question: and
so your Answer is, No Man who rejects the Truth necessary to his Salvation,
has considered, studied or examined Matters of Religion. But we will let that
go: and yet with that allowance, your Answer will be nothing to the purpose,
unless you will dare to say, that all Dissenters reject Truth necessary to
Salvation. For without that Supposition, that all Dissenters reject Truth
necessary to Salvation, the Argument and Answer will stand thus. It may be
useless to punish all Dissenters to make them consider, because some of them
may have considered already. To which, the Answer is, Yes, some of them may
have considered already, but those who reject Truth necessary to their
Salvation, have not considered as they ought.

I said, The greatest part of Mankind, being not able to discern betwixt Truth
and Falsehood, that depends upon long L. 2. p. 16.
and many Proofs, and remote Consequences; nor ha^ing Ability enough to
discover the false Grounds, and resist the captious and fallacious Arguments of
Learned Men versed in Controversies, are so much more exposed, by the Force,
which is used to make them hearken to the Information and Instruction of Men
appointed to it by the Magistrate, or those of his Religion, to be led into
Falsehood and Error, than they are likely this way to be brought to embrace the
Truth which must save them; by how much the National Religions of the World
are, beyond comparison, more of them false or erroneous, than such as have God
for their Author, and Truth for their Standard. You reply, If the first part of
this be true; then an infallible Guide, and implicit Faith, are more necessary
than P. 29.
ever you thought them. Whether you conclude from thence or no, that then there
will be a necessity of an infallible Guide, and an implicit Faith, it is
nevertheless true, that the greatest part of Men are unable to discern, as I
said, between Truth and Falsehood depending, upon long and many Proofs, etc. But
whether that will make an infallible Guide necessary or no, Imposition in
Matters of Religion certainly will: since there can be nothing more absurd
imaginable, than that a Man should take upon him to impose on others in Matters
of their Eternal Concernment, without being, or so much as pretending to be
infallible: For color it with the name of Considering as much as you please,
as long as it is to make Men consider as they ought, and considering as they
ought, is so to consider, as to embrace; the using of Force to make Men
consider, and the using of Force to make them embrace any Doctrine or Opinion,
is the same thing: and to show a difference betwixt imposing an Opinion, and
using Force to make it be embraced, would require such a piece of Subtilty, as
I heard lately from a Learned Man out of the Pulpit, who told us, that though
two things, he named, were all one, yet for Distinction's sake, he would divide
them. Your Reason for the necessity of an infallible Guide, is, For if the
greatest part of Mankind be not able to discern betwixt Truth and Falsehood in
Matters concerning their Salvation ( as I must mean if I speak to the purpose)
their Condition must needs be very hazardous, if they have not some Guide or
Judge, to whose Determination and Direction they may securely resign themselves.
And therefore they must resign themselves to the Determination and Direction of
the Civil Magistrate, or be punished. Here it is like you will have something
again to say to my Modesty and Conscience, for imputing to you, what you no
where say. I grant it, in direct words; but in effect as plainly as may be. The
Magistrate may impose sound Creeds and decent Ceremonies, i. e such as he
thinks sit, for what is sound and decent he I hope must be Judge, and if he be
Judge of what is sound and decent, it amounts to no more, but what he thinks
sit: and if it be not what he thinks sit, why is one Ceremony preferred to
another? why one Doctrine of the Scripture put into the Creed and Articles, and
another as sound left out? They are Truths necessary to Salvation. We shall see
that in good time, here only I ask, Does the Magistrate only believe them to be
Truths and Ceremonies necessary to Salvation, or does he certainly know them to
be so? If you say he only believes them to be so, and that that is enough to
authorize him to impose them, you by your own Confession, authorize Magistrates
to impose what they think necessary for the Salvation of their Subjects Souls;
and so the King of France did what he was obliged to, when he said he would
have all his Subjects saved, and so fell to Dragooning.

If you say the Magistrate certainly knows them to be necessary to Salvation,
we are luckily come to an Infallible Guide. Well then, the sound Creeds are
agreed on; the Confession and Liturgy are framed; the Ceremonies pitched on;
and the Terms of Communion thus set up, you have Religion established by Law:
and what now is the Subject to do? He is to conform. No; he must first
consid^r. Who bids him consider? no body, he may if he pleases, but the Law
says nothing to him of it: consider or not consider, if he conforms it is well,
and he is approved of, and admitted. He does consider the best he can, but
finds some things he does not understand, other things he cannot believe,
assent or consent to. What now is to be done with him? He must either be
punished on, or resign himself up to the Determination and Direction of the
Civil Magistrate, which till you can ^ind a better name for it, we will call
Implicit Faith. And thus you have provided a Remedy for the hazardous Condition
of weak Understandings, in that which you suppose necessary in the case, viz.
an infallible Guide and implicit Faith, in Matters ^oncerning Men's Salvation.

But you say, For your part you know of no such Guide of God's appointing. Let
that be your Rule, and the Magistrate with his Co-active Power, will be left
out too. You think there is no need of P. 29.
any such, because notwithstanding the long and many Proofs and remote
Consequences, the false Grounds, and the captious and fallacious Arguments of
Learned Men versed in Controversies, with which I ( as well as those of the
Roman Communion) endeavor to amuse you; through the Goodness of God the Truth
which is necessary to Salvation, lies so obvious and exposed to all that
sin^erely and diligently seek it, that no such Person shall ever fail of
attaining the Knowledge of it. This then is your Answer, that Truths necessary
to Salvation are obvious; so that those who seek them sincerely and diligently,
are not in danger to be misled or exposed in those to Error, by the Weakness of
their Understandings. This will be a good Answer to what I objected from the
Danger most are in to be led into Error, by the Magistrate's adding Force to
the Arguments for their National established Religions; when you have shown,
that nothing is wont to be imposed in National Religions, but what is necessary
to Salvation; or which will a little better accommodate your Hypothesis, when
you can show that nothing is imposed, or required for Communion with the Church
of England, but what is necessary to Salvation; and consequently, is very easy
and obvious to be known, and distinguished from Falsehood. And indeed, besides
what you say here, upon your Hypothesis, that Force is lawful only, because it
is necessary to bring Men to Salvation, it cannot be lawful to use it, to bring
Men to any thing, but what is absolutely necessary to Salvation. For if the
Lawfulness of Force be only from the need Men have of it to bring them to
Salvation, it cannot lawfully be used, to bring Men to that, which they do not
need, or is not necessary, to their Salvation; for in such an Application of
it, it is not needful to their Salvation. Can you therefore say, that there is
nothing required to be believed and professed in the Church of England, but
what lies so obvious and exposed to all that sincerely and diligently seek it,
that no such Person P. 29.
shall ever fail of attaining the Knowledge of it? What think you of St.
Athanasius's C^eed? is the Sense of that so obvious and exposed to every one
who seeks it, which so many Learned Men have explained so different Ways, and
which yet a great many profess they cannot understand? Or is it necessary to
your or my Salvation, that you or I should believe and pronounce all those
damned who do not believe that Creed, i. e. every Proposition in it? which I
fear would extend to not a few of the Church of England, unless we can think
that People believe, i. e. assent to the Truth of Propositions, they do not at
all understand. If ever you were acquainted with a Country-Parish, you must
needs have a strange Opinion of them, if you think all the Plough-Men and
Milk-Maids at Church, understood all the Propositions in Athanasius's Creed;
it is more truly, than I should be apt to think of any one of them, and yet I
cannot hence believe my self authorized to judge or pronounce them all damned:
it is too bold an Intrenching on the Prerogative of the Almighty, to their own
Master they stand or fall.

The Doctrine of Original Sin, is that which is professed, and must be owned by
the Members of the Church of England, as is evident from the 39 Articles, and
several Passages in the Liturgy: and yet I ask you, whether this be so obvious
and exposed to all that diligently and sincerely seek the Truth, that one who
is in the Communion of the Church of England, sincerely seeking the Truth, may
not raise to himself such Difficulties concerning the Doctrine of Original Sin
as may puzzle him, though he be a Man of Study; and whether he may not push his
Enquiries so far, as to be staggered in his Opinion.

If you grant me this, as I am apt to think you will, then I enquire whether it
be not true (notwithstanding what you say concerning the Plainness and
Obviousness of Truths necessary to Salvation) that a great part of Mankind may
not be able to discern between Truth, and Falsehood, in several Points, which
are thought so far to concern their Salvation, as to be made necessary Parts of
the National Religion?

If you say it may be so, then I have nothing farther to enquire; but shall
only advise you not to be so severe hereafter in your Censure of Mr. Reynolds,
as you are, where you tell me, that the famous Instance I give of the two
Reynolds's is not of any moment to prove the contrary; unless I can undertake,
that he that erred was as sincere in his Enquiry after that Truth, as I suppose
him able to examine and judge.

You will, I suppose, be more charitable another time, when you have
considered, that neither Sincerity, nor Freedom from Error, even in the
established Doctrines of their own Church, is the Privilege of those who join
themselves in outward Profession to any National Church whatsoever. And it is
not impossible, that one who has subscribed the 39 Articles, may yet make it a
Question, Whether it may b^ truly said that God imputes the first Sin of Adam
to his Posterity? etc. But we are apt to be so fond of our own Opinions, and
almost Infallibility, that we will not allow them to be sincere, who quit our
Communion; whilst at the same time, we tell the World, it is presumable, that
all who embrace it, do it sincerely, and upon Conviction; though we cannot but
know many of them to be but loose, inconsiderate, and ignorant People. This is
all the reason you have, when you speak of the Reynolds's, to suspect one of
the Brothers more than the other: And to think, that Mr. Chillingworth had not
as much Sincerity when he quitted, as when he returned to the Church of
England, is a Partiality, which nothing can justify without pretending to
Infallibility.

To show that you do not fancy your Force to be useful, but that you judge so
upon just and sufficient Grounds, you tell us, the strong probability of its
Success is grounded upon the Consideration of P. 34
humane Nature, and the general Temper of Mankind, apt to be ^rought upon by
the Method you speak of, and upon the indisputable Att^station of Experience.
The Consideration of humane Nature, and the general Temper of Mankind, will
teach one this, that Men are apt, in things within their power, to be wrought
upon by Force, and the more wrought upon, the greater the Force or Punishments
are: So that where moderate Penalties will not work, great Severities will.
Which Consideration of humane Nature, if it be a just Ground to judge any Force
useful, will I fear necessarily carry you, in your Judgment, to Severities
beyond the moderate Penalties, so often mentioned in your System, upon a strong
Probability of the Success of greater punishment, where less would not prevail.

But if to consider so as you require, i. e. so as to embrace, and believe, be
not in their Power, then no Force at all, great or little, is or can be useful.
You must therefore (consider it which way you will) either renounce all Force
as useful, or pull off your Mask, and own all the Severities of the cruellest
Perseentors.

The other Reason of your judging Force to be useful, you say, is grounded on
the indisputable Att^station of Experience. Pray tell us where you have this
Attestation of Experience for your moderate, which is the only useful Force:
Name the Country where True Religion or Sound Christianity has been Nationally
received, and established by moderate Penal Laws, that the observing Persons
you appeal to, may know where to employ their Observation: Tell us how long it
was t^ied, and what was the Su^cess of it? And where there has been the
Relaxation of such moderate Penal Laws, the fruits whereof have continually
been Epicurism and Atheism? Till you do this, I fear, that all the World will
think, there is a more indisputable Attestation of Experience for the Success
of Dragooning, and the Severities you condemn, than of your moderate Method;
which we shall compare with the King of France's, and see which is most
successful in making Proselytes to Church-Conformity, (for yours as well as his
reach no farther than that) when you produce your Examples: the consident Talk
whereof, is good to count^nce a Cause, though Experience there be none in the
case.

But you appeal, you say, to all observing Persons, Whether P. 3^.
where-euer True Religion or Sound Christianity have been Nationally received
and (...) by moderate Penal Laws, it has not always visibly lost ground by the
Relaxation of those Laws? True or False Religions, Sound or Unsound
Christianity, wherever established into National Religions by Penal Laws,
always have lost, and always will lose ground, i. e. lose several of their
Confo^ming Professors upon the Relaxation of those Laws. But this concerns not
the True, more than other Religions; nor is any Prejudice to it: but only
shows, that many are, by the Penalties of the Law, kept in the Communion of the
National Religion, who are not really convinced, or persuaded of it: and
therefore, as soon as Liberty is given, they own the dislike they had many of
them before, and out of Persuasion, Curiosity, etc. seek out, and bet^ke
themselves to some other Profession. This need not startle the Magistrates of
any Religion, much less those of the True, since they will be sure to retain
those, who more mind their secular Interest than the Truth of Religion, (who
are everywhere the greater number) by the advantages of Countenance and
P^ferment: and if it be the True Religion, they will retain those also, who are
in earnest of it, by the stronger tie of Conscience and Conviction.

You go on, Whether Sects and Hercsies ( even the wildest and most absurd, and
even Epicurism and Atheism) have not continually P. 34.
thereupon spread themselves, and whether the very Life of Christianity has not
sensibly decayed, as well as the Number of sound Prosessors of it been daily
lessened upon it? As to Atheism and Epicurism, whether they more spread under
Toleration, or National Religions, established by moderate Penal Laws, when you
show us the Countries where fair trial has been made of both, that we may
compare them together, we shall better be able to judge.

Epicurism and Atheism, say you, are found constantly to spread themselves upon
the Relaxation of moderate Penal Laws. We will suppose your History to be full
of Instances of such Relaxations, which you will in good time communicate to
the World, that wants this Assistance from your Observation. But were this to
be justified out of History, yet would it not be any Argument against
Toleration; unless your History can furnish you with a new sort of Religion
founded in Atheism. However, you do well to charge the spreading of Atheism
upon Toleration in Matters of Religion, as an Argument against those who deny
Atheism (which takes away all Religion) to have any Right to Toleration at all.
But perhaps (as is usual for those who think all the World should see with
their Eyes, and receive their Systems for unquestionable Verities) Zeal for
your own way makes you call all Atheism, that agrees not with it. That which
makes me doubt of this, are these following words; Not to speak of what at this
time our Eyes cannot but see for fear of P. 35.
giving Offense: Though I hope it will be none to any that have a just Concern
for Truth and Piety, to take notice of the Books and Pamphlets which now fly so
thick about this Kingdom, manifestly tending to the multiplying of Sects and
Divisions, and even to the promoting of Skepticism in Religion among us. In
which number, you say, you shall not much need my pardon, if you reckon the
First and Second Letter concerning Toleration. Wherein, by a broad Insinuation,
you impute the spreading of Atheism among us, to the late Relaxation made in
favor of Protestant Dissenters: and yet all that you take notice of as a proof
of this, is, the Books and Pamphlets which now fly so thick about this Kingdom,
manifestly tending to the multiplying of Sects and Divisions, and even to the
promoting of Skepticism in Religion amongst us; and for instance, you name the
First and Second Letter concerning Toleration. If one may guess at the others
by these, The Athcism and Skepticism you accuse them of will have but little
more in it, than an Opposition to your Hypothesis; on which, the whole business
of Religion must so turn, that whatever agrees not with your System, must
presently, by Interpretation, be concluded to tend to the promoting of Atheism
or Skepticism in Religion. For I challenge you to show in either of those two
Letters you mention, one word tending to Epicurism, Atheism or Skepticism in
Religion.

But, Sir, against the next time you are to give an account of Books and
Pamphlets tending to the promoting Skepticism in Religion amongst us. I shall
mind you of the third Letter concerning Toleration, to be added to the
Catalogue, which asserting and building P. 47.
upon this, that True Religion may be known by those who profess it, to be the
only True Religion, does not a little toward betraying the Christian Religion
to Scepticks. For what greater advantage can be given them, than to teach, that
one may know the True Religion? thereby putting into their hands a Right to
demand it to be demonstrated to them, that the Christian Religion is true, and
bringing on the Professors of it a necessity of doing it. I have heard it
complained of as one great Artifice of Scepticks, to require Demonstrations
where they neither could be had, nor were necessary. But if the True Religion
may be known to Men to be so, a Sceptick may require, and you cannot blame him
if he does not receive your Religion, upon the strongest probable Arguments,
without Demonstration.

And if one should demand of you Demonstration of the Truths of your Religion,
which I beseech you, would you do, either renounce your Assertion, that it may
be known to be true, or else undertake to demonstrate it to him?

And as for the decay of the very Life and Spirit of Christianity, and the
spreading of Epicurism amongst us: I ask, what can more tend to the promoting
of them than this Doctrine, which is to be found in the same Letter, viz. That
it is presumable that those who conform, do it upon Reason and Conviction? When
you can instance in any thing so much tending to the promoting of Skepticism in
Religion and Epicurism, in the first or second Letter concerning Toleration, we
shall have reason to think you have some ground for what you say.

As to Epicurism, the spreading whereof you likewise impu^e to the Relaxation
of your moderate Penal Laws; That so far as it is distinct from Atheism, I
think regards Men's Lives more than their Religions, i. e. speculative Opinions
in Religion and Ways of Worship, which is that we mean by Religion, as
concerned in Toleration. And for the Toleration of corrupt Manners, and the
Debaucheries of Life, neither our Author, nor I do plead for it; but say it is
properly the Magistrate's Business, by Punishments, to restrain and suppress
them. I do not therefore blame your Zeal against Atheism and Epicurism; but you
discover a great Zeal against something else, in charging them on Toleration,
when it is in the Magistrate's power to restrain and suppress them by more
effectual Laws than those for Church-Conformity. For there are those who will
tell you that an outward Profession of the National Religion, even where it is
the True Religion, is no more opposite to, or inconsistent with Atheism or
Epicurism, than the owning of another Religion, ^specially any Christian
Profession, that differs from it. And therefore you, in vain, impute Atheism or
Epicurism to the Relaxation of Penal Laws, that require no more than an outward
Conformity to the National Church.

As to the S^cts and Un-christian Divisions (for other Divisions there may be
without prejudice to Christianity) at whose Door they chiesly ought to be laid,
I have showed you elsewhere.

One thing I cannot but take notice of here, that having named Sects, Heresi^s,
Epicurism, Atheism, and a D^ay of the Spirit and Life of Christianity, as the
fruits of (...), for which you had the Attestation of (...) (...), you add
these words, Not to speak of what our (...) at this (...) cannot but P. 34.
(...), for fear of giving offense. Whom is it, I beseech you, you are so
afraid of offending, if you should speak of the Epicurism, Atheism, and D^ay of
the Spirit, and Life of Christianity ^gst (...) (...)? But I see, he that is so
mode^ in one ^ he will not take upon ^, (...) what they cannot know ^ he calls
moderate Pe^is or Force, may yet, in another part of the same Letter, by bro^d
Insinnations, use (...), wherein it is a hard matter to think Law-mak^rs and
Gov^nners are not meant. But whoever be meant, it is at least advisable in
Accusations that are easier suggested than made out, to cast abroad the Slander
in general, and leave others to apply it, for ^ear those who are named, and so
justly offended with a false Imputation, should be entitled to ask, as in this
case, how it appears that Sects and Herosies have multiplied, Epicurism and
Atheism spread themselves, and that the Life and Spirit of Christianity is
decayed, more within these two years than it was before, and that all this
Mischief is owing to the late Relaxation of the Penal Laws against Protestant
Dissenters.

You go on, And if these have always been the Fruits of the Relaxation P. 35.
of moderate Penal Laws, made for the preserving and advancing true Religion;
You think this Consideration alone is abundantly sufficient to show the
^fulness and Benefit of such Laws. For if these Evils have constantly sprung
from the Relaxation of those Laws, (...) evident they were prevented before by
those Laws. One would think by your saying, always been the Fruits, and
constantly sprung, that moderate Penal Laws, for preserving the true Religion,
had been the constant Practice of all Christian Commonwealth; and that
Relaxations of them, i^ favor of a free Toleration, had frequently happened;
and that there were Examples both of the one and the other, as common and
known, as of Prince; that have persecuted for Religion, and learned Men who
have employed their Skill to make it good. But till you show us in what Ages or
Countries your moderate Establishments were in Fashion, and where they were
again removed to make way for our Author's Toleration, you to as little purpose
talk of the Fruits of them, as if you should talk of the Fruit of a Tree which
no Body planted, or was no where suffered to grow till one might see what Fruit
came from it.

Having laid it down as one of the Conditions for a fair debate ^.
of this Controversy, `That it should be without supposing all along your
Church in the right, and your Religion the true; I add these words, Which can
no more be allowed to you IN THIS CASE, whatever your Church or Religion be,
than it can be to a Papist or a Lutheran, a Presbyterian or an Anabaptist; nay
no more to you, than it can be allowed to a Jew or Mohammedan. To which you
reply, No Sir? Not whatever P. 47.
your Church or Religion be? That seems somewhat hard. And you think I might
have given you some reason for what I say: For certainly it is not so
self-evident as to need no proof. But you think it is no hard matter to guess
at my Reason, though I did not think fit expresty to own it. For it is obvious
enough there can be no other Reason for this Assertion of mine, but either the
equal Truth, or at least the equal Certainty (or Uncertainty) of all Religions.
For whoever considers my Assertion, must see, that to make it good I shall be
obliged to maintain one of these two things. Either, 1. That no Religion is the
true Religion, in opposition to other Religions: Which makes all Religions true
or false, and so either way indifferent. Or, 2. That though some one Religion
be the true Religion, yet no Man can have any more Reason than another Man of
another Religion may have, to believe his to be the true Religion. Which makes
all Religions equally certain, (or uncertain, whether I please) and so renders
it vain and idle to enquire after the true Religion, and only a piece of good
luck if any Man be of it, and such good luck as he can never know that he has
till he come into the other World. Whether of these two Principles I will own,
you know not. But certainly one or other of them lies at the bottom with me,
and is the lurking Supposition upon which I build all that I say.

Certainly no, Sir, neither of these Reasons you have so ingenuously and
friendly found out for me, lies at the bottom; but this, That whatever
Privilege or Power you claim, upon your supposing yours to be the true
Religion, is equally due to another (who supposes his to be the true Religion)
upon the same claim: and therefore that is no more to be allowed to you than to
him. For whose is really the true Religion, yours or his, being the matter in
contest betwixt you, your supposing can no more determine it on your side, than
his supposing on his; unless you can think you have a right to judge in your own
Cause. You believe yours to be the true Religion, so does he believe his: you
say you are certain of it, so says he, he is: you think you have Arguments
proper and sufficient to convince him, if he would consider them; the same
thinks he of his. If this claim, which is equally on both sides, be allowed to
either, without any Proof, it is plain he, i^ whose favor it is allowed, is
allowed to be Judge in his own Cause, which no body can have a Right to be, who
is not at least infallible. If you come to Arguments and Proofs, which you must
do, before it can be determined whose is the True Religion, it is plain your
Supposition is not allowed.

In our present case, in using Punishments in Religion, your supposing yours to
be the True Religion, gives you or your Magistrate no more Advantage over a
Papist, Presbyterian or Mohammedan, or more Reason to punish either of them for
his Religion, than the same. Supposition in a Papist, Presbyterian or Mohammedan
gives any of them, or a Magistrate of their Religion, advantage over you, or
reason to punish you for your Religion: and therefore this Supposition, to any
purpose or privilege of using of Force, is no more to be allowed to you, than
to any one of any other Religion. This the words, IN THIS CASE, which I there
used, would have satisfied any other to have been my meaning: But whether your
Charity made you not to take notice of them, or the Joy of such an Advantage as
this, not to understand them, this is certain, you were resolved not to lose
the Opportunity, such a place as this afforded you, of showing your Gift, in
commenting and guessing shrewdly at a Man's Reasons, when he does not think fit
expressly to own them himself.

I must own you have a very lucky hand at it, and as you do it here upon the
same ground, so it is just with the same Success, as you in another place have
exercised your Logic on my saying something to the same purpose, as I do here.
But, Sir, if you will add but one more to your plentiful stock of Distinctions,
and observe the difference there is between the ground of any one's supposing
his Religion is true, and the Privilege he may pretend to by supposing it true,
you will never stumble a^ this again; but you will find, that though upon the
former of these Accounts, Men of all Religions cannot be equally allowed to
suppose their Religions true, yet in reference to the Latter, the Supposition
may and ought to be allowed, or denied equally to all Men. And the reason of it
is plain, viz. because the Assurance wherewith one Man supposes his Religion to
be true, being no more an Argument of its Truth to another, than vice versa;
neither of them can claim by the Assurance, wherewith he supposes his Religion
the True, any Prerogative or Power over the other, which the other has not by
the same Title an equal Claim to, over him. If this will not serve to spare you
the pains another time of any more such Reasonings, as we have twice had on
this Subject, I think I shall be forced to send you to my Mahometans or Pagans:
and I doubt whether I am not less civil to your Parts than I should be, that I
do not send you to them now.

You go on and say, But as u^reasonable as this Condition is, you see no need
you have to decline it, nor any occasion I had to impose it upon you. For
certainly the making what I call your new P. 47.
Method, cons^ltent and practicable, does no way oblige you to suppose all
along your Religion the True, as I imagine. And as I imagine it does: For
without that Supposition, I would fain have you show me how it is in any one
Country practicable to punish Men to b^ing them to the True Religion. For if
you will argue for Force, as necessary to bring Men to the True Religion,
without supposing yours to be it, you will find your self under some such
difficulty as this, that then it must be first determined, (and you will
require it should be) which is the True Religion, before any one can have a
Right to use Force to bring Men to it; which, if every one did not determine
for himself, by supposing his own the True, no body, I think, will desire
Toleration any longer than till that be settled.

You go on, No, Sir, it is enough for that purpose, that there is P. 47.
one True Religion, and but one. Suppose not the National Religion establish^d
by Law in England to be that, and then even upon your Principles of its being
useful, and that the Magistrate has a Commission to use Force for the promoting
the True Religion, prove if you please, that the Magistrato has a Power to use
Force to bring Men to the National Religion in England. For then you must prove
the National Religion, as established by Law in England, to be that One True
Religion, and so the True Religion, that he rejects the True Religion, who
dissents from any part of it, and so rejecting the True Religion, cannot be
saved. But of this more in another place.

Your other two Suppositions which you join to the foregoing, are, That that
Religion may be known by those who (...) (...) to be the Ibid.
only True Religion; and may also be manifested to be such by them to others,
so far at least, as to oblige them to receive it, and to leave them without
Excuse, if they do not.

These, you say, are Suppositions enough for the making your M^od consistent
and pra^ioable. They are, (...), more than enough, for you, upon them, to prove
any National Religion in the World, the only True Religion. And till you have
proved (for you profess here to have quitted the Supposition of any one's being
true, as necessary to your Hypothesis) some National Religion to be that only
True Religion, I would gladly know how it is any where practicable to use Force
to bring Men to the True Religion.

You suppose there is one True Religion, and but one. In this we are both
agreed: And from hence, I think, it will follow, since whoever is of this True
Religion shall be saved, and without being of it no Man shall be saved, that
upon your second and third Supposition, it will be hard to show any National
Religion to be this only True Religion. For who is it will say, he knows, or
that it is knowable, that any National Religion (wherein must be comprehended
all that, by the Penal Laws, he is requird to embrace) is that only True
Religion; which if Men reject, they shall; and which, if they embrace, they
shall not miss Salvation? Or can you undertake that any National Religion in
the World can be manifested to be such, i. e. in short, to contain all things
necessary to Salvation, and nothing but what is so? For that, and that alone,
is the One only True Religion, without which no body can be saved; and which is
enough for the Salvation of every one who embraces it. And therefore whatever
is less or more than this, is not the One only True Religion, or that which
there is a necessity for their Salvation, Men should be forced to embrace.

I do not hereby deny, that there is any National Religion which contains all
that is necessary to Salvation, for so does the Romish Religion, which is not
for all that, so much as a True Religion. Nor do I deny, that there are
National Religions that contain all things necessary to Salvation, and nothing
inconsistent with it, and so may be called True Religions. But since they all
of them join with what is necessary to Salvation, a great deal that is not so,
and make that as necessary to Communion, as what is necessary to Salvation, not
suffering any one to be of their Communion, without taking all together; nor to
live amongst them free from Punishment, out of their Communion; will you
affirm, that any of the National Religions of the World, which are imposed by
Penal Laws, and to which Men are driven with Force, can be said to be, that One
only True Religion, which if Men embrace, they shall be saved; and which if
they embrace not, they shall be damned? And therefore, your two Suppositions,
True or False, are not enough to make it practicable, upon your Principles of
necessity, to use Force upon Dissenters from the National Religion, though it
contain in it nothing but Truth, unless that which is required to Communion be
all necessary to Salvation. For whatever is not necessary to Salvation, there
is no necessity any one should embrace. So that whenever you speak of the True
Religion, to make it to your purpose, you must speak only of what is necessary
to Salvation; unless you will say, that in order to the Salvation of Men's
Souls, it is necessary to use Force to bring them to embrace something, that is
not necessary to their Salvation. I think that neither you nor any body else,
will affirm, that it is necessary to use Force to bring Men to receive all the
Truths of the Christian Religion, though they are Truths God has thought sit to
reveal. For then, by your own Rule, you who profefs the Christian Religion,
must know them all, and must be able to manifest them to others; for it is on
that here you ground the Necessity and Reasonableness of Penalties used to
bring Men to embrace the Truth. But I suspect it is the good word Religion (as
in other places other words) has misled you, whilst you content your self with
good Sounds, and some confused Notions, that usually accompany them, without
annexing to them any precise determined Signification. To convince you that
it is not without ground I say this, I shall desire you but to set down what you
mean here by True Religion, that we may know what in your Sense is, and what is
not contained in it. Would you but do thus fairly, and define your Words, or
use them in one constant settled Sense, I think the Controversy between you and
me, would be at an end without any farther trouble.

Having showed of what advantage they are like to be to you for the making your
Method practicable, in the next place let us consider your Suppositions
themselves. As to the first, There is one true Religion, and but one, we are
argeed. But what you say in the next place, That that one true Religion may be
known by those who profess it, will need a little Examination. As first, it
will be necessary to enquire, what you mean by known, whether you mean by it
Knowledge properly so called, as contra-distinguish'd to Belief; or only the
assurance of a sirm Belief? If the l^tter, I leave you your Supposition to make
your use of it, only with this Desire, that to avoid Mistakes, when you do make
any use of it, you would call it Believing. If you mean that the true Religion
may be known with the certainty of Knowledge properly so called; I ask you
farther, whether that true Religion be to be known by the Light of Nature, or
needed a Divine Revelation to discover it? If you say (as I suppose you will)
the latter; then I ask whether the making out of that to be a Divine
Revelation, depends not upon particular matters of Fact, whereof you were no
Eyewitness; but were done many Ages before you were born, and if so, by what
Principles of Science they can be known to any Man now living?

The Articles of my Religion, and of a great many other such short-sighted
People as I am, are Articles of Faith, which we think there are so good grounds
to believe, that we are persuaded to venture our Eternal Happiness on that
Belief: And hope to be of that number of whom our Savior said, Blessed are
they that have not seen, and yet have believed. But we neither think that God
requires, nor has given us Faculties capable of knowing in this World several
of those Truths which are to be believed to Salvation. If you have a Religion,
all whose general Truths are either self-evident, or capable of demonstration,
(for matters of Fact are not capable of being any way known but to the
bystanders) you will do well to let it be known, for the ending of
Controversies, and banishing of Error concerning any of those Points out of the
World. For whatever may be known, besides matter of Fact, is capable of
demonstration, and when you have demonstrated to any one any Point in Religion,
you shall have my consent to punish him if he do not assent to it. But yet let
me tell you there are many Truths even in Mathematics, the evidence whereof
one Man seeing is able to demonstrate to himself, and so may know them; which
Evidence yet he not being able to make another see, (which is to demonstrate to
him) he cannot make known to him, though his Scholar be willing, and with all
his Power applies himself to learn it.

But granting your Supposition, That the one true Religion may be known by
those who profess it to be the only true Religion; will it follow from hence,
that because it is knowable to be the true Religion, therefore the Magistrate
who prosesses it actually knows it to be so? Without which Knowledge, upon your
Principles, he cannot use Force to bring Men to it. But if you are but at hand
to assure him, which is the true Religion, for which he ought to use Force, he
is bound to believe you; and that will do as well as if he examined and knew
himself, or perhaps better. For you seem not well satisfied with what the
Magistrates have lately done, without your leave, concerning Religion in
England. And I confess the easiest way to remove all Difficulties in the Case,
is for you to be the Magistrates infallible Guide in matters of Religion. And
therefore you do well here also to keep to your safe Style, lest if your Sense
were clear and determined, it might be more exposed to Exceptions; and
therefore you tell us the true Religion may be known by those who profess it.
For not saying by some of those, or by all those, the Error of what you say is
not so easily observed, and requires the more trouble to come at: Which I shall
spare my self here, being satisfied, that the Magistrate who has so full an
employment of his Thoughts in the Cares of the Government, has not an overplus
of leisure to attain that Knowledge which you require, and so usually contents
himself with believing.

Your next Supposition is, That the one true Religion may also be manifested to
be such, by the^, to others; so far, at least, as to oblige them to receive it,
and leave them without excuse if they do not. That it can be manifested to
some, so as to oblige, i. e. cause them to receive it, is evident, because it
is received. But because this seems to be spoken more in reference to those who
do not receive it, as appears by these following Words of yours; Then it is
altogether as plain that it may be very reasonable and P. 84.
necessary for some Men to change their Religion; and that it may be made
appear to them to be so. And then, if such Men will not consider what is
offered to c^nvince them of the reasonableness and necess^y of doing it; it may
be very fit and reasonable, you tell me, for any thing I have said to the
contrary, in order to the bringing them to the consideration, to require them,
under convenient Penalties, to forsake their false Religions, and to embrace
the true. You suppose the true Religion may be so manifested by a Man that is
of it, to all Men so far as to leave them if they do not embrace it, without
excuse. Without Excuse, to whom I beseech you? to God indeed, but not to the
Magistrate, who can never know whether it has been so manifested to any Man,
that it has been through his Fault that he has not been convinc^d, and not
through the fault of him to whom the Magistrate committed the care of
convincing him: And it is a sufficient ex^use to the Magistrate, for any one to
say to him, I have not neglected to consider the Arguments, that have been
offered me, by those whom you have employed to manifest it to me, but that
yours is the only true Religion I am not Religion. Which is so direct and
sufficient an Excuse to the Magistrate, that had he an express Commission from
Heaven to punish all those who did not consider, he could not yet justly punish
any one whom he could not convince had not considered. But you endeavor to
avoid this, by what you infer from this your Supposition, viz. That then it may
be very fit and reasonable, for any P. 48.
thing I have said to the contrary, to require Men under convenient Penalties
to forsake their false Religions, to embrace the true, i^order to the bringing
them to consideration. Whether I have said any thing to the contrary, o^ no,
the Readers must judge, and I need not repeat. But now I say, it is neither just
nor reasonable to require Men, under Penalties, to attain one end, in order to
bring them to use the means not necessary to that, but to another end. For
where is it you can say (unless you will return to your old Supposition, of
yours being the true Religion; which you say is P. 47.
not necessary to your method) that Men are by the Law required to forsake
their false Religions, and embrace the true? The utmost is this, in all
Countries where the National Religion is imposed by Law, Men are required under
the Penalties of those Laws outwardly to conform to it; which you say is in
order to make them consider. So that your Punishments are for the attaining one
end, viz. Conformity in order to make Men use consideration, which is a means
not necessary to that, but another end, viz. finding out and embracing the one
true Religion. For however consideration may be a necessary means to find and
embrace the one true Religion, it is not at all a necessary means to outward
Conformity in the Communion of any Religion.

To manifest the consistency and practicableness of your Method, to the
Question, what advantage would it be to the true Religion, if Magistrates did
every where so punish? You answer, P. 51.
That by the Magistrates punishing, if I speak to the purpose, I must mean
their punishing Men for rejecting the true Religi^n (so tendered to them, as
has been said) in order to the bringing them to consider and embrace it. Now
before we can suppose Magistrates every where so to punish, we must suppose the
true Religion to be every where the National Religion. And if this were the
case; you think it is evident enough, what advantage to the true Religion it
would be, if Magistrates every where did so punish. For then we might
reasonably hope that all f^lse Religions would soon vanish, and the true become
on^ more the only Religion in the World: Whereas if Magistrates should not so
punish, it were much to be feared (especially considering what has already
happened) that on the contrary false Religions, and Atheism, as more agreeable
to the Soil, would daily take deeper Root, and propagate themselves, till there
were no room left for the true Religion (which is but a foreign Plant) in any
Corner of the World.

If you can make it practicable that the Magistrate should punish Men for
rejecting the True Religion, without judging which is the True Religion: or if
True Religion could appear in Person, take the Magistrate's Seat, and there
judge all that rejected her, something might be done. But the mischief of it is,
it is a Man that must condemn, Men must punish, and Men cannot do this, but by
judging, who is guilty of the Crime, which they punish. An Oracle, or an
Interpreter of the Law of Nature who speaks as clearly, tells the Magistrate,
he may and ought to punish those, who reject the True Religion, tendered with
sufficient Evidence: The Magistrate is satisfied of his Authority, and believes
this Commission to be good. Now I would know how possibly he can execute it,
without making himself the Judge, 1. What is the True Religion; unless the Law
of Nature at the same time delivered into his Hands the 39 Articles of the One
only True Religion, and another Book wherein all the Ceremonies and outward
Worship of it are contained. But it being certain, that the Law of Nature has
not done this; and as certain, that the Articles, Ceremonies and Discipline of
this One only True Religion, have been often varied in several Ages and
Countries, since the Magistrate's Commission by the Law of Nature was first
given: there is no Remedy left, but that the Magistrate must judge what is the
True Religion, if he must punish them who reject it. Suppose the Magistrate be
commissioned to punish those who depart from right Reason, the Magistrate can
yet never punish any one, unless he be Judge what is right Reason; and then
judging that Murder, Theft, Adultery, Narrow Cart-Wheels, or want of Bows and
Arrows in a Man's House, are against right Reason, he may make Laws to punish
Men guilty of those, as (...) right Reason.

So if the Magistrate in England or France, having a Commission to punish those
who reject the One only True Religion, judges the Religion of his National
Church to be it, it is possible for him to lay Penalties on those who reject it,
pursuant to that Commission; otherwise, without judging that to be the One only
True Religion, it is wholly impracticable for him to punish those who embrace it
not, as Rejecters of the One only True Religion.

To provide as good a Salvo as the thing will bear, you say, in the fol^wing
words, Before we can suppose Magistrates every where so to punish, we must
suppose the True Religion to be every where the National. That is true of
actual Punishment, but not of laying on Penalties by Law; for that would be to
suppose the National Religion makes or chooses the Magistrate, and not the
Magistrate the National Religion. But we see the contrary; for let the National
Religion be what it will before, the Magistrate does not always fall into it
and embrace that; but if he thinks not that, but some other the True, the first
Opportunity he has, he changes the National Religion into that which he judges
the True, and then punishes the Dissenters from it; where his Judgment, which
is the True Religion, always necessarily precedes, and is that which ultimately
does, and must determine who are Rejecters of the True Religion, and so
obnoxi^us to Punishment. This being so, I would gladly see how your Meth^d can
be any way practicable to the advantage of the True Religion, whereof the
Magistrate everywhere must be Judge, or else he can punish no body at all.

You tell me that whereas I say, that to justify Punishment it P. 54.
is requisite that it be directly useful for the procu^ing some (...) Good than
that which it takes away; you wish I had told you why it must needs be directly
useful for that purpose. However exact you may be in demanding Reasons of what
is said, I thought here you had no cause to complain; but you let slip out of
your Memory the foregoing words of this Passage, which together stands thus,
Punishment is some Evil, some Inconvenience, L. 2. p. 47.
some Suffering, by taking away, or abridging some good thing, which he who is
punished ha^ otherwise a Right to. Now to justify the bringing any such Evil
upon any Man, two Things are requisite; 1. That he that does it has a
Commission so to do. 2. That it be directly useful for the promoting some
greater Good. It Is evident by these Words, that Punishment brings direct Evil
upon a Man, and therefore it should not be used but where it is directly useful
for the procuring some greater Good. In this case, the signification of the
Word directly, carries a manifest Reason in it, to any one who understands what
directly means. If the taking away any Good from a Man cannot be justified, but
by making it a Means to procure a greater, is it not plain it must be so a
Means as to have, in the Operation of Causes and Effects, a natural Tendency to
that Effect? and then it is called directly useful to such an end: And this may
give you a reason, why Punishment must be directly useful for that purpose. I
know you are very tender of your indirect and at a distance Usefulness of
Force, which I have in another place showed to be, in your way, only useful by
accident; nor will the Question you here subjoin, excuse it from being so, viz.
Why (...) (...) not as directly useful for the bringing Men to the P. (...).
True Religion, as the R^d of Correction is to drive Foolishness from a Child
or to work Wisdom in him? Because the Rod works on the Will of the Child to
obey the Reason of the Father, whilst under his Tuition, and thereby makes it
supple to the Dictates of his own Reason afterward, and disposes him to obey
the Light of that, when being grown to be a Man, that is to be his Guide, and
this is Wisdom. If your Penalties are so used, I have nothing to say to them.

Your way is charged to be impracticable to those Ends you purpose, which you
endeavor to clear, p. 63. That there may be fair play on both sides, the
Reader shall have in the same view what we both say.

(...). 2. p. 57. It remains now to examine, whether the Author's Argument will
not hold good, even against Punishments in your way. For if the Magistrate's
Authority be, as you here say, only to procure all his Subjects, (mark what you
say, ALL HIS SVBJECTS) the means of discovering the way of Salvation, and to
procure (...), as much as in him lies, that NONE remain ignorant of it, or
refuse to embrace it, (...) for want of using those means, or by reason of any
such prejudices as may render them (...). If this be the Magistrate's business,
in reference to ALL HIS SUBJECTS; I desire you, or any Man else, to tell me how
this can be done, by the application of Force only to a part of them; Unless
you will still vainly suppose ignorance, negligence, or prejudice, only amongst
that part which any-where differs from the Magistrate. If those of the
Magistrate's Church may be ignorant of the way of Salvation; If it be possible
there may be amongst them, those who refuse to embrace it, e^her for want of
using those means, or by reason of any such prejudices as may render them
ineffectual; What, in this case, becomes of the Magistrate's Authority to
procure all his Subjects the means of discovering the way of Salvation? Must
these of his Subjects be neglected, and left without the means be has Authority
to procure them? Or must he use Force upon them too? And then, pray, show me
how this can be done. Shall the Magistrate punish those of his own Religion, to
proc^re them the means of discovering the the way of Salvation, and to procure,
as much as in him lies, that they remain not ignor ant of it, or refuse not to
embrace it? These are such contradictions in Practice, this is such
condemnation of a Man's own Religion, as no one can expect from the Magistrate;
and I dare say you desire not of him. And yet this is that he must do, If his
Authority be to procure ALL his Subjects the means of discovering the way to
Salvation. And if it be so needful, as you say it is, that he should use it; I
am sure Force cannot do that till it be applied wider, and Punishment be laid
upon more than you would have it. For if the Magistrate be by Force to procure,
as much as in him lies, that NONE remain ignorant of the way of Salvation; must
he not punish all those who are ignorant of the way of Salvation? And pray t^ll
me how is this any way practicable, but by supposing none in the National
Church ignorant, and all out of it ignorant of the way of Salvation? Which,
what is it, but to punish Men barely for not being of the Magistrate's
Religion; The very thing you deny he has Authority to do? So that the
Magistrate having, by your own confession, no Authority thus to use Force; and
it being otherways impracticable for the procuring all his Subjects the means
of discovering the way of Salvation; there is an end of Force. And so Force
being laid aside, either as unlawful, or unpracticable, the Author's Argument
holds good against Force, even in your way of applying it.

L. 3. p. 63. But how little to the purpose this Request of yours is, will
quickly appear. For if the Magistrate provides sufficiently for the instruction
of all his Subjects in the true Religion; and then requires them all, under
convenient Penalties, to hearken to the Teachers and Ministers of it, and to
profess and (...) it with one accord, under their (...), in Public Assemb^ies:
Is there any prctence to say, that in so doing he applies Force only to a part
of his Subjects; when the Law is general, and excepts none? '^is true, the
Magistrate insticts the Penalties in that ease, only upon them that break the
Law. But is that the the thing you mean by his applying Force only to a part of
his Subjects? Would you have him punish all, indifferently? them that obey the
Law, as well as them that do not?

As to Ignorance, Negligence and Prejudice, I desire y^u, or any Man ^lse, to
tell me what better course can be taken to c^re them, than that which I have
mentioned. For if after all that God's Ministers, and the Magistrate can do,
some will still remain ignorant, negligent, or prejudiced; I do not take that
to be any disparagement to it: For certainly that is a very extraordinary
Remedy, which infassibly cures all discas'd Persons to whom it is applied.

The Backwardness and Lusts that hinder an impartial Examination, A. p. 6, --
12. P. 6, -- 8.
as you describe it, is general. The Corruption of Nature which hinders a real
embracing the true Religion, that also you tell us here, is universal. I ask a
Remedy for these in your way. You say the Law for Conformity is general,
excepts none. Very likely, none that do not conform; but punishes none who
conforming, do neither impartially examine nor really embrace the true
Religion. From whence I conclude, there is no corruption of Nature in those,
who are brought up or join in outward Communion with the Church of England. But
as to Ignorance, Negligence and Prejudice, you say you desire me, or any Man
else, to tell what better course can be taken to cure them, than that which you
have mentioned. If your Church can find no better way to cure Ignorance and
Prejudice, and the Negligence, that is in Men, to examine Matters of Religion
and heartily embrace the true, than what is impracticable upon Conformists,
then of all others, Conformists are in the most deplorable Estate. But, as I
remember. you have been told of a better way, which is, the (...) with Men
seriously and friendly about Matters in Religion, by those whose Prosession is
the Care of Souls; examining what they do understand, and where, either through
Laziness, Prejudice or Dissiculty, they do stick; and applying to their several
Diseases proper Cures, which it is as impossible to do by a general Harangue,
once or twice a Week out of the Pulpit, as to sit all Men's Feet with one Shoe,
or cure all Men's Ails with one, though very wholesome, Diet-drink. To be thus
instant in season and out of season, some Men have thought a better way of
Cure, than a Desire, only to have Men driven by the Whip, either in your, or
the Magistrate's hands, into the Sheepfold: where when they are once, whether
they understand or no, their Ministers Se^mons; whether they are, or can be
better for them or no; whether they are ignorant and hypocritical Conformists,
and in that way like to remain so, rather than to become knowing and sincere
Converts, some Bishops have thought is not sufficiently enquired; but this no
body is to mention, for whoever does so, makes himself an occasion to she^ his
good Will to the Clergy.

This had not been said by me here, now I see how apt you are to be put out of
temper with any thing of this kind, (though it be in every serious Man's Mouth)
had not you desired me to show you a better way than Force, your way applied.
And to use your way of Arguing, since bare Preaching, as now used, it is plain,
will not do, there is no other means left but this to deal with the corrupt
Nature of Conformists; for Miracles are now ceased, and Penalties they are free
from; therefore, by your way of concluding, no other being left, this of
Visiting at home, conferring and instructing, and admonishing Men there, and
the like Means, proposed by the Reverend Author of the Pastoral Care, is
necessary; and Men, whose business is the Care of Souls, are obliged to use it:
for you cannot prove, that it cannot do some Service (I think I need not say)
(...) and at a distance. And if this be proper and sufficient to bring
Consormists (notwithstanding the Corruption of their Nature) to examine
impartially, and really embrace the Truth that must save them, it will remain
to show, Why it may not do as well on Nonconformists (whose, I imagine, is the
common Corruption of Nature) to bring them to examine and embrace the Truth,
that must save them? And though it be not so extraordinary a Re^edy as will
infallibly cure all diseased Persons, to whom it is applied; yet since the
Corruption of Nature, which is the same Disease, and ^inders the impartial
Examination, and hearty embracing the Truth that must (...) them, is equally in
both, Conformists and Nonconformists, it is reasonable to think it should in
both have the same Cure, let that be what it will.

CHAP. X. Of the Necessity of Force in Matters of Religion. Chap. 10.

You tell us you do not ground the lawfulness of such Force, P. 30.
as you take to be useful for promoting the true Religion, upon the bare
usefulness of such Force, but upon the necessity as well as usefulness of it;
and therefore you declare it to be no fit means to be used, either for that
purpose or any other, where it is not necessary as well as useful.

How useful Force in the Magistrate's Hand, for bringing Men to the true
Religion, is like to be, we have shown in the foregoing Chapter, in answer to
what you have said for it. So that it being proved not useful, it is impossible
it should be necessary. However we will examine what you say to prove the
necessity of it. The Foundation you build on for its necessity we have in your
Argument considered, where having at large dilated on Men's A. p. 10.
inconsiderateness in the choice of their Religions, and their persisting in
those they have once chosen, without due Examination, you conclude thus; Now if
this be the case, if Men are so ^verse se to a due Consideration, if they
usually take up their Religion, without examining it as they ought, what other
(...) is there left? Wherein you suppose Force necessary, instead of proving it
to be so; for Preaching and Persuasion not prevailing upon all Men, you upon
your own Authority think fit something else should be done; and that being
resolved, you readily pitch on Force, because you say you can find nothing
else, which in effect is only to tell us, if the Salvation of Men's Souls were
only left to your discretion, how you would order the matter.

And in your answer to me, you very considently tell us, P. 7.
the true Religion cannot prevail without the assistance either of Miracles, or
of Authority. I shall here only observe one or two things, and then go on to
examine how you make this good.

The first thing I shall observe is, that in your Argument considered, etc. you
suppose Force necessary only to master the aversion there is in Men to
considering and examination: And here in your Answer to me, you make Force
necessary to conquer the aversion there is in Men to embrace and obey the true
Religion. Which are so very different, that the former justisies the use of
Force only to make Men consider, the other justisies the use of Force to make
Men embrace Religion. If you meant the same thing when you writ your first
Trtatise, it was not very ingenuous to express your self in such Words as were
not proper to give your Reader your true meaning; it being a far different
thing to use Force to make Men consider, which is an action in their power to
do or omit; and to use Force to make them embrace, i. e. believe any Religion,
which is not a thing in any ones power to do or forbear as he pleases. If you
say you meant barely considering in your first Paper, as the whole current of
it would make one believe, then I see your Hypothesis may mend, as we have seen
in other parts, and in time, may grow to its full Stature.

Another thing I shall remark to you, is, That in your first Paper, besides
Preaching and Persuasion, and the Grace of God, nothing but Force was
necessary. Here in your second, it is either Miracles or Authority, which how
you make good, we will now consider.

You having said, you had no reason from any Experiment or expect A. p. 2. L.
2. p. 3.
that true Religion should be any way a gainer by Toleration. I in^anced in the
prevailing of the Gospel, by its own Beauty, Force and Reasonableness, in the
first Ages of Christianity. You reply, P. 5.
that it has not the same Beauty, Force and Reasonableness now, that it had
then, unless I include Miracles too, which are now ce^sed and as you tell us,
were not withdrawn, till by their P. 37.
help Christianity had prevailed to be received for the Religion of the Empire,
and to be encouraged and supported by the Laws of it.

If therefore we will believe you upon your own word, Force being necessary
(for prove it necessary you never can) you have entered into the Counsel of
God, and tell us, when Force could not be had, Miracles were employed to supply
its want. I cannot but think, say you, it is highly probable (if we may be
allowed to guess at P. 37.
the Counsels of insinite Wisdom) that God was pleased to continue them till
then, i. e. till the Laws of the Empire supported Christanity, not so much for
any necessity there was of them all that time, for the evincing the Truth of
the Christian Religion, as to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance.
You allow your self to guess very frelly, when you will make God use Miracles
to supply a means he no where authorized or appointed; How long Miracles
continued we shall see anon.

Say you, If we may be allowed to guess: this Modesty of yours where you
confess you guess, is only concerning the time of the continuing of Miracles;
but as to their supplying the want of coactive Force, that you are positive in,
both here and where you tell us, Why Penalties were not necessary at first, to
make Men to P. 38.
give Ear to the Gospel, has already been shown; and a little after, the great
and wonderful things which were to be done for the evidencing the truth of the
Gospel, were abundantly sufficient to procure Attention, etc. How you come to
know so undoubtedly that Miracles were made use of to supply the Magistrate's
Authority, since God no where tells you so, you would have done well to show.

But in your Opinion Force was necessary, and that could not then be had, and
so God must use Miracles. For, say you, Our P. 36.
Savior was no Magistrate, and therefore could not inflict political
Punishments upon any Man, so much less could he empower his Apostles to do it.
Could not our Savior empower his Apostles to denounce or inflict Punishments
on careless or obstinate Unbelievers, to make them hear and consider? You
pronounce very boldly methinks of Christ's Power, and set very narrow limits to
what at another time you would not deny to be infinite: But it was convenient
here for your present purpose, that it should be so limited. But, they not
being Magistrates, he could not empower his Apostles to inflict political
Punishments. How is it of a sudden, that they must be political Punishments?
You tell us all that is necessary, is to lay Briars and Thorns in Men's ways, to
trouble and disease them to make them consider. This I hope our Savior had
power to do, if he had found it necessary, without the assistance of the
Magistrates; he could have always done by his Apostles, and Ministers, if he
had so thought ^it, what he did once by St. Peter, have dropped Thorns and
Briars into their very Minds, that should have pricked, troubled and diseased
them sufficiently. But sometimes it is Briars and Thorns only that you want,
sometimes it must be Humane Means, and sometimes, as here, nothing will serve
your turn but political Punishments; just as will best suit your occasion, in
the Argument you have then before you.

That the Apostles could lay on Punishments, as troublesome and as great as any
political ones when they were necessary, we see in Ananias and Saphira: And he
that had all Power given him in Heaven and in Earth, could, if he had thought
^it, have laid Briars and Thorns in the way of all that received not his
Doctrine.

You add, But as he could not punish Men to make them hear him, P. 36.
so neither was there any need that he should. He came as a Prophet sent from
God to reveal a new Doctrine to the World; and therefore to prove his Mission,
he was to do such things as could only be done by a Divine Power: And the Works
which he did were abundantly sufficien both to gain him a hearing, and to
oblige the World to receive his Doctrine. Thus the want of Force and
Punishments are supplied. How far? so far as they are supposed necessary to
gain a hearing, and so far as to oblige the World to receive Christ's Doctrine;
whereby, as I suppose, you mean sufficient to lay an Obligation on them to
receive his Doctrine, and render them inexcusable if they did not: But that
they were not sufficient to make all that saw them effectually to receive and
embrace the Gospel, I think is evident, and you will not I imagine say, that
all who saw Christ's Miracles believed on him. So that Miracles were not to
supply the want of such Force, as was to be continued on Men to make them
consider as they ought, i. e. till they embraced the Truth that must save them.
For we have little reason to think that our Savior, or his Apostles, contended
with their neglect or refusal by a constant train of Miracles, continued on to
those who were not wrought upon by the Gospel preached to them. St. Matthew
tells us, XIII. 57. that he did not many mighty works Lightfoot Harm. of the N.
T. Sect. (...). and (...).
in his own Country, because of their Unbelief; much less were Miracles to
supply the want of Force in that use you make of it, where you tell us it is to
punish the fault of not being of the true Religion: For we do not find any
miraculously punished to bring them in to the Gospel. So that the want of Force
to either of these purposes not being supplied by Miracles, the Gospel it is
plain subsisted and spread it self without Force so made use of, and without
Miracles to supply the want of it' and therefore it so far remains true, that
the Gospel having the same Beauty, Force and Reasonableness now as it had at
the beginning, it wants not Force to supply the defect of Miracles, to that for
which Miracles were no where made use of. And so far, at least, the Experiment
is good, and this Assertion true, that the Gospel is able to prevail by its own
Light and Truth, without the continuance of Force on the same Person, or
punishing Men for not being of the true Religion.

You say, Our Savior being no Magistrate, could not inslict Political P. 36.
Punishments; much less could be empower his Apostles to do in. I know not what
need there is, that it should be political; so there were so much Punishment
used, as you say, is sufficient to make Men consider, it is not necessary it
should come from this or that Hand: or if there be any odds in that, we should
be apt to think it would come best, and most effectually, from those who
preached the Gospel, and could tell them it was to make them consider, than
from the Magistrate, who neither does, nor according to your Scheme can, tell
them it is to make them consider. And this Power, you will not deny, but our
Savior could have given to the Apos^les.

But if there were such absolute need of Political Punishments Titus or Trajan
might as well have been converted, as Constantin^ For how true it is, that
Miracles supplied the want of Force front those Days till Constantine's, and
then ceased, we shall see by and by. I say not this to enter boldly into the
Counsels of God, (...) to take upon me to consure the Conduct of the Almighty,
or to call his Providence to an account; but to answer your saying; Our S^viour
was no Magistrate, and therefore could not inflict Political Punishments: For
he could have had both Magistrates and Political Punishments at his Service, if
he had thought sit, and needed not to have continued Miracles longer, than
there was necessity for evincing the Truth of the Christian Religion, as you
imagine, to supply P. 37.
the want of the Magistrate's Assistance, by Force, which is necessary.

But how come you to know, that Force is necessary? Has God revealed it in his
Word? no where. Has it been revealed to you in particular? that you will not
say. What reason have you for it? none at all but this, that having set down
the grounds, upon A. p. 6, 12.
which Men take up and persist in their Religion, you conclude, what means is
there lest bue Force? Force therefore you conclude necessary, because without
any Authority, but from your own Imagination, you are peremptory, that other
means, besides Preaching and Persuasion, is to be used; and therefore is it
necessary, because you can think of no other.

When I tell you there is other Means, and that by your own confession the
Grace of God is another Means, and therefore Force is not necessary: You reply,
Though the Grace of God be P. 39.
another Means, and you thought sit to mention it, to prevent Cavils; yet it is
none of the Means of which you were speaking, in the place I refer to; which
any one who reads that Paragraph wist find to be only HUMANE Means: and
therefore though the Grace of God be both a proper and sufficient Means, and
such as can work by it self, and without which neither Penalties nar any other
Means can do any thing; yet it may be true however, that when Admonitions and
Entreaties fail, there is no HUMANE Means left, but Penalties, to bring
prejudiced Persons to hear and consider, what may convince them of their
Errors, and discover the Truth to them. And then Penalties will be necessary in
respect to that end as an HUMANE Means.

In which Words, if you mean any answer to my Argument, it is this, that Force
is necessary, because to bring Men into the right way there is other HUMANE
Means necessary, belides Admonitions and Persuasions. For else what have we to
do with HUMANE in the case? But it is no small advantage one owes to Logic,
that where Sense and Reason fall short, a distinction ready at hand may each it
out. Force, when Persuasions will not prevail, is necessary, say you, because
it is the only Means lest, When you are told it is not the only Means left, and
so cannot be necessary on that account: You reply, that when P. 40.
Admonitions and Intreatics fail, there is no HUMANE Means left, but Penalties,
to bring prej^diced Persons to hear and consider what may convince them of
their Errors, and discover the Truth to them: And then Penalties will be
necessary in respect to that end, as an HUMANE Means.

Suppose it be urged to you, when your moderate lower Penalties fail, there is
no Humane Means left, but Dragooning and such other Severities; which you say
you condemn as much as P. 9.
I, to bring prejudiced Persons to hear and consider what may convince them of
their Errors, and discover the Truth to them. And then Dragooning,
Imprisonment, Scourging, Fining (...). will be necessary in respect to that
end, as an HUMANE Means. What can you say but this? that you are empowered to
judge what degrees of Humane Means are necessary, but others are not. For
without such a considence in your own Judgment, where God has neither said how
much, nor that any Force is necessary, I think this is as good an Argument for
the highest, as yours is for the lower Penalties. When Admonitions and
Entreaties will not prevail, then Penalties, lower Penalties, some degrees of
Force will be necessary, say you, as an HUMANE Means. And when your lower
Penalties, your some degrees of Force will not prevail, then higher Degrees
will be necessary, say I, as an HUMANE Means. And my reason is the same with
yours, because there is no other Means (i. e. HUMANE Means) left. Show me how
your Argument concludes for lower Punishments being necessary, and mine not for
higher, even to Dragooning, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.

But let us apply this to your Succedaneum of Miracles, and then it will be
much more admirable. You tell us, Admonitions and Entreaties not prevailing to
bring Men into the right way, Force is necessary, because there is no other
Means left. To that it is said, yes, there is other Means left, the Grace of
God. Ay, but, say you, that will not do; because you speak only of HUMANE
Means. So that according to your way of arguing some other HUMANE Means is
necessary: For you your self tell us, that the Means you were speaking of,
where you say, that when Admonitions and Entreaties will not do, what other
Means is there left but Force? were HUMANE Means. Your words are, Which any
one, who reads that Paragraph, will find to be only HUMANE Means. By this
Argument then other HUMANE Means are necessary besides preaching and
persuasion, and those HUMANE Means you have found out to be either Force or
Miracles: The latter are certainly notable Humane Means. And your distinction
of Humane Means serves you to very good purpose, having brought Miracles to be
one of your Humane Means. Preaching and Admonitions, say you, are not
sufficient to bring Men into the right way, something else is necessary, Yes,
the Grace of God; no, say you, that will not do, it is not Humane Means: it is
necessary to have other Humane Means, therefore in the three or four First
Centuries after Christianity, the insufficiency of Preaching and Admonitions
was made up with Miracles, and thus the necessity of other Humane Means is made
good. But to consider a little further your Miracles as supplying the want of
Force.

The Question between us here is, whether the Christian Religion did not
prevail in the first Ages of the Church, by its own Beauty, Force and
Reasonableness, without the Assistance of Force? I say it did, and therefore
external Force is not necessary. To this you reply, that it cannot prevail by
its own Light, and P. 7.
Strength, without the Assistance either of Miracles, or of Authority; and
therefore the Christian Reli^ion not being still accompanied with Miracles,
Force is now necessary. So that to make your equivalent of Miracles correspond
with your necessary Means of Force, you seem to require an actual application
of Miracles, or of Force, to prevail with Men to receive the Gospel, i. e. Men
could not be prevailed with to receive the Gospel without actually seeing of
Miracles. For when you tell us, that you are sure I P. 6.
cannot say the Christian Religion is still accompanied with Miracles, as it
was at its first planting; I hope you do not mean that the Gospel is not still
accompanied, with an undoubted testimony, that Miracles were done by the first
publishers of it, which was as much of Miracles; as I suppose the greatest part
of those had, with whom the Christian Religion prevailed, till it was supported
and encouraged, as you tell us, by the Laws of the Empire: For I think P. 27.
you will not say, or if you should, you could not expect to be believed, that
all, or the greatest part of those, that embraced the Christian Religion,
before it was supported by the Laws of the Empire, which was not till the
Fourth Century, had actually Miracles done before them, to work upon them. And
all those, who were not Eyewitnesses of Miracles done in their Presence, it is
plain had no other Miracles, than we have, that is upon report; and it is
probable not so many, nor so well attested as we have. The greatest part then
of those who were converted; at least, in some of those Ages, before
Christianity was supported by the Laws of the Empire, I think you must allow,
were wrought upon by bare preaching, and such Miracles as we still have,
Miracles at a distance, related Miracles. In others, and those the greater
number, Prejudice was not (...) moved, that they were prevailed on to consider,
to consider as they ought, i. e. in your Language, to consider so as to
embrace. If they had not so considered in our Days, what, according to your
Scheme, must have been done to them, that did not consider as they ought? Force
must have been applied to them, what therefore in the Primitive Church was to
be done to them? Why! your (...) Miracles, actual Miracles, such as you deny
the Christian Religion to be still accompanied with, must have been doncin
their presence, to work upon them. Will you say this was (...) and (...) a new
Church History for us, and out do those Writers, who have been thought pretty
liberal of Miracles If you do not, you must consess Miracles supplied not the
place of Force, and so let fall all your fine Contrivance about the necessity
either of Force or Miracles; and perhaps you will think it at last a more
becoming Modesty, not to set the Divine Power and Providonce on work, by Rules,
and for the ends of your Hypothesis, without having any thing in Authentic
History, much less in Divine and unerring Revelation to justify you. But Force
and Power deserve something more than ordinary and allowable Arts or Arguments,
to get and keep them: Si violandum sit jus regnandi causa violandum cst.

If the Testimony, of Miracles having been done, wore sufficient to make the
Gospel prevail, without Force, on those, who were not Eyewitnesses of them, we
have that still, and so upon that account need not Force to supply the want of
it: But if Truth must have either the Law of the Country, or actual Miracles to
support it, what became of it after the Reign of Constantine the Great, under
all those Emperors, that were erroneous or Heretical? It supported it self in
Piedmont, and France, and Turkey, many Ages without Force or Miracles: And it
spread it self in diverse Nations and Kingdoms of the North and East, without
any Force or other Miracles, than those, that were done many Ages before. So
that, I think, you will, upon second thoughts, not deny, but that the true
Religion is able to prevail now, as it did at first, and has done since in many
places, without assistance from the Powers in being, by its own Beauty, Force,
and Reasonableness, whereof well-attested Miraclesis a part.

But the account you give us of Miracles will deserve to be a little examined;
we have it in these Words, Considering that those P. 37.
extraordinary Means were not withdrawn, till by their help Christianity had
prcvail'd to be received for the Religion of the Empire, and to be supported
and encouraged by the Laws of it, you cannot you say but think it highly
probable, (if we may be allowed to guess at the Counsels of infinite Wisdom)
that God was pleased to continue them till then, not so much for any necessity
there was of them all that while, for the evincing the Truth of the Christian
Religion, as to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. Miracles then,
if what you say be true, were continued till Christianity was received for the
Religion of the Empire, not so much to evince the Truth of the Christian
Religion, as to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. But in this the
Leanned Author, whose Testimony you quote, f^ils you. For the tells Dodwell.
Dissertar. in (...). Diss. 2.
you that the chief use of Miracles in the Church, after the Truth of the
Christian Religion had been sufficiently consirmed by them in the World, was to
oppose the salse and pretended Miracles of Heretics and Heathens; and
answerable hereunto Miracles ceased and returned again, as such oppositions
made them more or less necessary. Accordingly Miracles which before had abated
in Trajan's and Hadrian's time, which was in the latter end of the First, or
beginning of the Second Century, did again revive to confound the Magical
Delusions of the Heretics of that time. And in the third Century the Heretics
using no such Tricks, and the Faith being consirm'd, they by dearees ceased, of
which there then, he says, could be no imaginable necissity. His Words are, Et
quidem^o minus necessaria Sect. LXV.
sunt pro veterum Principiis, recentiora illa Miracula, quod Haereticos (quos
appellant) nullos adversarios habeant, qui contraria illis dogmata astruant
Miraculis. Sic enim vidimus, apud veteres, dum nulli Ecclesiam exercerent
Adversarii, seu Haretici, seu Gentiles; aut satis illi praeteritis Miraculis
(...); ant nullas ipsi praestigias opponerent quae veris essent Miraculis
oppugnandae; (...) deinde paulatim esse mirificam illam spiritus virtutem.
Ortos sub Trajano Hadrianoque Haereticos (...) praestigiis Magicis fuisse usos,
and proinde Miraculorum verorum in Ecclesia usum una REVIXISSE. Ne dicam
praestigiatores etiam Gentiles eodem illo seculo sane frequentissimos, Apuleium
in Africa, in Asia, Alexandrum, Pseudomantim, multosque alios quorum meminit
Aristides. Tertio seculo orto Haeretici Herniogenes, Praxeas, Noetus,
Theodotus, Sabellius, Novatianus, Artemas, Samosatenus, nulla, (...) videtur,
Miracula ipsi venditabant, nullis propterea Miraculis oppugnandi. Inde vidimus,
apud ipsos etiam Catholicos, sensim defecisse Miracula. Et quidem, Haereticis
nulla in contrarium Miracula ostentantibus, quae tandem singi potest
miraculorum necessitas traditam ab initio fidem, Miraculisque adeo jamdudum
confirmatam praedicantibus? Nulla certe prorsus pro Primaevo Miraculorum
exemplo. Nulla denique consciis vere Primaevam esse fidem quam novis Miraculis
suscipiunt confirmandam.

The History therefore you have from him of Miracles, serves for his
Hypothesis, but not at all for yours. For if they were continued to supply the
want of Force, which was to deal with the Corruption of depraved Humane Nature,
that being without any great variation in the World, constantly the same, there
could be no reason why they should abate and fail, and then return and revive
again. So that there being then, as you suppose, no necessity of Miracles for
any other end, but to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance, they
must, to suit that end, be constant and regularly the same, as you would have
Force to be, which is steadily and uninterruptedly to be applied, as a
constantly necessary Remedy, to the corrupt Nature of Mankind.

If you allow the Learned Dodwell's Reasons, for the continuation of Miracles,
till the Fourth Century, your Hypothesis, that they were continued to supply
the Magistrate's Assistance, will be only precarious. For if there was need of
Miracles till that time to other purposes, the continuation of them in the
Church, though you could prove them to be, as frequent and certain, as those of
our Savior, and the Apostles, it would not advantage your cause: since it
would be no evidence, that they were used for that end, which as long as there
were other visible uses of them, you could not, without Revelation, assure us
were made use of by Divine Providence to supply the want of the Magistrate's
Assistance. You must therefore confute his Hypothesis, before you can make any
advantage of what he says, concerning the continuation of Miracles, for the
establishing of yours. For till you can show, that that which he assigns was
not the end, for which they were continued in the Church; the utmost you can
say, ^is, that it may be imagined, that one reason of their continuation was to
supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance: But what you can without proof
imagine possible, I hope you do not expect should be received as an
unquestionable proof, that it ^as so. I can imagine it possible they were not
continued for that end, and one Imagination will be as good a proof as another.

To do your Modesty right therefore, I must allow, that you do faintly offer at
some kind of reason, to prove that Miracles were continued to supply the want
of the Magistrate's Assistance: And since God has no where declared, that it
was for that end, you would persuade us in this Paragraph, that it was so, by
two Reasons. One is, that the Truth of the Christian Religion being
sufficiently evinced by the Miracles done by our Savior and his Apostles, and
perhaps their immediate Successors, there was no other need of Miracles to be
continued till the Fourth Century, and therefore they were used by God to
supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. This I take to be the meaning
of these Words of yours, I cannot but think it highly probable that God was
pleased to continue them till then, not so much for any necessity there was of
them all that while for the evincing the Truth of the Christian Religion, as to
supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. Whereby, I suppose, you do not
barely intend to tell the World what is your opinion in the case, but use this
as an Argument, to make it probable to others, that this was the end for which
Miracles were continued, which at best will be but a very doubtful Probability
to build such a bold Assertion on, as this of yours is, viz. That the Christian
Religion is not able to subsist and pre^ail in the World, by its own Light and
Strength, without the assistance either of Force, or actual Miracles. And
therefore you must either produce a Declaration from Heaven that authorizes you
to say, that Miracles were used to supply the want of Force, or show that there
was no other use of them but this. For if any other use can be assigned of
them, as long as they continued in the Church, one may safely deny, that they
were to supply the want of Force: and it will lie upon you to prove it by some
other way than by saying you think it highly probable. For I suppose you do not
expect that your thinking any thing highly probable, should be a sufficient
Reason for others to acquiesce in. When perhaps, the History of Miracles
considered, no Body could bring himself to say he thought it probable, but one
whose Hypothesis stood in need of such a poor support.

The other Reason you seem to build on is this, That when Christianity was
received for the Religion of the Empire, Miracles ceased; because there was
then no longer any need of them: which I take to be the Argument infinuated in
these Words, Considering that those extraordinary means were not withdrawn,
till by P. 37.
their help Christianity had prevailed to be received for the Religion of the
Empire. If then you can make it appear that Miracles lasted till Christianity
was received for the Religion of the Empire, without any other Reason for their
continuation, but to supply the wants of the Magistrate's Assistance; and that
they ceased as soon as the Magistrates became Christian: Your Argument will
have some kind of probability, that within the Roman Empire this was the method
God used for the propagating the Christian Religion. But it will not serve to
make good your Position, That the Christian Religion cannot subsist and prevail
by its own Strength and Light, without the assistance of Miracles or Authority,
unless you can show, that God made use of Miracles, to introduce and support it
in other parts of the World, not subject to the Roman Empire, till the
Magistrates there also became Christians. For the corruption of Nature being
the same without, as within the Bounds of the Roman Empire; Miracles, upon your
Hypothesis, were as necessary to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance
in other Countries as in the Roman Empire. For I do not think you will find the
Civil Sovereigns were the first converted in all those Countries, where the
Christian Religion was planted after Constantine's Reign: And in all those it
will be necessary for you to show us the Assistance of Miracles.

But let us see how much your Hypothesis is favored by Church History. If the
Writings of the Fathers of greatest Name and Credit are to be believed,
Miracles were not withdrawn when Christianity had prevailed to be received for
the Religion of the Empire. Athanasius, the great Defender of the Catholic
Orthodoxy, writ the Life of his Contemporary St. Anthony, full of Miracles;
which though some have questioned, yet the Learned Dodwell allows to be writ by
Athanasius: and the Style evinces it to be his, which is also confirmed by
other Ecclesiastical Writers.

Palladius tells us, That Ammon did many Miracles: But that particularly St.
Athanasius related in the Life of Anthony, That Ammon going with some Monks,
Anthony had sent to him; when they came to the River Lycus, which they were to
pass, was afraid to strip for fear of seeing himself naked; and whilst he was
in dispute of this matter, he was taken up, and in an ecstasy carried over by an
Angel, the rest of the Monks swimming the River. When he came to Anthony,
Anthony told him he had sent for him, because God had revealed many things to
him concerning him, and particularly his Translation. And when Ammon died, in
his retirement, Anthony saw his Soul carried into Heaven by Angels. Palladius
in vita Ammonis.

Socrates tells us, That Anthony saw the Soul of Ammon taken (...) 3.
up by Angels, as Athanasius writes in the Life of Anthony.

And again, says he, It seems supersluous for me to relate the many Miracles
Anthony did, how he fought openly with Devils, discovering all their Tricks and
Cheats: For Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria has prevented me on that Subject,
having writ a Book (...). l. 1. c. 21.
particularly of his Life.

Anthony was thought worthy of the Vision of God, and led a Life perfectly
conformable to the Laws of Christ. This whoever reads the Book, wherein is
contained the History of his Life, will easily know; wherein he will also see
Prophecy shining out: For he prophesied very clearly of those who were infected
with the Arian Contagion, and foretold what Mischief from them was threatened to
the Churches, God truly revealing all these things to him, which is certainly
the principal evidence of the Catholic Faith. No such Man being to be found
amongst the Heretics. But do not take this upon my Word, but read and study
the Book it self.

This Account you have from St. Chrysostom, whom Mr. Dodwell Chrysostom. Hom. 8.
in Mat. 2.
calls the Contemner of Fables.

St. Hierom, in his Treatise De Viro Perfecto, speaks of the frequency of
Miracles done in his time, as a thing past question: Besides those, not a few
which he has left upon record, in the Lives of Hilarion and Paul, two Monks,
whose Lives he has writ. And he that has a mind to see the plenty of Miracles
of this kind, need but read the Collection of the Lives of the Fathers, made by
Rosweydus.

Russin tells us, That Athanasius lodged the Bones of St. John Baptist in the
Wall of the Church, knowing by the Spirit of Prophecy, the good they were to do
to the next Generation: And of what Efficacy and Use they were, may be
concluded from the Church with the golden Roof, built to them soon after, in
the place of the Temple of Serapis.

St. Austin tells us, That he knew a blind Man restored to sight C^cum
illuminatum fuisse jam noveram. Necea quae cognoscimus, enumerare possumus.
Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 13.
by the Bodies of the Millan Martyrs, and some other such things; of which
kind, there were so many done in that time, that many escaped his Knowledge; and
those which he knew, were more than he could number. More of this you may see
Epist. 137.

He further assures us, that by the simple Relics of St. Stephen, a blind
Woman received her Sight. Lucullus was cured of an old Fistula; Eucharius of
the Stone; Three Gouty Men recovered; A Lad killed with a C art-wheel going
over him, restored to Life safe and sound, as if he had received no hurt: A Nun
lying at the point of Death, they sent ber Coat to the Shrine, but she dying
before it was brought back, was restored to Life by its being laid on her dead
Body. The like happened at Hippo to the Daughter of BASSUS; and two others,
whose Names he sets down, were by the same Relics raised from the dead.

After these and other Particulars there set down, of Miracles done in his time
by those Relics of St. Stephen, the holy Father goes on thus; What shall I
do? pressed by my Promise of dispatching this Work, I cannot here set down all:
And without doubt Que utique mecum ^iunt.
many, when they shall read, his, will be troubled that I have omitted so many
Particulars, which they truly know as well as I. For if I should, ^assing by
the rest, (...) only the miraculous Cures which have been wrought by this most
glorious Martyr Stephen, in the Colony of (...) dati sunt. Cum videremus
antiquis (...) divinarum signa (...) etiam nostris (...) frequentari. Aug. de
Civ. (...) I. (...) 8.
Calama, and this of ours, I should fill many Books, and yet should not take in
all of them: But only of those of which there are Collections published, which
are read to the People: For this I took care should be done, when I saw that
Signs of divine Power, like those of old, were FREQUENT also in our Times. It
is not now two Years since that Shrine has been at Hippo: And many of the Books
(which I certainly knew to be so) not being published, those which are
published concerning those miraculous Operations, amounted to near fifty when I
writ this. But at Calama, where this Shrine was before, there are more
published, and their number is incomparably greater. At Uzal also a Colony, and
near Utica, we know many famous Things to have been done by the same Martyr.

Two of those Books he mentions, are printed in the Appendix of the X^ Tome of
St. Austin's Works of Plantius Edit. One of them contains two Miracles, the
other, as I remember, about seventeen. So that at Hippo alone, in two Years
time, we may count, besides those omitted, there were published above 600
Miracles, and, as he says, incomparably more at Calama: besides what were done
by other Relics of the same St. Stephen in other parts of the World, which
cannot be supposed to have had less virtue than those sent to this part of
Africa. For the Relics of St. Stephen, discovered by the Dream of a Monk,
were divided and sent into distant Countries, and there distributed to several
Churches.

These may suffice to show, that if the Fathers of the Church of great it Name
and Authority are to be believed, Miracles were not withdrawn, but continued
down to the latter end of the 4th Century, long after Christianity had
prevailed to be received for the Religion of the Empire.

But if these Testimonies of Athanas^, Chrysostom, Palladius, Russin, St.
Hierom, and St. Austin, will not serve your turn, you may find much more to
this purpose in the same Authors; and if you please, you may consult also St.
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Ambrose, St. Hilary,
Theodoret, and others.

This being so, you must either deny the Authority of these Fathers, or grant
that Miracles continued in the Church after Christianity was received for the
Religion of the Empire: and then they could not be to supply the want of the
Magistrate's Assistance, unless they were to supply the want of what was not
wanting; and therefore they were continued for some other end. Which end of the
Continuation of Miracles, when you are so far instructed in, as to be able to
assure us, that it was different from that for which God made use of them in
the 2d and 3d Centuries: when you are so far admitted into the Secrets of
Divine Providence, as to be able to convince the World that the Miracles
between the Apostles and Constantine's Time, or any other Period you shall
pitch on, were to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance, and those
after, for some other purpose, what you say may deserve to be considered. Till
you do this, you will only show the Liberty you take, to assert with great
Confidence, though without any ground, whatever will suit your System; and that
you do not stick to make bold with the Counsels of infinite Wisdom, to make
them subservient to your Hypothesis.

And so I leave you to dispose of the Credit of Ecclesiastical Writers, as you
shall think fit; and by your Authority, to establish or invalidate theirs as
you please. But this, I think, is evident, that he who will build his Faith or
Reasonings upon Miracles delivered by Church-Historians, wi^ find cause to go
no farther than the Apostles time, or else not to stop at Constantine's: since
the Writers after that period, whose Word we readily take as unquestionable in
other things, speak of Miracles in their time with no less Assurance, than the
Fathers before the 4th Century; and a great part of the Miracles of the 2d and
3d Centuries stand upon the Credit of the Writers of the 4th. So that that sort
of Argument which takes and rejects the Testimony of the Ancients at pleasure,
as may best suit with it, will not have much force with those, who are not
disposed to embrace the Hypothesis, without any Arguments at all.

You grant, That the True Religion has always Light and Strength P. 7.
of its own, i. e. without the Assistance of Force or Miracles, sufficient to
prevail with all that consider it seriously, and without Prejudice: That
therefore, for which the Assistance of Force is wanting, is to make Men
consider seriously, and without Prejudice. Now whether the Miracles, that we
have still, Miracles done by Christ and his Apostles, attested, as they are, by
undeniable History, be not fitter to deal with Men's Prejudices, than Force, and
than Force which requires nothing but outward Conformity, I leave the World to
judge. All the Assistance the true Religion needs from Authority, is only a
Liberty for it, to be truly taught; but it has seldom had that, from the Powers
in being, in its first entry into their Dominions, since the withdrawing of
Miracles: And yet I desire you to tell me, into what Country the Gospel,
accompanied (as now it is) only with past Miracles, has been brought by the
Preaching of Men, who have labored in it after the Example of the Apostles,
where it did not so prevail over Men's Prejudices, that as many as were ordained
to eternal Life, considered and believed it. Which, as you may see, A^t. XIII.
48. was all the Advance it made, even when assisted with the Gift of Miracles:
For neither then were all, or the majority wrought on to consider, and embrace
it.

But yet the Gespel cannot prevail by its own Light and Strength; and therefore
Miracles were to supply the place of Force. How was Force used? A Law being
made, there was a continued Application of Punishment to all those, whom it
brought not to embrace the Doctrine proposed. Were Miracles so used till Force
took place? For this, we shall want more new Church History, and I think
contrary to what we read in that part of it which is unquestionable; I mean in
the Acts of the Apostles, where we shall find, that the then Promulgators of
the Gospel, when they had preached, and done what Miracles the Spirit of God
directed, if they prevailed not, they often left them: Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the Word of Acts XIII. 46. Ver. 51.
God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing you put it from you, and
judge your selves unworthy, we turn to the Gentiles. They shook off the Dust of
their Feet against them, and came unto Iconium. Acts XIX. 9.
But when diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way,
before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the Disciples. Paul
was pressed in Spirit, and testisied to the Jews Acts VIII. 6.
that Jesus was Christ; and when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he
shook his Raiment, and said unto them, Your Blood be upon your own heads, I am
clean, from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles. Did the Christian
Magistrates ever do so, who thought it necessary to support the Christian
Religion by Laws? Did they ever, when they had a while punished those, whom
Persuasions and Preaching had not prevailed on, give off, and leave them to
themselves, and make trial of their Punishment upon others? Or is this your way
of Force and Punishment? If it be not, yours is not what Miracles came to
supply the room of, and so is not necessary. For you tell us, they are punished
to make them consider, and they can never be supposed to consider as they
ought, whilst they persist in rejecting; and therefore, they are justly
punished P. 24, 25.
to make them so consider: So that not so considering, being the Fault for
which they are punished, and the Amendment of that Fault the end which is
designed to be attained by punishing, the Punishment must continue. But Men
were not always heat upon with Miracles. To this, perhaps you will reply, that
the seeing of a Miracle or two, or half a dozen, was sufficient to procure a
hearing; but that being punished once or twice, or half a dozen times, is not;
for you tell us, the Power P. 36.
of Miracles communicated to the Apostles, served altogether, as well as
Punishment, to procure them a hearing: Where, if you mean by Hearing, only
Attention, who doubts but Punishment may also procure that? if you mean by
Hearing, receiving and embracing, what is proposed, that even Miracles
themselves did not effect upon all Eyewitnesses. Why then, I beseech you, if
one be to supply the place of the other, is one to be continued on those who do
reject, when the other was never long continued, nor, as I think, we may safely
say, often repeated to those, who persisted in their former Persuasions?

After all therefore, may not one justly doubt, whether Miracles supplied the
place of Punishment; nay, whether you your self, if you be true to your own
Principles, can think so? You tell us, that not to join themselves to the True
Church, where sufficient Evidence is offered to convince Men that it is so, is
a Fault that P. 25.
it cannot be unjust to punish. Let me ask you now; Did the Apostles, by their
Preaching and Miracles, offer sufficient Evidence to convince Men that the
Church of Christ was the True Church; or, which is, in this case, the same
thing, that the Doctrine they preached was the True Religion? If they did, were
not those, who persisted in Unbelief, guilty of a Fault? And if some of the
Miracles done in those days, should now be repeated, and yet Men should not
embrace the Doctrine, or join themselves to the Church which those Miracles
accompanied, would you not think them guilty of a Fault, which the Magistrate
might justly, nay, ought to punish? If you would answer truly and sincerely to
this Question, I doubt you would think your beloved Punishments necessary
notwithstanding Miracles, there being no other ^umane Means left. I do not make
this Judgment of you, from any ill Opinion I have of your good Nature, but it
is consonant to your Principles: For if not Professing the True Religion, where
sufficient evidence is offered by bare Preaching, be a Fault, and a Eault jus^y
to be punished by the Magistrate, you will certainly think it much more his
Duty to punish a greater Fault, as you must allow it is, to reject Truth
proposed with, Arguments and Miracles, than with bare Arguments: Since you tell
us, that the P. 77.
Magistrate is obliged to procure, as much as in him lies, that every Man take
care of his own Soul, i. e. consider as he ought; which no Man can be supposed
to do, whilst he persists in rejecting: As you tell us, page 24.

Miracles, say you, supplied the want of Force, till by their help Christianity
had prevailed to be received for the Religion of the Empire. Not that the
Magistrates had not as much Commission then, from the Law of Nature, to use
Force, for promoting the true Religion, as since: But because the Magistrates
then, not being of the true Religion, did not afford it the assistance of their
Political Power. If this be so, and there be a necessity either of Force or
Miracles, will there not be the same Reason for (...) ever since, even to this
Day, and so on to the end of the World, in all those Countries where the
Magistrate is not of the true Religion? Unless (as you urge it) you will say
(what (...). p. 16.
without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and benign Disposer of all
things, has not furnished Mankind with competent means for the promoting his
own Honor in the World, and the good of Souls.

But to put an end to your pretense to Miracles, as supplying the place of
Force. Let me ask you, whether since the withdrawing of Miracles, your moderate
degree of Force has been made use of, for the support of the Christian
Religion? if not, then Miracles were not made use of to supply the want of
Force, unless it were for the supply of such Force as Christianity never had,
which is for the supply of just no Force at all; or else for the supply of the
Severities which have been in use amongst Christians, which is worse than none
at all. Force, you say, is necessary: what Force? not Eire and Sword, not loss
of E^ates not maiming with Corporal Punishments, not st^ving and tormenting in
(...) Prisons: those you condemn. Not Compulsion: these Severities, you say,
are apter to hinder, than promote the true Religion; but moderate lower
Penalties, tolerable Inconveniences, such as should a little disturb and
disease Men. This assistance not being to be had from the Magistrates, in the
First Ages of Christianity, Miracles, say you, were continued till Christianity
became the Religion of the Empire, not so much for any necessity there was of
them, all that while, for the ev^ncing the Truth of the Christian Religion, as
to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. For the true Religion not
being able to support it self by its own Light, and Strength, without the
assistance either of Miracles, or of Authority, there was a necessity of the
one or the other; and therefore, whilst the Powers in being assisted not with
necessary Force, Miracles supplied that want. Miracles, then being to supply
necessary Force, and necessary Force being only lower moderate Penalties, some
Inconveni^ncies, such as only disturb and disease a little. If you cannot show
that in all Countries, where the Magistrates have been Christian, they have
assisted with such Force, it is plain that Miracles supplied not the want of
necessary Force; unless to supply the want of your necessary Force, for a time,
were to supply the want of an Assistance, which true Religion had not upon the
withdrawing of Miracles, and I think I may say, was never thought on by any
Authority, in any Age or Country, till you now, above 1300 Years after, made
this happy discovery. Nay, Sir, since the true Religion, as you tell us cannot
prevail or subsist without, Miracles or Authority, i. e. your moderate Force;
it must necessarily follow, that the Christian Religion has, in all Ages and
Countries, been accompanied either with actual Miracles, or such Force: which,
whether it be so or no, I leave you and all sober Men to consider. When you can
show, that it has been so, we shall have reason to be satis^ with your bold
Assertion: That the Christian Religion, as delivered in the New Testament,
cannot prevail by its own Light, and Strength, without the assistance of your
moderate Penalties, or of actual Miracles accompanying it. But if ever since
the withdrawing of Miracles in all Christian Countries, where Force has been
thought necessary by the Magistrate to support the National, or (as every where
it is called) the true Religion, those Severities have been made use of, which
you (for a good Reason) condemn, as apter to hinder, than promote the true
Religion; it is plain that Miracles supplied the want of such an Assistance from
the Magistrate, as was apter to binder, than promote the true Religion. And
your substituting of Miracles, to supply the want of moderate Force, will show
nothing, for your Cause, but the zeal of a Man so sond of Force, that he will
without any warrant from Scripture, enter into the Counsels of the Almighty;
and without authority from History, talk of Miracles, and Political
Anministrations, as may best suit his System.

To my saying, a Religion that is from God, wants not the assistance of Humane
Authority to make it prevail; you answer, This is not simply nor always true.
Indeed when God takes the matter P. 8.
wholly into his own Hands, as he does at his first revealing any Religion,
there can be no need of any assistance of Humane Authority: but when God has
once sufficiently settled his Religion in the World, so that if Men from
thenceforth will do what ^ey may and ought, in their several Capacities, to
preserve and propagate it, it may (...) and prevail without that extraordinary
Assistance from him, which was necessary for its first establishment. By this
Rule of yours, how long was there need of Miracles to make Christianity subsist
and prevail? If you will keep to it, you will find there was no need of
Miracles, after the promulgation of the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles; for
I ask you, was it not then so sufficiently settled in the World, that if Men
would from thenceforth have done what they might and ought, in their several
Capacities, it would have subsisted and prevailed without that extraordinary
assistance of Miracles? unless you will on this occasion retract what you say
in other places, viz. that it is a Fault not to receive the true Religion,
where sufficient evidence is offered to convince Men that it is so. If then
from the times of the Apostles, the Christian Religion has had sufficient
evidence, that it is the true Religion, and Men did their Duty, i. e. receive
it, it would certainly have subsisted and prevailed, even from the Apostles
Times, without that extraordinary Assistance, and then Miracles after that were
not necessary.

But perhaps you will say, that by Men in their several Capacities, you mean
the Magistrates. A pretty way of speaking, proper to you alone: But even in
that Sense, it will not serve your turn. For then there will be need of
Miracles, not only in the time you propose, but in all times after. For if the
Magistrate, who is as much subject as other Men to that Corruption of Humane
Nature, by which you tell us False Religions prevall against the True, should
not do what he may and ought, so as to be of the true Religion, as it is the
odds he will not, what then will become of the true Religion, which according
to you cannot subsist or prevail without either the Assistance of Miracles or
Authority? Subjects cannot have the Assistance of Authority, where the
Magistrate is not of the true Religion; and the Magistrate wanting the
assistance of Authority to bring him to the true Religion, that want must be
still supplied with Miracles, or else, according to your Hypothesis, all must
go to wrack; and the True Religion, that cannot subsist by its own Strength and
Light, must be lost in the World. For I presume you are scarce yet such an
Adorer of the Powers of the World, as to say, that Magistrates are privileged
from that common Corruption of Mankind, whose opposition to the true Religion
you suppose cannot be overcome, without the assistance of Miracles or Force.
The Flock will stray, unless the Bell-weather conduct them right; the
Bell-weather himself will stray, unless the Shepherd's Crook and Staff (which
he has as much need of as any Sheep of the Flock) keep him right. Ergo, The
whole Flock will stray, unless the Bell-weather have that assistance which is
necessary to conduct him right. The Case is the same here. So that by your own
Rule, either there was no need of Miracles to supply the want of Force, after
the Apostles time, or there is need of them still.

But your Answer, when looked into, has something in it more excellent. I say,
a Religion that is of God, wants not the assistance of Humane Authority to make
it prevail. You answer, True, when God takes the matter into his own Hands. But
when once P. 8.
he has sufficiently settled Religion, so that if Men will but do what they may
and ought, it may subsist without that extraordinary assistance from Heaven;
then he leaves it to their Care. Where you suppose, if Men will do their Duties
in their several Capacities, true Religion, being once established, may subsist
without Miracles. And is it not as true, that if they will, in their several
Capacities, do what they may and ought, true Religion will also subsist without
Force? But you are sure Magistrates will do what they may and ought, to
preserve and propagate the true Religion, but Subjects will not. If you are
not, you must bethink your self how to answer that old Question, -- Sed quis
custodiet (...)
Custodes? --


To my having said, that prevailing without the assistance of Force, I thought
was made use of as an Argument for the Truth of Christian Religion. You reply,
that you hope I am mistaken, for sure this is a very bad Argument, That the
Christian Religion, P. 6.
so contrary in the (...) of is, as well to Elesh and Blood, as to the Powers
of Darkness, should prevail as it did; and that not only without any assistance
from Authority, but even in spite of all the opposition which Authority and a
wicked World, joined with those infernal Powers, could make against it. This I
acknowledge has deservedly been insisted upon by Christians as a very good proof
of their Religion. But to argue the Truth of the Christian Religion, from its
^eer prevailing in the World, without any aid from Force, or the assistance of
the Powers in being; as is whatever Religion should so prevail, must needs be
the true Religion, (whatever may be intended) is really not to desend the
Christian Religion, but to be^ray it. How you have mended the Argument by
putting in ^eer, which is not any where used by me, I will not examine. The
Question is, whether the Christian Religion, such as it was then, (for I know
not any other Christian Religion) and is still contrary to the Flesh and Blood,
and to the Powers of Darkness, prevailed not without the assistance of Humane
Force, by those aids it has still? This, I think, you will not deny to be an
Argument used for its Truth by Christians, and some of our Church. How far any
one in the use of this Argument, pleases or displeases you, I am not concerned.
All the use I made of it was to show, that it is confessed that the Christian
Religion did prevail, without that Humane Means of the coactive Power of the
Magistrate, which you assumed to be necessary; and this, I think, makes good
the Experiment I brought. Nor will your seeking, your way, a Refuge, in
Miracles, help you to evade it; as I have already shown.

But you give a Reason for what you say, in these following words; For neither
does the True Religion always prevail without P. 6.
the Assistance of the Powers in being; nor is that always the True Religion,
which does so spread and prevail. Those who use the Argument of its prevailing
without Force, for the Truth of the Christian Religion, it is like will tell
you, that, if it be true, as you say, that the Christian Religion (which at
other times does) sometimes does not prevail without the Assistance of the
Powers in being, it is, because when it fails, it wants the due Assistance and
Diligence of the Ministers of it. How shall they hear without a Preacher? How
shall the Gospel be spread and prevail, if those who take on them to be the
Ministers and Preachers of it, either neglect to teach it others as they ought,
or confirm it not by their Lives? If therefore you will make this Argument of
any use to you, you must show, where it was, that the Ministers of the Gospel,
doing their Duty by the Purity of their Lives, and their interrupted Labor, in
being instant in season and out of season, have not been able to make it
prevail. An Instance of this, it is believed you will scarco find: And if this
be the case, that it fails not to prevail where those, whose Charge it is,
neglect not to teach and spread it with that Care, Assiduity, and Application
which they ought, you may hereafter know where to lay the blame; Not on the
Want of sufficient Light and Strength in the Gospel to prevail, (wherein
methinks, you make very bold with it) but on the want of what the Apostle
requires in the Ministers of it; some part whereof, you may read in these Words
to Timothy; But thou, O Man of God, follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness: Give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine, preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season; reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine: And more to this purpose
in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

That the Christian Religion has prevailed, and supported it self in the World
now above these 1600 Years, you must grant, and that it has not been by Force,
is Demonstration. For wherever the Christian Religion prevailed, it did it,
as far as we know any thing of the means of its Propagation and Support,
without the help of that Force, moderate Force, which you say, is alone useful
and necessary. So that if the Severities you condemn, be, as you confess, apter
to hinder than promote the Gospel, and it has no where had the Assistance of
your moderate Penalties, it must follow, that it prevailed without Force, only
by its own Strength and Light, displaid and brought home to the Understandings
and Hearts of the People, by the Preaching, Entreaties and Exhortations of its
Ministers. This at least you must grant, that Force can be by no means
necessary to make the Gospel prevail any where, till the utmost has been tried
that can be done by Arguments and Exhortations, Prayers and Entreaties, and all
the friendly Ways of Persuasion.

As to the other part of your Assertion, Nor is that always the True Religion,
that does so spread and prevail. It Is like they will demand Instances of you,
where False Religions ever prevailed against the Gospel, without the assistance
of Force on the one side, or the betraying of it by the Negligence and
Carelessness of its Teachers on the other? So that if the Gospel any where wants
the Magistrate's Assistance, it is only to make the Ministers of it do their
Duty. I have heard of those, and possibly there are Instances of it now not
wanting, who by their pious Lives, peaceable and friendly Carriage, and
diligent Application to the several Conditions and Capacities of their
Parishioners, and screening them as much as they could from the Penalties of
the Law, have in a short time scarce left a Dissenter in a Parish; where,
notwithstanding the Force had been before used, they scarce found any other.
But how far this has recommended such Ministers to those who ought to encourage
or follow the Example, I wish you would inform your self, and then tell me. But
who sees not that a Justice of Peace's Warrant Vid. Pastoral Care, page 202.
is a shorter, and much easier way for the Minister, than all this ^do of
instruction, Debates, and particular Application. Whether it be also more
Christian, or more effectual to make real Converts, others may be apt to
enquire. This, I am sure, it is not justifiable (even by your very Principles)
to be used till the other has been thoroughly tried.

But if there be any thing in the Argument for the Truth of Christianity, (as
God forbid there should not) that it has, and consequently can prevail without
Force, I think it can scarce be (...) in matter of Fact, that False Religions
do also prevail against the Christian Religion, when they come upon equal Terms
in Competition; and as much Diligence and Industry is used by the Teachers of
it, as by Seducers to False Religions, the Magistrate using his Force on
neither side. For if in this case, which is the fair trial, Christianity can
prevail, and False Religions too, it is possible Contrarieties may prevail
against one another both together. To make good therefore your Assertion, you
must show us, wherever any other Religion so spread and prevailed, as to
drive Christianity out of any Country without Force, where the Ministers of it
did their Duty to teach, adorn and support it.

As to the following words, Nor is that always the True Religion P. 6.
which does so spread and prevail; as I doubt not but you will acknowledge with
me, when you have but considered within how few Generations after the Flood,
the Worship of false Gods prevailed against that which Noah professed and
taught his Children, which was undoubtedly the True Religion, almost to the
utter Exclusion of it, (though that at first was the only Religion in the
World) without any aid from Force, or assistance from the Powers in being. This
will need something more than a negative Proof, as we shall see by and by.

Where I say, The Inventions of Men need the Force and L. 2. p. 3.
Help of Men: A Religion that is from God, wants not the assistance of humane
Authority. The first part of those Words you take no notice of; neither grant
nor deny it to be so, though perhaps it will prove a great part of the
Controversy between us.

To my Question, Whether if such a Toleration as is proposed by the Author of
the First Letter, were established in France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, etc. the
True Religion would not P. 8.
be a gainer by it? You answer, That the True Religion would be a loser by it
in those few Places where it is now established as the National Religion; and
particularly, you name England. It is then, it seems, by your way of moderate
Force and lower Penalties, that in all Countries where it is National, the True
Religion has prevailed and subsists. For the Controversy is between the
Author's universal Toleration, and your new Way of Force; for greater degrees
of Force, you condemn as hurtful. Say then that in England, and wherever the
True Religion is National, it has been beholden to your Force for the
Advantages and Support it has had, and I will yield you the Cause. But of
National Re ligions, and particularly that of England, I have occasion to speak
more in another place.

In the next place you answer, That you suppose I do not hope P. 9.
I shall persuade the World to consent to my Toleration. I think by your
Logic, a Proposition is not less true or false, because the World will or will
not be persuaded to consent to it. And therefore, though it will not consent to
a general Toleration, it may nevertheless be true that it would be advantageous
to the True Religion: and if no body must speak Truth till he thinks all the
World will be persuaded by it, you must have a very good Opinion of your
Oratory, or else you will have a very good Excuse to turn your Parsonage, when
you have one, into a sine-Cure. But though I have not so good an Opinion of my
Gift of Persuasion, as perhaps you have of yours; yet I think I may without any
great Presumption hope, that I may as soon persuade England, the World, or any
Government in it, to consent to my Toleration, as you persuade it to content it
self with moderate Penalties.

You farther answer, If such a Toleration, established there, would permit the
Doctrine of the Church of England to be truly preached, and its Worship set up
in any Popish, Mohammedan or Pagan Country, you think True Religion would be a
gainer by it for a time; but you think withal, that an universal Toleration P.
10.
would ruin it both there and every where else, in the end. You grant it then
possible, notwithstanding the Corruption of humane Nature, that the True
Religion may gain some where, and for some time, by Toleration: It will gain
under a new Toleration you think, but decay under an old one; Would you had
told us the Reason why you think so. But you think there is great reason to
fear, that without God's extraordinary Providence, it wo^ld in a P. 9.
much shorter time, than any one, who does not well consider the matter, will
imagine, be most effectually (...) by it throughout the World. If you have
considered right, and the matter be really so, it is demonstration, that the
Christian Religion, since Constantine's time, as well as the True Religion
before Moses's time, must needs have been totally extinguished out of the
World, and have so continued, unless by Miracle and immediate Revelation
restored. For those Men, i. e. the Magistrates, upon whose being of the True
Religion, the Preservation of it, according to you, depends, living all of them
under a free Toleration, must needs lose the True Religion effectually and
speedily, from among them; and they quitting the True Religion, the assistance
of Force, which should support it against a general Defection, be utterly lost.

The Princes of the World are, I suppose, as well infected with the depraved
Nature of Man, as the rest of their Brethren. These, whether 100 or 1000,
suppose they lived together in one Society, wherein, with the True Religion,
there were a free Toleration, and no Coactive Power of the Magistrate employed
about Matters of Religion, would the True Religion be soon extirpated amongst
them? If you say it would not, you must grant Toleration not to be so
destructive of the True Religion, as you say; or you must think them of another
race, than the rest of corrupt Men, and free from that general Taint. If you
grant that the True Religion would be quickly extirpated amongst them, by
Toleration, living together in one Society, the same will happen to them,
living as Princes, where they are free from all Coactive Power of the
Magistrate in Matters of Religion, and have as large a Toleration as can be
imagined. Unless you will say, that depraved humane Nature works less in a
Prince than a Subject; and is most tame, most mortified, where it has most
Liberty and Temptation. Must not then, if your Maxim be true, Toleration
quickly deprive the few Orthodox Princes that are in the World (take it when
you will) of the True Religion; and with them, take away the Assistance of
Authority, which is necessary to support it amongst their Subjects? Toleration
then does not, whatever your Fears are, make that woeful wrack on True Religion
which you talk of.

I shall give you another Evidence of it, and then come to examine your great
Reason taken from the Corruption of humane Nature, and the Instance you so
often repeat, and build so much on, the Apostasy after the Flood. Toleration,
you sav, would quickly, and effectually extirpate the True Reiigion throughout
the World. What now is the Means to preserve True Religion in the World? If you
may be believed, it is Force, but not all Force, great Severities, Fire, Faggot,
Imprisonment, loss of Estate, etc. These will do more harm than good; it is only
lower and moderate Penaltics, some tolerable Inconveniences, can do the
business. If then moderate Force has not been all along, no, nor any where,
made use of for the Preservation of the True Religion, the Maintenance and
Support of the True Religion in the World, has not been owing to what you
oppose to Toleration: And so your Argument against Toleration is out of doors.

You give us in this and the foregoing Pages, the Grounds of your Fear, It is
the Corruption of humane Nature which opposes the True Religion. You express it
thus, Idolatry prevailing against p. 7.
it [the True Reigion] not by its own Light and Strength, for it could have
nothing of either, but merely by the Advantage it had in the Corruption and
Pravity of humane Nature, finding out to it self more agreeable Religions than
the true. For, say you, whatever Hardships some False Religions may impose, it
will however, always be easier to carnal and worldly-minded Men, to give even
their Firstborn for their Transgressions, than to mortify their Lusts from
which they spring, which no Religion but the True, requires of them. I wonder,
saying this, how you could any longer mistake the Magistrate's Duty, in
reference to Religion, and not see wherein Force truly can and ou^ht to be
serviceable to it. What you have said, plainly shows you, that the Assistance
the Magistrate's Authority can give to the True Religion, is in the subduing of
Lusts, and its being directed against Pride, Injustice, Rapine, Luxury and
Debauchery, and those other Immoralities which come properly under his
Cognizance, and may be corrected by Punishments; and not by the imposing of
Creeds and Ceremonics, as you tell us. Sound and Decent, you might have left
out, p. 13.
whereof their Fancies, and not the Law of God, will always be Judge and
consequently the Rule.

The Case between the true and false Religions, as you have stated it, in
short, sounds thus, True Religion has always Light and p. 7.
(...) of its own sufficient to prevail with all that seriously consider it,
and without prejudice. (...) or False Religions have nothing of Light or
Strength to prevail with. Why then does not the true Religion prevail against
the false, having so much the advantage in Light and Strength? The
Counter-ballance of Prejudice hinders. And wherein does that Str^ngth? The
Drunkard must part with his Cups and Companions, and the Voluptuous Man with
his Pleasures. The Proud and Vain must lay by all Excess in Apparel, Furniture
and Attendance; and Money, the support of all these, must be got only by the
ways of Justice, Honesty, and fair Industry. And every one must live peaceably,
uprightly, and friendly with his Neighbor. Here then the Magistrate's
a^istance is wanting: Here they may and ought to interpose their Power, and by
Severities, against Drunkenness, Laciviousnes, and all sorts of Debauchery; by
a steady and unrelaxed Punishment of all the ways of Fraud and Injustice; and
by their Administration, Countenance, and Example, reduce the Irregularities of
Men's Manners into order, and bring Sobriety, Peaceableness, Industry and
Honesty into Fashion. This is their proper Business everywhere; and for this
they have a Commission from God, both by the Light of Nature and Revelation;
and by this, removing the great Counterpoise, which lies in strictness of Life,
and is so strong a Bias, with the greatest part, against: the true Religion,
they would cast the Balance on that ^de. For if Men were forced by the
Magistrate to live sober, honest and strict Lives, whatever their Religion
were, would not the advantage be on the side of Truth, when the gratifying of
their Lusts were not to be obtained by for saking her? In Men's Lives lies the
main Obstacle to right Opinions in Religion: and if you will not believe me,
yet what a very rational Man of the Church of (...) (...) of the Folly of
(...). p. 16.
England says in the case, will deserve to be remembered. Did Religion bestow
Heaven, without any Forms and Conditions, indifferently upon all; If the Crown
of Life was Hereditary, and free to good and bad, and not settled by Covenant
upon the Elect of God only, such as live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present World; I believe there would be no such thing as an Insidel among us.
And without Controversy it is the way and means of attaining to Heaven, that
makes profane Scoffers so willing to let go the expeclation of it. It Is not the
Articles of the Creed, but their Dury to God and their Neighb^r, that is such
an inconsi^tent incredible Legend. They will not practice the Rules of
Religion, and therefore they cannot believe the Doctrines of it. The ingenious
Author will pardon me the change of one word, which I doubt not but (...) his
Opinion, though it did not so well that Argument he was then on.

You grant the true Religion has always Light, and Strength to prevail; (...)
Religions have neither. Take away the satisfaction of Men; Lusts, and which
then, I pray, has the advantage? Will Men, against the Light of their Reason,
do violence to their Understandings, and for sake Truth, and Salvation too,
gratis? You tell us here, No Religion but the true requires of Men the
difficult Task of mortifying their Lust s. This being granted you, what Service
will this do you to prove a necessity of Force to punish all Disseuters in
England? Do none of their Religions require the mortisying of Lusts as well as
yours?

And now, let us consider your Instance whereon you build so much that we hear
of it over and over again. For you tell us. Idolatry (...), but yet not by the
help of Force, as has been p. 7. P. 10.
sufficiently (...). And again, That Truth left to shift for her self, will not
(...) well enough, has been sufficiently (...). What you have done to show
this, is to be seen, where you tell us, Within how P. 6.
few Generations after the ^ood, the Worship of False Gods prevailed against
the Religion which Noah professed, and taught his Children, (which (...) (...)
the true Religion) almost to the ^tter exclusion of it, (though that at (...)
(...) was the only Religion in the World) without any Aid from ^orce, or the
Assistance of the Powers in being, for any thing we find in the History of
those Times, as we may reasonably believe, considering that it found an
entrance into the World, and entertainment in it, when it could have no such
Aid, or Assistance. Of which (besides the Corruption of Humane Nature) you
suppose there can no other Cause be assigned, or none more probable than this,
that the Powers then in being, did not do what they might and ought to have
done, toward the preventing, or checking that horrible Apostasy. Here you tell
us, that the Worship of False Gods, within a very few Generations after the
Flood prevailed against the true Religion, almost to the ^tter exclusion of it.
This you say indeed, but without any Proofs, and unless that be showing, you
have not, as you pretend, any way shown it. Out of what Records, I beseech you,
have you^ that the true Religion was almost wholly extirpated out of the Wo^ld,
within a few Generations after the Flood? The Scripture, the largest History we
have of those Times, says (...) of it, nor does, as I remember, mention any as
guilty of Idolatry, within 2 or 300 Years after the Flood. In Canaan it self, I
do not think that you can out of any credible History (...), that th^re was any
Idolatry within ten or twelve Generations after Noah; much less that it had so
overspread the World and extirpated the true Religion, out of that part of it
where the Scene lay of those Actions recorded in the History of the Bible. In
Abraham's (...), (...) who was King of (...), was also the Priest of the most
High God. We read that God, with an immediate Hand, punished miraculously,
first (...), at the Confusion of Babel, and afterward Sodom, and four other
Cities; but in neither of these Places is there any, the le^st, mention of
Idolatry, by which they provoked God, and drew down Vengeance on themselves. So
that truly you have shown nothing at all, and what the Scripture shows is
against you. For besides, that it is plain, b^ Melchisedeck the King of Sale^
and Priest of the most High God, to whom Abraham P. 6.
paid Tithes, that all the Land of Canaan was not yet overspread with Idolatry,
though afterward in the Time of (...), by the forsciture was therefore made of
it to the Israelites, one may have reason to suspect it were more desiled with
it, than any part of the World. Besides Salem, I say, he that reads the Genesis
XX, XXI, XXVI.
Story of Abimelech, will have reason to think, that he also and his Kingdom,
though Philistines, were not then infected with Idolatry.

You think they, and almost all Mankind were Idolaters, but you may be
mistaken; and that which may serve to show it, is the Example of Elijah the
Prophet, who was at least as infallible a Guesser as you, and was as well
instructed in the State and History of his own Country, and Time, as you can be
in the State of the whole World 3 or 4000 Years ago. Elijah thought that
Idolatry had wholly extirpated the true Religion out of Israel, and complains
thus to God. The Children of Israel have for saken 1 Kings XIX. 10.
thy Covenant, thrown down thy Altars, and stain thy Prophets with the Sword;
and I, even I alone, am left, and they seek my Life to take it Ver. 14.
away. And he is so fully persuaded of it, that he repeats it again: and yet
God tells him, that he had there yet 7000 Knees that had not bowed to Baal,
7000 that were not Idolaters: though this was in the Reign of Ahab, a King
zealous for Idolatry; and in a Kingdom set up in an Idolatrous Worship, which
had continued the National Religion, established and promoted by the continued
Succession of several Idolatrous Princes. And though the National Religions
soon after the Flood were false, which you are far enough from proving; how
does it thence follow, that the true Religion was near extirpated? which it
must needs quite have been, before St. Peter's time, if there were so great
reason to fear, P. (...).
as you tell us, That the true Religion, without the assistance of Force, would
in a much shorter time, than any one that does not well consider the matter
would imagine, be most effectually extirpated throughout the World. For above
2000 Years after Noah's time, St. Peter tells us, That in every Nation, he that
search God, and ActsX 35.
works (...), is accepted by him. By which Words, and by the occa^ion on
which they were spoken, it is manifest, that in Countries where for 2000 Years
together no Force had been used for the support of Noah's true Religion, it was
not yet wholly (...). But that you may not think it was so near, that there was
but one left, only Cornelius, if you will look into Acts XVII. 4. you will find
a great Multitude of them at Thessalonica, And of the devo^t Greeks a great
Multitude believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas. And again, more of them
in A^ens, Ver. 17.
a City wholly given to Idol^try. For that those (...), which we translate
devout, and whereof many are mentioned in the Acts, were Gen^iles, who
worshipped the true God, and kept the Precepts of No^, Mr. Mede has abundantly
proved. So that what ^ever you, ^ho have well considered the matter, may
imagine of the shortness of time, wherein Noah's Religion would be effectually
extirpated throughout the World, without the assistance of Force, we find it at
Athens, at Philippi, at (...), amongst the Rom^ns, in Antioch of Pisidia, in
Th^ssalonica, above 2000 Years after, and that not so near being extinguished,
but that in some of those Places the Professors of it were numerous: at
Thessalonica they are called a great Multitude: at (...) many: and how many of
them there were in other parts of the World, whereof there was no occasion to
make mention in that short History of the (...) of the Apostles, who knows? If
they answered, in other Places, to what were found in these, as that reason is
there to suppose they should not? I think we may imagine them to be as many, as
there were effectually of the true Religion Christians in Europe, a little
before the Reformation, not withstanding the assistance the (...) Religion had
from Authority, after the withdrawing of Mira^les.

But you have a Salvo, for you write warily, and endeavor to save your self on
all hand^; you say, There is great reason to P. (...).
fear, that without God's EXTRAORDINARY PROVIDENCE, it would in a much shorter
time, than any one, who does not well consider the matter, would imagine, be
most (...) extirpated by it, throughout the World. It Is, without doubt, the
Providence of God which governs the A^airs both of the World and his Church;
and to that, whether you call it Ordinary or Extraordinary, you may trust the
Preservation of his Church, without the use of such Means, as he has no where
appointed or authorized. You fancy Force necessary to preserve the True
Religion, and hence you conclude the Magistrate authorized, without any farther
Commission from God, to use it, if there be no other Means left; and therefore
that must be used: If Religion should be preserved without it, it is by the
Extraordinary Providence of God; where Extraordinary signi^cs nothing, but
begging the thing in question. The true Religion has been preserved many Ages,
in the Church, without Force. Ay, say you, that was by the Extraordinary
Provid^ce of God. His Providence which overrules all Events, we ea^ly grant
it: But why Extraordinary Providence? because Force was (...) to preserve it.
And why was Force (...)? because otherwise, without Extraordinary Providence,
it cannot be preserved. In such Circles, covered under good Words, but
misapplied, one might show you taking many a Turn in your answer, if it were
^it to waste others time to trace your Wanderings. God has appointed Preaching,
Teaching, Perswa^on, Instruction, as a means to continue and propagate his true
Religion in the World; and if it were any where preserved and propagated
without that, we might call it his Extraordinary Providence; but the means he
has appointed being used, we may conclude, that Men have done their Duties, and
so may leave it to his Providence, however we will call it, to preserve the
little Flock (which he bids not to fear) to the end of the World.

But let us return again to what you say, to make good this Hypothesis of
yours, That Idolatry entered first into the World by the Contrivance, and spread
it self by the Endeavors of private Men, without the Assistance of the
Magistrates, and P. 6.
those in Power. To prove this, you tell us, That it found Entrance into the
World, and Enterta^nment in it, when it could have no such Aid or Assistance.
When was this, I b^eech you, that Idolatry found this Entrance into the World?
Under what King's Reign was it, that you are so positive it could have no such
Aid or Assistance? If you had named the time, the thing (though of no great
mom^nt to you) had been sure. But now we may very justly question this bare
Assertion of yours. For since we find, as far back as we have any History of
it, that the great Men of the World were always forward to set up and promote
Idolatry and False Religions, you ought to have given us some reason why,
without Authority from History, you a^irm that Idolatry, at its entrance into
the World, had not that Assistance from Men in Power, which it never failed of
afterward. Who they were that made Israel to sin, the Scripture tells us.
Their Kings were so zealous Promoters of Idolatry, that there is (...) one of
them, that has not that Brand left upon him in holy Writ.

One of the first False Religions, whose rise and way of propagating we have an
account of in Sacred History, was by an ambitious Usurper, who having rebelled
against his Master, with a False Title set up a False Religion, to secure his
Power and Dominion. Why this might not have been done before Jeroboam's days,
and Idols set up at other places, as well as at Dan and Bethel, to serve
politic Ends, will need some other Proof, than barely saying, it could not be
so at first. The Devil, unless much more ignorant, was not less busy in those
days to engage Princes in his favor, and to weave Religion into Affairs of
State, the better to introduce his Worship, and support Idolatry, by
accommodating it to the Ambition, Vanity, or Superstition, of Men in Power: and
therefore, you may as well say, that the Corruption of humane Nature, as that
the Assistance of the Powers in being, did not, in those days, help forward
False Religions; because your Reading has furnished you with no particular
mention of it out of History. But you need but say, P. 6.
that the Worship of False Gods prevailed without any aid from Force, or the
assistance of the Powers in being, for any thing we find in the History of
those times, and then you have sufficiently (...), what? even that you have
just nothing to show for your Assertion.

But whatever that any thing is, which you find in History, you may meet with
Men (whose reading yet I will not compare with yours) who think they have found
in History, that Princes and those in Power, first corrupted the True Religion,
by setting up the Images and Symbols of their Predecessors in their Temples;
which, by their Influence, and the ready Obedience of the Priests they
appointed, were in succession of Time, proposed to the People as Objects of
their Worship. Thus they think they find in History that (...), Queen of Egypt,
with her Counselor Thoth, instituted the Funeral-Rites of King Osir^, by the
Honor done to the sacred Ox. They think they find also in History, that the
^ame Thoth, who was also King of Egypt in his turn, invented the Figures of the
first Egyptian Gods, Saturn, Dagon, Jupiter Hammon, and the rest: that is, the
Figures of their Statues or Idols; and that he instituted the Worship and
Sacrifices of these Gods: And his Institutions were so well assisted by th^se
in Authority, and observed by the (...) they set up, that the Worship of those
Gods soon became the Religion of that, and a Pattern to other Nations. And here
we may perhaps, with good reason, place the rise and original of Idolatry after
the Flood, there being nothing of this kind more ancient. So ready was the
Ambition, Vanity, or Superstition of Princes, to introduce their Predecessors
into the Divine Worship of the People, to secure to themselves the greater
Veneration from their Subjects, as descended from the Gods; or to erect such a
Worship, and such a Priesthood, as might awe the blinded and seduced People
into that Obedience they desired. Thus Ham, by the Authority of his Successors,
the Rulers of Egypt, is first brought for the Honor of his Name and Memory
into their Temples, and never left, till he is erected into a God, and made
Jupiter Hammon, etc. which Fashion took afterward with the Princes of other
Countries.

Was not the great God of the Eastern Nations, Baal, or Jupiter Bel^, one of
the first Kings of Assyria? And which, I pray, is the more likely, that Courts,
by their Instruments the Priests, should thus advance the Honor of Kings
amongst the People for the ends of Ambition and Power; or the People find out
these resined Ways of doing it, and introduce them into Courts for the
enslaving themselves? What Idolatry does your History tell you of among the
Greeks, before Phoroncus and Danaus, Kings of the Argives, and Cecrops and
Theseus Kings of (...), and Cadmus King of Thebes, introduced it? An Art of
Rule it is probable they borrowed from the Egyptians. So that if you had not
vouched the Silence of History, without consulting it, you would possibly have
found, that in the first Ages, Princes, by their Influence and Aid, by the Help
and Artisice of the Priests they employed, their Fables of their Gods, their
Mysteries and Oracles, and all the Assistance they could give it by their
Authority, did so much against the Truth, before direct Force was grown into
fashion, and appeared openly, that there would be little reason of putting the
Guard and Propagation of the True Religion, into their hands now, and arming
them with Force to promote it.

That this was the Original of Idolatry in the World, and that it was borrowed
by other Magistrates from the Egyptians, is farther evident in that this
Worship was settled in Egypt, and grown the National Religion there, before the
Gods of Greece, and several other Idolatrous Countries, were bo^. For though
they took their Pattern of Deifying their deceased Princes, from the Egyptians,
and kept, as near as they could, to the Number and Genealogies of the Egyptian
Gods; yet they took the Names still of some great Men of their own, which they
accommodated to the Mythology of the Egyptians. Thus, by the assistance of the
Powers in being, Idolatry entered into the World after the Flood. Whereof, if
there were not so clear Footsteps in History, why yet should you not imagine
Princes and Magistrates, engaged in False Religions, as ready to employ their
Power for the maintaining and promoting their False Religions, in those days,
as we find them now? And therefore, what you say in the next Words, of the
entrance of Idolatry into the World, and P. 6.
the it sound in it, will not pass for so very evident without Proof, though
you tell us never so considently, that you suppose, besides the Corruption of
humane Nature, there can no other Carse be assigned of it, or none more
probable than this, That the Powers then in being, did not what they might and
ought to have done ((...). e. if you mean it to your purpose, use Force your
way, to make Men consider, or to impose Creeds and Ways of Worship) toward the
(...) or checking that horrible Apostasy.

I grant that the entranee and growth of Idolatry, might be owing to the
Negligence of the Powers in being, in that they did not do what they might and
ought to have done, in using their Authority to suppress the Enormities of Men's
Manners, and correct the Irregularity of their Lives. But this was not all the
Assistance they gave to that horrible Apostasy: They were, as for as History
gives us any light, the Promoters of it, and Leaders in it, and did what they
ought not to have done, by setting up False Religions, and using their
Authority to establish them to serve their corrupt and ambitious Designs.

National Religions, established by Authority, and enforced by the Powers in
being, we hear of every where, as far back as we have any account of the rise
and growth of the Religions of the World. Show me any place, within those few
Generations, wherein you say the (...) prevailed after the Flood, where the
Magistrates, being of the True Religion, the Subjects by the Liberty of a
Toleration, were lead into False Religions, and then you will produce something
against Liberty of Cons^ience. But to talk of that great Apostasy, as wholly
owing to Toleration, when you cannot produce one Instance of Toleration then in
the World, is to say what you please.

That the majority of Mankind were then, and always have been, by the
Corruption and Pravity of humane Nature, led away, and kept from embracing the
True Religion, is past doubt. But whether this be owing to Toleration, in
Matters of Religion, is the Question. David describes an horrible Corruption
and Apostasy in his time, so as to say, There is none that does Psalm. XIV
good, no not one; and yet I do not think you will say, a Toleration, then in
that Kingdom, was the cause of it. If the greatest part cannot be ill without a
Toleration, I am afraid you must be fain to find out a Toleration in every
Country, and in all Ages of the World. For I think it is true, of all Times and
Places, that the Broad way that leads to Destruction, has had most
Travelers. I would be glad to know where it was that Force, your way applied,
i. e. with Punishments only upon Nonconformists, ever prevailed to bring the
greater number into the Narrow-way, that leads unto Life; which our Savior
tells us, there are sew that sind.

The Corrup^on of Humane Nature, you say, opposes the True Religion. I grant it
you. There was also, say you, an horrible Apostasy after the Flood; let this
also be granted you: and yet from hence it will not follow, that the True
Religion cannot subsist and prevail in the World without the assistance of
Force, your way applied, till you have shown, that the False Religions, which
were the Inventions of Men, grew up under Toleration, and not by the
Encouragement and Assistance of the Powers in being.

How near soever therefore, the True Religion was to be extinguished within a
few Generations after the Flood, (which whether more in danger then, than in
most Ages since, is more than you can show.) This will be still the Question,
Whether the Liberty of Toleration, or the Authority of the Powers in being,
contributed most to it? And whether there can be no other, nor more probable
Cause assigned, than the want of Force, your way applied, I shall leave the
Reader to judge. This I am sure, whatever Causes any one else shall assign, are
as well proved as yours, if they offer them only as their Conjectures.

Not but that I think Men could run into false and foollsh Ways of Worship,
without the Instigation or Assistance of humane Authority; but the Powers of
the World, as far as we have any History, having been always forward enough (
True Religion as little serving Princes as private Men's Lusts) to take up Wrong
Religions, and as forward to employ their Authority to (...) the Religlon, good
or bad, which they had once taken up, I can see no reason why the not using of
Force, by the Princes of the World, should be assigned as the sole, or so much
as the most probable Cause of propagating the False Religions of the World, or
extirpating the True; or how you can so positively say, Idolatry prevailed
without any assistauce from the Powers in being.

Since therefore History leads us to the Magistrates, as the Authors and
Promoters of Idolatry in the World, to which we may suppose their not
supressing of Vice, joined as another Cause of the spreading of False
Religions, you were best consider, whether you can still suppose there can no
other Cause be assigned, of the prevailing of the worship of False Gods, but
the Magistrate's not interposing his Authority in matters of Religion. For that
that cannot with any probability at all be assigned as any Cause, I shall give
you this further Reason. You impute the prevailing of False Religions, to the
Corruption and Pravity of Humane Nature, left to it self, unbridled by
Authority. Now, if Force, your way applied, does not at all bridle the
Corruption and Pravity of Humane Nature, the Magistrate's not so interposing
his Authority, cannot be assigned as any Cause at: all of that Apostasy. So
that let that Apostasy have what rise, and spreas as far as you please, it will
not make one jot for Force, your way applied, or show that that can receive any
assistance your way from Authority. For your use of Authority and Force, being
only to bring Mento an outward Conformity to the National Religion, it leaves
the Corruption and Prauity of Humane Nature, as unbridled as before; as I have
shown elsewhere.

You tell us, That it is not true, that the true Religion will preuail P. 7.
by its own Light and Strength, without Miracles, or the assistance of the
Powers in being, because of the Corruption of Humane Nature. And for this you
give us an instance in the Apostasy presently after the Flood. And you tell.
us, That without the (...) of Force it would presently be extirpated out of the
World. (...) the P. 9.
Corruption of Humane Nature be so universal, and so strong, that, without the
help of Force, the true Religion is too weak to stand it, and cannot at all
prevail, without Miracles or Force; How come Men ever to be converted, in
Countries where the National Religion is False? If you say by Extraordinary
Providence, what that amounts to, has been shown. If you say this Corruption is
so potent in all Men, as to oppese and prevail against the Gospel, not assisted
by Force or Miracles, that is not true. If in most Men, so it is still, even
where Force is used. For I desire you to name me a Country, where the greatest
part are really and truly Christians, such as you confidently believe Christ,
at the last Day, will own to be so. In England, having, as you do, excluded all
the Dissenters (or else why would you have them punished, to bring them to
embrace the true Religion?) you must, I fear, allow your self a great Latitude
in thinkiing, if you think that the Corruption of Humane Nature, does not so
far prevail, even amongst Conformists, as to make the Ignorance, and Lives, of
great numbers amongst them, such as suits not at all with the Spirit of ^ue
Christianity. How great their Ignorance may be, in the more spiritual and
elevated parts of the Christian Religion, may be guessed, by what the Reverend
Bishop, before cited, says of it, in reference to a Rite of the Church; the
most easy and obvious to be instructed in, and understood. His Words are, In
the common management of that Holy Right [Consirmation] it is but too uisible,
that of those Multitudes Pastoral Care, (...). 189.
that crowd to it, the far greater part co^ merely as if they were to receive
the (...) Blossing, without any sense of the Vow made by them, and of their
renewing their Baptismal Engagements in it. And if Origin were now alive, might
he not sind many in our Church to whom these Words of his Orig. Hom. in Jos. IX.
might be applied; Whose Faith signifi^only (...) much, and goes no farther
than this, VIZ. that they come duly to the Church, and how their Heads to the
Priests? etc. For it seems it was then the Fashion to bow to the Priest as it
is now to the Altar. If therefore you say Force is necessary, because without
it no Men will so consider as to embrace the true Religion, for the Salvation
of their Souls, that I think is manifestly false. If you say it is necessary to
use such means as will make the greatest part so embrace it, you must use some
other means than Force, your way applied, for that does not so far work on the
Majority. If you say it is necessary, because possibly it may work on some,
which bare Preaching, and Persuasion, will not: I answer, If possibly your
moderate Punishments may work on some, and therefore they are necessary, it is
as possible, that greater Punishments may work on others, and therefore they
are necessary, and so on to the utmost Severities.

That the Corruption of Humane Nature is every where spread, P. 25.
and that it works powerfully in the Children of Disobedience, who received not
the Love of the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness; and therefore God
gives them up to believe a Lie, no Body, I think, will deny. But that this
Corruption of Humane Nature works equally in all Men, or in all Ages; and so,
that God will, or ever did, give up all Men, not restrained by Force, your way
modified and applied, to believe a Lie, (as all False Religions are) that I yet
see no reason to grant. Nor will this Instance of Noah's Religion, you so much
rely on, ever persuade, till you have proved, that from those eight Men which
brought the true Religion with them into the new World, there were not eight
thousand, or eighty thousand, which retained it in the World in the worst Times
of the Apostasy. And Secondly, till you have proved, that the False Religions
of the World prevailed, without any aid from Force, or the assistance of the
Powers in being. And Thirdly, That the decay of the true Religion was for want
of Force, your moderate Force, neither of which you have at all proved, as, I
think it manifest.

One Consideration more touching Noah, and his Religion, give me leave to
suggest, and that is; If Force were so necessary for the support of the true
Religion, as you make it, it is strange God, who gave him Precepts about other
things, should never reveal this to him, nor any Body else, that I know. To
this, you, who have confessed the Scripture not to have given the Magistrate
this Commission, must say, that it is plain enough in the Commission that he
has from the Law of Nature, and so needed not any Revelation, to instruct the
Magistrate in the Right he has to use Force. I confess the Magistrates have
used Force in matters of Religion, and have been as considently and constantly
put upon it by their Priests, as if they had as clear a Commission from Heaven,
as St. Peter had to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. But yet it is plain,
notwithstanding that Commission from the Law of Nature, there needs some
farther instruction from Revelation, since it does not appear, that they have
found out the right use of Force, such as the true Religion requires for its
Preservation; and though you have after several thousands of Years, at last,
discovered it, yet it is very (...), you not being able to tell, if a Law were
now to be made against those who have not considered as they ought, what are
those moderate Penalties which are to be employed against them, though yet
without that all the rest signifies nothing. But however P. 7.
doubtful you are in this, I am glad to find you so direct, in putting Men's
rejecting the (...) Religion, upon the difficulty they have to (...) their
(...), which the true Religion requires of them, and I desire you to remember
it in other places, where I have occasion to mind you of it.

To conclude, That we may see the great advantage your Cause will receive from
that Instance, you so much rely on, of the Apostasy after the Flood; I shall
oppose another to it. You say, That Idolatry prevailed in the World, in a few
Generations, almost to P. 6.
the ^tter exclusion of the true Religion, without any Aid from Force, or
Assistance of the Powers in being, by reason of Toleration. And therefore, you
think there is great reason to fear, that the trac Religion P. 9.
would, by Toleration, quickly be most effectually extirpated thoughout the
World. And I say, that after Christianity was received for the Religion of the
Empire, and whilst Political Laws, and Force, interposed in it, an horrible
Apostasy prevailed (...) (...) (...). XXX. p-194. and Apost. of the late (...)
most the ^tter exclusion of the true Religion, and a general introducing of
Idolatry. And therefore I think there is great reason to fear more harm than
good, from the use of Force in Religion.

This I think as good an Argument against, as yours for Force, and something
better; since what you build on is only presumed by you, not proved from
History: whereas the matter of Fact here is well known, nor will you deny it,
when you consider the State of Religion in Christendom under the assistance of
that Force, which you tell us, succeeded and supplied the place of withdrawn
Miracles, which in your Opinion, are so necessary in the absence of Force, that
you make that the reason of their continuance; and tell us, they were continued
^ill P. 37.
Force could be had; not so much for evincing the Truth of Christian Religion,
as to supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance. So that when ever Force
failed, there, according to your Hypothesis, are Miracles to supply its want;
for without one of them, the True Religion (if we may believe you) will soon be
^terly extirpated; and what Force, in the absence of Miracles, produced in
Christendoin several Ages before the Reformation, is so well known, that it
will be hard to find what Service your way of arguing will do any but the
Romish Religion.

But to take your Argument in its full Latitude, you say, but you say it
without Book, that there was once a Toleration in the World to the almost utter
Extirpation of the true Religion; and I say to you, that as far as Records
authorize either Opinion, we may say Force has been always used in matters of
Religion, to the great prejudice of the true Religion, and the Professors of
it. And there not being an Age wherein you can show me, upon a fair Trial of an
established National Toleration, that the true Religion was extirpated, or
endangered, so much as you pretend by it: Whereas there is no Age (whereof we
have sufficient History to judge of this matter) wherein it will not be easy to
find that the true Religion, and its Followers, suffered by Force. You will in
vain endeavor, by Instances, to prove the ill effects, or uselesness of
Toleration, such as the Author proposed, which I challenge you to show me was
ever yet set up in the World, or that the true Religion sufferd by it; and it is
to the want of it, the Restraints and Disadvantages the true Religion has
labored under, and its so little spreading in the World will justly be
imputed; until, from better Experiments, you have something to say against it.

Our Savior has promised that he will build his Church on this fundamental
Truth, That he is Christ the Son of God; so that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it: And this I believe, though you tell us the True Religion is
not able to subsist without the assistance of Force, when Miracles cease. I do
not remember that our Savior any where promises any other assistance but that
of his Spirit, or gives his little Flock any Encouragement to expect much
Countenance or Help from the great Men of the World, or the Coercive Power of
the Magistrates, nor any where authorizes them to use it for the support of his
Church; Not many wise Men after the Flesh; not many 1 Cor. 1.25
mighty, not many noble, is the Style of the Gospel; and I believe will be
found to belong to all Ages of the Church Militant, past and to come, as well
as to the first: For God, as St. Paul tells us, has chosen the foolish things
of the World to confound the wise, and the weak things of the World to confound
the mighty; and this not only till Miracles ceased, but ever since. To be hated
for Christ's Name sake, and by much Tribulation to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, has been the general and constant Lot of the People of God, as well as
it seems to be the current Strain of the New Testament; which promises nothing
of secular Power or Greatness; says nothing of Kings being nursing Fathers, or
Queens nursing Mothers: which Prophecy, whatever meaning it have, it is like our
Savior would not have omitted to support his Church with some Hopes and
Assurance of such Assistance, if it were to have any Accomplishment before his
second Coming; when Israel shall come in again, and with the Gentiles make up
the Fullness of his glorious Kingdom. But the Tenor of the New Testament is, All
that will live Godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy III.

In your Argument considered, you tell us, That no Man can fail A. p. 7.
of finding the way of Salvation that seeks it as he ought. In my answer, I
take notice to you, that the places of Scripture you cite to prove it, point
out this way of seeking as we ought, to be a good Life; as particularly that of
St. John, If any one will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it
be of God: upon which I use these Words. So that these places, if they prove
what you L. 2. p. 5.
cite them for, That no Man can fail of finding the way of Salvation, who seeks
it as the ought; they do also prove, that a good Life is the only way to seek
as we ought; and that therefore, the Magistrates, if they would put Men upon
seeking the way of Salvation as they ought, should by their Laws and Penalties
force them to a good Life; a good Conversation being the surest and readiest
way to a right Understanding. And that if Magistrates will severely and
impartially set themselves against Vice, in whomsoever it is found, True
Religion will be spread wider -- than ever hitherto it has been by the
Imposition of Creeds and Ceremonies. To this you reply, Whether the P. 13.
Magistrates setting themselves severely and impartially against what you
suppose I call Vice, or the Imposition of sound Creeds and decent Ceremonies,
does more conduce to the spreading the True Religion, and rendering it fruitful
in the Lives of its Professors, we need not examine; you confess, you think,
both together do best; and this, you think, is as much as needs be (...) to
that Paragraph. If it had been put to you, Whether a good Living, or a good
Prebend would more conduce to the enlarging your Fortune, I think it would be
allowed you as no improper or unlikely Answer, what you say here, I think both
together would do best; but here the case is otherwise, your Thinking
determines not the Point: and other People of equal Authority, may, and I will
answer for it, do think otherwise: but because I pretend to no Authority, I
will give you a Reason, why your Thinking is insufficient. You tell us, That
Force is not a fit Means, where it is not necessary as well as P. 30.
useful; and you prove it to be necessary because there is no other Means left.
Now if the Severity of the Magistrate, against what I call Vice, will, as you
will not deny, promote a good Life, and that be the right Way to seek the
Truths of Religion, here is another Means besides imposing, of Creeds and
Ceremonies, to promote True Religion; and therefore, your Argument for it
Necessity because of no other Means left, being gone, you cannot say both
together are best, when one of them being not necessary, is therefore, by your
own Confession, not to be used.

I having said, That if (...) an indirect and at a distance Usefulness were
sufficient to justify the Use of Force, the (...) might make his Subjects
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven: You reply, That you suppose I will not say
Castration is necessary, P. 31.
because you hope I acknowledge, that Marriage, and that Grace which God denies
to none, who seriously ask it, are sufficient for that Purpose. And I hope you
acknowledge, that Preaching, Admonitions and Instructions, and that Grace which
God denies to none who seriously ask it, are sufficient for Salvation. So that
by this Answer of yours, there being no more necessity of Force to make Men of
the True Religion, than there is of Castration to make Men chaste, it will
still remain that the Magistrate, when he thinks fit, may, upon your
Principle;, as well castrate Men to make them chaste, as use Force to make them
embrace the Truth that must save them.

If Castration be not (...), because Marriage and the Grace of God is
sufficient, without it; nor will Force be necessary, because Preaching, and the
Grace of God is sufficient without it; and this, I think, by your own Rule,
where you tell us, Where there are many useful Means, and some of them are
sufficient without P. 34.
the rest, there is no necessity of using them all. So that you must either
quit your necessity of Force, or take in Castration, too, which however, it
might not go down with the untractable and desperately perverse and obstinate
People in these Western Countries, yet is a Doctrine, you may hope, may meet
with a better Reception in the Ottoman Empire, and recommend you to some of my
Mahometans.

To my saying, If what we are apt to think useful, were L. 2. p. 1^.
thence to be concluded so we might be in danger to be obliged to believe the
pretended Miracle of the Church of Rome, by your way of Reasoning; Unless we
will say (that which without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and benign
Disposer and Governor of all things, does not use all useful Means for
promoting his own Honor in the World, and the good of Souls. This, I think,
will conclude as much for Miracles as for Force: You reply, You think it will
not; For in the place I intend, you speak not of useful, P. 3.
but of competent, i. e. sufficient Means: Now competent, or sufficient Means
are necessary; but you think no Man will say that all useful Means are so: And
therefore though, as you (...), it cannot be said without (...), that the wise
and benign Disposer and Governor of all things has not furnished Mankind with
competent Means for the promoting his own Honor in the World, and the Good of
Souls; yet it is very agreeable with Pie^y, and with Truth too, to say that he
does not now use all useful Means: Because as none of his Attributes obliges
him to use more than sufficient Means; s, he may use sufficient Means, without
using all useful Means. For where there are many useful Means, and some of them
are sufficient without the rest, there is no necessity of using them all. So
that from God's not using Miracles now, to promote the True Religion, I cannot
conclude that he does not think them useful now, but only that he does not
think them necessary. And therefore, though what we are apt to think useful,
were thence to be concluded so; yet if whatever is useful, be not (...) to be
concluded necessary, there is no reason to fear that we should be obliged to
believe the Miracles pretended to by the Church of Rome. For if Miracles be not
now necessary, there is no inconv^nience in thinking the Miracles pretended to
by the Church of Rome, to be but pretended Miracles. To which I answer, Put it
how you will, for competent Means, or useful Means, it will conclude for
Miracles still as much as for Force. Your Words are these, If such a degree of
outward Force, as (...) been mentioned, be really of great A. p. 16.
and necessary use for the advancing these Ends, as taking the World as we find
it, you say, you think it appears to be; then it must be acknowledged there is
a right somewhere to use it for the advancing those Ends; unless we will say
(what without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and benign Disposer of all
things, has not furnished Mankind with competent Means for the promoting his
own Honor in the World, and the Good of Souls. What, I beseech you, now is the
sum of this Argument, but this, Force is of great and (...) use; therefore, the
wise and benign Disposer of all things, who will not leave Mankind unfurnished
(which it would be Impiety to say) of competent Means for the promoting his
Honor in the World, and the Good of Souls, has given somewhere a right to use
it?

Let us try it now, whether it will not do as well for Miracles. Miracles are
of great and necessary use, (as great and necessary at least as Force;)
therefore, the wise and benign Disposer of all things, who will not leave
Mankind unfurnished (which it would be Impiety to say) of competent Means for
the promoting his Honor in the World, and the Good of so^ls, has given
somewhere a Power of Miracles. I ask you, when I in the Second Letter used your
own Words, applied to Miracles instead of Force, would they not conclude then
as well for Miracles as for Force. For you must remember there was not then in
all your Scheme one word of Miracles to supply the place of Force. Force alone
was mentioned, Force alone was necessary, all was laid on Force. Nor was it
easy to divine, that Miracles should be taken in, to mend the Defects of your
Hypothesis, which in your Answer to me, you now have done, and I easily allow
it, without holding you to any thing you have said, and shall always do so. For
seeking Truth, and not Triumph, as you frequently suggest, I shall always take
your Hypothesis as you please to reform it, and either embrace it, or show you
why I do not.

Let us see therefore, whether this Argument will do any better now your Scheme
is mended, and you make Force or Miracles necessary. If Force or Miracles are
of great and necessary use for the promoting True Religion, and the Salvation
of Souls, then it must be acknowledged, that there is somewhere a Right to use
the one, or a Power to do the other, for the advancing those Ends; unless we
will say (what without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and be^ign
Disposer and Governor of all things has not furnished Mankind with competent
Mean; for the promoting his own Honor, and the Good of Souls. From whence it
will follow, if your Argument be good, that where Men have not a Right to use
Force, there still we are to expect Miracles, unless we will say, etc. Now
where the Magistrates are not of the True Religion, there by this part of your
Scheme, there is a Right in no body to use Force; for if there were, what need
of Miracles (as you tell us there was) in the first Ages of Christianity, to
supply that Want? Since the Magistrates, who were of False Religions then, were
furnished with as much Right, if that were enough, as they are now. So that
where the Magistrates are of False Religions, there you must, upon your
Principles, affirm Miracles are still to supply the want of Force; unless you
will say (what without Impiety cannot be said) that the wise and benign
Disposer and Governor of all things, has not furnished Mankind with competent
Means for the promoting his own Honor in the World, and the good of So^ls. Now
how far this will favor the Pretenses of the Church of Rome to Miracles in the
East and West Indies, and other Parts not under Popish Governments, you were
best consider. This is evident, that in all Countries where the True Religion
is not received for the Religion of the State, and supported and encouraged by
the Laws of it, you must allow Miracles to be as necessary now, as ever they
were any where in the World, for the supply of the want of Force, before the
Magistrates were Christians. And then what advantage your Doctrine gives to the
Church of Rome, is very visible. For they, like you, supposing theirs the one
only True Religion, are supplied by you with this Argument for it, viz. That
the True Religion will not prevail by its own P. 7.
Light and Strength, without the assistance of Miracles or Authority. Which are
the competent Means, which, without Impiety, it cannot be said, that the wise
and benign Disposer and Governor of all things, has not furnished Mankind with.
From whence they will not think it hard to draw this Consequence; that
therefore the wise and benign Governor of all things, has continued in their
Church the Power of Miracles (which yours does not so much as pretend to) to
supply the want of the Magistrate's Assistance, where that cannot be had to
make the True Religion prevail. And if a Papist should press you with this
Argument, I would gladly know what you would reply to him.

Though thi^ be enough to make good what I said, yet since I seek Truth, more
than my own Justification, let us examine a little, what it is you here say of
competent Means: Competent Means, P. 33.
you say, are necessary; but you think no Man will say, all useful Means are
so. If you think you speak plain clear determined Sense, when you used this
good English Word Competent, I pity you: if you did it with Skill, I send you
to my Pagans and (...). But this safe way of Talking, though it be not
altogether so clear, yet it so often occurs in you, that it is hard to P. 25.
judge, whether it be Art or Nature. Now pray what do you mean by Mankind's
being furnished with competent Means? If it be such Means as any are prevailed
on by to embrace the Truth that must save them, Preaching is a competent Means;
for by Preaching alone, without Force, many are prevailed on, and become truly
Christians; and then your Force, by your own Confession, is not necessary. If
by competent, you understand such Means by which all Men are prevailed on, or
the majority, to become truly Christians, I fear your Force is no competent
Means.

Which way ever you put (...), you must acknowledge Mankind to be destitute of
competent Means, or your moderate Force not to be that necessary competent
Means: Since whatever Right the Magistrates may have had any where to use it,
wherever it has not been used, (let the cause be what it will that kept thi^
Means from being used, there the People have been destitute of that Means.

But you will think there is little reason to complain of Obscurity, you having
abundantly explained what you mean by competent, in saying, competent, i. e.
sufficient Means. So that we have nothing to do but to find out what you mean
by sufficient: and the Meaning of that Word, in your use of it, you happily
give us in these following, What does any Man mean by sufficient P. 51.
Evidence, but such as will certainly win Assent wherever it is duly
considered? Apply this to your Means, and then tell me, whether your Force be
such competent, i. e. sufficient Means; that it certainly produced embracing
the Tr^, wherever it was duly, i. e. your way applied; if it did not, it is
plain it is not your competent sufficient Means, and so the World, without any
such Imputation to the Divine Wisdom and Benignity, might be without it. If you
will say it was sufficient, and did produce that end wherever it was applied,
I desire you then to tell me whether Mankind has been always furnished with
competent Means. You have it now in your choice, either to talk impiously or
renounce Force, and disown it to be competent Means; one of the two I do not
see how, by your own Argument, you can avoid.

But to lay by your competent and sufficient Means, and to ease you of the
uncertainty and difficulty you will be in to determine what is so, in respect
of Mankind; I suppose it will be little less impious to say, that the wise and
benign Disposer and Governor has not furnished Mankind with necessary Means,
as to say he has not furnished them with competent Means. Now, Sir, if your
moderate Penalties, and nothing else, be, since the withdrawing of Miracles,
this necessary Means, what will be left you to say, by your Argument, of the
Wisdom and Benignity of God in all those Countries, where moderate Penalties
are not made use of? where Men are not furnished with this Means to bring them
to the True Religion? For unless you can say, that your moderate Penalties have
been constantly made use of in the World for the Support and Encouragement of
the True Religion, and to bring Men to it, ever since the withdrawing of
Miracles, you must con^s, that not only some Countries, (which yet were enough
against you) but Mankind in general, have been unfurnished of the necessary
Means for the promoting the Honor of God in the World, and the Salvation of
Men's Souls. This Argument out of your own Mouth (were there no other) is
sufficient to show the Weakness and Unreasonableness of your Scheme; and I hope
the due, Consideration of it, will make you cautious another time, how you
entitle the Wisdom and Benignity of God to the support of what you once fancy
to be of great and necessary use.

I having thereupon said, Let us not therefore be more wise L. 2. p. 19.
than our Maker in that stupendous and supernatural Work of our Salvation, the
Scripture, etc.

You reply, Though the Work of our Salvation be, as I justly P. 35.
call it, stupendous and supernatural; yet you suppose no sober Man doubts, but
it both admits, and ordinarily requires the use of natural and humane Means, in
Subordination to that Grace which works it.

If you had taken notice of these immediately following Words of mine, The
Scripture that reveals it to us, contains all that we can know or do, in order
to it; and where that is silent, it is presumption in us to direct; You would
not have thought what you here say a sufficient Answer: For though God does
make use of natural and humane Means in Subordination to Grace, yet it is not
for Man to make use of any Means, in Subordination to his Grace, which God has
not appointed, out of a Conceit it may do some Service indirectly and at a
distance.

The whole Covenant and Work of Grace, is the Contrivance of God's infinite
Wisdom. What it is, and by what Means he will dispense his Grace, is known to
us by Revelation only; which is so little suited to humane Wisdom, that the
Apostle calls it the Foolishness of Preaching. In the Scripture, is contained
all that Revelation, and all things necessary for that Work, all the Means of
Grace: There God has declared all what he would have done for the Salvation of
Souls; and if he had thought Force necessary to be joined with the Foolishness
of Preaching, no doubt but he would some where or other have revealed it, and
not left it to the Wisaom of Man: which how disproportioned and opposite it is
to the Ways and Wisdom of God in the Gospel, and how unfit to be trusted in the
business of Salvation, you may see 1 Cor. I. from v. 17, to the end.

The Work of Grace admits, and or dinarily requires the use of natural and
bumane Means. I deny it not: Let us now hear your Inference; Therefore till I
have shown that no Penal Laws, that can P. 35.
be made, can do any Service toward the Salvation of Men's Souls in
Subordination to God's Grace, or that God has forbidden the Magistrate to use
Force, (for so you ought to put it;) but you rather choose (according to your
ordinary way) to use general and doubtful Words; and therefore you say, To
serve him in that great Work with the Authority which he has given him, there
will be no occasion for the Caution I have given, not to be wiser than our
Maker in that stupendous Work of our Salvation. By which way of Arguing, any
thing that I cannot show, cannot possibly, cannot indirectly and at a distance,
or by accident, do any Service, or God has not forbidden, may be made use of
for the Salvation of Souls. I suppose you mean expressly forbidden, for else I
might think these Words, [Who has required this at your hands?] a sufficient
Prohibition of it. The sum of your Argument is what cannot be showed not to do
any Service, may be used as an humane Means in Subordination to Grace, in the
Work of Salvation. To which I reply, That what may, through the Grace of God,
sometimes do some Service, cannot without a farther warrant from Revelation,
than such an Usefulness be required, or made use of as a subordinate Means to
Grace. For if so, then Auricular Confession, Penance, Pilgrimages, Processions,
etc. which no body can show, do not ever do any Service, at least, indirectly
and at a distance, toward the Salvation of Souls.

It Is not enough that it cannot be shown that it cannot do any Service to
justify its Usefulness; For what is there that may not, indirectly and at a
distance, or by accident, do some Service? To show that it is an humane Means,
that God has no where appointed, in Subordination to Grace, in the supernatural
Work of Salvation, is enough to prove it an unwarrantable Boldness to use it:
And much more so in the present case of Force, which, if put into the
Magistrate's hands with Power to use it in Matters of Religion, will do more
harm than good; as I think I have sufficiently shewon.

And therefore, since according to you, the Magistrate's Commission, to use
Force for the Salvation of Souls, is from the Law of Nature; which Commission
reaches to none, since the Revelation of the Gospel, but Christian Magistrates;
it is more natural to conclude, (were there nothing else in the case but the
Silence of Scripture) that the Christian Magistrate has no such Power, because
he has no such Commission any where in the Gospel, wherein all things are
appointed necessary to Salvation; than that there was so clear a Commission
given to all Magistrates by the Law of Nature, that it is necessary to show a
Prohibition from Revelation, if one will deny Christian Magistrates to have
that Power. Since the Commission of the Law of Nature to Magistrates, being
only that general one, of doing Good according to the best of their Judgments:
if that extends to the use of Force in Matters of Religion, it will abundantly
more oppose than promote the True Religion, if Force in the case has any
Efficacy at all, and so do more harm than good: Which though it shows not,
(what you here demand) that it can not do any Service toward the Salvation of
Men's Souls, for that cannot be shown of any thing; yet it shows the Disservice
it does, is so much more, than any Service can be expected from it, that it can
never be proved, that God has given Power to Magistrates to use it by the
Commission they have of doing Good, from the Law of Nature.

But (...) you tell me, Till I have (...) that Force and Penalties cannot do
any Service toward ^he Sa^ation of Souls, there will be no occa^ion for the
Caution I gave you, not to be wiser than our Maker in that stupendous and
supernatural Work, you have forgot your own (...), That it is not enough to
authorize P. 30.
the use of Force, that it may be useful, if it be not also necessary. And when
you can prove such Means necessary, which though it cannot be shown, never upon
any occasion, to do any Service; yet may be, and is abundantly shown, to do so
little Service, and so uncertainly, that if it be used, it will, if it has any
Efficacy, do more harm than good: If you can, I say, prove such a Means as that
necessary, I think I may yield you the Cause. But the use of it has so much
certain Harm, and so little and uncertain Good in it, that it can never be
supposed included or intended in the general Commission to the Magistrates, of
doing good: Which may serve for an Answer to your next Paragraph.

Only let me take notice, that you here make this Commission P. 35.
of the Law of Nature to extend the use of Force, only to induce those, who
would not otherwise, to hear what may and ought to move them to embrace the
Truth. They have heard all that is offered to move them to embrace, i. e.
believe, but are not moved: Is the (...) by the Law of Nature commissioned to
punish them for what is not in their Power? for Faith is the Gift of God, and
not in a Man's Power: Or is the Magistrate commissioned by the Law of Nature,
which impowers him in general, only to do them good? Is he, I say, commissioned
to make them lie, and (...) that which they do not believe? And is this for
their good? If he punish them till they embrace, i. e. believe, he punishes
them for what is not in their Power; if till they embrace, i. e. barely
prosess, he punishes them for what is not for their good: To neither of which,
can he be commissioned by the Law of Nature.

To my saying, Till you can show us a (...) in Scripture, it will be fit for us
to obey that (...) of the Gospel, Mark 4. 24. which bids us take ^eed what we
(...). You reply, That this you suppose is only intended for the (...) Reader;
P. 36.
For it ought to be renderd, Attend to what you hear; which you prove out of
(...). What if I or my Readers are not so learned, as to understand either the
Greek Original, or (...) Latin Comment? Or if we did, are we to be blamed for
understanding the Scripture in that Sense, which the National, i. e. (as you
say) the True Reli^ion authorizes, and which you tell us, would be a Fault in
us if we did not believe? P. 20.


For if, as you suppose, there be sufficient Provision made in England for
instructing all Men in the Truth, we cannot then but take the Words in this
Sense, it being that which the Public Authority has given them; for if we are
not to follow the Sense as it is given us in the Transtation authorized by our
Governors, and used in our Worship established by Law, but must seek it
elsewhere, 'twill be hard to find, how there is any other Provision made for
instructing Men in the Sense of the Scripture, which is the Truth that must
save them, but to leave them to their own Inquiry and Judgment, and to
themselves, to take whom they think best for Interpreters and Expounders of
Scripture, and to quit that of the True Church, which she has given in her
Translation. This is the Liberty you take to differ from the True Church, when
you think ^it, and it will serve your purpose. She says, take take what you
hear; but you say, the true Sense is, (...) to what you hear. Methinks you
should not be at such variance with Distenters; for after all, nothing is so
like a Nonconformist as a Conformist. Though it be certainly every one's Right
to understand the Scripture in that Sense which appears truest to him, yet I do
not see how you, upon your Principles, can depart from that which the Church of
England has given it: but you, I nd^, when you think fit, take that Liberty;
and so much Liberty as that, would, I think, satisfy all the (...) in England.

As to your other place of Scripture; if St. Paul, as it seems to me in that
Xth to the Romans, were showing that the Gentiles were provided with all things
necessary to Salvation, as well as the Jews; and that by having Men sent to
them to preach the Gospel, that Provision was made, what you say in the two
next Paragraphs will show us, that you understand, that the Greek P. 37.
Word (...) signifies both Hearing and Report, but does no more answer the
Force of those two Verses, against you, Romans X. 14, 17.
than if you had spared all you said with your Greek Criticism. The Words of
St. Paul are these; How then shall they call on him on whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach, except they
be sent? So then Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God. In
this Deduction of the Means of propagating the Gospel, we may well suppose St.
Paul would have put in Miracles or Penalties, if, as you say, one of them had
been necessary. But whether or no every Reader will think St. Paul set down in
that place all necessary Means, I know not; but this, I am consident, he will
think, that the New Testament does; and then I ask, Whether there be in it one
word of Force to be used to bring Men to be Christians, or to hearken to the
good Tidings of Salvation, offered in the Gospel?

To my asking, What if God, for Reasons best known to Himself, would not have
Men compelled? You answer, If he would not have them compelled now Miracles are
ceased, as far as moderate P. 38.
Penalties compel, (otherwise you are not concerned in the Demand) he would
have told us so. Concerning Miracles supplying the want of Force, I shall need
to say nothing more here but to your Answer, That God would have told us so. I
shall in few Words state the Matter to you. You first suppose Force necessary
to co^pel Men to hear, and thereupon suppose the Magistrate invested with a
Power to compel them to hear, and from thence peremptorily declare, that if God
would not have Force used, he would have told us so. You suppose also, that it
must be only moderate Force. Now may we not ask one, that is so far of the
Council of the Almighty that he can positively say what he would or would not
have, to tell us, whether it be not as probable that God, who knows the Temper
of Man that he has made, who knows how apt he is not to spare any degree of
Force wh^ he believes he has a Commission to compel Men to do any thing in
their power, and who knows also how prone Man is to think it reasonable to do
so: whether, I say, it is not as probable that God, if he would have the
Magistrate to use none but moderate Force to compel Men to hear, would also
have told us so? Fathers are not more apt than Magistrates to strain their
Power beyond what is convenient for the Education of their Children; and yet it
has pleased God to tell them in the New Testament of this Moderation, by a
Precept more than once repeated.

To my demanding, `What if God would have Men left to their freedom in this
Point, if they will hear or if they will forbear, will you constrain them? Thus
we are sure he did `with his own People, etc. You answer, But those Words,
whether P. 38.
they will hear or whether they will sorbear, which we find thrice used in the
Prophet Ezekiel, are nothing at all to my purpose. For by Hearing there, no Man
understands the bare giving an Ear to what was to be preached, nor yet the
considering it only; but the complying with it, and obeying it, according to
the Paraphrase which Grotius gives of the Words. Methinks, for this once, you
might have allowed me to have hit upon something to the purpose, you having
denied me it in so many other places: if it were but for Pity, and one other
Reason; which is, that all you have to say against it, is, that by Hearing
there, no Man understands the bare giving an ear to what was to be preached,
nor yet the considering it, but the complying with it, and obeying it. If I
misremember not, your Hypothesis pretends the use of Force to be not barely to
make Men give an ear, nor yet to consider, but to make them consider as they
ought, i. e. so as not to reject; and therefore, though this Text out of
Ezekiel, be nothing to the purpose against have giving an ear, yet if you
please, let it stand as if it were to the purpose against your Hypothesis, till
you can find some other Answer to it.

If you will give your self the pains to turn to A^s XXVIII. 24, -- 28. you
will read these Words, And some believed the things that were spoken, and some
believed not. And when they agreed not among themselves they departed, after
that Paul had spoken one word; Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet,
unto our Fathers, saying, Go unto this People, and say, Hearing, ye shall hear,
and shall not understand; and Seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive. For the
Heart of this People is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and
their Eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their Eyes, and hear
with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and should be converted, and
I should heal them. Be it known therefore unto you, that the Salvation of God
is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.

If one should come now, and out of your Treatise, called the Argument of the
Letter concerning Toleration considered and answered, A. p. 7, etc.
reason thus, It is evident that these Jews have not sought the Truth in this
matter, with that Application of Mind and Freedom of Judgment which was
requisite, whilst they suffered their Lusts and Passions to ^it in judgment,
and manage the Enquiry. The Impressions of Education, the Reverence and
Admiration of Persons, worldly Respects, and the like incompetent Motives, have
determined them. Now if this be the case; if these Men are averse to a due
Consideration of things, where they are most concerned to use it, WHAT MEANS IS
THERE LEFT (besides the Grace of God) to reduce them out of the wrong Way they
are in, but to lay Thorns and Briars in it? Would you not think this a good
Argument to show the necessity of using Force and Penalties upon these Men in
the Acts, who refused to be brought to embrace the True Religion upon the
Preaching of St. Paul? For what other Means was left, what humane Method could
be used to bring them to make a wiser and more rational Choice, but laying such
Penalties upon them as might balance the weight of such Prejudices, which
inclined them to prefer a false Way before the true? Tell me, I (...) you,
would you not (had you been a Christian Magistrate in those days) have thought
your self obliged to try, by Force, to overbalance the P. 11.
Weight of those Prejudices which inclined them to prefer a false Way to the
true? for there was no other humane Means lefe; and if that be not enough to
prove the necessity of using it, you have no Proof of any necessity of Force at
all.

If you would have laid Penalties upon them, I ask you, what if God, for
Reasons best known to himself, thought it not necessary to use any other Humane
Means, but Preaching and Persuasion? You have a ready Answer, There is no other
Humane Means but Force, and some other Humane Means besides Preaching, is
necessary, i. e. in your Opinion: and is it not fit your Authority should carry
it? For as to Miracles, whether you think fit to rank them amongst Humane Means
or no; or whether or no there were any showed to these unbelieving Jews to
supply the want of Force, I guess, in this case, you will not be much helped,
which ever you suppose: Though to one unbi^s'd, who reads that Chapter, it
will, I imagine, appear most probable that St. Paul, when he thus parted with
them, had done no Miracles amongst them.

But you have, at the Close of the Paragraph before us, provided a Salvo for
all, in telling us, However the Penalties you P. 38.
defend, are not skch as can any way be pretended to take away Men's Freedom in
this Point. The Question is, Whether there be a necessity of using other Humane
Means but Preaching, for the bringing Men to embrace the Truth that must save
them; and whether Force be it? God himself seems, in the Places quoted and
others, to teach us that he would have Men left to their freedom from any
Constraint of Force in that Point; and you answer, The Penalties you defend are
not such as can any ways be pretended to take away Men's freedom in this Point.
Tell us what you mean by these Words of yours, take away Men's Freedom in this
Point; and then apply it. I think it pretty hard to use Penalties and Force to
any Man, without taking away his Freedom from Penalties and Force. Farther, the
Penalties you think necessary, if we may believe you your self, are to be such
as may balance the Weight of A. p. 11.
those Prejudices which incline Men to prefer a false Way before a true:
whether these be such as you will defend, is another Question. This, I think,
is to be made plain, that you must go beyond the lower degrees of Force and
moderate Penalties, to balance these Prejudices.

To my saying, That the Method of the Gospel is to pray L. 2. p. 21.
and beseech, and that if God had thought it necessary to have Men punished to
make them give ear, he could have called Magistrates to be Spreaders of the
Gospel as well as poor Fishermen, or Paul a Persecutor, who yet wanted not
Power to punish Ananias and Sapbira, and the incestuous Corinthian. You P. 38.
reply, Though it be the Method of the Gospel, for the Ministers of it to pray
and beseech Men; yet it appears from my own Words here, both that Punishments
may be sometimes necessary; and that Punishing; and that even by those who are
to pray and beseech, is inconsistent with that Metbod. I fear, Sir, you so
greedily lay hold upon any Examples of Punishment, when on any account they
come in your way, that you give your self not liberty to consider whether L. 2.
p. 19.
they are for your purpose or no; or else you would scarce inser, as you do
from my Words, that, in your case, Punishments may be sometimes necessary.
Ananias and Saphira were punished; therefore it appears, say you, that
Punishment may be sometimes necessary. For what, I beseech you? For the only
End, you say, Punishments are useful in Religion, i. e. to make Men consider.
So that Ananias and Saphira were struck dead: For what end? To make them
consider. If you had given your self the leisure to have reflected on this and
the other Instance of the incestuous Corinthian, it is possible you would have
found neither of them to have served very well to show Punishment necessary to
bring Men to embrace the True Religion; for both these were Punishments laid on
those who had already embraced the True Religion, and were in the Communion of
the True Church, and so can only show (if you will infer any thing concerning
the necessity of Punishments from them) that Punishments may be sometimes
necessary for those who are in the Communion of the True Church. And of that
you may make your advantage.

As to your other In^erence from my Words, viz. That Punishing, and that even
by those who are, as Ambassadors, to pray and beseech, is consistent with that
Method: When they can do it as the Apostles did, by the immediate Direction and
Assistance of the Spirit of God, I shall easily allow it to be consistent with
the Method of the Gospel. If that will not content you, it is plain you have an
itch to be handling the secular Sword; and since Christ has not given you the
Power you desire, you would be executing the Magistrate's pretended Commission
from the Law of Nature. One thing more let me mind you of, and that is, that
if, from the Punishments of Ananias and Saphira, and the incestuous (...), you
can infer a necessity of Punishment to make Men consider, it will follow that
there was a necessity of Punishment to make Men consider, notwithstanding
Miracles; which cannot therefore be supposed, to supply the want of Punishments.

To my asking, What if God, foreseeing this Force would L. 2. p. 21.
be in the hands of Men, as passionate, as humoursom, as liable to Prejudice
and Error, as the rest of their Brethren, did not think it a proper Means to
bring Men into the right Way? You reply, But if there be any thing of an
Argument in this, it P. 39.
proves that there ought to be no Civil Government in the World; and so proving
too much, proves nothing at all. This you say; but you being one of those
Mortals which is liable to Error as well as your Brethren, you cannot expect it
should be received for insallible Truth, till you have proved it; and that you
will never do, till you can show, that there is as absolute a necessity of
Force in the Magistrate's hand for the Salvation of Souls, as there is of Force
in the Magistrate's hands for the Preservation of Civil Society; And next, till
you have proved that Force, in the hands of Men, as passionate, and humoursom,
or liable to Pr^judice and Error as their Brethren, would contribute as much to
the bringing Men, and keeping them in the right Way to Salvation, as it does to
the support of Civil Society, and the keeping Men at Peace in it.

Where Men cannot live together without mutual Injuries, not to be avoided
without Force, Reason has taught them to seek a Remedy in Government, which
always places Power somewhere in the Society to restrain and punish such
Injuries; which Power, whether placed in the Community it self, or some chosen
by the Community to govern it, must still be in the hands of Men; and where (as
in Society of civilized and settled Nations) the Form of the Government place
this Power out of the Community it self, it is unavoidable, that out of Men
(such as they are) some should be made Magistrates, and have Coercive Power or
Force put into their hands, to govern and direct the Society for the Public
Good; without which, Force so placed in the hands of Men, there could be no
Civil Society, nor the ends for which it is instituted to any degree attained.
And thus Government is the will of God.

It Is the Will of God also, that Men should be saved; but to this, it is not
necessary that Force or Coa^live Power should be put into Men's hands; because
God can, and has provided other Means to bring Men to Salvation: To which, you
indeed suppose, but can never prove Force necessary.

The Passions, Humors, Liableness to Prejudices and Errors, common to
Magistrates with other Men, do not render Force in their hands so dangerous and
unuseful, to the Ends of Society, which is the Public Peace, as to the Ends of
Religion, which is the Salvation of Men's Souls. For though Men of all Rank^,
could be content to have their own Humors, Passions and Prejudices satisfied,
yet when they come to make Laws, which are to direct their Force in civil
Matters, they are driven to oppose their Laws to the Humors, Passions and
Prejudices of Men in general, whereby their own come to be restrained: For if
Lawmakers, in making of Laws, did not direct them against the irregular
Humors, Prejudices and Passions of Men, which are apt to mislead them: If they
did not endeavor with their best Judgment, to bring Men from their Humors and
(...), to the Obedience and Practice of right Reason, the Society could not
subsist, and so they themselves would be in danger to lose their Station in it,
and be exposed to the unrestrained Humors, Passions, and Violence of others.
And hence it comes, that be Men as humoursom, passionate, and prejudiced as
they will, they are still by their own Interest obliged to make use of their
best Skill, and with their most unprejudiced and sedatest Thoughts take care of
the Government and endeavor to preserve the Commonwealth; and therefore,
notwithstanding their Humors and Passions, their liableness to Error and
Prejudice, they do provide pretty well for the Support of Society, and the
Power in their hands is of use to the maintenance of it.

But in Matters of Religion it is quite otherwise; you had told us, about the
latter end of your Argument C. how liable Men were in choosing their Religion,
to be misled by Humor, Passion and Prejudice; and therefore, it was not fit
that in a Business of such Concernment they should be left to themselves: and
hence, in this Matter of Religion, you would have them subjected to the
Coactive Power of the Magistrate. But this Contrivance is visibly of no
advantage to the True Religion, nor can serve at all to secure Men from a wrong
Choice. For the Magistrates, by their Humors, Prejudices and Passions, (which
they are born to like other Men) being as liable, and likely to be misled in
the Choice of their Religion, as any of their Brethren, as constant Experience
has always shown, what advantage could it be to Mankind, for the Salvation of
their Souls, that the Magistrates of the World should have Power to use Force
to bring Men to that Religion which they, each of them, by whatsoever Humor,
Passion or Prejudice influenced, had chosen to themselves as the True? For
whatsoever you did, I think with Reverence we may say, that God foresaw, that
whatever Commission one Magistrate had by the Law of Nature, all Magistrates
had: And that Commission, if there were any such, could be only to use their
Coactive Power to bring Men to the Religion they believed to be true, whether
it were really the true or no: And therefore, I shall, without taking away
Government out of the World, or so must as question it, still think this a
reasonable Question; What if God, foresecing this Force would be in the hands
of Men, as passionate, as humoursom, as liable to Prejudice and Error as the
rest of their Brethren, did not think it a proper Means, in such hands, to
bring Men into the right Way? And that it needs a better Answer than you have
given to it: And therefore, you might have spared the pains you have taken in
this Paragraph, to prove that the Magistrates, being liable as much as other
Men to Humor, Prejudice, Passion and Error, makes not Force, in his hand,
wholly Un^erviceable to the Administration of Civil Government. Which is what
no body denies: and you would have better imploid it to prove, that if the
Magistrate's being as liable to Passion, Humor, Prejudice and Error as other
Men, made Force, in his hands, improper to bring Men to the True Religion, this
would take away Government out of the World: which is a Consequence, I think, I
may deny.

To which, let me now add, What if God foresaw that if Force, of any kind or
degree whatsoever, were allowed in behalf of Truth, it would be used by ^rring,
passionate, prejudiced Men, to the restraint and ruin of Truth, as constant
Experience in all Ages has shown, and therefore commanded that the Tares should
be (...) to grow with the Wheet till the Harvest, when the infallible Judge
should sever them. That Parable of our Savior's plainly tells us, If Force
were once permitted, even in favor of the True Religion, what Mischief it was
like to do in the Misapplication of it, by forward busy mistaken Men, and
therefore be wholly forbid it; and yet, I hope, this does not take away Civil
Government out of the World?

To my demanding, `What if there be other Means? and saying, `Then yours ceases
to be necessary upon that account, that there is no other Means left; for the
Grace of God is another Means. You answer, That though the Grace of God be P.
39.
another Means, yet it is none of the Means of which you were speaking in the
place I refer to, which any one, who reads that Paragraph, will find to be only
Humane Means. In that place, you were endeavoring to prove Force necessary to
bring Men to the True Religion, as appears; and there having dilated for four
or five A. p. 6.
Pages together upon the Carelessness, Prejudices, Passions Lusts, Impressions
of Education, worldly Respects, and other the like Causes, which you think
mislead and keep Men from the True Religion; you at last, conclude Force
necessary to bring Men to it, because Admonitions and (...) not prevailing,
there is no other Means left. To this, Grace being instanced in as another
Means, you tell us here, you mean, no other HUMANE Means left. So that to prove
Force necessary, you must prove that God would have other Humane Means used
besides Praying, Preaching, Persuasion and Instruction; and for this, you will
need to bring a plain Direction from Revelation for your moderate Punishments;
unless you will pretend to know, by your own natural Wisdom, what Means God has
made necessary; without which, those whom he has foreknown and predestined,
Romans VIII. 29.
and will in his good time call by such Means as he thinks sit, according to
his purpose, cannot be brought into the Way of Salvation Perhaps you have some
Warrant we know not of, to enter thus boldly into the Counsel of God; without
which, in another Man, a modest Christian would be apt to think it Presumption.

You say, there are many who are not prevailed on by Prayers, Entreaties and
Exhortations, to embrace the Religion. What then is to be done? Some degrees of
Force are necessary to be used. Why? Because there is no other Humane Means
left. Many are not prevailed on by your moderate Force; What then is to be
done? Greater degrees of Force are necessary, because there is no other Humane
Means left. No, say you, God has made moderate Force necessary, because there
is no other Humane Means left where Preaching and Entreaties will not prevail:
but he has not made greater degrees of Force necessary, because there is no
other Humane Means left where moderate Force will not prevail. So that your
Rule changing, where the Reason continues the same, we must conclude you have
some way of Judging concerning the Purposes and Ways of the Almighty in the
Work of Salvation, which every one understands not. You would not else, upon so
slight Ground as you have yet produced for it, which is nothing but your own
Imagination, make Force, your moderate Force so necessary, that you bring in
question the Wisdom and Bounty of the Disposer and Governor of all things, A.
p. 16.
as if he had not furnished Mankind with competent Means for the promoting his
own Honor in the World, and the good of Souls, if your moderate Force were
wanting to bring them to the True Religion; whereas you know, that most of the
Nations of the World always were destitute of this Humane Means to bring them
to the True Religion. And I imagine you would be put to it, to name me one now
that is furnished with it.

Besides, if you please to remember what you say in the next Words, And
therefore thongh the Grace of God be both a proper and sussicient Means, and
such as can work by it self, and without P. 39.
which, neither Penalties nor any other Means can do any thing; and by
consequence, can make any Means effectual: How can you say any Humane Means, in
this supernatural Work, unless what God has declared to be so, is necessary?
Preaching and Instruction, and Exhortation, are Humane Means that he has
appointed: These, therefore, Men may and ought to use; they have a Commission
from God, and may expect his Blessing and the Assistance of his Grace; but to
suppose, when they are used and prevail not, that Force is necessary, because
these are not sussicient, is to exclude Grance, and ascribe this Work to Humane
Means; as in effect you do, when'you call Force competent and sussicient Means,
as you have done. For if bare Preaching, by the Assistance of Grace, can and
will certainly prevail; and moderate Penalties, as you confess, or any kind of
Force, without the Assistance of Grace, can do nothing, How can you say, that
Force is in any case a more necessary or a more competent, or sufficient Means,
than bare Preaching and Instruction? unless you can show us, that God has
promised the Cooperation and Assistance of his Grace to Force, and not to
Preaching? The contrary whereof, has more of Appearance. Preaching and
Persuasion are not competent Means, you say; Why? because, without the
Cooperation of Grace, they can do nothing: But by the Assistance of Grace,
they can prevail even without Force. Force too, without Grace, you acknowledge
can do nothing; but joined with Preaching and Grace, it can prevail. Why then,
I pray, is it a more competent Means than Preaching, or why necessary, where
Preaching prevails not? since it can do nothing without that, which, if joined
to Preaching, can make Preaching effectual without it.

You go on, Yet it may be true however, that when Admonitions P. 40.
and Entreaties fail, there is no HUMANE Means left but Penalties, to bring
prejudiced Persons to hear and consider what may convince them of their Errors,
and discover the Truth to them: And then Penalties will be necessary in respect
to that end, as an HUMANE Means. Let it be true or not true, that when
Entreaties, etc. fail, there is no HUMANE Means left but Penalties: Your
Inference I deny, that then Penalties will be necessary as an HUMANE Means. For
I ask you, since you lay so much stress to so little purpose on HUMANE Means,
is some Humane Means necessary? if that be your Meaning, you have Humane Means
in the case, viz. Ad^onitions, Entreaties, being instant in season and out of
season. i ask you again; Are Penalties necessary because the End could not be
obtained by Preaching, without them? that you cannot say, for Grace
cooperating with Preaching will prevail; Are Penalties then necessary as sure
to produce that End? nor so are they necessary, for without the Assistance of
Grace, you consess, they can do notbing. So that Penalties, neither as Humane
Means, nor as any Means, are at all necessary. And now you may understand what
I intend, by saying that the Grace of God is the only Means; which is the
Enquiry of your next Paragraph, viz. this I intend, that it is the only
efficacious P. 40.
Means, without which all Humane Means is ineffectual. You tell me, If by it I
intend that it does either always, or ordinarily, exclude Ibid.
All other Means; you see no ground I have to say it. And I see no ground you
have to think I intended, that it excludes any other Means that God in his
Goodness will be pleased to make use of: But this I intend by it, and this, i
think, i have ground to say, that it excludes all the Humane Means of Force
from being necessary, or so much as lawful to be used, unless God has required
it by some more authentic Declaration than your bare saying or imagining it is
necessary. And you must have more than Humane Confidence, if you continue to
mix this poor and humane Contrivance of yours, with the Wisdom and Counsel of
God in the Work of Salvation; since he having declared the Means and Methods to
be used for the saving Men's Souls, has in the Revelation of the Gospel, by your
own Consession, prescribed no such Humane Means.

To my saying, God alone can open the Ear that it may hear, and open the Heart
that it may understand. You reply, But by, P. 40.
your favor, this does not prove that he makes use of no Means in doing of it.
Nor needs it: it is enough for me, if it proves, that if Preaching and
Instruction does not open the Ear, or the Heart, (...) not necessary any one
should try his Strength with an Hammer or an Auger. Man is not in this
business, (where no Means can be effectual, without the assistance and
cooperation of his Grace) to make use of any Means which God has not
prescribed. You here set up a way of propagating Christianity according to your
Fancy, and tell us how you would have the work of the Gospel carried on: You
commission the Magistrate by Arguments of Congruity; you find an efficacy in
Punishment toward the converting of Men: you limit the Force, to be used to
low and moderate degrees; and to Countries where sufficient Means of
Instruction are provided by the Law. And where the Magistrate's Religion is the
True, i. where it pleases you; and all this without any Direction from God, or
any Authority so much as pretended from the Gospel; and without its being truly
for the Propagation of Christianity, but only so much of it as you think fit,
and what else you are pleased to join to it. Why else, in the Religion you are
content to have established by Law, and promoted by Penalties, is any thing
more or less required, than is exprestly contained in the New Testament.

This indeed is well suited to any one, who would have a Power of punishing
those who differ from his Opinion, and would have Men compelled to Conformity
in England. But in this your fair Contrivance, what becomes of the rest of
Mankind, left to wander in Darkness out of this Goshen, who neither have, nor
(according to your Scheme) can have your necessary Means of Force and Penalties
to bring them to embrace the Truth that must save them: For if that be
necessary, they cannot without a Miracle, either Prince or People, be wrought
on without it. If a Papist at Rome, a Lutheran at Stockholm, or a Calvinist at
Geneva, should argue thus for his Church, would you not say, that such as these
looked like the Thoughts of a poor prejudiced narrow Mind? But they may
mistake, and you cannot; they may be prejudiced, but you cannot. Say too, if
you please, you are confident you are in the Right, but they cannot be
confident that they are so. This I am sure, God's Thoughts are not as Man's
Thoughts, nor his Ways as Man's Ways, Isai. LV. 8. And it may abate any one's
Confidence of the necessity or use of Punishments, for not receiving our
Savior, or his Religion, when those who had the power of Miracles were told,
that they knew not what manner of Spirit they were of, when they would have
Joh. IX. 5.
commanded down Fire from Heaven. But you do well to take care to have the
Church you are of, supported by Force and Penalties, whatever becomes of the
Propagation of the Gospel, or the Sal^ation of Men's Souls, in other parts of
the World, as not coming within your Hypothesis.

In your next Paragraph, to prove that God does bless the use of Force, you say
you suppose I mean, by the Words you there P. 40.
cite, that the Magistrate has no ground to hope that God will bless any
Penalties that he may use to bring Men to hear and consider the Doctrine of
Salvation; or (which is the same thing) that God does not (at least not
ordinarily) afford his Grace and Assistance to them who are brought by such
Penalties to hear and consider that Doctrine, to enable them to hear and
consider it as they ought, i. e. so as to be moved heartily to embrace it. You
tell me, If this be my Meaning; then to let me see that it is not true, you
shall only desire me to tell you, whether they that are so brought to hear and
consider, are bound to believe the Gospel or not? If I say they are; ( and you
suppose I dare not say otherwise;) then it evidently follows, that God does
afford them that Grace which is requisite to enable them to believe the Gospel:
Because, without that Grace, it is impossible for them to believe it; and they
cannot be bound to believe what it is impossible for them to believe. To which,
I shall only answer, That by this irrefragable Argument, it is evident, that
wherever due Penalties have been used (for those you tell us are sufficient
and competent Means) to make Men hear and consider as they ought, there all Men
were brought to believe the Gospel; which, whether you will resolve with your
self to be true or false, will be to me indifferent, and on either hand equally
advantage your Cause. Had you appealed to Eperience for the Success of the use
of Force by the Magistrate, your Argument had not shown half so much depth of
Theological Learning: But the Mischief is, that if you will not make it all of
a piece Scholastic, and by arguing that all whom the Magistrates use Force
upon, are brought to consider as they ought, and to all that are so wrought
upon, God does afford that Grace which is (...); and so roundly conclude for a
greater Success of Force, to make Men believe the Gospel, than ever our Savior
and the Apostles had by their Preaching and Miracles, (for that wrought not on
all) your unanswerable Argument comes to nothing. And in truth, as you have in
this Paragraph ordered the matter, by being too sparing of your abstract
Metaphysical Reasoning, and employing it but by halves, we are fain, after all,
to come to the dull way of Experience; and must be forced to count, as the
Parson does his Communicantes, by his Easter-Book, how many those are that are
so broughs to hear and consider, to know how far God blesses Penalties. Indeed,
were it to be measured by conforming; the Easter-Book would be a good Register
to determine it. But since you put it upon Believing, that will be of somewhat
a harder Disquisition.

To my saying, (upon that place out of Isaiah VI. 10. Make the Heart of this
People fat, lest they understand, and convert, and be healed) Will all the
Force you can use be a means to make such People hear and understand, and be
converted? You reply, No, sir, it will not. But what then? What if God declares
P. 41.
that he will not heal those who have long resisted all his ordinary Methods,
and made themselves, morally speaking, incurable by them? (Which is the utmost,
you say, I can make of the Words I quote.) Will it follow from thence, that no
good can be done by Penalties upon others, who are not so far gone in
Wickedness and Obstinacy? If it will not, as it is evident it will not, to what
purpose is this said? It is said to this purpose, viz. to show that Force ought
not to be used at all. Those ordinary Methods which, resisted, are punished
with a Reprobate Sense, are the ordinary Methods of Instruction, without Force;
as is evident by this place and many others, particularly Romans I. From whence I
argue; That what State soever you will suppose Men in, either as past, or not
yet come to the Day of Grace, no Body can be justified in using Force to work
upon them. For till the ordinary Methods of Instruction and Persuasion can do
no more, Force is not necessary, (for you cannot say what other Means is there
left) and so by your own Rule not lawful. For till God has pronounced this
Sentence here, on any one, Make his Heart fat, etc. the ordinary Means of
Instruction and Persuasion, may, by the assistance of God's Grace, prevail. And
when this Sentence is once passed upon them, and God will not afford them his
Grace to (...) them; (I take it, you confess in this place) I am sure you must
confess your Force to be wholly useless, and so utterly (...): Unless that can
be pertinent to be used, which you own can do nothing. So that whether it will
follow, or no, from Men's being given up to a Reprobate Mind, for having
resisted the preaching of Salvation, That no good can be done by Penalties upon
others; this will follow, that not knowing whether Preaching may not, by the
Grace of God, yet work upon them; or whether the Day of Grace be past with
them; neither you nor any Body else can say that Force is necessary; and if it
be not necessary, you your self tell us it is not to be used.

In your next Paragraph, you complain of me, as representing P. 41.
your Argument, as you say I commonly do, as if you allowed any Magistrate, of
what Religion soever, to lay Penalties upon all that dissent from him. Unhappy
Magistrates that have not your allowance! But to console them, I imagine they
will (...) that they are all under the same Obligation, one as another, to
propagate the Religion they believe to be the true, whether you allow it them
or no. For to go no farther than the first Words of your Argument, which you
complain I have misrepresented, and which you tell me runs thus, When Men fly
from the Means of right Information; I ask you here, who shall be Judge of those
Means of right Information, the Magistrate who joins Force with them to make
them be (...) to, or no? When you have answered that, you will have resolved a
great part of the Question, What Magistrates are to use Force.

But that you may not complain again of my misrepresenting, I must beg my
Readers leave to set down your Argument at large in your own Words, and all you
say upon it. When Men fly from the Means of a right Information, and will not
so much as consider how reasonable A. p. 11.
it is, thoroughly and impartially to examine a Religion, which they embraced
upon such Inducements, as ought to have no sway at all in the matter, and
therefore with little or no Examination of the proper grounds of it; What
Humane Method can be used to bring them to act like Men, in an Affair of such
consequence, and to make a wiser and more rational choice, but that of laying
such Penalties upon them, as may balance the weight of those Prejudices, which
inclined them to prefer a False Way before the True, etc. Now this Argument,
you tell me, I pretend to retort in this manner: And, I say, I see no P. 41.
other Means left (taking the World as we now find it, wherein the Magistrate
never lays Penalties, for Matters of Religion, upon those of his own Church,
nor is it to be expected they ever should) to make Men of the National Church,
any where, thoroughly and impartially examine a Religion, which they embraced
upon such Inducements as ought to have no sway at all in the matter, and
therefore with little or no examination of the proper Grounds of it: And
therefore, I conclude the use of Force by Dissenters upon Conformists
necessary. I appeal to all the World, whether this be not as just and natural a
Con^clusion as yours? And you say, you are well content the World should judge.
And when it determines, that there is the same reason to say, That to bring
those who conform to the National Church, to examine their Religion, it is
necessary for Dissenters (who cannot possibly have the (...) Power, because the
National Church has that (...) its side, and cannot be National without it) to
use Force upon Conformists, As there is to say, That where the National Church
is the True Church, there to bring Dissenters (as I call them) to examine their
Religion, it is necessary for the Magistrate (who has the Coactive Power) to
lay moderate Penalties upon them for dissenting: You say, when the World
determines thus, you will never pretend any more to judge what is reasonable, in
any case what soever. For you doubt not but you may safely presume that the
World will easily admit these two things. 1. That though it be very fit and
desirable, that all that are of the true Religion, should understand the true
Grounds of it; that so they may be the better able, both to defend themselves
against the assaults of Seducers, and to reduce such as are out of the Way; yet
this is not strictly necessary to their Salvation: Because Experience shows (as
far as Men are capable to judge of such Matters) that many do (...) believe and
profess the true Religion, and conscientiously practice the Duties of it, who
yet do not understand the true Grounds upon which it challenges their Belief:
And no Man doubts but whosoever does so believe, profess, and practice the
True Religion, if he perseveres to the end, shall certainly attain Salvation by
it. 2. That how much soever i^ concerns those who reject the true Religion
(whom I may call P. 39.
Dissenters if I please) to examine and consider why they do so; and how
needful soever Penalties may be to bring them to this; it is, however, ^tterly
unreasonable that such as have not the Coactive Power, should take upon them to
inslict Penalties for that purpose: Because, as that is not consistent with
Order and Government; which cannot stand, A. p. 6.
where private Persons are permitted to usurp the Coactive Power; So there is
nothing more manifest, than that the prejudice which is done to Religion, and
to the Interest of Men's Souls, by destroying Government, does infinitely
outweigh any good that can possibly be done by that which destroys it. And
whoever admits and considers these things, you say, you are very secure will be
far enough from admitting, that there is any Parity of Reason in the Cases we
here speak of, or that mine is as just and natural a Conclusion as yours.

The sum of what you say, amounts to thus much. Men being apt to take up their
Religion, upon Inducements that ought to have no sway at all in the Matter, and
so, with little or no Examination of the Grounds of it; therefore Penalties are
necessary to be laid on them, to make them thoroughly and impartially examine.
But yet Penalties need not be laid on Conformists, in England, to make them
examine; because they, and you, believe yours to be the true Religion: Though
it must be laid on Presbyterians and Independents, etc. to make them examine,
though they believe theirs to be the true Religion; because you believe it not
to be so. But you give another very substantial Reason, why Penalties cannot be
laid on Conformists, to make them examine; and that is, because the National
Church has the Coactive Power on its side, and therefore they have no need of
Penalties to make them examine. The National Church of France too, has the
Co-active Power on its side; and therefore, they who are of it have no need of
Penalties, any of them, to make them examine.

If your Argument be good, that Men take up their Religions A. p. 11.
upon wrong Inducements, and without due Examination of the proper Grounds of
it; and that therefore, they have need of Penalties to be laid on them to make
them examine, as they ought, the Grounds of their Religion; You must confess
there are some in the Church of England to whom Penalties are necessary: Unless
you will affirm, that all, who are in the Communion of the Church of England,
have so examined: But that I think you will not do, however you endeavor to
palliate their Ignorance, and Negligence, in this matter. There being therefore
a need of Penalties; I say, it is as necessary that Presbyterians should lay
Penalties on the Conformists of the Church of England, to make them examine, as
for the Church of England to lay Penalties on the Presbyterians to make them do
so: For they each equally believe their Religion to be true; and we suppose, on
both sides, there are those who have not duly examined. But here you think you
have a sure advantage, by saying it is not consistent with the Order of
Government, and so is impracticable. I easily grant it. But is yours more
practicable? When you can make your way practicable, for the end for which you
pretend it necessary ( viz.) to make all, who have taken up their Religion upon
such Inducements, as ought to have no sway at all in the Matter, to examine
thoroughly and impartially the proper grounds of it; When, I say, you can show
your way practicable, to this end, you will have cleared it of one main
Objection, and convinced the World that yours is a more just and natural
Conclusion than mine.

If your Cause were capable of any other defense, I suppose we should not have
had so long and elaborate an Answer as you have given us in this Paragraph,
which at last bottoms only on these two things: 1. That there is in you, or
those of your Church, some Approaches toward Insallibility; in your Belief
that your Religion is true; which is not to be allowed those of other Churches,
in the Belief of theirs. 2. That it is enough if any one does but conform to
it, and remain in the Communion of your Church: Or else one would think there
should be as much need for Conformists too of your Church, to examine the
Grounds of their Religion, as for any others.

To understand the true Grounds of the True Religion; is not, P. 42.
you say, strictly necessary to Salvation. Yet, I think, you will not deny, but
it is as strictly necessary to Salvation, as it is to conform to a National
Church in all those things it imposes: some whereof, are not necessary to
Salvation; some whereof, are acknowledged by all to be indifferent; and some
whereof, to some conscientious Men, who thereupon decline Communion, appear
unsound or unlawful. If not being strictly necessary to Salvation, will excuse
from Penalties in the one case, why will it not in the other? And now I shall
excuse the World from determining my Conclusion to be as natural as yours: For
it is pity so reasonable a Disputant as you are, should take so desperate a
Resolution as never to pretend any more to judge what is reasonable in any case
what soever.

Whether you have proved that Force, used by the Magistrate, be a Means
prescribed by God to procure the Gift of Faith from him, (which is all you say
in the next Paragraph,) others must judge.

In that following; you quote these Words of mine. If all the Means God has
appointed to make Men hear and consider, be Exhortation in season and out of
season, etc. together with Prayer for them, and the Example of Meekness, and a
good Life; this is all ought to be done, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear. To which you thus reply, But if P. 43.
these be not all the Means God has appointed, then these things are not all
that ought to be done. But if I ask you, How do you know that this is not all
God has appointed, you have nothing to answer (to bring it to your present
purpose) but that you know it by the Light of Nature. For all you say is but
this; That by the Light of Nature you know Force to be useful and necessary to
bring Men into the way of Salvation; By the Light of Nature you know the
Magistrate has a Commission to use Force to that purpose; And by the same Light
of Nature, you know that Miracles were appointed to supply the want of Force
till the Magistrates were Christians. I imagine, Sir, you would scarce have
thought this a reasonable Answer, if you had taken notice of my Words in the
same Paragraph immediately preceding those you have cited; Which (that you may
see the Scope of my Argument) I will here trouble you with again; and they are
these. It is not for you and me, out of an Imagination that they may I. 2. p.
22.
be useful, or are necessary, to prescribe Means in the great mysterious Work
of Salvation, other than what God himself has directed. God has appointed Force
as useful and necessary, and therefore it is to be used, is a way of Arguing
becoming the Ignorance and Humility of poor Creatures. But I think Force useful
or necessary, and therefore it is to be used, has methinks a little too much
Presumption in it. You ask what Means is there left? None, say I, to be used by
Man, but what God himself has directed in the Scriptures, wherein are contained
all the Means and Methods of Salvation. Faith is the Gift of God. And we are
not to use any other Means to procure this Gift to any one, but what God
himself has prescribed. If he has prescribed appointed, that any should be
forced to hear those who tell them they have mistaken their way, and offer to
(...) then the right; and that they should be (...) by the Magistrate, if they
did not; 'twill be past doubt, it is to be made (...) of. But till that can be
done, 'twill be in vain to say, what other Means is there left.

My Argument here lies plainly in this; That all the Means and Methods of
Salvation are contained in the Scripture: Which either you were to have denied,
or else have (...) where it was, in Scripture, that Force was appointed. But
instead of that, you tell us, that God appointed Miracles in the beginning of
the Gospel. And though, when these (...), the Means I mention were all the
Ministers had left, yet this proves not that the Magistrate was not to use
Force. Your Words are, As to the first Spreaders of the Gospel, it has already
been shown that God appointed other Means besides these for them to use, to
^nduce Men to P. 43.
hear and consider: And though, when those extraordinary Means ceased, these
Means which I mention, (viz. Preaching, etc.) were the only Means left to the
(...) of the Gospel; yet that is no Proof that the Magistrate, ^hen he became
Christian, could not lawfully (...) such Means as his Station (...) him to
(...), when they became (...). I said, in (...) words, No Means was to be used
by MAN, but what God himself has directed in the Scripture. And you answer,
This is no Proof that the Christian Magistrate may not use Force. Perhaps when
They so peremptorily interpose their decisive Decreas in the Business of
Salvation; establish Religions by Laws and Penalties, with what Articles,
Creeds, Ceremonies and Discipline they think fit; (for this we see done almost
in all Countries) when they force Men to bear those, and those only, who, by
their Authority, are chosen and allowed (...) Men they have mistaken their way,
and offer to show them the right; it may be thought necessary to prove
Magistrates to be MEN. If that needs no Proof, what I said needs some other
Answer.

But let us examine a little the Parts of what you here say. As to the first
Spreaders of the Gospel, say you, it has already been those, that God appointed
other Means besides Exhortation in season, and out of season, Prayer, and the
Example of a good Life, for them to use to induce Men to hear and consider.
What were those other Means? To that you answer readily, Miracles. Ergo, Men
are directed now by Scripture to use Miracles. Or else what Answer do you make
to my Argument, which I gave you in these Words, `No Means is to be used by
Man, but what God himself has directed in the Scriptures; wherein are contained
all the Means and Methods of Salvation. No, they cannot use Miracles now as a
Means, say you, for they have them not. What then? Therefore the Magistrate,
who has it, must use Force to supply the want of those extraordinary Means
which are now ceased. This indeed is an Inference of yours, but not of the
Scriptures. Does the Scripture say any thing of this? Not a word: not so much
as the least Intimation toward it in all the New Testament. Be it then true or
false, that Force is a Means to be used by Men in the absence of Miracles, this
is yet no Answer to my Argument; this is no Proof that'tis appointed in
Scripture; which is the thing my Argument turns on.

Revelation then fails you. Let us see now how Reason and Common Sense, that
common Light of Nature, will help you out.

You then reason thus. Bare Preaching, etc. will not prevail on Men to hear and
consider: and therefore some other Means is necessary to make them do so. Pray
what do you mean by Men, or any other of those indefinite Terms, you have
always used in this Case? Is it that bare Preaching will prevail on no Men?
Does Reason (under which I comprehend Experience too, and all the ways of
Knowledge, contradistinguish'd to Revelation) discover any such thing to you? I
imagine you will not say that; or pretend that no Body was ever brought, by
Preaching and Persuasion, to hear and consider the Truths of the Gospel, (mean
by considering what you will) without other Means used by those who applied
themselves to the care of converting them. To such therefore as may be brought
to hear and consider, without other Means, you will not say that other Means
are necessary.

In the next place, therefore, When you say bare Preaching will not prevail on
Men; Do you mean that't will not prevail on all Men, and therefore'tis
necessary that Men should use other Means? Neither, I think, will Reason
authorize you to draw such a Consequence: Because neither will Preaching alone,
nor Preaching (...) with Force; or any other Means Man can use, prevail on all
Men. And therefore no other Means can be pretended to be necellary to be used
by Man, to do what Men by those Means never did, nor never can do.

That some Men shall be saved, and not all, is, I think, past question to all
that are Christians: And those that shall be saved, it is plain, are the (...).
If you think not this plain enough in Scripture, I desire you to turn to the
17th of the 29 Articles of the Church of England, where you will read these
Words: Predestination to Life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby
(before the Foundations of the World were laid) he has constable decreed by his
Counsel secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation those whom he ha^
CHOSEN in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
Salvation, as Vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so
excellent a Benefit of God, be called according to God's purpose by his Spirit,
(...) in due (...): They through Grace obey the calling; They be justified
freely; They be made Sons of God by Adoption; They be made like the Image of
his only begotten Son Jesus Christ; They walk religiously in good Works; and at
length by God's Mercy, They attain to everlasting Felicity. Now pray tell me
whether bare Preaching will not prevail on all the Elect to hear and consider,
without other Means to be used by Men. If you say it will; the neceslity of
your other Means, I think, is out of doors. If you say it will not; I desire
you to tell me how you do know it without Revelation; And whether by your own
reason you can tell us, whether any, and what Means God has made necessary,
besides what he has appointed in Scripture for the calling his Elect. When you
can do this, we shall think you no ordinary Divine, nor a Stranger to the
secret Counsels of the insinitely wise God. But till then, your mixing your
Opinion with the Divine Wisdom in the great Work of Salvation, and from
Arguments of Congruity, taking upon you to declare the Necessity or Usefulness
of Means, which God has not expressly directed, for the gathering in of his
Elect, will scarece authorize the Magistrate to use his Co^tive Power for the
edisying and completing the Body of Christ, which is his Church. Those whom
God has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, before the Foundations of the World,
are called, according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit, working in due season,
and through Grace obey the calling; say you in your Article. The outward Means
that God has appointed for this, is Preaching. Ay, but Preaching is not enough;
that is, not sussicient Means, say you. And I ask you how you know it; since
the Scripture, which declares all that we can know in this matter, says nothing
of the Insussiciency of it, or of the Necessity of any other? Nor can there be
a Necessity of any other Means than wh^t God expressly appoints, in a Matter
wherein no Means can operate effectually, without the Assistance of his Grace;
and where the Assistance of his Grace can make any outward Means, he appoints
effectual.

I must desire you here to take notice, that by Preaching, which I use for
Shortness, I mean Exhortation, Instruction, Entreaty, Praying for, and in fine,
any outward Means of Persuasion in the Power of Man, separate from Force.

You tell us here, As to the first Spreaders of the Gospel, God appointed other
Means, viz. Miracles, for them to use to induce Men to hear and consider. If by
the first Spreaders of the Gospel, you P. 43.
mean the twelve Apostles and 70 Disciples, whom Christ himself sent to preach
the Gospel; They indeed were appointed by his immediate Command, to show
Miracles by-the Power which he had bestowed upon them. But will you say, all
the Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel had such a Commission, and such a
Power all along from the Apostles time; and that they, every one, did actually
show Miracles to induce Men to hear and consider, quite down, till Christianity
was supported by the Law of the Empire? Unless you could show this, though you
could produce some well-attested Miracles, done by some Men in every Age till
that time, yet it would not be sufficient to prove that Miracles were appointed
to be constantly used to induce Men to hear and consider; and so by your
Reasoning, to supply the want of Force, till that necessary Assistance could be
had from the Authority of the Magistrate become Christian. For since it is what
You build upon, that Men will not hear and consider upon bare Preaching, (and I
think you will forwardly enough agree, that till Christianity was made the
Religion of the Empira, there were those every where that heard the Preachers
of it so little, or so little considered what they said, that they rejected the
Gospel;) and that therefore Miracles or Force are necessary Means to make Men
hear and consider; You must own that those who preached without the Power of
Miracles, or the Coactive Power of the Magistrate accompanying them, were
unfurnished of competent and sufficient Means to make Men hear and consider;
and so to bring them to the True Religion. If you will say the Miracles done by
others were enough to accompany their Preaching, to make it be heard and
considered; the Preaching of the Ministers at this day is so accompanied, and
so will need no assistance of Force from the Magistrate. If the report of
Miracles done by one Minister of the Gospel some time before, and in another
place, were sufficient to make the Preaching of ten or a thousand others, be
heard and considered, why is it not so now? For the Credibility and Attestation
of the Report is all that is of moment; when Miracles done by others, in other
places, are the Argument that prevails. But this, I fear, will not serve your
turn in the business of Penalties; and whatever might satisfy you in the case
of Miracles, I doubt you would not think the Salvation of Souls sufficiently
provided for, if the Report of the Force of Penalties, used some time since on
one side of the Tweed, were all that should assist the Preachers of the True
Religion on the other, to make Men hear and consider.

St. Paul, in his Epistle to Titus, instructs him what he, and the Presbyters
he should ordain in the Cities of Crete, were to do for the propagating of the
Gospel, and bringing Men heartily to embrace it. His Directions are, that they
should be blameless, not Rioters, not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to
Wine nor filthy Lucre, not Strikers, not unruly; Lovers of Hospitality, and of
good Men; sober, just, holy, temperate; To be able by sound Doctrine, both to
exhort and convince Gainsayers; In all things to be a Pattern of good Works;
In Doctrine, showing Uncorruptedness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that
cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed,
having no evil to say of you. These things speak, and exhort, and r^buke, with
all Authority. Avoid foolish Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions. A Man
that is an Heretic after the first and second Admonition, reject. To repay you
the favor of your Greek, it is (...) which, if I may take your liberty of
receding from ONr Translation, I would read avoid.

The Cretans, by the Account St. Paul gives of them, were a People that would
require all the Means that were needful to prevail with any Strangers to the
Gospel to hear and consider. But yet we find nothing directed for the Support
and Propagation of the Gospel in this Island, but Preaching, Exhortation,
Reproof, etc. with the Example of a good Life. In all this Epistle, writ on
purpose to instruct the Preachers of the Gospel, in the Means they were to use
among the Cretans, for their Conversion, not a word about Miracles, their Power
or Use: Which one would think strange, if They were the Means appointed and
necessary to make Men hear and consider, and without which they would not do
it. Preaching, Admonition, Exhortation, Entreaties, Instruction, by the common
Light of Reason, were known, and natural to be used, to persuade Men. There
needed not be much said to convince Men of it. But if Miracles were a necessary
Means, it was a Means wholly new, unexpected, and out of the Power of other
Teachers. And therefore one would think, if they were appointed for the Ends
you propose, one should hear something of that Appointment: Since that they
were to be used; or how, and when; was farther from common Apprehension; and
seems to need some particular Direction.

If you say the same Spirit that gave them the Power of Mivacles, would also
give them the knowledge both that they had it, and how to use it; I am far
enough from limiting the Operations of that infinitely wise Spirit, who will
not fail to bring all the Elect of God into the Obedience of Truth, by those
Means, and in that manner he shall think necessary. But yet our Savior, when
he sent abroad his Disciples, with the Power of Miracles, not only put it in
their Commission, whereby they were informed that they had that extraordinary
Gift, but added Instructions to them in the use of it. Freely you have
received, freely give; A Caution as necessary to the Cretan Elders, in the use
of Miracles, if they had that Power; There being nothing more liable to be
turned to the advantage of Filthy Lucre.

I do not question but the Spirit of God might give the Power, and stir up the
Mind of the first Spreaders of the Gospel to do Miracles on some extraordinary
occasion. But if they were a necessary means, to make Men hear and consider
what was preached to them, till Force supplied their place; and so were
ordinarily to accompany the preaching of the Gospel, (unless it should be
preached without the means appointed and necessary to make it prevail) I think,
in that case, we may expect it should expressly have made a part of the
Preachers Commission; it making a necessary part of the effectual Execution of
his Function.

But the Apo^le, it seems, thought fit to lay the stress upon instructing
others, and living well themselves, upon being instant in season, and out of
season. And therefore directs all his Advices for the ordering the Cretan
Church, and the propagating the Gospel there, to make them attend to those
necessary things of Life and Doctrine; without so much as mentioning the
appointment, need, or use of Miracles.

I said, But whatever Neglect or Aversion there is in some L. 2. p. 23.
Men, impartially and thoroughly to be instructed; there will upon a due
Examination (I fear) be sound no less a Neglect and Aversion in others,
impartially and thoroughly to instruct them. It Is not the talking even general
Truths in plain and ^ear Language; much less a Man's own Fancies in
Scholastical or uncommon ways of speaking, an hour or two, once a week, in
public; that is enough to instruct even willing Hearers in the way of
Salvation, and the Grounds of their Religion: And that Politic Discourses and
Inve^tives, from the Pulpit, instead of Friendly and Christian Debates with
People at their Houses, were not the proper means to inform Men in the
Foundations of Religion; and that if there were not a neglect in this part, I
thought there would be little need of any other Means. To this you tell me, in
the next Paragraph, You do not see how P. 43.
pertinent my Discourse, about this matter, is to the present question. If the
showing the Neglects, observable in the use of what is agreed to be necessary
Means, will not be allowed by you to be pertinent, in a debate about necessary
Means; when possibly those very Neglects may serve to make other Means seem
requisite, which really are not so; Yet if you are not of those who will never
think any such Discourse pertinent; you will allow me to mind you of it again,
as not impertinent in answer to your last Letter, wherein you so often tell us
of the sufficient Provision made for Instruction. For wherever the Neglect be,
it can ^arce be said there is sufficient Provision made for Instruction in a
Christian Country, where great numbers of those, who are in the Communion of
the National Church, are grossly ignorant of the Grounds of the Christian
Religion. And I ask you, whether it be in respect of such Conformists you say,
as you do in the same Paragraph, That when the best Provision is made that can
be, for the Ibid.
Instruction of the People, you fear a great part of them will still need some
moderate Penalties to bring them to hear and receive Instruction?

But what if all the means that can, be not used for their Instruction? That
there are Neglects of this kind, you will, I suppose, take the word of a
Reverend Prelate of our Church, who thought he could not better show his
Good Will to the Clergy, Past. Care, p. 115, -- 118.
than by a seasonable Discourse of the Pastoral Care, to c^re that Neglect for
the future. There he tells you, that Ministers should watch over and seed their
Flock, and not enjoy their Benesices as Farms, etc. Which Reproach, says he, (
whatever We may be) our Church is free of; which he proves by the Stipulation
and Covenant they make with Christ, that they will never cease their Labor,
Care and Diligence, till they have done all that lies in them, according to
their bounden Duty, toward all such as are, or should be committed to their
Care, to bring them to a Ripeness of age in Christ. And a Page or two after,
having repeated part of the Promise made by those who take Orders, he adds, In
this is expressed the so much NEGLECTED, but so necessary Duty, which
Incumbents owe their Flock in a private way; visiting, instracting and
admonishing; which is one of the most useful and important Parts of their Duty,
how generally socuer it may be disused or forgetten. P. 187. He says, Every,
Priest that minds his Duty will find, that no Part of it is so useful as
Catechistical Discourses; by means whereof, his People will understand all his
Sermons the better, when they have once had a clear Notion of all those Terms
that must run through them; for those not being understood, renders them all
unintelligible. Another Part of the Priest's Duty, he tells you, is with
relation to them Past. Care, p. 201.
that are without, who are of the side of the Church of Rome, or among the
Dissenters. Other Churches and Bodies are noted for their Z^al, in making
Proselytes; for their (...) Endeavors, as well as their unlawful Methods in
it: They reckoning perhaps that all will be (...) by the increasing their
PARTY; which is the true Name of making Converts, except they become at the
same time good Men, as well as Votaries to a Side or Cause. We are certainly
very REMISS in this of both hands. Little pains is taken to gain either upon
Papists or Nonconformists: The LAW HAS BEEN SO MUCH TRUSTED TO, that that
Method only was thought sure; it was much valued, and others at the same time
as much NEGLECTED. And whereas, at first, WITHOUT FORCE OR VIOLENCE, in forty
Years time, Popery from being the prevailing Religion, was reduced to a
bandful; we have now in above twice that number of Years, made very little
Progress, etc.

Perhaps here again you will tell me, you do not see how this is pertinent to
the present Question; Which, that you may see, give me leave to put you in
mind, that neither you nor any body else can pretend Force necessary till all
the Means of Persuasion have been used, and nothing negl^ted that can be done
by all the softer Ways of Application. And since it is your own Doctrine, that
Force is not lawful, unless where it i^ necessary; the Magistrate, upon your
Principles, can neither lawfully use Force, nor the Ministers of any National
Church plead for it any where, but where they themselves have first done their
Duties: A Draught whereof, a^apted to our present Circumstances, we have in the
newly published Discourse: of the Pastoral Care. And he that shall press the use
of Force as necessary, before he can answer it to himself and the World, that
those who have taken on them the care of Souls have performed their Duties,
were best consider, whether he does not draw up an Accusation against the Men
of that Holy Order, or against the Magistrate who suffers them to neglect any
part of their Duty. For whilst what that Learned Bishop, in the Passages above
cited and in other places, mentions, is neglected; it cannot be said that no
other Means but Force is lest: Those, which are on all hands acknowledge
necessary and useful Means, not having yet been made use of.

To vindicate your Method from Novelty, you tell me, it is P. 43.
as old as St. Austin. Whatever he says in the place you quote, it shows only
his Opinion, but not that it was ever used. Therefore, to show it not to be new
in practice, you add, that yon think it has been made use of by all those
Magistrates, who having made all requisite Provisions for the instructing their
People in the Truth, have likewise required them under convenient Penalties to
embrace it. Which is as much as to say, that those Magistrates who used your
Method, did use your Method. And that certainly you may think safely, and
without fear of being gainsaid.

But now I will tell you what I think, in my turn: And that is, if you could
have found any Magistrates who had made use of your Method, as well as you
think you have found a Divine that approves of it, you would have named those
Magistrates as forwardly as you do St. Austin. If I think amiss, pray correct
me yet, and name them.

That which makes me imagine you will hardly find any Examples L. 2. p. 24.
of it, is what I there said in these Words; All other Lawmakers have
constantly taken this Method; that where any thing was to be amended, the Fault
was first declared, and then Penalties denounced against all those who after a
time set, should be found guilty of it. This the common Sense of Mankind, and
the very Reason of Laws (which are intended not for Punishment but Correction)
has made so plain, that the subtilest and most refined Lawmakers have not gone
out of this Course, nor have the most ignorant and barbarous Nations mist it.
But you have outdone Solon and Lycurgus, Moses, and our Savior, and are
resolved to be a Lawmakers of a Way by your self. It Is an old and obsolete Way,
and will not, serve your turn, to begin with Warnings and Threats of Penalties,
to be inflicted on those who do not re^orm, but continue to do that which you
think they fail in. To allow of Impunity to the Innocent, or the Opportunity of
Amendment to those who would avoid the Penalties, are Formalities not worth
your Notice. You are for a shorter and surer Way. Take a whole Tribe, and
punish them at all Adventures, whether guilty or no of the Miscariage which you
would have amended; or without so much as telling them what it is you would
have them do, but leaving them to find it out if they can. All these
Absurdities are contained in your Way of proceeding; And are impossible to be
avoided by any one, who will punish Dissenters, and only Dissenters, to make
them consider and weigh the Grounds of their Religion, and impartially examine
whether it be true or no, and upon what Grounds they took it up; that so they
may find and (...) ace the (...) that must save them. These Absurdities, I
fear, must be removed, before any Magistrates will find your Method practicable.

I having said, Your Method is not altogether unlike the Plea made use of to
excuse the late barbarous usage of the Protestants in France, from being a
Persecution for Religion, viz. That it was not a Punishment for Religion, but
for disobeying the King's Laws, which required them to come to Mass: So by your
Rule, Di^enters must be punished, not for the Religion they have embraced, and
the Religion they have rejected. In answer to this, in the next Paragraph, you
take abundance of P. 44.
pains to prove, that the King of France's Laws, that require going to Mass,
are no Laws. You were best to say so on the other side of the Water. It Is sure
the Punishments were Punishments, and the Dragooning was Dragooning. And if you
think that Plea excused them not, I am of your Mind. But nevertheless am of
Opinion, as I was, that it will prove as good a Plea as yours. Ibid.
Which is what you argue against in your next Paragraph, in the Words
following, wherein you examine the likeness of your new Method to this plea.
You tell me, I say, by your Rule, the Di^enters' (from the true Religion, for
you speak of no other) must be punished (or if I please subjected to moderate
Penaltics, such as shall make them uneasy, but ^uber destroy or undo them): For
what? Indeed I thought by your (...) Book, you meant not for their Religion,
but to make them consider; but here you ask me where it is you say that
Dissenters from the true Religion, are not to be punished for their Religion?
`So then, it seems, in your Opinion now, Dissenters from the true Religion are
to be punished, or (as you are pleased to mollify the Expression, for the thing
is the same) subjected to moderate Penalties for their Religion. I think I
shall not need to prove, to any one but one of your nice Style, that the
Execution of Penal Laws, let the Penalties be great or small, are Punishments.

If therefore the Religion of Dissenters from the true, be a Fault to be
punished by the Magistrate; Who is to judge who are guilty of that Fault? Must
it be the Ma istrate everywhere, or the Magisrate in some Countries and not in
others, or the Magistrate nowhere? If the Magistrate nowhere is to be judge
who are Dissenters from the true Religion, he can nowhere punish them. If he
be to be everywhere Judge, then the King of France, or the Great Turk, must
punish those whom they judge Dissenters from the true Religion, as well as other
Potentates. If some Magistrates have a right to judge, and others not; That yet,
I fear, (how absurd soever it be) should I grant it, will not do your business.
For besides that They will hardly agree to make you their infallible Umpire in
the case, to determine who of them have, and who have not this right to judge
which is the True Religion; or if they should, and you should declare the King
of England had that Right, ( viz. whilst he complied to support the Orthodoxy,
Ecclesiastical Polity, and those Ceremonies which you approve of;) But that the
King of France, and the Great Turk, had it not, and so could have no right to
use Force on those they judged Dissenters from the true Religion; You ought to
bethink your self what you will reply to one that should use your own Words; If
such a degree of outward Force, as has been A. p. 16.
mentioned, be really of great and even necessary use, for the advancing of the
True Religion, and Salvation of Souls, then it must be acknowledged, that in
France and Turkey, etc. there is a right somewhere to use it, for the advancing
those ends; unless we will say (what without Impiety cannot be said) that the
wise and benign Disposer and Governor of all things, has not in France and
Turkey furnished Mankind with competent Means, for the promoting his own Honor,
and the good of Souls.

You go on, and tell us, they are to be punished, not for following P. 44.
the Light of their own Reason, nor for obeying the Dictates of their own
Con^lences, but rather for the contrary. For the Light of their own Reason, and
the Dictates of their own Conscience (if their Reason and their Consciences
were not perverted and abused) would undoubtedly lead them to the same thing,
to which the Method you speak of is designed to bring them; i. e. to the same
thing to which your Reason and your Conscience leads you. For if you were to
argue with a Papist, or a Presbyterian, in the case; What privilege have you to
tell him, that his Reason and Conscience is perverted, more than he has to tell
you that yours is so? Unless it be this insupportable Presumption, that your
Reason and Conscience ought to be the Measure of all Reason and Conscience in
all others, which how you can claim, without pretending to Infallibility, is
not easy to discern.

The Diversion you give your self, about the likeness and unlikeness of those
two Pleas, I shall not trouble my self with; since, when your Fit of Mirth was
over, you were forced to confess, That as I have made your Plea for you, you
think there P. 45.
is no considerable difference, as to the Fairness of them, excepting what
arises from the different degrees of Punishment, in the French Discipline, and
your Method. But if the French Plea be not true; and that which I make to be
yours be not yours; -- I must beg your pardon, Sir, I did not think it was your
Opinion, (nor do I yet remember that you any where said in your A. etc.) that
Men were to be punished for their Religion; but that it was purely to make Men
examine the Religion they had embraced, and the Religion that they had
rejected. And if that were of moment, I should think my self sufficiently
justified, for this my Mistake, by what you say in your Argument, etc. from p.
6, to 12. But since you explain your self otherwise here, I am not unwilling to
take your Hypothesis, as you from time to time shall please to reform it. You
answer then, That to make them examine, is indeed the Ibid.
next End for which they are to be punished. But what is that to my Question?
Which, if it be pertinent, demands for what Fault, not for what End, they are
to be punished: As appears even by my next Words. So that they are punished,
not for having offended against a Law, ( i. e. not for any Fault;) for there is
no Law in England that requires them to examine. This, I must confess, was to
show, that here, as in France, whatever was pretended, yet the True Reason why
People were punished, was their Religion. And it was for this Agreement, that
in both Places Religion was meant, though something else was talked of, that I
said your plea was like that made use of in France. But I see I might have
spared my Pains to prove that you punish Diffenters for their Religion, since
you here own it.

You tell me, in the same place, I was impertinent in my Question, (which was
this, For what then are they to be punished?) that I demanded for what End, and
not for what Fault they are to be punished. In good earnest, Sir, I was not so
subtle as to distinguish them. I always thought that the End of all Laws was
to amend those Faults which were forbidden; and that when any one was punished,
the Fault for which he was punished was the ^ransgression of the Law, in that
particular which was by the Law commanded or forbidden; and the End of the
Punishment, was the Amendment of that Fault for the future. For Example; If the
Law commanded to hear, not Hearing was the Fault punished; and the End of that
Punishment, was to make the Offenders hear. If the Law commanded to examine,
the Fault punished, when that Law was put in Execution, was not Examining; and
the End of the Punishment, to make the Offenders examine. If the Law commanded
Conformity, the Fault was Nonconformity, and the End of it to make Men conform.

This was my Apprehension concerning Laws, and Ends of Punishments. And I must
own my self still so dull as not to distinguish otherwise between the Fault for
which Men are to be punished, and the End for which they are to be punished,
but only as the one is past, the other future. The Transgression or Fault, is
an Omission or Action that a Man is already guilty of; the End of the
Punishment, that it be not again repeated. So that if a Man be punished for the
Religion he (...), I can see no other End for which he is punished, but to make
him quit that Religion. No other immediate End I mean; for other remote Ends,
to which this is subordinate, it may have. So that if not examining the
Religion which Men have embraced, and the Religion they have rejected, be not
the Fault for which Men are punished; I would be glad you would show me how it
can be the next End, as you say it is, of their being punished. And that you
may not think my Dullness gives you a Labor without Ground, I will tell you
the Reason why I cannot find any other next End of Punishment, but the
Amendment of the Fault forbidden; and that is, Because That seems to me to be
the End, the next End, of any Action; which, when obtained, the Action is to
cease, and not cease till it be attained. And thus, I think, it is, in
Punishments, ordained by the Law. When the Fault forbidden is amended, the
Punishment is to cease, and not till then. This is the only way I have to know
the End, or final Cause for which any Action is done. If you have any other,
you will do me a kindness to instruct me. This it is which makes me conclude,
(and I think with me all those who have not had the Leisure and Happiness to
attain the utmost resining of the Schools) that if their Religion be the Fault
for which Dissenters are punished, Examining is not the End for which they are
punished; but the Change of their Religion: Though Examining may perhaps in
some Men, precede their Change, and help to it. But that is not necessary. A
Man may change his Religion without it: And when he has changed, let the Motive
be what it will, the End the Law aims at is obtained, and the Punishment
ceases. So on the other side, If not Hearing, not Examining, be the Fault for
which Men are punished, Conformity is not the next End for which they are
punished, though it may perhaps, in some, be a Consequence of it; but Hearing
and Examining must be understood to be the Ends for which they are punished. If
they are not the Ends, why does the Punishment cease when those Ends are
attained? And thus you have my Thoughts concerning this Matter, which perhaps
will not be very pertinent (as mine have not the good luck always to be to you)
to a Man of nicer Distinctions.

But let us consider your Hypothesis as it now stands, and see what advantage
you have got to your Cause by this new Explication. Dissenters from the True
Religion are to be punished, say you, for their Religion. Why? Because it is a
Fault. Against whom? Against God. Thence it follows indeed, that God, if he
pleases, may punish it. But how will you prove that God has given the
Magistrates of the Earth a Power to punish all Faults against himself?
Covetousness, or not loving our Neighbor as our selves, are Faults or Sins
against God. Ought the Magistrate to punish these? But I shall not need to
trouble you much with that Question. This Matter I think will be decided
between us without going so sar.

If the Magistrate may punish any one for not being of the True Religion, must
the Magistrate judge what is that True Religion or no? If he must not, what must
guide him in the punishing of some, and not of others? For so it is in all
places where there is a National Religion established by Penal Laws. If the
Magistrate be commissioned by the same Law of Nature (for that is all the
Commission you pretend to) to judge what is the True Religion, by which he is
authorized to punish those who dissent from it; Must not all Magistrates judge,
and accordingly punish those who dissent from that, which they judge the True
Religion, i. e. in effect, those who dissent from theirs? And if all
Magistrates have a Power to punish those who are not of their Religion, I ask
you, Whether it be of more use or disadvantage to the promoting True Religion
and Salvation of Souls? And when you have resolved that Question, you will then
be able to tell me whether the Usefulness of it (which must be determined by
the greater Good or Harm it is like to do) is such as to justify your Doctrine
about it, or the Magistrate's use of it.

Besides, your making the Dissenting from the True Religion a Pault to be
punished by the Magistrate, puts an end to your Pretense to moderate
Punishments; which, in this place, you make use of to distinguish yours from
the French Method; saying, That your Method punishes Men with Punishments which
do not deserve to be called so, when compared with those of the French
Discipline. But if the Dissenting from the True Religion, be a Fault that the
Magistrate is to punish, and a Fault of that consequence, that it draws with it
the loss of a Man's Soul; I do not see how other Magistrates, whose Duty it is
to punish Faults under his Cognizance, and by punishing to amend them, can be
more remiss than the King of France has been, and fo^bear declaring that they
will have all their People saved, and endeavor by such Ways as he has done to
effect it: Especially since you tell P. 8.
us, That God now leaves Religion to the Care of Men, under his ordinary
Providence, to try whether they will do their Duties in their several
Capacities or not, leaving them answerable for all that may follow from their
Neglect. In the correcting of Faults, Malo nodo (...) (...), is not only what
is justifiable, but what is requisite. But of this more fully in another place.

In the next place; I do not see how, by your Method, as you explain it here,
the Magistrate can punish any one for not being of the True Religion, (though
we should grant him to have a Power to do it) whilst you tell us, That your
Method punishes Men for rejecting the True Religion, proposed to them with
sufficient P. 45.
Evidence, which certainly is a Fault. By this Part of your Scheme it is plain,
that you allow the Magistrate to punish none but those to whom the True
Religion is proposed with sufficient Evidence. And sufficient Evidence, you
tell us, is such as will certainly win P. 53.
(...) wherever it is duty considered. Now by this Rule, there will be very
few that the Magistrate will have right to punish; since he cannot know whether
those who dissent, do it for want of due Consideration in them, or want of
sufficient Evidence in what is proposed; unless you mean by due Consideration,
such Consideration that always does bring Men actually to (...); which is in
effect to say nothing at all. For then your Rule amounts to thus much, That
sufficient Evidence is such as will certainly win Assent wherever it is
considered duly, i. e. so as to win Assent. This being like some of those other
Rules we have met with, and ending in a Circle, Which after you have traced,
you at last sind your self just where you were at setting out; I leave it to
you to own as you think sit: And tell you, if by duly considering, you mean
considering to his utmost; that then, that which is proposed to one with
sufficient Evidence to win Assent, may not be so to another.

There are Propositions extant in Geometry, with their Demonstrations annexed,
and that with such sufficient Evidence to some Men of deep Thought and
Penetration, as to make them see the Demonstration, and give Assent to the
Truth: Whilst there are many others, and those no No^ices in Mathematics, who
with all the Consideration and Attention they can use, are never able to attain
unto it. It Is so in other Parts of Truth. That which has Evidence enough to
make one Man certain, has not enough to make another so much as guess it to be
true, though he has spared no Endcavour or Application in examining it. And
therefore, if the Magistrate be to punish none but those who reject the True
Religion, when it has been offered with sufficient Evidence, I imagine he will
not have many to punish; if he will, as he ought, distinguish between the
Innocent and the Guilty.

Upon your Forwardness to encourage the Magistrate's use of Force in Matters of
Religion, by its Usefulness, even so far as to pretend Advantages from what
your self acknowledge the Misapplication of it; I say that, So instead of (...)
from, L. 2. p. 26.
you give Encouragement to the Mischief: which upon your Principle, joined to
the natural Thirst in Man after Arbitrary Power, may be carried to all manner
of Exorbitancy, with some Pretense of Right. To which your Reply is, That you
speak on-where but of the Use and Necessity of Force. What think you in the
place mentioned, of the Gain that you tell the Sufferers they shall make by the
Magistrate's punishing them to bring them to a wrong Religion? You do not, as I
remember, there say, that Force is necessary in that case: Though they gaining,
as you say, by it this Advantage, that they know better than they did before
where the Truth does (...); You cannot but allow, that such a Misapplication of
Force may do some Service indirectly and at a distance toward the Salvation of
Souls.

But that you may not think, whilst I had under Consideration the dangerous
Encouragement you gave to Men in Power, to be very busy with their Force in
Matters of Religion, by all the ^orts of Usefulness you could imagine of it,
however applied, right or wrong, that I declined mentioning the Necessity you
pretend of Force, because it would not as well serve to the purpose for which I
mention its Usefulness; I shall here take it so, that the Reader may see what
reason you had to complain of my not doing it before.

Thus then stands your System. The procuring and advancing any way of the
spiritual and eternal Interests of Men, is one of the Ends of Civil Society.
And Force is put into the Magistrate's hands, as necessary for the attaining
those Ends, where no other Means are left, Who then upon your Grounds may
quickly find Reason, where it ^utes his Inclination, or serves his Turn, to
punish Men directly to bring them to his Religion. For if he may use Force
because it is necessary, as being the only Means left to make Men consider
those Reasons and Arguments, which otherwise they would not consider, Why may
he not by the same Rule use Force, as the only Means left to make Men degrees
of G'ory, which otherwise they would not attain, and so to advance their
eternal Interests? For St. Paul (...) us, that the (...) of this Life work for
us a far more exce^ding weight of Glory. So that whether the Magistrate may
not, when it may serve his turn, argue thus from your Principles, judge you:
Dissenters from my Religion must be punished, if in the wrong, to bring them
into the right Way; if in the right, to make them by their Sufferings Gainers
of a far more exceeding weight of Glory.

But you say, Unless it be as necessary for Men to attain any greater P. 73.
degree of Glory as it is to attain Glory, it will not follow that if the
Magistrate may use Force, because it may be indirectly, etc. useful toward the
procuring any degree of Glory, he may by the same Rule use it where it may be
in that manner useful toward the procuring a greater degree of Glory. But that
there is the same necessity of Men's attaining a greater degree of Glory, as
there is of their attaining Glory, no Man will affirm. For without attaining
Glory, they cannot escape the Demnation of Hell, which yet they may escape,
without any greater degree of Glory. One of the Ends of a Commonwealth is, say
you, the advancing Men's eternal Interests. The procuring greater degrees of
Glory, is the advancing a Man's eternal Interest. The use of Force, to make Men
suffer for the Truth what otherwise they would not suffer, is as necessary for
the attaining an higher degree of Glory, as using Force to make Men consider,
what otherwise they would not consider, is necessary, P. 73.
for the attaining any degree of Glory. But you will say, Attaining Glory is
absolutely necessary, but the attaining any greater degree of Glory, however
desirable, is not so necessary. Now if there be not the same necessity of the
one of these, as there is of the other, there can be no Pretense to say, that
whatever is (...) in respect of one of them, is likewise so in respect of the
other. But there will always be a just Pretense to say, if advancing the
eternal Interests of Men be one of the Ends of a Commonwealth, and that the
Force in the Magistrate's hands be necessary to the attaining that End; that
then the Magistrate is obliged to use it; whether you will think that End
absolutely necessary, or as necessary as another, or no. I shall not here
trouble you again with your Mistake about what is absolutely necessary, having
taken notice of it in another place. Only I shall desire you to show me, that
the attaining of Glory is absolutely necessary, when next time you have
occasion to affirm it. Attaining of Glory is necessary in order to Happiness:
And attaining a greater degree of Glory, is necessary in order to greater
Happiness: But neither of them is absolutely necessary, but in order to their
respective Ends.

And now though, as you say, you do not think your self bound to take notice of
all that may be done with some pretense of Right: Yet, I suppose, upon cooler
Thoughts, when you have considered of what dangerous Consequence an Argument,
managed as yours is, may be to the True Religion, and the sincere Prosessors of
it; and what Occalion or Encouragement it may give to Men in Power warmed with
Zeal, and excited by the proper Ministers of their own Religion, to make a
wrong and exorbitant Use of Force in Matters of Religion, you will another time
think your self bound not to let it go abroad again without some Caution to the
Magistrate in the Use of it; without one word of Advice at least, that since it
is given him, as you say, only for promoting the True Religion, he should take
care and examine impartially whether what he imploys it for, be the one only
True Religion. It being your Opinion whenever he makes use of Force in Matters
of Religion, for the promoting any thing but that, he goes beyond his
Commission, injures his Subjects, and indangers his own Soul.

By this time, Sir, I suppose you see upon what Grounds I think you have not
cleared those Difficulties which were charged by me on your Method: And my
Reader will see what reason there was for those Imputations which, with so loud
an Outcry, you laid upon me of unfair Dealing; since there is not one of them
which cannot be made good to be contained either in your Book or in your
Hypothesis; and that so clearly, that I could not imagine that a Man who had so
far considered Government, as to engage in Print, in such a Controversy as
this, could miss seeing it as soon as mentioned to him. One of them which very
much offends you, and makes you so often tell me what I say is impertinent and
nothing to the purpose, and sometimes to use warmer Expressions, is, that I
argue against a Power in the Magistrate to bring Men to his own Religion: For I
could not imagine that, to a Man of any Thought, it could need proving; that if
there were a Commission given to all Magistrates by the Law of Nature, which
obliged them to use Force to bring Men to the True Religion, it was not
possible for them to put this Commission in execution, without being Judges
what was the True Religion; and then there needed no great quickness to
perceive, that every Magistrate, when your Commission came to be put in
execution, would, one as well as another, find himself obliged to use Force to
bring Men to that which he believed to be the True Religion. But since this was
so hard for you to see, I now have been at the pains to prove it, and thereby
to clear all thoseImputations. I shall not instance in any other: They are all
of a like kind. Only where you complain I have not cited your Words fairly, if
you can show that I have done it any where in this or the Second Letter, to the
advantage of my Cause; or to avoid any Argument in them, not answered; if you
please to show it me, I shall either let you see your Mistake, or acknowledge
mine.

And now whether you shall think what I have said worth that Consideration you
promise, or take it all for Cavils and Impertinencies, P. 78.
to me is very indifferent. Enjoy if you please that short and easy way of
answering. But if the Party you write for, be, as you say, God and the Souls of
Men, it will require you seriously to weigh your Scheme, examine and put
together the Parts of it, observe its Tendency and Consequences; and in a word,
consider Things, and not Words. For the Party of God and Souls needs not any
Help from Obscurity or Uncertainty of general and equivocal Terms, but may be
spoke out clearly and distinctly; Needs no retreat in the round of equivalent,
or the uncertainty of misapplied Expressions, that may serve to amuse and
deceive the unwary, but instruct no body; And lastly, needs no Leave nor
Allowance from Men of Art to direct both Subjects and Magistrates to the
Examination of the Scriptures, wherein God has revealed to the World the Ways
and Means of Salvation. In doing of this, in a Treatise where you profess P. 68.
the Subject of your Enquiry is only what Method is to be used to bring Men to
the True Religion; the Party you profess to write for would have justified you
against the Rules of any lawful Art; and no Christian Man, of what Art soever,
would have denied you that Liberty: And, if I mistake not, the Party, you say
you write for, demands it of you.

If you find upon a Review of the whole, that you have managed your Cause for
God and the Souls of Men, with that Sincerity and Clearness that satisfies your
own Reason, and you think may satisfy that of other Men, I shall congratulate
to you so happy a Constitution. But if all your magnified and necessary Means
of Force, in the way you contend for, reaches no farther than to bring Men to a
bare outward Conformity to the Church of England; wherein you can ^dately
affirm, that it is presumable that all that are of it are so upon Reason and
Conviction; I suppose there needs no more to be said to convince the World what
Party you write for.

The Party you write for is God, you say. But if all you have said, aims or
amounts to nothing more than that the Church of England, as now established by
Law, in its Doctrines, Ceremonies and Discipline, should be supported by the
Power of the Magistrate, and Men by Force be driven into it; I fear the World
will think you have very narrow Thoughts of God; or that that is not the Party
you write for. It Is true, you all along speak of bringing Men to the True
Religion. But to evidence to you, that by the one only True Religion, you mean
only that of the Church of England; I tell you, that upon your Principles, you
cannot name any other Church now in the World, (and I again demand of you to do
it) for the promoting whereof, or punishing Dissenters from it, the Magistrate
has the same Right to use Force, as you pretend he has here in England. Till
you therefore name some such other True Church and True Religion, besides that
of England, your saying that God is the Party you write for, will rather show
that you make bold with his Name, than that you do not write for another Party.

You say too, you write not for any Party, but the So^s of Men. You write
indeed, and contend earnestly, that Men should be brought into an outward
Conformity to the Church of England. But that they embrace that Profession upon
Reason and Conviction, you are content to have it presumable, without any
farther Enquiry or Examination. And those who are once in the outward Communion
of the National Church, however ignorant or irreligious they are, you leave
there (...) by your only competent Means, Force; without which, you tell us,
the True Religion, by its own Light and Strength, is not able to prevail
against Men's Lusts and the Corruption of Nature, so as to be considered as it
ought, and heartily embraced. And this dropped not from your Pen by chance: But
you professedly make Excuses for those of the National Religion who are
ignorant of the Grounds of it; And give us Reasons why Force cannot be used to
those who outwardly conform, to make them consider so as sincerely to embrace,
believe and obey, the Truth that must P. (...).
save them. But the ^verend Author of the Pastoral Care tell you, PARTY is the
true Name of making Converts, except they become at the same time good Men.

If the use of Force be necessary for the Salvation of Souls; and Men's Souls be
the Party you write for; you will be suspected to have betrayed your Party, if
your Method and necessary Means of Salvation reach no farther than to bring Men
to outward Conformity, though to the True Church; and after that abandons them
to their Lusts and depraved Natures, destitute of the help of Force, your
necessary and competent Means of Salvation.

This way of managing the Matter, whatever you intend, ^ms rather, in the
Fitness of it, to be for another Party. But since you assure us you write for
nothing but God and Men's Souls, it can only be said you had a good Intention,
but ill Luck; since your Scheme, put into the Language of the Country, will sit
any National Church and Clergy in the World, that can but suppose it self the
True; and that I presume none of them will fail to do.

You were more than ordinary reserved and gracious when you tell me, That what
Party I write for, you will not undertake to P. ^9.
say. But having told me, that my Letter tends to the promoting of (...) in
Religion, you thought ('it is like) that was sufficient to show the Party I write
for; and so you might safely end your Letter with Words that looked like civil.
But that you may another time be a little better informed what Party I write
for, I will tell you. They are those who in every Nation ^ear God, (...) (...),
and are accepted with him; and not those who in every Nation are zealous for
Humane Constitutions, cry up nothing so much as outward Con^ormity to the
National Religion, and are accepted by those who are the Promoters of it. Those
that I write for are those, who, according to the Light of their own Con^ences,
are everywhere in earnest in Matters of their own Salvation, without any
desire to impose on others; A Party so seldom favored by any of the Powers or
Sects of the World; A Party that has so few Preferments to bestow; so few (...)
to reward the ^ndeavours of any one who appears for it, that I conclude I shall
easily be believed when I say, that neither Hopes of Preferment, nor a Design
to recommend my self to those I live amongst, has (...) my Understanding, or
misled me in my Undertaking. So much Truth as serves the turn of any particular
Church, and can be accommodated to the narrow Interest of some Humane
Constitution, is indeed often received with applause, and the Publisher finds
his account in it. But I think I may say, Truth (in its full Latitude, of those
generous Principles of the Gospel, which so much recommend and inculcate
universal Charity, and a Freedom from the Inventions and Impositions of Men in
the things of God,) has so seldom had a fair and favorable Hearing any where,
that he must be very ignorant of the History and Nature of Man, however
dignified and distinguished, who proposes to himself any secular Advantage by
writing for her at that rate.

As to your Request in the Close of your Letter, I hope this will satisfy you,
that you might have spared it; And you with the rest of the World will see that
all I (...) in my former Letter was so true, that you need not have given me
any caution for the future. As to the (...) of what I say, I doubt whether I
shall please you: Because I find by your last Letter, that what is brought by
me to show the Weakness, Absurdities, or (...) of what you write, you are very
apt to call (...), and nothing to the purpose. You must pardon me therefore, if
I have endeavored more to please other Readers than you in that Point. I hope
they will find, in what I have said, not much besides the matter. But to a Man
who, supposing himself in the right, builds all upon that Supposition, and
takes it for an Injury to have that Privilege denied him; To a Man who would
soveraignly decide for all the World, what is the True Religion, and thereby
empower what Magistrates he thinks fit, and what not, to use Force; To (...) a
Man not to seem (...), would be really to be so. This makes me pleased with
your Reply to so many Passages of my Letter, that they were nothing to the
purpose: And it is in your Choice whether in your Opinion any thing in this
shall be so.

But since this depends upon your keeping steadily to clear and (...) Notions
of things, separate from Words and (...), used in a doubtful and undetermined
Signification; wherewith (...) of Art often (...) themselves and others; I
shall not P. 78.
be so unreasonable as to expect, whatever you promise, that you should ^y by
your Learning to embrace Truth, and own what will not perhaps suit very well
with your Circumstances and Interest.

I see, my Design not to omit any thing that you might think looks like an
Argument In yours, has made mine grow beyond the size of a Letter. But an
Answer to any one being very little different from a Letter, I shall let it go
under that Title. I have in it also endeavored to bring the scattered Parts of
your Scheme into some Method, under distinct Heads, to give a fuller and more
(...) View of them. Wherein, if any of the Arguments which give support to your
Hypothesis, have escaped me unawares; be pleased to show them me; and I shall
either acknowledge their Force, or endeavor to show their Weakness. I am,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, PHILANTHROPUS.
June 20, 1593.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page Line Read 1 21 THose 8 33 Either 13 27 Baptism. The 18 11 those who both
21 15 a Surgeon 27 3 A. p. 20. [In the Margin.] 4 the Doctrine. d. P. 121.
30 26 them? That 26 show. 37 30 P. 27. [In the Margin.] 38 13 Consideration;
whoever 42 35 P. 271 [In the Margin.] 45 12 Penalties 46 7 their Arguments
cannot prevail. 48 6 things, I 53 9 should. Yet 58 2 will not 69 8 give in to
71 13 (for 17 himself) it 83 15 munion, excluding 108 34 named, it will 110 28
nishments? 119 12 learn from 14 fit, you 26 however beholden 127 7 do. If 136
19 Hearts, the 165 9 unless we 169 1 Argument. I 171 9 no. 173 24 these ends
187 33 P. 70. [In the Margin.] 188 20 and not 189 23 P. 70. [In the Margin.]
193 3 Deviation 194 9 Examination which 207 27 Religion uponr] 217 6 Magistrate
218 11 down 220 19 Conviction: when 221 27 Conformity: 225 5 in my opinion 228
37 was replied 261 36 them. What 263 27 Asia Alexandrum Pseudomantim 265 39
Want 267 36 single Relics 268 27 Plantins 273 24 little; If 274 15
Administrations 277 20 uninterrupted 278 26 Parish, where 296 20 Force, 304 37
is, what 305 1 cannot, without 2 Revelation than usefulness, be 6 Souls may all
be justified 311 27 consistent 313 10 the Societies 11 places 15 which Force,
so 314 34 so much as questioning 315 16 Wheat 35 ligion, you 316 13 the True
Religion 329 27 is not 35 points, effectual 335 10 Acknowledged 343 8 P. 73.
[In the Margin.]

Books Printed (...), and Sold by A. and J. Churchill, at (...) Black Swan in
Peter-Noster-Row.
(...) (...) Roman History. Forcacio's Novels and Tales. (...) Paul (...) Lives
of the Popes of Rome. -- History of the Turks. Two Vol. Rushworth's Historical
Collections. Lloyd Dictionariun Historicum, Pocticum, Geographicum. Statutes of
Ireland. Bolton Justice of Ireland. Sir George Wheeler's Travels into Greece.
Leybourn's Dialling. (...) Chronicle and History of the Kings of Scotland.
Machiavel's Works. Thesaurus Brevium. Sir Simon Dew's Journal of Parliament, Q.
Elizabeth. Dr. Brady's Introduction to the History of England. Milton's
Paradise regained. Leybourn Cursus Mathematicus. Sir Roger L' Estrange IF sop's
Fables. Bp. Hall's Contemplations. Clark Praxis Cur. Ecclesiasticis. Dr.
Gibson's Anatomy. Dr. Patrick Mensa Mystica. Gentleman's Recreations. (...) L'
Clere's Logica, etc. Drelincourt of Death. Beybourn's Arithmetic. Protestant
Reconciler, Complete. Homer's (...). (...) Minores. Royal Grammar. Gibbon's
Heraldry. Partridge's Treasury of Physic. Bp. (...) of Prayer and Preaching.
Thibault's Chemistry. Glasier's Chemistry. Valerius Maximus, English. Two
Treatises of Government. The Three Letters for Toleration. Some Considerations
of the Consequences of Lowering Interest, and raising the Value of Money. Sir
William Temple's Observations on Holland. -- Misellanea. Dr. Burnet's Travels.
Plato (...) Selden's Table-Talk. Debates of Oxon and (...) Parliaments. Titi
Petronii arbitrii Satyricon, cum fragmentis AttaeceGraecae recuper at (...).
Anno 1688. Livii Orationes selectae. 12o. Sleidan de quatuor summis Imperiisve.
Aristotle's Rhetoric, English. Dr. Whitby's several Pieces. Partridge's
Astrology. (...) Orationes, large 12o. Lat. Guide to Heaven. 24o. Latin
Testament, the Cambridg Edition.

