A MEMORIAL OF GOD'S JUDGMENTS, Spiritual and Temporal. OR SERMONS To call to
Remembrance. First Preached and now Published for Public Benefit.

By Nic. Lockier Minister of the Gospel.

A Psalm of David to bring to Remembrance.

Psalm. 38. and 70. Title. And thou shall remember all the way, which the Lord
thy God has led thee, these forty Years in the wilderness, to humble thee and
to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments or no.

Deuteronomy. 8.2. Veteris incommodi reminisci.

Caes. Tempus illud reminiscitur moerens.

Ovid. London, Printed for Dorman Newman, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the
Kings Arms and Bible in the Poultry, 1671.

To the People of God, and to the Readers of the following Tract, Grace and
Mercy by Jesus Christ.
Reader,
THese Sermons were preached, when God's Judgments were destroying these
Nations, by Sword and Pestilence, to second the works of God with the word of
God, for the saving edification of the punished. Now because we are apt to
forget the Rods of God, and his words, and our duty urged by them both, I have
thought it might be profitable (at least) to some, to publish these Discourses,
such as they be, and leave them to the blessing of God, and the good and candid
acceptance of such, as shall please to peruse them The Sword and Pestilence
were not strokes of God, which only concerned the City of London, but the whole
three Nations, and therefore these Instructions are due and proper to all the
People of God, and to any that have a heart to make use of them. Our Fathers
went under five Miracles, says One, through the Wilderness, the Cloud, the
raining of daily Manna, the following of the Waters from the Rock Horeb, the
continual newness of their Clothes, and the untiredness of their Feet. The
People of God in these Nations, have gone under many wonderful Providence, to
that state of tranquillity wherein now they are, this among them all is a
standing one, that the Bush has so long burned, and yet is not quite consumed,
neither by Plague nor Sword, nor any other hard things done unto them.

How the late Judgments were ushered in amongst us, with signs in the Heavens,
in the Earth, and in the Seas, we cannot quite forget: Several blazeing Stars
in one Year's space, the like scarce not known, and other multiplied Prodigies
many ways; and how they are all gone off, with heightened security, and
multiplied prodigious wickedness, may justly affect us much to consider, and
affright us more to think, what worse things may quickly come upon us. Our
lives during the late Judgments did hang in doubt from God and man, whether God
would spare us from the Pestilence, or Man spare us from the Sword. The dread
of the Sword was not small, when the Seas did roar, and the Rivers also at our
Doors. The dread of the Plague was many Plagues; I am sure the best Christians
that felt it, will say, that spiritual stroke not to have been small, though
their lives since (I fear) may more than say it to be so. The destroying Angel
passed over few Houses, and some he swept clean, and no Lord have mercy on us,
heard for so much as one. Other Houses had some spared, but with Hezekia's
mark, a Plague soar on their Bodies, and a worse upon their hearts, both which
continue to this day. Under all this dreadful Discipline, what was done then
and since, to show repentance, reformation, thankfulness for such great
escapes, may well cause great and deep thoughts of heart. From Adam to Moses
were Twenty-Six Generations, and accordingly does the Psalmist praise God six
and twenty times, according to the numeral letters of the word Jehova, who did
all the wonders for that People, which are mentioned in that 136 Psalm. And
surely six and twenty times over, has the Lord merited praises, and all worthy
walking, at all our hands, high and low, for the many great things he has done
for us at Sea and Land, but I pray God we be not found six and twenty times
worse than then we were.

Some remindings of God's great works amongst us, by his word (I think all will
grant) are therefore needful, and pity it is but the word of God, should go
freely forth over the Nations for such great ends, to preach over the
punishments of God afresh unto us; If the punishments of God must repeat and
preach themselves again, for want of the word, that will not be so pleasing,
nor it may be, not so profitable for us. Many thousands were killed by the
Sword and Pestilence, but few (I fear) made spiritually alive by either. The
word, O the powerful preaching of the word of God; This, this kindly convinces
and converteth, yea and diverteth Sword and Pestilence, and Famine, with all
other judgments, as all experience and divine History shows. What prosperous
times for health and wealth, peace and plenty, were in Juda, when they were
zealous to promote the word and true worship of God! when we fall out with
these, God, he falls on upon us with one judgment or other; If men do not
believe this, they may feel it seven times more. Our nature is enmity to all
good, some thing is treated of this and its cure, in this tract, which indeed
is the cure of all evils; for whence come Wars and contentions? Come they not
from our unmortified lusts, which war in our corrupt hearts? Death, whether by
Sword, or Pestilence, or any how, is no good friend to an ill life: some thing
also is said of this, in this Tract, to make us remember our later end, to live
and die well. In miseries of all sorts we need friends, mercy from Men, as well
as mercy from God; some thing therefore is said in this Tract, to quicken to
this, to be pitiful and tender hearted one to another. Clouds return after
rain, and make more and greater storms; some thing is said of this too, and
much more may be felt, if we do not repent. Kadesh Barnea was so called, from a
double punishment which was there inflicted. GOD may sanctify Himself upon Us,
because he is not sanctified in Us. And he may make us wandering Sons, because
we still wander much from Him.
It was called Kadesh, because there the Lord sanctified himself upon the
People, for their corporal and spiritual Whoredoms with the Midianites: And it
was called barnea, or the wandering Son, because there was the Decree made, for
their long wandering in the Wilderness. Pray God we be not called Kadesh Barnea
too, for our making so little good use of former punishments. God's double
punishments and troops of calamities, even all his waves may pass over us
justly: some thing of this also is said, in the last part of this Tract; the
Lord bless all to all that peruse these things.

The People of God loving one another fervently, profiting one another with
their Gifts, Graces, Estates; being sober, sound in the faith, holy, heavenly;
and about this glory a defense will make States and Nations blessed. Surely if
we (the Lord's People) were but as zealous to use liberty and privilege well,
as we are to have it, it would come faster than it does. Let us look more into
our selves, and more up to God, as the readiest way to all good: These are the
thoughts, desires, and prayers of Him, who is

Yours ever in the Lord. N. L.

Romans vii. xxiv. O wretched Man that I am: Who shall deliver me from the body
of this Death?


THe great weight of sin and misery, and the want of one to remove well both,
is the cause of this doleful complaint; O wretched man that I am: Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? or from this body of death; as it is
put in the Margent: The weight of sin is groaned under, in this term of my
Text, body; which is a word of quantity, nomen quan^itatis.
and means the corruption of our nature, to be a very extensive thing, that the
whole state of man in all the powers of his Soul and Body, is depraved and
vitiated, and made utterly unfit to serve God, and most fit to serve sin and
Satan, with all Organs and Instruments within and without.

Secondly, This term in my Text, body; is also Nomen qualitatis, a word of
quality, that means the naturalness of this general pravity to us, it lay with
us (as Mr. Rutherford says) in our Mothers Womb, as Twins, as one body lies
with another; It took us fast by the heel in the Womb, and we could never kick
it off since.

Thirdly, For as much as there is this Epethite given to this Body, calling it
a Body of Death, and a Body of this Death; it notes not only the weight of sin,
but also of misery, death being here put to signify guilt and punishment: Our
depraved condition casts us under all guilt, and under all punishment, that
is, actually under much misery, and liable every moment to all misery in Soul
and Body, in this World, and in the World to come; not only liable to death, as
it is a dissolution of Soul and Body, and all the sicknesses and diseases which
prepare unto it; but liable to this death, that is a separation of both Soul
and Body from God for ever.

Now, to deliver us from the Body of this death, a Body of corruption, which
exposes us to such a death as this: There no Man, nor Angel is able, no all
the Angels, did they join to do us service in this thing, to change our
natures, to take off guilt, to rectify the Image of God, which we have lost;
they cannot stir this Body, as to any of these in the least, nor any member of
it; they are not able to remove one sin, or satisfy for the guilt of it; nor
draw one line, an eye, or an eye-brow, or one finger of the new man. This great
weight of sin and misery, and this utter impotency of all created strength to
help out of it, makes the Apostle to cry out thus: O wretched man that I am:
Who shall deliver me, etc.

First, this, That every one is in a wretched and miserable condition by
nature; Depraved in all powers of Soul and Body, and exposed in both to the
utmost displeasure of God. O wretched man that I am, etc. He does not mean
himself alone, but speaks as personating the best of men, and so consequently
all men; for that he did thus complain of a corrupt state, who was so holy; who
else, but has cause much more to complain? For this death which my Text,
speaks of, has passed over all Men, for as much as all Men have finned in
Adam. And this Apostle which speaks but of himself in this case in my Text
speaks generally elsewhere; That by nature we are the Children of wrath, as
well as others, Ephesians. 2.3.

Secondly, This may be learned from these words, That our state by nature, is
not a safe state to be rested in. That our state, as we come into this World,
is not such, as we should be contented with, but a state much to be complained
of by the best, and much cried out upon, and much strugled under to be freed
from. O wretched man that I am: Who shall deliver me? etc. Flesh and blood
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. They which rest in their state, as they
come into this World, and think that they attain to be moral and civil, just
and righteous to men, and little or nothing complain of that which the Apostle
does here in my Text, a Body of Death, do not know their own danger.

Thirdly, We may here learn, That the best are not so good as they should be:
That the best in this World, are much burdened and much endangered, with
natural corruption. The Apostle Paul, though regenerated, found much of the
rebellion of an evil nature, of which he knew not how to get rid, carrying him
Captive to what he would not, and so exposing him continually to the
displeasure of God. I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh dwells no good
thing, for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I
find not; for the good I would I do not, but the evil I would not that I do.
Corrupt nature, as it easily besets us, so it as easily overcomes us, for any
strength that we have of our own: Such as so feelingly complain, as Paul here
does, will not easily be brought to drink in the Popish Doctrine of Perfection.

Fourthly, We may here learn, That our state in this World, at best, is but a
wretched state; for, though a little grace be given unto us, it is so
over-matched with a great body of sin, that we rather undo, than do any thing
that is good. Is it not a wretched state to be so hampered with an ill Inmate
Night and Day, that when one pulls one way, 'tother pulls stronger still the
wrong way. To see two Dogs coupled, a little one and a great one, What a woeful
condition is the little one in! how he is pulled and haled up and down this way
and that way, not which way he would go, but which way the great one will go,
or else he grins his teeth on the little one, and bites him and abuses him
much; just so is the condition of the most regenerate in this World. And
therefore he that is best, and has best in this World, can say no better of it
than he finds, and daily feels, that his condition is but a wretched
condition; O wretched man that I am, etc.

The Point which I would stand on, That we all ought to be deeply sensible of
natural corruption: Or, we all ought much to lay to heart our fallen state by
nature. The Apostle Paul was a holy Man, yet very sensible of much unholiness,
a body of it, of which he was little other than the Soul, and this he groans
and sighs under; O wretched man that I am, etc. And, this written for our
Example: Take another instance in this Apostle, as soon as converted. And Saul
arose from the Earth, and when his Eyes were opened he saw no man, but they led
him by the Hand; and he was three Days without sight, and did neither eat nor
drink, Act. 9.9. Why did he neither eat nor drink for three Days? Doubtless he
was in a deep sense of his lost condition, as one in the gall of bitterness,
and bonds of iniquity, both by nature and practice: That his natural corruption
was so great a weight upon him afterward, as we here see it was by my Text, it
was much more heavy upon him at first view, when this bottomly gulf was first
opened to this self-conceited Pharisee, what I say is very likely, by the three
Days horror and astonishment, wherein he lay starving himself; Doubtless he
thought himself as unworthy to eat or drink, so unworthy to live, as the poor
Publican which smote his breast, and would not look up to Heaven, as not
judging himself worthy to go upon the Earth. The eating of the Passover with
sower Herbs might point at this, for their coming out of Egypt, snadowed their
coming out of spiritual bondage and misery, in which they were: And so the
miseries of natural bondage by sin, and our fall: and then their sower Herbs,
might well teach them, as to keep a sense of their bodily slavery and misery;
so especially to keep a deep sense of their soul-slavery and misery, and all
the sower things and conflicts of their inward condition. The poor Jailer may
be a further authority, for this Doctrine which I have observed: His eyes being
some thing opened, to see what a wretched Man he was by his nature and
practice, trembled, and would have made away himself, and came and fell at the
Apostles Feet, with a great outcry, What must I do to be saved? Act. 16.30.

And whereas I make the Proposition Universal, saying, That we all ought to be
deeply sensible of natural corruption. I ground it upon my Text, and the
Example that is given to follow, in such an eminent Man as the Apostle Paul
was: That the Apostle Paul was not exempted from natural corruption, nor from
this duty of deep-laying it to heart, neither are others. But then the Question
will be, by what Rule the Apostle Paul did this, for he himself says, that we
should follow him no otherwise, than as he followed Christ; By what Rule then
did the Apostle thus lay to heart his fallen state? And was his Rule universal,
that is, for all the fallen Sons of Adam? For this, see, 1 King. 8.38. When the
House, for communion between God and Man, was made and consecrated, this is the
great Law of fellowship and communion between God and Man, That even every one
should know the Plague of his heart. Now, by the Plague of the heart, is meant,
says Interpreters, principally our fallen and corrupt state of Soul by nature,
and then such particular special ebullitions thereof in act, to open scandal
and provocation; And this one Law is for Jew and stranger: And by knowing this
Plague of the heart, which every one was to do, means that they should be well
acquainted with their natural corruption, and actual transgressions, and deeply
bewail them, and truly, as having to do with an All-seeing and All-searching
God, who searches the heart: so it follows, in the next words, Verse. 39. What
Prayer or Supplication soever be made by any Man, or by all the People of
Israel, which shall know every Man the Plague of his own heart, and spread
forth his hands toward this house, then hear thou in Heaven thy
dewlling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every one according to his
ways, whose heart thou know, for thou, even thou know all the hearts of
the Children of Men. The New Testament concurreth to this, in as much as John
the Baptist thus began the Gospel, by calling upon all to repent, and so Christ
himself called upon all his hearers to repent, Mat. 4.17. The other of John the
Baptist, is, Mat. 3.2. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. This is the Power of God by the
Word, to change your hearts, and to open the everlasting Doors: By repenting,
he means, what he says further in his Sermon, Mat. 5* 3, 4, 5. Poor in spirit,
mourning for sin, attended with a desire of relief, a hungering and thirsting
for a better state. That is, Repentance is, that sinners be thoroughly convinced
of their lost condition by nature, and of their utter inability to make their
own relief and escape, from the displeasure of God due unto them by it, and
therefore hunger and thirst, that is, earnestly desire relief from God, in that
way which he has appointed in Christ through the Gospel, for the Salvation of
sinners. Thus, and in this Path the Publican was taught to come, begging mercy
for a sinner. He smote his breast, as that where he felt the Plague lay, and
said, God be merciful to me a sinner. I purpose to say no more, to prove the
truth of the Point.

For the Explication of this Doctrine, these things may be said, wherein the
further confirmation of the Point will arise. First. We should be deeply
sensible of natural corruption, in its being simply considered. Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. David had
fallen into great actual transgressions, of Murder and Whoredom, and he, that
he might practice repentance, according to the rule thereof, took to heart how
he came into the World; Behold, I am an old sinner so born, shaped in iniquity
in the Womb, and out of this shape I cannot change my self, and therefore I
complain to thee, O God, Do thou wash me thoroughly, and cleanse me thoroughly,
that is, justify and sanctify me with the Blood and Spirit of thine anointed
one, on whom thou have laid my help: So in Psalm. 8. What is sorry man, Enosh,
or wretched man, as the Apostles Epithet is in my Text, that thou art mindful
of such a forlorn Creature, which words also show, that we should be sensible
of our natural state in the Being, yea, in the first being of it in us. Our
Savior in his Sermon to the Woman of Canaan, confirms this that I am upon,
that we should all, Jew and Gentile, be sensible of corrupt nature in the being
of it. But he answered, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the House of
Israel; by these words he names the Jews state by nature, to make this Gentile
reflect upon her own state, as also such, and lost. Then came she and
worshipped, saying, Lord help me. As if she had said with much sorrow of heart,
if there be any lost Creature in the World, surely I am one. Then Christ
replies again. It is not meet to take the Childrens bread, and to give it to
Dogs. By which words Christ would insinuate more particularly to her, what the
state of us Gentiles is by nature, as Dogs most fierce against Sheep, oppo^^^
to all good, and inclined (as Dogs) to all ill, and mischievous qualities and
ways. By which words it is evident, that Christ would have this Woman well
acquainted with the being of her natural condition, that there is such a great
mischief befallen us, that we are by nature rather Dogs, and Bears, and Wolves,
and Tygars than Men, than holy Men as we were created; and that this poor Woman
did make this use of Christ's Doctrine, appears by her reply, And she said,
truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat off the Crumbs which fall from their Masters
Table, Mat. 15.24, 25, 26, 27. Truth Lord, I am more like a Dog, or any Brute,
than what I should be, and by my sin become as the Beast which perishes. 1.
Ignorant, darkened in my cogitations, profane, alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance, that is in me. Add to this, Rev. 3.17. Where we find
great blame is cast upon the Church of Laodicea, that she said, She was rich
and increased in goods, and needed nothing, and knew not that she was poor, and
blind, and wretched, (which is the word of my Text.) and naked. Did not know
this and that: 1. Did not deeply lay to heart, that by nature they were
corrupt, and in a wretched condition, and destitute of whatever should make
them truly blessed, truly rich, and truly wise, and truly happy; they were
vainly puffed up, it seems, with some few gifts and parts, and not aware of the
pravity of all, and of the whole that Man is by nature, and therefore proud, as
otherwise could not choose but be, as a Peacock of his Feathers, whilst he
looks only on his Tail, and not on his Legs.

Secondly, We should be deeply sensible of natural corruption, whole Body, a
great, and large corporation of all wickedness, defiling and destroying all; so
was Paul, Who shall deliver me from this Body, etc. If thine eye be evil, the
whole Body shall be filled with darkness. That is, says the margent, If thy
affections be corrupt, and given to this World; If a sinners affections be
naught, Set upon this World, and any of the lusts of it, he is under the weight
and slavery of the whole body of corruption, Mat. 6.23. And this does Christ
preach, to make sinners sensible of the extensive being of natural corruption,
that it is a little leaven which has leavened the whole lump. The Apostle was
sensible of natural corruption, as in the being of it, so in the extensiveness
of its being, he was sensible of concupiscence, that Fire which is in the
nature to evil, and he was sensible of the extensiveness of this evil, -- All
manner of concupiscence, Romans 7.7, 8. I had not known lust, says the margent,
concupiscence, that is, I had not been pricked at heart for it, and deeply
sensible of it, but that the convincing power of the Lord helped on this work.
But sin taking occasion by the commandment stirred and irritated this lust, and
set all on fire, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, that is, wicked
lusts and heart-burnings. Angels appeared in white, to show the purity of their
nature, say the Dutch, on Act. 1.10. And we should be always in black, in
mourning, to show the impurity of our nature in the vastness of it; for, from
the crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot, we are nothing but bruises and
putrefying sores, which are not dressed at all, nor bound up, but all open and
running, and stinking in every ones Nosthrils, of which in bodily matters we
are deeply sensible. All these metaphors are made into an allegory, on purpose
to make fallen man sensible of the extensiveness of his misery by his Fall,
that he is bruised all over, in his Head, in his Breast, in his Legs, from top
to bottom, no part sound and incorrupt. The Scripture speaks of being born in
sin, and of being altogether born in sin, the one speaks the being of our
fallen state, of which we should be sensible, and the other speaks of the
vastness and extensiveness of the being, of which also we should be sensible;
Thou art altogether born in sin, Joh. 9.34. They spoke truth, though they did
it not to a good end: Yet the words in themselves are true, and have a good
scope, that we might be made sensible of our fallen state, and how great it is,
how great our fall is, how it has bruised and putrified, and spoiled all.

Thirdly, We should be deeply sensible of natural corruption, in all the
properties of it: As, First, The aversness of it to all good: If natural
corruption were a mere impotency to all good, it were not so evil. But it is an
aversation; that a body can never go to meal with a stomach, how sensible is
any one of this, as a great misery? This is our case spiritual, we can never go
to pray, to hear, to meditate, to any holy duty, but our hearts hang off, and
hang this way and that way, that we go^ to Heaven, as if we were going to Hell:
Should we not be deeply sensible of this? that we are still a silly Dove
without heart, to all that is heavenly. The poor Mariners were very sensible,
that they found one in their Ship which untrimmed it, Jon. 1. This Man, though
a good man, yet when the Ship and he tossed, and like all to be drowned, he was
so drowsy that he could not hold open his eyes, like the Disciples of Christ,
when their Master was ready to be leized on, yet were drowsy and could not
watch and pray; Should not such an indisposedness to good, if the body of death
had no other bad property, deeply be bewailed? I have heard some complain, and
indeed it should be for a lamentation, that sometimes even in this duty of
hearing, have not been able to hold open their eyes, and yet at all common
business as well awake as can be. The Church was called upon to this and that
Divine duty, and she had put off her Coat, and knew not how to put it on;
natural corruption has this ill property, never ready, nor dressed, and fitted
to any good, and yet at the same time ready and dressed to any thing that is
evil, as wise to this, as foolish to any thing that is good: The natural man,
or animal man, is a Soul too low still for any matter divine; which thing
alone, if there were no other evil property in natural corruption, should be
deeply laid to heart.

A Second property of natural corruption, is perverseness. Vain Man would be
wise, though he be born as the wild Ass-colt, Job. 11.12. This Zophar spoke of
Job, as seeing him perverse, as he thought; but he was right enough as to the
thing, though not as to Job in this matter. Thus we are by nature, of no more
reason than a wild Ass, and yet as unturnable as that Creature. The old Man is
proud, and wilful, yea presumptuous, yea of enmity and despite if resisted, as
Lions and Dragons are, spitting their some and poison as Cats* in the face of
all that contradict. It Is said of Judas, (...)
that he became headlong, Act. 1.18. He was so in his life, for he would on in
his work of betraying Christ, though convinced by Christ's own preaching, and
told to his Face that he should betray him. And so are the ways of corrupt
nature carried headlong: He takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the
counsels of the froward are carried headlong, Joh. 5.13. And all this
continually, as the Blackamore that cannot change his skin. No place better
sets out the bad property of natural corruption, then that Genesis 6.5. God saw
that the wickedness of man was great, and that every imagination of the thought
of his heart was evil, and only evil, and that continually. For such a visible,
as well as audible Sermon, as Noah preached, of 120 Years long, would surely
have turned them from their sins, had they not been desperately obstinate, and
so continually, of which God was sensible, and complained, and was grieved at
his heart that he made man; And shall God so much lay to heart the depraved
state of a man, and man himself not lay it to heart at all?

Fourthly, We should be deeply sensible of natural corruption, in the
consequence of it. It is a body of death, a body of this death; that is, it
disposes us to all the wrath of God, both in this World, and in the World to
come. And therefore does the Apostle cry out here in my Text, as one utterly
loft; O wretched man that I am, Who shall deliver me, etc. And they likewise
who were pricked at heart, by the Apostle Peter's preaching, with the sense of
their sinful state, Cried out, Men and Brethren, What shall we do to be saved?
Which are Scriptures of purpose, to show, that we should be deeply sensible of
the evil consequence of corrupt nature, as it will destroy Soul and Body. Judas
is called a Child of Perdition, and so are we called Children of wrath by
nature, that is, such as are not under mercy, (...), not pitied.
as the expression is rightly rendered in the Queens translation, 1 Pet. 2.10.
Now, how are Malefactors affected with the consequence of their evil way, when
they are going to the Gallows, especially when they have no hope of mercy, when
they be not under talk of mercy and pardon. Now, our natural state is death,
without all mercy, that is the sentence pronounced upon it, if the state so
abide, a carnal state, it is death without all mercy, and every carnal man
should speak of himself, as the Apostle Peter does, as one not under mercy, or
as one that has not yet obtained mercy, but lies liable, as a Prisoner
condemned, every hour to Execution. I take it, that their atonement day,
spoken of, Levit. 23.27. Wherein they were to afflict their Souls upon pain of
death, had principal reference to their state of sin by nature, that body of
sin which they brought into the World with them, which exposed them, and us all
unto death, and all misery in this World, and that to come: and, if it be so,
then you have the Point in hand proved, and the reason of it, why we should be
deeply sensible of corrupt nature, as well as of all that flows from it,
because God commands it, and commands it upon great penalty, We die for it
else, unless we afflict our Souls, under the sense of our fallen state, and
Gods displeasure belonging thereunto, that Soul which does not so well die for
it; their afflicting day was a day to go to the Root, and to cast salt and
brine upon the springs of wickedness, which if they did not, the wrath of God
seized on their Roots. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade
Men, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.11. We persuade Men. To what? Answ. To look
well about them, that they be not found in their carnal state, when Christ
comes to Judgment: So that the deepest sense of this thing should be upon us
that can possibly be, as if we were now going before the Judgment of quick and
dead, and all in our sins: or as if we were going to the Wedding of a great
Prince, and had not one rag on our backs, to cover our nakedness.

streams from this Fountain. If we should mourn over the evil Womb, then over
all the evils, which this Womb brings forth. And yet what twins and what tens,
and what great man-sins and provocations, does this evil Womb bring forth
every where at this day, and yet who lays to heart either Mother or Children? I
hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright; no Man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turns to his course, as the
Horse rusheth into the Battle, Jer. 8.6.

Giving themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all iniquity with
greediness, and drink in all abominations, as the Fish does Water. So far from
sense of all sin, either in the heart, or in the life, that all such frame of
spirit is scoffed at: If a man do but cast the least discountenance on the
greatest sin; What? you are a Phanatick, and ready, as Swine, to turn and tear,
and rent such, as cast such Pearls before them, as wholesome and seasonable
reproofs: and are as the wild Ass that snuffeth up the wind, and in the heat
of her lust cannot be turned away, Febris accedit, the mad Feavour will and
must have its course, though Heaven or Hell bear upon breaking off, or going
on. They say in the pride and stoutness of their hearts, to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant. To talk of a body of death, Lord, what
strange language would this be now adays, and if a Man should chance to sigh,
as the Apostle, O wretchea man that I am, What will become of me? that Hellish
cordial, I doubt, would be readily administered, God dam-me, thou will do well
enough. Never was it such a God-daring time for wickedness, If it be such a
God-damning time, as persons p^ay, Hell will be full of Souls ind^ed.
for many Ages surely, as this. Men have made their hearts as an Adamant, that
they may not repent: and seared their Consciences with a hot Iron, that they
may be sin-proof, and not fall before the greatest wickedness, nor the greatest
judgment of God. That capital curse, I fear, is inflicted on many, of judicial
hardness of heart, Isa. 6.10, 11, 12. Make the heart of this People fat, and
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed:
Then I said, Lord, how long? and he answered till the Cities be wasted without
Inhabitants, and the Houses without Men and the Land be utterly desolate, and
the Lord have removed Men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst
of the Land. This will be a strong reproof indeed, if this should be the
reproof upon us, and yet very pleasing.

Paul had many) did the Apostle complain, as here of the Body of Death. Do you
any where read him say, O wretched man that I am, I am poor, I am in Prison,
Who shall deliver me out of these sad conditions? Alas, he made nothing of
hunger, of nakedness, of stripes, of deaths often, but gloried in them. But the
body of this death that made him fetch deep sighs, O wretched man that I am, he
never called himself so for any bodily evil whatsoever. The Israelites were
enjoined, when they came with their first fruits, to make a solemn confession
of their great unworthiness, of God's great bounty and goodness; A Syrian ready
to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with
a few, Deuteronomy. 26.5. If you be deeply sensible, then this is the allay in all
your glory still, in all your mirth, this is the qualm that comes over your
heart, that makes it sad; what, a wretch ready to perish came I into this holy
and good Land; And, why should such a dead Dog as I be treated thus with grace,
which abuse all that is bestowed on me. Thus you look back to the hole of the
Pit, out of which dug daily, and sigh, if deeply sensible.

Secondly, If you be deeply sensible of natural corruption, then are you very
vile in your own eyes; I am more vile, says Agar, than any man. David calls
himself a Beast, and the Cananitish Woman owns her self to be a Dog; and if
Christ had called her a Viper, a Toad, a Monster, no doubt she would have owned
it: If I wash me with Snow water, and make me never so clean, yet shall thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me, Job. 9.31. If ye
be indeed sensible of your naughty state by nature, ye are Persons of low eyes,
ye think the Clothes ye wear too good for you, because ye defile them; the Meat
you eat too good for you, because to the unclean, all things are unclean; and
the Earth too good to bear you, because you are such a great load of filth,
such a going Dunghill; If ye be indeed sensible of natural corruption, ye are
poor in Spirit, unworthy that Christ or any good thing should come under your
root; This Apostle means all this, when he calls himself a wretch, laboring
under a Body of Death. The Leper under the Law, and the Person with a Running
Issue, how low and loathsome were they in their own eyes, loath and ashamed to
come near, nay to come in fight of any one.

Thirdly, If ye be deeply sensible of natural corruption, then ye are as this
Apostle in my Text, at an utter loss in your selves, what to do for
deliverance, from the guilt and power of it. O wretched man that I am, Who
shall deliver me, I am utterly to seek to save my self, so is all the Creation.
I cannot deliver my self, and who of all the Creatures of God, in Heaven or in
Earth, that can deliver me? To which of the Saints or Angels shall I turn? So
the Prophet Isaiah saw himself at an utter loss, upon the sense of his vile
condition. Then said I, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. He saw no way but one with him; I am cut off! So is the
reading in the Margent; I am gone and lost utterly now, the holy God has seen
what an unholy wretch I am, he has got a view of me, and a sent of me, and
surely he will think on it for ever, what an ugly sight he saw, and what a
filthy smell he smelt! Do you feel your selves undone by sin? by reason of this
Running Issue, and that in your nature: Are ye a burden to your selves, because
a burden and grief to the Holy Spirit of God? Or, are you not clean: and pure
in your own eyes, and cock-sure ye shall go to Heaven when you die, you have
lived so well amongst all your neighbors, and have done so much good, and
every one speaks so well of you? Can such a state do amiss? Our Savior says,
the whole need no Physician, and that he came to save lost ones, such who are
so deeply possessed, with the sign and sense of their sinful state by nature,
and life and conversation, that they cry out, Who will deliver me, wretched me?
most sinful and forlorn me? Isaac was at a loss for an Offering, and doubtless
thought at last that he must be burnt.

Fourthly, If ye be deeply sensible of the body of death, Naaman the Syrian,
how he prised any Person or means, that could cure his Leprosy! And the
Manslayer, how he prized, and pursued the City of refuge: And, what would not
one of those pursued Man-slayers have given, for but one Foot within the Gate
of the City of refuge! To them that are under the deep sense of sin, the
Redeemer that is come from Zion, to turn away ungodliness from Jacob, is very
precious. O how precious was Christ, to this Apostle, which my Text mentions,
as you read in the next Verse. O wretched Man that I am: Who shall deliver me?
I thank God through Jesus Christ: As a Man almost drowned, having some one that
can swim, leaping in, and taking hold of him; O how does he thank God for this
friend I The Apostle Paeul being deeply sensible of his wretched state by
nature, did so esteem Christ, that the truth is, he esteemed all else, in
comparison* but as dung and dross; Nebuchadnezar which was brought as a Beast
from grass, from creeping upon all four; O how he magnified the true God for a
while! So does that sinner magnify and extol Christ, Dan. 4.34.
that is brought from crawling, like a Toad upon all four, in the filth and
poison of his natural corrupt on, The black crabbed Tree of the Cross has made
Christ and my Soul very entire, (says Mr. Rutherford) He is my Song in the
Night: So I say, the black Crab-stock of natural corruption, makes Christ and
that sinner very dear and entire, and his Song in dark Night, who is in the
pains and travels of natural corruption. The Fountain open for sin and for
uncleanness, is very precious to that Leper, which indeed, and from his heart,
cries out unclean.

Christ, Luke 8.47. and confessed her condition, and how long it had been so
with her, and what ineffectual means she had used, and yet wasted all on them.
Though your corrupt nature be hid from the eyes of men, and from your own eyes
much, to much, yet not in the least hid from the eyes of Christ; and therefore
come trembling to him, and confess all your vileness to him, as far as you are
able (but alas, what a hard task do I mention (...)) and how long you have
layne in this forlorn state, and do as Beggars by the Highways sides, pull
off all Plasters from every soar, and take heed of hiding any sin with
Fig Leaves, as your Father Adam, let the great Physician see and know all,
every putrefied soar, that is not bound up, nor mollified with ointment; and
who knows but his eye may move his heart toward you, to pity you, and to
play the good Samaritan, and to dress your filthy souls and soars, and to
anoint them and mollify them. This I think is the meaning of the Prophet, Isa.
42.18. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind that ye may see.

Hearken to me ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord, look
to the roots whence ye were hewn, Isa. 51.1.
and to the hole of the Pit whence ye are dug, meaning Abraham, who was an
Idolater, and dead in trespasses and sins, as well as others. The Body of Death
is the hole of the Pit, out of which comes all the Frogs and Locusts, which
crawle and swarm in your lives. Many Professors not bewailing this well and
thoroughly, as they should, build a brave House to look on, but on the Sand,
which with storms falls, and the fall thereof is great. The time of loss is
to be looked into and considered. Damni dati tempus inspicitur. And how old is
our loss of God's Image? How inveterate is our wound? How old is the old Man?
as old as Methusalah? The old man came into the World with you, and a Miracle
it is, that it had not with its great weight, like a Millstone about your
Necks, pressed you to your place long ago; yea, the old man came into the
World, with this world that now is, and with the other world that is drowned,
and it will bring this to the Fire at last, and from burning to burning; it is
very proper work to be casting tears upon such sparks, as will burn to the
lowest Hill.

Secondly, It Is needful work this, to know every Man the Plague of his own
heart. To know it, that is to sigh and groan under it, as here the Apostle Paul
does. When Daniel had received that sad Vision of Nebuchadnezar's ruin, the
lopping down of that tall Tree which reached to Heaven, and the sad condition
of a beast which he was to be cast into. Daniel remained speechless for one
hour, and his thoughts troubled him, and he was not able to say a word to the
King, but sighed and looked sad, Dan. 4.19. And an hour more (it may be) he
would have stood sad and sighing before the King and silent, if the King had
not forced matter from him. And this carriage was very needful to set home
things upon the King's heart, and to make him look about him well. And would I
could so preach to all you this Day, and in this place, who are in your natural
condition. If I were silent now for one hour more, and did only sigh over all
you carnal and unregenerate Men and Women, and look sad, and sometimes mourn,
would it not be very needful, as hearts are now heardened, well and deeply to
affect you? Certainly it would so make you look about you well, before the
great Lopper death come. It Is very needful work for you and me to be at, this
oft-bewailing our fallen state, and the body of this death, because we are
become as Nebuchadnezar by his fall: Beasts that perish, even we that were in
honor, in higher honor than Nebuchadnezar was before his fall. We are become
as Beasts in some respects, and much worse than Beasts in other respects; We
are in this state without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
World, which he calls upon every one to remember, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Wherefore
remember that ye in times past were thus and thus, etc.

Thirdly, This is to go to the Root of our Disease, to lay an Axe to the Root.
The Apostle was wise, when he fell upon the main body of wickedness in him. Son
of man cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, and say, Thus says the Lord
God unto all Jerusalem, thy Birth and thy Nativity is of the Land of Canaan,
thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite, and thy Navel was not
cut, nor salted, etc. Ezekiel. 16.2, 3. You cannot know your abominations, as you
should, that is, be affected with them, as you should, unless you look to the
Root, from whence they all spring, and fix your eyes and your hearts there
well, according to this wholesome instruction of the Lord. We are by nature
Amorites and Hittites, as wild as any, Children of wrath as well as others,
and in us: (i.e.) In our nature dwells no good, but the seeds of all
wickedness; and until we thus go to the bottom, we do in our humiliations but
skin over soars, and not search and cleanse them well. This, this Apostle
calls for, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leaven; what a deal a-do
there was to search out leaven, and to get totally rid of it; among the Jews
much is said of it: the Apostle would have us as industrious about corrupt
nature, which he calls old leaven, in all our humiliations, wherein there
should be soul-examinations, that we should fall close upon our evil hearts and
state within, and smite upon them, and cry out much upon them. Damni dans
causam, damnum ipsum dedisse videtur. The old leaven, is the cause of all the
sins and miseries we daily fall into; This, this therefore we should especially
bewail, and labor about, to pluck up the root of bitterness.

Fourthly, There is no dealing with any actual sin, without effectual dealing
with the body of sin. To go to lave a Pool, and not first to deal with the
Spring, as it is foolish, so it is an endless work. How can a clean thing come
out of an unclean? If the heart remain still filthy, How is it possible to make
the life holy? Hence it is, that the heart is so much called for to be
cleansed, and that sinck to be well looked after, because there is the seat of
natural pravity, and the very Core of all corruption. Cut off branches, as you
would lop a Tree, cut them off all, and leave the roots through the sent of mud
they will grow, as Job says; every occasion and temptation, so long as the
nature remains unrenewed and unlookt to, will make sin break out afresh, and
the Dog will return to his own vomit. The Queens Daughter is therefore called
upon, to forget her Father's House, or else she would be hankering to be there
again. They which came out of Egypt in body, and did not come out spiritually,
as to their souls, how unsteadfast were they and their righteousness, as the
morning dew, and in their hearts went back again to Egypt. If any Israelite
having taken in War a Heathen Woman, and beautiful, that he had a desire to
marry, he was first to bring her home to his House, and shave her Head, and
pare her Nails, and was to put off the raiment of her captivity, and then she
was to bewail her Father and her Mother a full Month, etc. That is, her
Heathenish state wherein born and bred, she was to bewail, and taught by this
paring of her Nails, and changing the Raiment of her Captivity, to look after
deliverance from her inward captivity, and for a new state, a new Father and
Mother, and all new, her hands, yea her very Nails; and all this but little
enough to make her forget her Father's House, and to forsake old haunts, and
customs, and ways. Who knows not, but that Nails and Hairs, and such
excrements are most apt and ready to grow again; and yet not more apt and ready
than sin is, though pared and shaved, if it be not dealt thoroughly with, in the
heart, and in the root.

Finally, Without this deep sense of our natural condition, Christ will not be
precious to us, nor indeed desirable, who is the only Physician for this great
cure: We shall be righteous in our own eyes, as the Pharisee, and not care for
any righteousness else, but our own, though we may talk of faith, and of the
righteousness of Christ, as many Christians do. We shall be as Country People,
which are whole as a Fish, and laughed at all Physicians. Till the Apostle Paul
was smitten down from Heaven, and his eyes opened, to see this body of death,
of which he complains in my Text, he was alive and brisk, and who but he, for a
holy and a happy man. But when the Commandment came in Authority upon him,
which he thought he had perfectly kept, sin revived, and he died. It Is the
poor, and blind, and wretched, and naked, that Christ counsels to come and buy
of him Eye Salve, and Garments to cover their nakedness, Rev. 3.17, 18. As we
are Proselites, (i.e.) Comers to Christ, so we are cured of our spiritual
Leprosy, and such Proselites we will never be, but as we see and feel our lost
state by nature, and our great necessity of him. Who looks after the things
which they do not need? Ho, he that thirsts, etc. and such will prise Milk
and Water. I cannot get a House in this Town, wherein to leave drink-silver in
my Masters name, says Mr Rutherford, There is no sale for Christ in the north,
(meaning at Aberdeen) he is like to lie long on my hand, ere any accept him.
Thus it is, with all unsensible and unheart-broken sinners, though at the brink
of Hell, yet will not come unto Christ, that they may be saved from their sins,
and from the wrath of God.

FINIS.
THE REMEDY OF NATURAL Corruption.
Being A SERMON ON Romans vii. xxv. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Romans vii. xxv. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THese words are an Answer to a sad Question: the Question is in the words
foregoing, -- Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? v. 24. That is,
from natural corruption, the guilt and the dominion and Power of it: This
Apostle was at an utter loss in himself, and as to all others, and then God
revealed an able Physician to him, as these words of my Text tell us. -- I
thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Christ is revealed to Sinners, which despair of all help in themselves, or in
any other Creature; Such will thank God for him, as here this wretched Man
does. Mr. Rutherford speaks, of a sorrow that has no eyes. This Apostle's
sorrow was such, for a time. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? He knew not of any delive^er, and then God became eyes
to the blind, and helped the sorrowful sinner, and the blind sinner to eyes, to
see a Savior, and an All-sufficient one. -- I thank God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

When Isaac was at a loss for an offering, and Abraham also, when the sorrow of
both had no eyes, God was sight and help to them both. Here is the wood* but
where is the Sacrifice, i. e. One to die? My Son, God will provide. And he did
so. Donatum non petitum gratius est, says the Civilian. A gift not asked, is
the most free. So did God provide that offering for Isaac, and so did he
provide this offering, for this Apostle, and wretched Man, and so he does for
every wretched Man which has the benefit of him, he is Donatum non petitum, to
every fallen Son of Adam, that is raised by him, He was found of him that asked
not after him.

Secondly, This may be further observed in these words, That God does not
barely show us the means of our good, the proper means of our Souls good, but
enable us to make effectual use of them to that end. If I should paraphrase
upon this Text, it would be to this effect. Wretched man, I am burdened much
with a body of sin and death, which is so heavy that I think often* it will one
time or other sink me to the lowest Hell: and I am as helpless as to all
others, as impotent and miserable in my self. O doubly wretched man that I am,
and am like to be, who will, who can deliver me? Yet I have some help showed to
me I thank God, but no body else he has in my blind and wretched conditi^n,
showed me an able Physician, by name. Jesus Christ our Lord, anointed and
allowed under his own hand, to help all such wretched Creatures as I am, and he
does enable me to make use of him to my burdened Souls ease and rest. This
Scripture and such like show, that there is full and effectual relief for all
burdened sinners, who are ready to sink under the burden of their sin and
misery.

That Christ is the proper remedy of natural corruption. I thank God through
Jesus Christ, etc. He whom God the Father has sealed, sanctified, and sent
into this World for this end, to Cure natural corrup^ion, is, Jesus Christ our
Lord, as the Apostle here calls him. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because he has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent
me to bind up the broken hearted to proclaim liberty unto the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound, Isa. 61.1. By Captives, and such
as are in Prison, is meant sinners in their unregenerated condition, who are
under the power and slavery of sin, and carried Captive by the evil one at his
will; and by broken hearted and poor, he means such as are deeply affected and
afflicted with the body of death, natural corruption, in the guilt and
pollution of it; these is Christ anointed with the Spirit of the Lord, to
relieve and help, to bind them up, and all their wounds and putrified soars,
and to heal them; and to preach liberty to them, and to bring them into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God; and such as are shut up under the power of
sin and Satan, as in a Prison, to break down these strong holds, and to open
the everlasting Doors to himself, the King of Glory, to make a Prison a Palace,
a Slave a Son, and Heir with him of all; with this compare, Isa. 32.2. And a
man shall be a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as
Rivers of Water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land,
and the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear
shall hearken, the heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the
Tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly. Men in their natural
condition may be in a calm; as long as the strong Man rules, all is at peace;
but these will be in a tempest, and a terrible one, first or last, when their
Consciences come to be convinced, as the Apostles here was. And then who is
able? and who is appointed to allay these storms? To this the Prophet answers.
-- A man shall be a hiding place, and a covert from wind and rain: but, so a
Man, that he is also God, or else he could do nothing at these winds and
storms. That these things are thus spiritually to be understood, appears by the
next words, v. 3, 4. And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, etc. So
that it means heart-storms and tempest, and heart-help, and Christ God-Man,
that is to be the helper, and the great Covert in these storms and tempests,
and the great Rock for shade, where the poor Soul is so scorched with the heat
of God's wrath, that he is ready to faint and die. Blindness, and deafness, and
rashness, they all speak one thing, the ill state we are in by nature, blind,
deaf, dumb, and yet rash, and mad, and confident enough, and the Man Christ
Jesus, who is called Emanuel God with us, he is the appointed curer of all
these Maladies.

This is a proof of the Point in hand in general: I will descend to particulars
of our fallen state, and show you that Christ is the appointed and proper
remedy, of all the diseases of our Souls. There are three things complained of,
and supposed, in the Apostles complaint in my Text, one is a body of death,
that is, our natural depraved state, which is the filth of sin.

Secondly, He complains of the Body of this Death, that is, the obligation of
sin, to the wrath of God, temporal and eternal, which we call the guilt of sin:
These two are expressed in his complaint. Now there is a third thing supposed,
in these complaints of a bad state, which is, that he would fain have a better,
or else he would not have complained of this, no more than other unregenerated
Sinners do. Now as to all these three, Christ is the proper and appointed
remedy and relief, of miserable and wretched Man.

First, As to the Body of Death, (i e.) as to the fi^th of sin, the depravation
of our nature, of which I spoke in the other Sermon, Christ is the remedy of
this, root and branch; see Isa. 51.9, 10, 11. Awake, awake, put on strength, O
Arm of the Lord, Awake as in the ancient days, in the Generations of old, Art
thou not it, that has cut Rahab? and wounded the Dragon? Art thou not it which
have dried up the Sea, and the Waters of the great deep, that have made the
depths of the Sea a way for the ransomed to pass over? Therefore the redeemed
of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy
shall be upon their head, and they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow
and mourning shall flee away. Now, put all these borrowed words into plain
English, and what deep must this mean, the drying up of which makes the way to
Zion, where everlasting joy is obtained? This deep must necessarily mean, the
bottomless Gulf of natural corruption, shadowed fitly by the deep, that has in
many parts no bottom; and as Christ was he that went before our Fathers, and
dried up that deep Sea, and made it a way to go through to Zion, and to the
holy Land: So it is he that dries up the deep Sea of sin in our nature, and so
makes way to the holy state and the holy Church the true Zion, in which is
everlasting joy. Now forasmuch, as corrupt nature, puts forth under some chief
head and grand lust, which is as King to all the Ch^ldren of pride, as Pharaoh
and his Princes to all the Body of Egypt; Who fights against these? Ans.
Christ: He is remedy for root and branch of the Body of Death. Art not thou it
which has cut Rahab, and wounded the head of the Dragon? The Prophet speaks
still in allusion to Pharaoh, and his Princes, which he calls, Crok^dile, or
Dragon, that is, a Sea-Dragon, wherewith Egypt abounded. This Sea of natural
corruption has some Sea-Dragons, great Soul-devouring Monsters swimming and
playing in it; And, who deals with these? Ans. He that dries up the deep, that
is, Christ. Art not thou he that has cut Rahab, and wounded the head of the
Dragon? This Text leads us by the hand, to that first promise made to Adam.
-- The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, which means our state
of sin, as headed and organized by Satan, through any particular prevailing
lust whatsoever, our state of sin is there spoken of, as headed by Satan, who
organiseth the old man, as Christ does the new. And this surely is that great
slaughter, and the Towers falling, which the Prophet especially points at,
upon the fall of which, the light of the Moon becomes as the light of the Sun,
and the light of the Sun as seven days, Isa. 30.26. For the says, they shall
be truly penitent, and cast away their Idols, i.e. their dearest lusts, as a
menstruous cloth, saying. Get ye hence, verse. 22. And the slaughters of all
our Idols, and the Mould wherein they are cast, to wit, our corrupt nature,
these are the great slaughters, and high imaginations, and proud affections
boiling over, yet subdued, these are the high Towers and strong Holds falling,
It was Christ that said to Man and Woman, Let them have dominion over-the Fish
in the Sea, and Fowls in the Heavens, and over all the Works of God's hands. So
it is Christ that says to fallen man, let him have dominion over sin, and
Satan that leads it, let it be by what cunning strong temptation soever, let
him rule over the Devil, and all the works of his hands, and let him put all
under his Feet.

Secondly, As to the body of this death, i.e. as to the guilt of sin, that
whereby as a Transgressor of God's will, Man stands bound over to the Judgment
of the great Day, to Eternal wrath and condemnation; Christ is the proper
remedy as to this also, to cancil every bond and handwriting of the Law and
Conscience against us, and to make us stand spotless before the Throne of the
great and most Holy God: See Zech. 13.1. In that Day there shall be a Fountain
opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and
for uncleanness. By sin is meant guilt, which Christ takes away by his blood;
and uncleanness, means the filth of our corrupt nature, which Christ purges by
his Spirit, which is a Spirit of Judgment and Burning: Of this I have spoken in
the last head I was upon; I have now only to show you, that Christ cures the
body of this death, that is, the guilt which we continually contract by our
corrupt state, and the obligation which this makes to the wrath of God, both
in this World, and in the World to come, and sets us in favor above. That
Christ does this for fallen Man; see Dan. 9.24 Seventy week^ are determined
upon thy People, and upon thy holy City, to finish the transgression, and to
make an end of sin, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the Vision and the Prophecy, etc.
And to anoint the most Holy, etc: By the Transgression here mentioned, is
meant, the Jews killing of Christ, and wishing his blood upon them, and by
sealing up the Vision, and the Prophecy, means the accomplishing of what God
had showed this Prophet, and other Prophets, concerning the Incarnation and
death of Christ. At such a time he shall come in Man's nature, and at such a
time he shall die, and by his death make an end of wickedness, that is, as to
the reigning power of it, and as to the obliging power of it: For, as if this
Prophet had said, He shall by his death satisfy the Justice of God, and dying
as such a spotless Lamb and Sacrifice, as one that has fulfilled all God's
wills, as one indeed after his own heart, he shall impute all this as theirs
who shall believe on him, and so procure their pardon, the favor of God, and
an everlasting righteousness, and well-pleasingness before God, and so make an
end of guilt utterly, that if it be sought for, it shall no where be found. The
Apostle Peter also confirms this that Christ cures the body of this death,
i. e the guilt of fin; For Christ suffered once for sin, the Just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.12. That he might bring us to
God: that is, That he might reconcile us to, and bring us into favor with God.

Thirdly, It is supposed by the complaint of this wretched state, that the
Apostle would have a better: His complaint of sin and depravation, and the loss
of God's Image, supposes that he would have holiness, and God's Image lost
restored: now as to this also, Christ is the proper remedy, as to destroy the
old Man, so to restore the new; as it is he that bind, the strong man, and
spoileth all his goods, so it is he that creates the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. He that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified, are all one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call
them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. He it is that sanctifies, and we are they which are
sanctified, and all this is of one; by the same Blood and Spirit by which as
such an undertaker of our sin, he sanctified himself, by the merit and efficacy
of the same he sanctifies us, who are not sinners merely by imputation and
deputation, as he was, but inherently. Christ's Blood and Spirit is the Laver
of regeneration, and the Fullers Soap that makes us white, and changes our
black-more skin. The Earth was without form, and vo^d, [tohu, bohu,] and the
Spirit of Christ fluttered upon it, and brought it in a little time to such a
glorious new thing, than what it was in its first Creation. So it is the same
Spirit of Christ, that fluttereth upon our Souls, which by nature are another
Chaos, and makes them a new Creation. To this I think the Apostle points, 2
Cor. 4.6. From whom I borrow this Metaphor. But God who causes the light to
shine out of darkness, etc. It was to Christ that the Father spoke, Come, let
us make Man in our Image; and it is he and the Father that work hitherto by the
Holy Ghost, that speak one to another; Come, let us quicken this dead Soul, and
make him stand up from the dead, and bear our Name in his Forehead, our
similitude and likeness. When the Prophet Ezekiel had said, that David should
be their Prince for ever, meaning Christ, he further says, in the Person of
this David, to wit, Christ, -- The Heathen shall know that I the Lord do
sanctify Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for ever
more, Ezekiel. 37.25.28. compared; It is this Zerubbabel's hand, that laid the
Foundation, and it is his hand that finisheth it, and therefore the charge is,
that none despise the little small beginings of it, though never so small. As
Christ can remove guilt and filth in one day, which is much rubbish indeed: So
he can make a new Creature as soon, if he please. He made the Thief a new man
quickly, and carried him to Heaven with Him that Day, He made Him, and finished
Him, and Housed Him, and all in a Day; He made but a Days work; nay, but a few
Hours work to finish Grace and Glory.

These things of the new state does Christ, and so as not to be undone. He
shall not fail, or be discouraged, till he have set Judgment in the Earth, and
the Isles shall wait for his Law, Isa. 42, 4. There be many discouraging things,
in the removal of natural corruption, as in any work I know, enough to quench
the Spirit of Christ quite, but it seems, that he is under such a Law; and
such an assistance from the Father, that he must know no discouragement, but
must on with the work against all opposition, and set and establish judgment,
that is, the state of the new Creature, or the work of grace; he must make the
new Creature, and he must establish it, i. e. so make it, that it may never be
marred again, as the Image of God in the first Adam was. Christ threw out filth
so, that the Devil cannot easily fetch it in again. And Christ build so upon
himself the Chief corner Stone, and firm Rock, that no storms can overturn,
Job is a great instance. The Apostle says, That Charity never fails; If our
love never fail, it is because that God's love to us in Christ, never fails.
The love of Christ is unchangeable, and so he makes ours, that much water
cannot quench it. Christ ordains us to bring forth much fruit, and our fruit to
remain, Joh. 15.16. When Polycarp was set on an Ass, and carried to his doom,
he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, be of good cheer, O Polycarp, and play
the Man, the Speaker no Man saw, but the voice was heard by many of us, says
the History. And if any one did play the Man in his suffering, he did. Have
respect to thine age, tender thy life; swear by the fortune of Caesar: repent
of what is past, and say remove the wicked. But he looking about with a
steadfast countenance upon the wicked Multitude, said, Remove O Lord these
wicked. -- Fourscore and six years have I served Christ, and he never offended
me in any thing; And, how then can I revile my King, that has thus kept me?
The pro-consul still urged him, but he still as stoutly resisted him, and
replied, I am a Christian; and there was no turning of him with all that they
could say or do. The first Work of grace in our first Parents was lost, but the
grace we now have by Christ, eating of that Tree of Life, is preserved for
ever, and none can pluck out of his hand.

Secondly, Christ does this excellent work of the new Creature, alone. But now
once in the end of the World, has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice
of himself, Heb. 9.26* What sacrifices soever have been used, they did not
mean, that any could remove Man's guilt or filth, but all pointed at Christ the
sacrificing of himself, and that this, and this alone, is the remedy of fallen
and sinful Man. He trod the Wine press of the wrath of God alone, and of the
People none with him, Isa. 63.3. David duell'd it with Goliath, and had nothing
but a contemptible weapon, a Sling, and a Stone. And so Christ duell'd it, with
all the Enemies of Man's salvation, and had nothing but a contemptible weapon,
a body subject to infirmities. Christ would not put any of this work, out of
his own hands to be done, -- Who his own self bare our sins, in his own body on
the Tree, that we being dead to sin should live to righteousness, by whose
stripes we are healed, 1 Pet. 2.24. Christ had none to help him, to bear the
Cross which God laid on him, though he had one to help bear the Cross, which
Men laid on him. The weight of our sins, as punished with infinite wrath and
torment; Alas, who could bear this Cross? or be compelled to it? and yet all
the damned are compelled to bear this Cross, and so will all reprobates. As in
one part of our restoration, Christ was alone, so in all the parts of it,
foundation and top-stone he lays both alone, and none of the People with him.
-- None offered to him first, not last. Look to Abraham your Father, and to
Sarah that bare you, for I called him alone, and increased him and blessed him,
Isa. 51.2. I think the scope of this Scripture, was to strengthen faith, that
though they were but few, yet that God was able to deliver them from all their
Enemies, as he did Abraham in a very lonely state in Canaan, from the Kings
that fought with him. But take the place more spiritually and strictly, for
Gods calling of him out of the state of Heathenisme, and so the bringing him to
a state of grace, the bringing him to a new Country and Religion and State, all
this God did for Abraham alone, and subdued all his inward enemies alone; and
made him an Heir of Eternal Salvation, alone. God would trust Abraham's best
estate with none, but himself. I desire but this, (says Mr. Rutherford) that
Christ would take me in hand to cure me, and undertake for a sick man, I know I
should not die under his hand, sorrow which has no eyes, has put a Vail upon
my Soul, that I cannot see him. If Christ undertake a sick sinners cure, let
his disease be what it will, never so desperate, never so long standing, he
cures him without any more Physicians, and none die under his hand.

Thirdly, Christ does this great service for Man, of making a better state,
freely; for Jew and Gentile, for great sinners and little sinners, (if there be
any such) Christ does all freely: He cured Naman, that his skin came, as if it
had been the skin of a young Child, and did it for nothing, though a very rich
Man, and would have given much for his Cure. Our Fathers had Manna from Heaven,
and Physic the brazen Serpent, which cured them and supported them for
nothing, and all that was Christ. The Manna that fed them was Christ, the
Serpent that healed them was Christ, -- Where there is neither Greek, nor Jew,
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but
Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11. In all sorts, Jews and Gentiles, Christ
works for the Cure of natural corruption, and does many Cures of this kind, but
takes nothing, no money, nor monys worth, he cursed Gehazi that would be meddling
this way. The Samaritan poured in Oil and Wine, and healed the wounded Man of
all his wounds, and all freely. And so brought the Prophet's Widow out of debt
freely; such Samaritans are now much wanting for Prophets Widows in debt; and
he frankly forgave a Debtor many Talents. GOD looked upon every of the Five Days
Work, and said it was good: But, on the Sixth Days Work, when he had made Man,
he beheld, and said it was very good, to show what special delight God had to
make his own Image, and to draw his own likeness in Man; so does Christ still
not only do this work of restoring fallen Man, and do it for nothing, but
delights to conform us to his Image, and when this Days work is done for any
wretched Man, he says, it is very good, and all the Angels rejoice with him.

By the which he went and preached to the Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19 It is
a very strong Prison, and very filthy, in which we are by nature, and who can
go into this Prison to preach there, but Christ? The Doors are all Iron, and
Iron-bars and Bolts upon them. If any one could go into these Prisons and
preach, 'twould have spoken the state the less deplorable, but for as much as
none can, but Christ himself, it speaks the Prison in which man is by nature,
very strong and terrible. It Is a great heap of filth, and a very great
Dunghill indeed, which all the Carts in the World employed about at once,
could not carry away, no none but an Infinite strength. Then was a fiery Sword
turning every way to keep out Adam from the Garden, and from communion with
God, and from eating of the Tree of Life, the Seal thereof; and surely this
misery of Man is great upon him, and this fiery Sword terrible, that none can
sheath it, and take it away, and bring Man into Paradise again, and communion
with God, but the Omnipotent Power of Christ. If any could have taken away that
brandished Sword; or, if an Angel from Heaven could have done it, and have
taken Adam by the hand, and have brought him into the Garden of delights, i.e.
of communion with God, the misery had not been so great. They are great and
fearful diseases, which none in this World can cure, no nor none in that World
above, though much more populous than this, but one even Christ himself. Let
the Inhabitants of the Rock sing, let them shout from the top of the Mountains,
Isa. 42.11. This is spoken of them that lived in the Wilderness of Arabia,
among Stones and Rocks, ( Ishmael's Posterity) where nothing but wild Beasts
and Devils haunt, the Inhabitants were like the Country they dwelt in, their
Hearts, Rocks and Mountains, and Legions of Devils, and cursed Spirits haunting
them. Now, O how mighty must he be, that drives a Wilderness! How mighty must
he be that bids or commands the Inhabitants of these hard Rocks, to sing and
melt with joy?

Secondly, Learn that we are much obliged to Christ, and God, for laying the
help of such desperate Diseases on one so mighty. The Apostle John wept, that
there was none found worthy to open the Book, nor to read it, nor to look
thereon, and he wept much; and when one was found out, how the tone is changed!
They that wept much rejoiced much, and sung a new Song, saying, Thou are worthy
to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God with thy Blood out of every Tongue, and Kindred, and have
made us to our God, Kings and Priests, Rev. 5.4.9. The opening not only of one
Book, but of all the Scriptures, and the heart too, much weeping there is among
sinners about this, and none is found worthy, that is, anointed and accepted of
God to this service but Christ, and he has bought his skill dear, with his own
heart blood, he was slain to get this art and ability. -- Worthy art thou to
receive Power, etc. for thou wast slain: And being thus, how much are we bound
to this Physician for our eyes, and for his eye salve, as to the light of the
Scriptures, and the way to any good, which we have! I will bring the blind by a
way that they know not, I will lead them in Paths which they have not known, I
will make darkness light, and crooked things straight, this will I do and not
forsake them; And who this is by whom God will do this, see Isa. 42.6.16.
compared, namely Christ. To lead a blind Body from place to place, and to do so
all Day long, all the Year long, yea all the Life long, and never to be weary,
how wonderfully is Man obliged to Christ and to God, that has given him to
such a work! Who is not tier'd to lead a blind Body a Day?

Thirdly, Learn that it is dangerous to reject Christ, because he is the
appointed and proper remedy of our fallen state. There is no other Name given
under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but by the Name of Christ. As there is
but one Faith, one Baptism, so there is but one Lord, Ephesians. 3.5, There being
no more Doors to go out from our filthy state, we had need to take heed, that
we do not neglect it, the shame of our nakedness will by such a course appear,
The marshy places will not be drained or healed. Ezeh 47.11.
i.e. we shall remain unhealed, and die in our sinful state, our sin will
remain: Ye are come to Mount Zion, not to Mount Zina, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the New Testament, and to the Blood of Sprinkling; which speaks better
things than the blood of Abel, See then that ye refuse not Him that spoke.
Moses was a Mediator of the old Covenant, and could do little; Christ is the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and can do all the Services of our fallen state,
and fulfill the great and precious promises of the New Testament to us. He that
rejected that Mediator which spoke on Earth, died for it, Heb. 12.25. How much
more will they who reject this Mediator, which now speaks from Heaven to us.
If Christ be only he which blesses us, and turns Jew and Gentile from their
sins; and God has only raised him from the dead, for this end, to bring
Salvation from afar, and we reject all, it cannot be taken well, either by God
the Father, or by Christ his Son. Unto you first God having raised up his Son,
has sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his iniquity, Act.
3.26. As if the Apostle had said, God has been at great cost and pains, to
part with his only Son to die, and then to raise him from the dead, and all for
this end to bless you Jews, and to turn you first, and then the Gentiles, from
their sins, and so to make them and you eternally happy; If you shall reject
all this love of God, and love of his Son, it will fall heavy, he will conster
it, that you have no mind to be turned from your sins, but to continue in them,
and so you shall for ever, and die and perish in them. -- He that is filthy
shall be filthy still.

[through Jesus Christ our Lord.] The Apostle is much taken with this, that the
Pipes of his cleansing, should be laid through the sides of Jesus Christ, so
costly a conveyance, both as to God, and as to his Son, but of none as to him.
I thank God all is in a good way of cure now, through Jesus Christ. Donatum ob
causam, non est donatum, sed potius permutatio. A gift given for some cause, is
not a gift, but rather an exchange of one thing for another: but when very
costly in it self, and yet of no cost to us, then it sparkles in the eyes of
the receiver; such a gift is Christ, in this great work of the cure of our
carnal state, And does the freeness of this love sparkle in your eyes? and lay
bonds upon you, and make you go bound with holy affection and admiration. No
man that was ever cured of a desperate disease, wherein he gave himself up for
death, but it was much obliging to him, as to the instruments used for his
Cure. Naaman the Syrian thought himself bound to choose the God of Israel for
his God, that had cured him of his Leprosy; If you be cured of your filthy
Leprosy, which is Christ's Priestly work, and Kingly work too, your Cure is
between them both; Do you choose him and own him for your Jesus; and Lord, as
the Apostle here does? -- I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Christ by
kindness conquers, as Jeptha did; If I do thus and thus for you, slay your
Enemies, deliver you from slavery, Shall I be your King? And, will ye choose me
to rule over you? and they consented willingly. If Christ has cured your Soul
diseases, then are you under the Law of this great kindness, and willing that
he should be your Lord, and to Rule you in all things according to his Word.

Secondly, The Apostle was taken, as with the love of Christ, so with the love
of the Father in this matter. I thank God; he has found out a way to do me
good, a new and living way through his Son: So the Apostle Peter, Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant
mercy has begotten us again, unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Christ
from the dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.3. He saw an abundant
mercy in the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as in the Son our Lord
Jesus Christ. That having no more Sons. should part with him out of his Bosom,
in Heaven, to lodge Him in a Manger; yea, worse, to lodge Him in Hell: nay, in a
Place worse than that, the filthy heart of the fallen Sons of Adam. So the
Apostle Paul again writing to the Ephesians, says, But God who is rich in
mercy for the great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sin
and trespasses, has he quickened us together with Christ, that in the Ages to
come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward
us, through Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. He saw rich mercy, and great love,
exceeding riches of grace in God, that by his own Son, and not by any lower
hand, he should quicken Men dead in trespasses and sins. And surely some thing
of this is, where this great Work is wrought, a confessing that Jesus is the
Lord, To the glory of God the Father.

Christ is the proper remedy of our fallen state, let this draw us to him, to
attend his Word and Ordinances, and to attend the Angels stirring of these
Waters. Christ does open Prison doors, and deliver Captives, but he does it
according to his Commission. Now well observe the terms of his Commission. Is.
61,
The Lord God has anointed me [to preach] good tidings to the meek. To which
agrees, 1 Pet. 3.19. By the which also he went [to preach] to the Spirits in
Prison, which were disobedient in the Days of Noah. Preaching, how lightly
soever esteemed, and how much soever opposed and suppressed, is the great
Ordinance by which Christ frees Captives and Prisoners; and therefore this
Ordinance, which is the most general Ordinance to convince and convert, should
carefully and tremblingly be attended upon. They that make light of preaching,
make light of their own depraved state, of their Captivity to sin and Satan,
these groan not with this Apostle under the body of death. Christ did create
every day orderly by his Word, he could have done it without, but he did all as
his Father appointed him, and did not Movere per saltum, make have and pursue
his own will, or his own infinite and absolute Power; so he does in the new
Creation, and therefore wait upon wisdoms Posts. -- Whosoever is simple, let him
turn in hither, where he will have Line upon Line* now a little and then a
little, to touch and turn his heart. Presently after the Creation was finished,
the Creator takes to himself the Title of Jehova, Genesis 2.4. These are the
Generations of the Heaven, and of the Earth, when they were created, in the Day
that Jehova Eloim made the Heaven and the Earth. When you do approach to the
Preaching of the Word, Remember this Name of Christ, that he is Jehova, and
able to give Being to his Word, That what he bids you to be, that he makes you
to be.

Christ as Jehova would Preach to you, as one giving Being in your heart, to
every Word which he speaks in your Ear: That Christ would so speak, that you
might hear and believe all that he says, as they at Iconium, Act. 14.1. Take
an Harp, go about the City, thou Harlot, that have been forgotten, make sweet
melody, sing many Songs, that thou may be remembered, Isa. 23.16. This spoke
the Lord to Tyrus, a filthy sinful City, and their punishment foretold, and
the time for Seventy Years, and then counseled to bemoan her self, that she
might be remembered, and it is observable how holy bemoaning our selves is
called, and holy panting for deliverance from the slavery of sin and wrath, it
is called sweet melody, and singing many Songs; So indeed is such panting under
the body of death, and to be delivered from it, as here the Apostle does. The
mourning Doves note, under the sense of our wretched state, with a panting
after Christ to cure it; no Music is such melody in the Ears of God, to make
him to remember us. Thus cry, and be ye all pained to be delivered.

Thirdly, Take to you words, and tell your great Physician how it is with you.
Ephesians. 4.18. This I say and testify in the Lord, that ye walk not as other
Gentiles, in the vanity of your minds, having your understandings darkened;
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in you,
because of the blindness of their heart, being past feeling, etc. Take up these
words, and apply them to your own depraved condition, saying, O wretched man
that I am, what a vain mind I have, and how I walk in the vanity of my mind all
the Day, I know not at Night where my mind has been all the Day, it has been
at this and at that, at the end of the Earth, but not in Heaven all the Day;
Children run not more from one toy to another in their action, than I do in my
thoughts and affections, and dwell upon nothing that is good scarce a moment.
My understanding is darkened, I know not God, I know not his Son, I know not the
Fathers Name, nor the Sons, I know not the Scriptures, both Testaments are a
sealed Book to me. I know not the Volume that is always open to me in my own
Closet, I know not my self, nor the deceit and guile that desperately stirs in
my heart continually. A vail is on my heart always as to all these necessary
things to be known. And as my Eyes be boared out like Samson's, as I have no
knowledge, so I have less affection. I am wholly alienated from the Life of
God, no spiritual life and heat in my heart, but as dead as Nabal; yea, not
only a dead heart, but a stony heart, twice dead, ten times dead, nothing will
make sense, neither words nor blows, as if I were utterly past all capacity of
feeling, as a Stone is. This is the poor and needy seeking Water, and finding
none.

Fourthly, Then when you have thus told out your broken story to your
Physician, then cast your selves upon Him, and tell him you do so. Honor his
ability and all sufficiency, to do as great Cures as yours is, though you have
not faith enough to honor his willingness to undertake your case. So did the
poor Leper. -- Lord, if thou will I know thou art able to make me whole, -- Me
though a Leper; God thy Father has highly exalted thee, and given thee a Name
above every name, Power and ability above all to open Prisons, to lead
Captivity Captive, to relieve the Poor, to bind up broken hearted: Thou can
whip out all the Worldly lusts which swarm in my heart, all the mony-changing
thoughts, and affections, which make my Soul common, and lean, and ill
favored. There be many great and precious Promises which God has made, and
the scope of them is, that I should be cleansed from all filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit, and have a Divine and holy nature, given me, and thou O Christ art
to make all these Promises, yea and Amen unto me, and art able to do it, if
thou will, yea even in my very filthy Soul, Why then is it not done? Touching
Christ's ability, see Genesis 2.5. And every Plant before it was in the Earth, and
every Herb before it grew, for the Lord had not made it to rain, and there was
not a Man to Till the ground. The meaning is, that Christ the Creator of all
things, the Eternal Word by which the Father commanded all things to be, was
not beholding to Nature or Art, to make any thing that was made, or to preserve
it when made; he made the Plants and Herbs before they were in the Earth, that
is, he gave the Earth such a formative Virtue, to shape such Plants, and
Flowers in her Womb, and then without Rain, or Man's Tillage and dressing, did
he preserve these, for Man nor Rain were not yet created, when these Plants and
Herbs were actually in Being: by his bare Word did he both make all Plants and
Herbs, and by the same bare Word, without Rain or Tillage of Man, did he make
them grow and subsist: Such is the Power of Christ's Word, as to any distress
of the Soul, to raise the dead, to cure the lame and blind.

I will be thou clean. Adam and his Wife perceived that they were naked, and
were ashamed, and hid themselves there, Genesis 3.7. and this shame was a blessed
forerunner of the great good which immediately follow, the revelation of Christ
to them, and the Promise, and the enabling of them to take hold of them, For
blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God. If God has
opened your eyes to perceive that you are naked, wretched, and miserable, and
to groan under it, as the Apostle Paul, and to be ashamed of your nakedness, as
our first Parents, and that this makes you tremble, and at an utter loss,
crying out, Who shall deliver you; it is a sure sign that God is at hand to
reveal Christ to you, as he did to Adam, and as he did to Paul, therefore
excite faith even from thy despair, by and by some or other will hear thee say.
-- I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord* am I escaped.

Motives particularly to press you to deceive and follow these Exhortations,
are these three. First, You who groan and sigh with this Apostle, O wretched
Man and Woman that I am, etc. You are particularly and specially invited, as it
were by name, to come to Christ, and to trust that he is both able and willing,
yea and cannot do otherwise, but relieve you, who ever he passes by, Come unto
me all ye that are wearied and heavy loaded, and ye shall find rest to your
Souls. The Promise expresses to all such as you, that ye shall find relief,
full relief, rest to your restless Souls, Luke 11.28. In this Promise, observe
the universality of the Invitement. -- Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy loaded; i. e. which cry out, as the Apostle in my Text, as lost and
undone, O wretched man, etc. All you by name are invited, and therefore it will
be your sin and shame not to come to Christ, that is, to trust, that he will
undertake your case, and do you good. Therefore as the Apostle says as to his
sufficiency, so say I, as to his will. -- Having such a High Priest, let us
draw nigh with a true heart, in full assurance of faith. So say I, having such
a merciful High Priest; yea, and having such a high and precious Promise, let
all burdened and heart-loaded sinners draw nigh to Christ, with full assurance
of faith, that he will give them rest. Where promises are so particularly
directed, it is much indulgence, and as a stretching out the Hand and Scepter
to Esther, to welcome and embolden the trembling doubting sinner, yea it is as
the Father of the Prodigals, beholding him afar off, and running to meet him.

Secondly, Consider, that Christ is not merely under the Bond of his Promise to
relieve such, though this he cannot break, as he cannot lie, but he is under
the bond of much affection in this work. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ
loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it, with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it to himself
spotless, Ephesians. 5.26. No Husband can with more natural affection, tender and
succor, the Wife of his bosom, then Christ does the helping of poor wretched
burdened sinners, the binding up and mollifying their maladies. Some are bound
fast enough to a business by their word, but not at all by their affection, and
these though they keep their word, yet it is in such a rough churlish way, as
is much discouraging; but it is not so with Christ, because he is under the
bond of his bowels and affections, as well as under the bond of his word, and
therefore trust in him, that your case shall be helped, and very carefully and
compassionately helped.

Finally, Confider the danger of not believing in this able One. You become
debtors to the Law to fulfill it, and debtors to your own desperate wretched
condition, as not self murderers, to deliver your selves from the body of death
in which you are, and from the wrath of God, to which this obliges you. You
frustrate the Ordinance of God, which he has anointed and appointed for your
good. You cast your selves under the Covenant of works, as that young Man,
which said to Christ, What shall [I do] to be saved! As if he could have saved
himself, and so made himself a debtor to fulfill the Law, and Christ put him
upon it, seeing he would that way be saved, and so he will serve you and them;
Confider whether you be able to keep the Law in every point, and so restore
your own state, some are at the Doctrine of Perfection, but they make void the
Gospel and Christ, and will as the young Man, mi^s perfection in one thing at
least, one thing will be wanting, and he that fails in one Point is guilty of
all, and will bring the curse of the breach of the whole Law upon him. Confider
that by nature you are the Children of wrath, and Transgressors from the Womb,
and how soon may the curse of this state be executed? Wherefore I conclude all
with the repetition of the promise again to you, Isa. 25.6, 7, 8. And, I
beseech you heed it well, and take hold of it for your good. And in this
Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make a Feast to all People, a Feast of fat
things, a Feast of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, and he will
destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering cast over all People, and the
Vail that is spread over all Nations, and he will swallow up death in victory,
and the Lord God will wipe all tears from all Faces, and the rebuke of his
People shall he take from all the Earth, for the Lord has spoken it; and let
me add, his heart and soul is in it, Jer. 3^.41. What is the Vail that covers
all Nations? Ans. The Vail of natural corruption, the Body of Death, as the
Apostle here calls it; and as this Prophet in this place calls it -- Death,
and says, it shall be swallowed up in victory; yea, he has engaged to wipe
all tears, from all Mourners eyes, who sigh and take on, as this Apostle,
because of their wretched condition, and to give them victory over the body of
this death, and the triumphs of this great victory, in this World, or in the
World to come. Comfort your selves all ye that groan under the Body of Death,
with these words.

FINIS.
SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS OF DEATH.
Being A SERMON ON Isaiah 57.1. The righteous Man perishes, and no Man lays
it to heart, and merciful Men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
Isaiah 57.1. The righteous Man perishes, and no Man lays it to heart, and
merciful Men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.


THe general Mortality of Mankind, and the Holy Use that should be made
thereof, by all the living, are the two principal things of this verse. Death
takes away the wicked, and doubtless the wicked and others too, should lay this
to heart; for Death is no partial Visitor, if it fetch off one wicked Man, and
send him to his place, it will fetch down another; nothing is more naturally
the wages of wickedness, than death; and yet no worse enemy to any wicked Man,
than death; therefore one wicked Man should be startled much, at the death of
another.

But Death sometimes takes away all Men, and then all Men, bad and good,
should be much moved, then all should lay to heart this, i.e. should be
sensible of their sin, and the displeasure of God, and speedily, make peace
with him, by repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that
so present evils, and also future presaged by present strokes, may be turned
away; which thing, this People could not be stirred up unto, which was the
reason of the complaint of this Prophet: he preached the Funerals of the dead,
the best dead, to the living good and bad, but no man laid it to heart: that
is, not held themselves deeply concerned, to look about them, to search their
Souls, to set House and Heart in order to die, but kept on every one in his
wonted pace of sin, and wickedness, and formality in Religion, and so fell most
of them in the common calamity.

The Doctrines which may be observed in these words, are these. First, That God
sometimes by common calamity takes away the good as well as the bad: Moses and
Aaron, as well as the mixed Multitude, which murmured, Did the Lord take off,
and would not let them come in to the good Land. -- The righteous Man
perishes, as if the Prophet had said, the Lord strikes more mortally than any
one is well aware, he plucks up the stakes in the Hedge, he pulls down the
Pillars of the whole Nation, and yet Men do not fear, that all will fall about
their Ears. Hence it is that another Prophet, calls upon the best People to
look about them, and to labor to be much better, yet gives them but a may be
for their safety. Seek meekness all ye meek of the Earth, ye which have wrought
his judgments, seek meekness, seek righteousness, it may be ye shall be hid in
the day of the Lord's wrath. As if the Prophet had said, I cannot ensure the
life of the best Man, because God sometimes destroys the righteous with the
wicked, for ends best known to himself. This should make us all fear and
tremble much in this dying Day, and to give all diligence to make our Calling
and Election sure, and to be getting Oil into our Lamps, yea and to keep them
trimmed, and to stand guirt, and ready to go in with the Bridegroom, if called
at Midnight, by the destroying Angel that is now abroad.

A Second Doctrine that may be observed in these words, is this, That gracious
Men and merciful are the likeliest to escape best, in times of common calamity
The Prophet seems to note it in these words of my Text, as very severe Justice,
that gracious and merciful Men should not be distinguished from others, in the
Day of evil. -- The righteous Man perishes, and merciful Men are taken away.
As if the Prophet had said, now the Lord is very angry indeed, that he will not
spare such as these, which are so precious in his eye, if any be. Noah a
righteous Man, was preserved from the Flood. And Lot a righteous Man, preserved
and plucked out of Sodom, and had there been Ten righteous more, the Cities
might have been saved for their sake, as the Ship full of Passengers for Paul's
sake. And Ebedmelech the Black more, a merciful Man, was saved from the
destructions which destroyed Jerusalem, and so was Jeremiah. This should incite
all People, as they love their lives in this dying day, to labor after grace,
and to be merciful Men and Women, yea bountiful in this day of want, for such
as are ready to yield themselves thus to the Scepter of Christ, and to follow
him fully, with all they have and are, will certainly escape best; such as yield
all to the Lord, will save all, if any do. You that become of profane,
righteous and holy Men, you take the likeliest way, I know, to escape well in
this mortal time; If you get not your lives, you will get your Souls for a
Prey, no Plague shall come nigh that, thus are you lodged safe in the Promise,
as soon as you become gracious, and break off from your wicked ways, by
repentance. And you that are gracious and godly, think on it, as you love your
lives in this day of mortality show your Faith by your Works, abound in this
gift also of mercifulness, many that are able and carry the Bag, are abroad and
I fear have carr^ed the Bag with them; you that are here, had need be the more
merciful, Man's poor will starve else. Surely such as are ready to preserve the
lives of others, God will preserve their lives.

A Third Doctrine, that may be observed in these words, is this, That times of
general security, under present lesser punishments, are of very evil presage.
If when God's Judgments are in the Earth, righteous Men and merciful be taken
away, and none lay these drops of the storms to heart, it fore-rells surely
that the Storm will come, and fall hard, and Thunder, and Hall much. Surely
some great Evils are at Door, when little ones are made light of: though I
cannot call the taking away of one righteous Man in this day, nor the taking
away of one merciful Man or Woman in this day, a little punishment. Dictum cum
vulgo.
I speak after you, if lesser Rods make no Body feel, great ones surely are a
making. -- Righteous Men are taken away, and none consider, that they are taken
from great Evil to come.

Sometimes with a foolish Virgins slumber, the good become bad in this, that
they lay not GOD's dealings to heart as they should, but let Death, like a
Moth, stilly take away one, and then another, and make no noise in Heaven about
it; good People are much in a hurry with this World, one about his Farm, and
another about his Merchandise, and whilst running here and there, hither and
thither, the King of Syria is gone, the matters which should have been close
kept to the heart, are slipped away out of the mind, and made no use of. And such
a temper among the Lord's People, as well as others, is a sure forerunner of
some roufing Judgment at Door, that may well awaken every Body: the Storm
begins to come in among you Citizens now, I hope you will be awake anon, the
Plague has kept in the out-parts a good while, O that we in the in-parts
within these Walls, had been well awake then, and laid matters to heart then as
we should!

The Doctrine which I would stand on, is this, That general Mortality should be
generally laid to heart. Mortal strokes upon all, good as well as bad, should
much affect all good and bad. The Strokes of God in this Prophet's time, when
he spoke the words of my Text, began to be general, God spared not righteous
nor wicked, and God thus promiscuously smiting, the Prophet was troubled, that
Men were no more affected, as well he might. From whence I observe, That
general Mortality, should be generally laid to heart. No Man, high or low, good
or bad, but should much lay to heart all the strokes of God, which bring death,
that great blow to Man's Being. Mortality by Plague, Sword, Famine, or any
other way, or by any other Disease, should be well considered, and well made
use of, especially if it reach the righteous, as well as others. The Lion has
roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy?
Amos 3.8. Nature teaches this in all Creatures, that when such Creatures of
prey are abroad, which they know they are in danger of to be preyed upon, to
dread and tremble, and to take all care they can, to shun them, and to save
themselves. The Prophet Mica, who Prophesied in the same time with Isaiah,
which so complained in my Text, complains just like him, and almost in the
same words, Mica 7.2. The good Man is perished out of the Earth, and there is
none upright among Men they all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every Man his
brother with a Net, etc. As if the Prophet had said, Good men perish out of the
Earth, and this is so far from being laid to heart, and looked upon as any
judgment, that all violences are used to take away the rest, every one lies in
wait for blood, yea the blood of his Brother, as Cain lay in wait for his
Brothers blood, And where will this end? And by this grief of this Prophet, I
gather that general Mortality, the perishing of good Men, and the perishing of
others, by violences, and murders, and such like, ought much to affect the
living, and not the lives of all sorts to be taken away, and made no more of,
than of Dogs, or Hogs, by the death of which there is an advantage. By this
Prophet Isaiah, we may see this Doctrine again confirmed, that general strokes
should generally affect, Isa. 64 9 10, 11. Be not wrath very soon, O Lord,
neither remember iniquity for ever, behold, we bessech thee, we are all thy
People. Thy holy Cities are a Wilderness Zion is a Wilderness, Jerusalem a
desolation, the holy and beautiful House our Fathers worshipped thee is burnt
with Fire, and all our pleasant things laid wast. The Prophet ^n these words
speaks prophetically, and beholds and represents that which was to be as
done, namely the destruction and desolation of Jerusalem, and that state,
Persons and things, one and all, and how does he speak of this general
Mortality of Persons and things, good and bad, high and low? Does he speak of
it slightly? O no, but with much complaint, and strong cry, and bemoans to God.
Be not wrath very sore, O Lord, be not angry for ever, Zion is a Desolation,
Jerusalem a Wilderness, etc. In these Desolations, as you know by the
Scripture, there was Death by Plague, Sword and Famine; then I conclude, that
general Mortality, should be generally laid to heart, for the Prophet did thus
complain to God, to affect all Men, that they might so complain to God, as he
did, how sadly matters went amongst them. Take one Scripture more Lam. 1.6. And
from the Daughter of Zion, all her beauty is departed, her Princes are become
like Hearts, that can find no pasture, and they are gone without strength
before the Pursuer. This Prophet lays to heart particularly the distresses of
Princes, and great Men; and alas, what are all these, to the distresses, and
death of the righteous, and holy, and merciful Men; which proves that we should
lay to heart the common strokes of God, as the Sword and Pestilence take away
one as well as another, bad and good, high and low.

I will prove this Point more particularly and distinctly to you. First, We are
to lay to heart Mortality by the Pestilence. I have sent among you the
Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, your Horses have I taken away, and have
made the stink of your Camps to come up into your Nosthrils, and so killed you
with Plagues, and Diseases, attending the Sword, and yet ye have not returned
to me, Amos 4.10. that is, you have not laid things to heart thoroughly, to be
ashamed of your evil ways, and to turn from them. The death of Men, nay the
death of Horses, (as such deaths not long since were amongst them) we are to
lay to heart, and so to lay to heart, as to prepare to meet God: then the death
of good Men by the Pestilence we are surely to lay to heart. From above has he
sent a Fire into my Bones, and it prevailed against them, he has made me
desolate and faint all the day, Lam. 1.13. The Prophet in these words, as in
all the rest, personateth the state of the People generally, and much laid to
heart GOD's immediate strokes upon the Persons of Men, by many mortal fierce
Diseases, without sparing any, -- From above has he sent Fire into my Bones,
and it has prevailed, etc.

Secondly, Mortality by Famine is to be laid to heart. The Prophet Joel
speaks of this stroke, which indeed is great. -- The Land is as the Garden of
Eden before them, and behind them a desolate Wilderness, and nothing shall
escape them, speaking of Vermin so devouring all Man's Provision, Joel 2.3. at
the 12th. verse. of this Chapter the Prophet tells us what effect this should
have. Therefore now also says the Lord, turn ye to me with all your heart, and
with fasting, weeping, and with mourning, rent your hearts, and not your
Garments, for he is gracious, who knows if he will return and repent. By
which of these strokes either Pestilence or Famine, the godly were taken away,
no Man can say; for, by Pestilence, Famine, and Sword, did the Lord contend
with that People; That he contended with them by Famine, the Prophet Joel, and
also the Prophet Jeremiah testifies, They have sown Wheat, and shall reap
Thorns, they have put themselves to pain, but shall not profit (thus does the
Prophet, poscere aciem, bid battle) and ye shall be ashamed of your revenue,
because of the fierce anger of the Lord, Jer. 12. 13. But most plain in Ezekiel.
c. 4. and 5. Where the Prophet is commanded to make Bread with Beans and
Fitches, and to eat this by weight, and to mix dung with it. And must this be
laid to heart? Yes, much: How can any do otherwise? Thus says the Lord, smite
with the Hand, and stamp with the Foot, and say, alas for all the evil
abominations of the House of Israel, for they shall fall by the Sword, by the
Famine, and by the Pestilence, Ezekiel. 6.11. Then they fell by all these, and
then it is probable that the righteous fell by all these, as others; then we
should lay to heart Mortality by all these; we should smite with the Hand, and
stamp with the Foot, and say alas. What great abom nations have caused all
these great Judgments? God's temporal strokes and judgments, which kill and
slaughter all sorts, should much be laid to heart by all sorts.

But you will say, Q.
What is it to lay to heart, the mortal strokes of GOD in a Nation?

I answer, A.
It is to be deeply sensible of the cause, as it may be in our selves, or in
the Nation wherein we live. Observe how the Lord counsels Ezekiel to carry
it, in the day of their dreadful misery. -- Thus says the Lord, smite with
thine Hand, and stamp with thy Foot, and say alas for all the evil
abominations of the Land of Israel: He does not barely bid him to say, alas
for all the evil punishments of the Land, as Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, but
alas for all the wickedness of the Land, which has caused these. He that is
far off shall fall by the Pestilence, and he that is near shall fall by the
Sword, and he that remains, and is besieged shall die by Famine, Ezekiel. 6.11.12.
So that to lay to heart mortal strokes in a Nation, is to be deeply affected
with the cause of them, in our selves, or in others.

If you ask me further, where we have found out causes in our selves, quos
accidam? as Salust says,

To whom shall I turn and prostrate my self? and say, I have sinned, Q.
and done this evil abomination?

Answ. To God, in the Name of Christ. A.
Therefore thus says the Lord, turn you even unto me, with all your heart and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, Joel 2.12. And to do this
forthwith, presently without all delay or else to be sure it is not turning to
the Lord with all the heart. To lay to heart God's willing Discipline, is to be
full of deep sorrow for sin in our selves, and others as the proper causes of
all sorts of deaths, and deaths of all sorts of Persons, good and bad, and to
turn from these to the Lord, and to believe on Christ, that the Lord for his
sake will be pacified, and turn away all his displeasure, and not make us a
reproach unto the Heathen, as it is in that Chapter, Joel 2.17.

Having thus proved and opened the Doctrine, I will show you in the next Place,
First, This Point is profitable to teach. If we are to be deeply sensible of
temporal strokes, such as refer to the death of our bodies, then much more are
we to be sensible of spiritual strokes, and eternal strokes, which refer to the
death of our Souls. I will send a Famine, not of Bread, but of hearing the Word
of the Lord. And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North to the
East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not
find it, Amos 8.11, 12. How diligently we get the Bills of Mortality now, and
being come up to Thousands, O how we lift up our hands, but who brings in
Weekly Bills of our Death of Souls, by the Famine of the Word, of hearing the
Word of the Lord, in City and Country? A great deal of do seems to be, about
the death of Bodies, but ah Lord, how many Thousand, Thousand Souls, have
perished in this City, and in these Nations, in a few years past, for want of
hearing the Word of the Lord, that is able to save the Soul! Be not wrath very
soar, see, behold, we are thy People, Zion is a Wilderness, Jerusalem a
Desolation, and all our pleasant things are scattered, Will the Lord refrain
for these things? Herein the Prophet seems to be touched to the quick, that Zion
and Jerusalem was desolate, and all these Soul-pleasant things were spoiled,
whereby Souls starved and perished, and Soul-Famine, and Pestilence was made, a
Famine of hearing the Word of the Lord, that whither soever they went, from one
City to another, from one Sea to another, 'twas all alike; This, this the
Prophet laid deeply to heart, and so should we; I urge it by way of proportion,
if we should deeply lay to heart bodily death, then much more Soul-death and
destruction. A fide exorbitans, puniendus, says the Civilian, such as play the
wanton, from the truth, must be punished answerably. We have been, and yet
still are, a fide exorbitantes, such as play the unruly Persons from the truth,
Children of Belial, which cannot bear Christ's Yoke, full of Soul-itch for
another Gospel, and being thus lewd in spirituals, answerably in spiritual
liberties and enjoyments has God punished us; it is not a little peril unto
us, that we meet now, although the hand of God affright such, as would be
looking after us; This, this we should deeply lay to heart, that the Bread for
our Souls fails, from the House of our God. The strokes of God, and the strokes
of Men together, affright away the Pastors, and so the Pastures of your Souls,
and yet all this but the just punishment of much spiritual wantonness and
exorbitancy.

Secondly, If temporal strokes which refer to the death of the body, should be
laid much to heart, then Eternal strokes, which make the everlasting
destruction of the Soul, should be deeply laid to heart much more. Such a
stroke as that, Isai. 63.17. O Lord, Why have thou made us to err from thy
ways? and hardened our hearts from thy fear? and such as that, Prove. 17.10. A
reproof enters more into a wise Man, than an hundred stripes into a Fool.
Some Men's hearts are by the inward strokes of GOD made Judgment-proof, that
Plague, Famine and Sword, all the Ten Plagues that were inflicted on Pharaoh,
and Ten more to them, will not stir them, nor turn them, no more than they
stopped or turned him, nor yet so much. And what do you see in this day, done
on the hearts of Men by the hand of God abroad, now, of Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence? Do these enter the hearts of Men? This speaks that Eternal strokes,
judicial wrath upon the Soul is abroad, fiting Men for Eternal death much, of
which I fear the most of us, are little aware. O Juresalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee, as a Hen her Chicken, and thou would not, but now
they are hid from thine Eyes. This was a Soul-mortal, and an Eternal stroke,
and how Christ laid it to heart! how he sighed and wept! O Jerusalem. And if
our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that perish, says the Apostle; and how
long has th^s stroke been, upon the Souls of most Assemblies in these Nations,
and else where! the Power of the Gospel hid, and a spurious efficacy gone forth
in the place thereof, faithful Laborers fishing all night, and can catch
nothing, scarce covert a Soul, and unfaithful Laborers, such as come not in by
the Door, but come in their own name, these pervert many, yea, though they come
with never so damnable Doctrines, if denying the Lord that bought them, yet
flockt after. O give me leave to tell you, in this day of God's sore
Visitation, Hinc illae lachrymae, these are Soul-Plagues, which have brought
our Bodily-Plagues; these are Soul mortal and eternal strokes, because we have
not received the truth in the love of it, and no Man of us have laid these to
heart, as we should. Spiritual Plagues and Judgments, have swept away Souls by
thousands all the Nations over, many years together, and who of us have laid
this Mortality to heart, as we should? See how the Prophet Isaiah lays to
heart spiritual strokes, Isa. 24.16, 17. My leanness, my leanness, the
treacherous dealer has dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous dealer has
dealt very treacherously, fear, and the snare, and the Pit are upon thee.
Treachery, swearing, for swearing, thus in spiritual matters, as Judas who
betrayed Christ, and as much as in him lay, the Bodies and Souls of all
Mankind, such treacherous dealers were the Jews, which the Prophets much
bewailed, as great, spiritual and eternal strokes, and so should we, as we see
these on any Nation, for these things are written for our learning, that we
should follow the footsteps of the Flock. It were well we that live in these
last and worst times of the World, could with the Prophet for like things, sigh
and say, My leanness, that we could sigh our selves lean this day before the
Lord, because of hypocrisy, treachery, and all Soul-villany, and spiritual
wickedness; and the hypocrisy and treachery of our own hearts, greatest of
all, and O how should we sigh and lament our selves lean for this, ere the
Plague sweep us away.

First, This may reprove such as are sensible of nothing, or nothing sensible.
Temporal strokes are thick, God and Man upon us, Pestilence at home, War
abroad, God and Man killing and slaughtering us, one at Sea, 'tother at land,
Is not this general Mortality? God shoots his Arrows every where, and how great
is his dread fallen upon us! In what Street of this poor City can one walk, but
dead Corpse and Ghosts walk; In what Fields about this City can one walk, where
death also does not walk, and as God's Bailiff, seize and arrest, and carry
away, to the great Bar above, and to the Judge of all the World, to receive all
that they have done here in the Body, good or bad? At what corner of this City,
can we that live abroad creep in, and not be met and saluted with trains of
dead Corpse, carrying to the Grave, to new Churchyards, and New-exchanges, old
Burying-places being over-fatted and glutted, and Corpse inhumanely crowding one
another out of their Places, before the time; and among all these sad
salutations, some righteous Men, and merciful Men and Women taken away, and we
can tell their names, and where they lived, and so ends the story till the next
Bill of Mortality come out, with more taken away, and then they put out the
talk of the other, and this is our laying of matters to heart, which is rather
a laying them to our Heads and Tongues, than to our Hearts: What change do all
your New-exchanges make? He that was a Drunkard, is so still: He that was an
Adulterer, is so still: And he that was an Hypocrite, and a Formalist, is so
still. They that were malicious to the righteous Man, and to the merciful Man,
are so still. Is it not at our peril even now, to meet to Preach and Pray, as
we do at this time? And have not righteous and merciful once, been hunted from
Praying, even in this Plague-time? And is not this our laying to heart general
Mortality? May not God well take those home to himself, of whom we are so
weary? Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord,
He, against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither
were they obedient to his Law. Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of
his anger, and the strength of Battle, and has set him on fire round about,
yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart, Isa. 42.25. So
it may be said of us, the hand of the Lord slays us round about, heaps upon
heaps, and we walk as if we knew nothing, as if it nothing concerned us. Who
smites upon his thigh, saying, What have I done, to ca^se all this? What is
that wickedness in my heart, by which I have slain so many, and so good People,
righteous and merciful ones? Lord have mercy upon us, is put up now at next
Door, it is now right over against me, says another; but, Lord have mercy upon
me, what have I yet in my heart amiss, that has brought the wrath of God so
nigh me, to stare me in the Face? I will scatter them (says the Lord) among
the Heathen, whom neither they nor their Fathers have known, and I will send a
Sword after them, till I have consumed them, and observe what follows, Were
they moved with this soar threat? Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider ye,
and call for the mourning Women, that they may come, and send for cunning Women
that they may come, and let them make have, and take up a wailing, Jer. 9.17,
18. As if the Prophet had said, unless you send for some artificial mourning,
here will be no mourning at all, for all that God has threatened or executed,
every ones heart is so dead and stone-hard; and just so it is now with the most
of us, that certainly the Plague of the heart, is much more numerous, than the
Plague upon our Bodies. If any ask, as Livy in another case. Quin ad hoc
accingeris? But why do not People gird themselves to this thing, no more? Truly
I know not; it is all the Plague.

Secondly, Such are to be reproved, who lay things to heart a little, but
nothing to purpose; as when the Plague is come near them, or when they meet the
white Rod, and the black followers upon Neighbors, nay, upon strangers
shoulders; for fear the dead should infect their living Friends, then they
stand and stare, and lift up their Eyes and Hands, O what a doleful sight is
this! and others concerned for their Relations, weep a while, and wring their
hands. -- No Mother lost such a Child. But as for sin the cause of all this,
Who cries out of this? Who turns from this? Or, who enquires after Christ, to
take hold of him, to make his peace with God, that these mortal quarrels might
cease? How many converts by the Plague, can ye show me? By swearing and lying,
and killing and stealing, and committing adultery, Men break out, and blood
touches blood, therefore shall the Land mourn and every one that dwells
therein shall languish with the Beast of the Field, and the Fowl of Heaven, and
Fishes of the Sea; yet let no Man strive nor reprove another, for the People
are as they that strive with the Priest, therefore shall thou fall in the day,
and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the Night, Hos. 4.3, 4. The Dutch Notes
are worth your perusal, upon these words. The fowlest sinners were committed by
great ones, and if any offered to reprove these, and seek to bring them to the
sense of their evil ways, they were sure to be silenced, and otherwise
punished, so far were that People, from laying any thing to heart. They strove
with the Priest, i. e. scorned his reproofs, stopped his mouth, imprisoned,
banished, killed all that opposed, and this was their laying to heart God's
dealings with them; the end was answerable, they all ranks high and low,
perished by the wrath of GOD and common judgment; and, so shall we, or any
People who tread in their steps: or else, why are such Scriptures written? A
little laying to heart of late has seemed to be, by commanding Fire to be made
in all Streets, and this, and this I fear, is as I have said, a little sense of
God's hand, and to very little purpose. It must be other Bon-fires to purge the
Heavens, to clear the highest Heavens. Whose heart is a fire as a righteous
man, as righteous Lot, vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked? Who
sighs and cries for his own wickedness, and the wickedness of the Land, and
turns from the evil of his way, and looks to him that fires the Prayers and
Offerings of his People, by his sweet Incense and Intercession? Bad men, and
good men die daily, and is this Preaching only turned into prating for an Hour,
by all you that pass by? Such is dead, and 'tother is dying, etc. And is here
all? One of the Cardinals having a great Bishopric in Germany in Luther's
days, confessed that the Mass was not void of its faults, that the Courts of
Rome were corrupted, that a general reformation of the Priests and Friars was
necessary, but that the poor rascal Monk Luther should begin all that, he
thought intolerable, and answerably set against him; so the Men of this Age
will confess that there are many things amiss in all ranks, but that such poor
rascals should reprove them in their Sermons and lives; this, this is now not
to be endured, Prisons are too good for such, and the Cure is worse than the
Disease. And this is all the sense that these wise men have of matters amiss,
which is little sense, but to no purpose.

Egypt; In your Houses it may be are, or have been, dead Bodies, and now some
dying; Are ye sensible what dead Souls ye have, and how hard to be raised from
the dead? How much alive to evil quickly; but as Nabal, as dead-hear^ed as a
stone to all good, to the great good, Christ, and to the embracing of him. Some
are well, and yet still offering their hand to the Physician, says Seneca,
their hearts being like a Pond after a storm, a long while trembling. Some are
not Soul well, the Plague of a hard heart being on them, and their sores and
swellings daily to be seen without searching for, and yet never offer their
Pulse to any to feel them, but judge themselves well, and their state good,
which confidence is carnal, and an evident token of an impenitent and
insensible heart.

If ye say that ye have no calamity in your Families, nor Death in your Houses,
yet Death is much in the dwellings of many others; How do ye lay this to heart?
God does whip some upon others backs, and this is tender mercy, and should be
the more melting, and abasing, and drawing to Christ, as Cords of great love;
Is it thus with you? How the Prophet Jeremiah was affected with the calamity of
others, especially as he saw it did no good upon their Souls, which was an
evident token, how well it wrought upon his Soul; though others smarted, yet he
laid to heart, and profited. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very
heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have
heard, O my Soul, the sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of War. Destruction
upon destruction is cried, for the whole Land is spoiled, suddenly are my Tents
spoiled, and my Curtains in a moment; How long shall I see the Standard, and
hear the sound of the Trumpet? for my People is foolish, they have not known
me, they are sottish Children, they have no understanding, they are wise to do
evil, but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4.19, 20. Let us apply these
words to our selves, do not we lie in such an ill frame of Spirit? Are not our
hearts (though God's hand be so heavy) still sottish and senseless of all that
whereby we have provoked God, to do all this against us? Very wise and quick to
see the Moat in others Eyes, and to lay the blame at others doors. You will
say, so did Jeremiah, in this Scripture which you have quoted. I answer, That
the Prophet did see provocations abroad, it is true, but that it was not
without looking well to his own heart; see Jer. 12.1, 2, 3. Righteous art thou
O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy,
which deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea they have taken
root, they grow, yea they bring forth fruit, thou art near in their mouths, and
far from their Reins; but, thou O Lord know me, and seen me, and tried my
heart toward thee, pull them out like Sheep for the slaughter, and prepare
them for the Day of slaughter. As if he had said, thou know right well that
I have frailties and infirmities many, yet thou also know that I bewail
them, and in all things I endeavor to approve my self to thee by thy help, and
would do nothing to provoke thee in this Day. Can we thus approve our selves to
GOD now?

Nabals are taken away, but none lay to heart one or the other. If the Prophets
charge in my Text, should be found a true charge against us, alas for us! we
are all dead Men and Women, and no escaping. Wherefore stir up your selves,
weep not for the dead, but weep for your selves, saying alas, alas, what have
I done? How do I live, that so many die where I dwell? Do not I infect the
Parish? my Family? this City? And be close home in these Queries, and in these
Heart-smitings; for surely, if we did judge our selves as we should, every one
in truth, we should not thus continually be judged of the Lord. The Bells tole
and ring in your ears, every Morning and Evening, but is there nothing else
sounds in your Ears? No Achan, no accursed thing that yet your hearts hide and
cleave so fast to? And will not yet, though thus affrighted, part with? A
dreadful sound is in his ears, Job 15.21
in prosperity the Destroyer shall come upon him, said Eliphaz to Job, he
speaks to Job, as to a worldly Man, caught in his worldly ways. You have had
worldly ways, and tumblings all over the World you Citizens, and now you are at
leisure, and quiet, Do you not hear some dreadful sound, in your ears of sin,
in this and in that? you have complained for want of leisure, now you have
leisure, pray lissen well now to your consciences, what dreadful reports they
are ready to make at the great Bat above against you, O lay these to heart
well, for these have slain you and us now, in all that is dear, and will slay
yet all the remnant, unless we all repent. The Prophet Elija by killing two
Captains and their Fifties, brought the third Captain upon his knees, and to
humble himself, whether in truth I know not, but he saved his life by it, and
the lives of his Fifty men. O that Christ by killing so many Thousands, so many
Eight Thousands, and so many Five Thousands, might bring the rest upon their
knees indeed to him; he got his life, and we should get our lives and our
Souls; and so would the Plague, as a Plague not come nigh our dwelling.

Secondly, Let me exhort you to lay to heart the import of these general
strokes, that one and all are so cut off, wicked and righteous. These kind of
general strokes do import, that we all have sinned, and have much provoked God,
one as well as another. Righteous Men, and merciful Men, have not been so holy
and righteous, and so merciful as we should. Behold, the Days come, says the
Lord, That I will punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised. Egypt and
Juda, and so puts them together, and then Edom and Ammon, and Moab and Israel,
with them which are in the uttermost parts of the Earth, For all these Nations
are uncircumcised in Flesh, and all the House of Israel are uncircumcised in
heart, Jer. 9.25.26. Some Men are outwardly and openly stark naught, and the
best of us it seems are not so good at heart as we should be; this let us lay
to heart all of us. Or else the import of this general mortality is, that God
means to harden the hearts of some much, by slaying the good as well as the
bad, that they who have no mind to repent and change their courses, may be
confirmed and encouraged in them, in as much as they see, that they escape as
well as others, and live as long as others. The World is drawing on apace to
Atheism, and the providence of God seems to rock the Cradle. The Idolater and
the sincere worshiper, the superstitious and the truly tender conscience; Nabal
and the merciful Abigail, all die promiscuously; Why, who can tell now which to
prefer to follow? That one may think his Religion as good as the other, the the
Papist and Protestant both die of the Plague; and that the ceremoneist may
think as well of his way, as the strict Nonconformist, they both die of the
Plague, and this is a Plague indeed to some; this is raining snares upon Men,
which are willing to slumber in their own ways. Some are afraid to be
over-righteous, and over-strict, and the judgments of God falling so
promiscuously, will make such very temperate in their Religion; If this be the
import of God's destroying righteous and wicked, to harden slight and loose
Professors, we had need look well to it, who profess the Gospel, that we be
very substantial and real, and that we be not caught with this snare of judging
by outward appearance, but look to the Word, what that requires. This snare the
Prophet Malachy speaks of, Mal. 2.17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words,
and yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? When ye say that every one that
does evil is good in the sight of the Lord; or, Where is the God of judgment?
Surely the Lord likes our good fellowship, and all the latitudes we use, and
carnal contents and pleasures, as well as their rigid strict self-denying
conversation, or else he would not spare us as much or more than he does them;
lay to heart this import of GOD's promiscuous dealing above all, how God
hardens sinners in their sins by such dealings.

Or Thirdly, and Lastly, This promiscuous dealing of God imports, that which my
Text here tells us, that there are greater evils to come, which God takes the
righteous from, and this should be much laid to heart indeed, according to the
very letter of my Text. So was Josia by a less judgment, taken from a greater.
A praesenti praesumitur, circa futura, says the Civilian. From present things,
we may presume concerning future. If Lot be warned and pulled out of Sodom,
there is surely some great and fearful storm a coming. If God snatch his
People, as he did Josia, in have (as it were) to Heaven, we may say with this
Prophet in my Text, they are taken from the evil to come. Lay to heart
therefore the hand of God, that it slayes so generally one and all; and lay to
heart the import of it, that it boads some greater evil to come. There be
Serpents which have heads in their tails, called Amphisbaenae. This stroke of
God taking away righteous and wicked, has a head in the tail of it, that will
make worse work, than this head which is now fore-most, and yet how many does
this fore-most head now smite and slay! and how mortal and tremendous is this
forehead!

Thirdly, Be exhorted to lay to heart this, that you may be the next cut off,
who ever you be, seeing the slaughter men in this day spare none, young nor
old, rich nor poor, close Lanes, nor open Streets, righteous nor wicked* What
should we all then say to our selves, but this, surely I may be next the mark
which God will hit. What a trade the Coffin-makers, and Grave-makers now have?
And Hell answerably doubly inlargeth it self, as you do now seek out for new
Church Yards; and should not we smite on our breasts, and say, O the wonderful
mercy and power, and patience of the Lord, that none of all these have been
employed about me yet! That so many thousands should be gone before, and so
many thousands more drawing on, and drawing after, and I yet not one of these;
O magnified be the rich and Sovereign mercy of God! Am I more righteous, more
merciful, more useful with my Talent than such, and such that are gone? O no:
not worthy to be named in the Day with them, and yet that I should be left, and
they taken, that they should have their turn, their over-turn before me!

When I say, lay to heart, that you may be next, I mean more than one thing,
the admiring of GOD's mercy, that you are yet spared; I mean this also, lay to
heart your state, whether you be ready. I was wroth with my People: I have
polluted mine Inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou did show them
no mercy; upon the ancient have thou very heavily laid the yoke. And thou
said, I shall be a Lady for ever: so that thou did not lay these things to
thy heart, neither did remember the latter end of it, Isa. 47.6, 7. Many
parts of the Christian World are given into the hands of Men, and they do with
them at their pleasure, and yet are secure, and consider not the end of such
ways, that it will be bitterness at last. I have nothing to do with such but
with you. Are not you yet in some ways which are not good, and yet promise
peace to your selves in them, yea though GOD's slaughter-men and Fellers be
come up to London, The Plague was first at Southhampton* and at other
Countrey-Towns, before it came to London.
yea come up to your Doors; and not say rather to your selves, I had need look
about me, I am likely to be next. And what if the Fellers fell me? Whither will
the Tree fall when it falls? Will not the fall of it be very great? If the
righteous scarcely escape now, if the merciful Man scarcely escape now, Am I
likely to escape?

Motives to press you thus to lay to heart these things, are these. First, etc.
are taken away, and yet none lay this to heart; If the Prophet had said few lay
things to heart. I would have kept his phrase, but because he says none, I am
but too justly lead to say so too. Mortality and deadness of Bodies is not yet
so general, as mortality and deadness of Souls. Zion stretches forth her
hands, and there is none to comfort, the Lord has commanded concerning Jacob,
that his adversaries should be round about him, Jerusalem is as a menstruous
Woman amongst them. Lam. 1.17. We the Lord's People (as in every Age) have
adversaries round about, the righteous Man and the merciful Man has
adversaries enough; But, who of the World, nay, who of our selves, lay this to
heart?

Second Motive to press you to lay to heart these times, is also in the Text.
Lay to heart present Rods, or it will be an ill presage upon us, that worse
things, Seven times worse are at Door. If we be yet senseless, and walk
contrary, surely we shall be punished Seven times more; it is an ill presage, as
to the whole Nation, that God may be laying an Axe to the Root of all. My
heritage is to me as a speckled Bird, the Birds round about are against her,
assemble all ye Beasts of the Field, come to devour, they have made it
desolate, and it being desolate mourns to me, the whole Land is made
desolate, because no man lays it to heart, Jer. 12.9, 10, 11. This Text
shows us the evil to come, which my Text speaks but darkly of. General
insensibility foretells general ruin. A poor speckled People, are most
Protestant Churches at this Day, and greater spots methinks we get still, by
gadding to change our way, which I fear are not the spots of his People. For
these things, Plague and Sword, and Famine have desolated much the Protestant
Countries, Cities and Nations, and we seem now to be drawing after: For these
things these Nations mourn, that is, the welfare of many mournes, but Persons
are still insensible. The City being desolate, it mourns, and the Land being
desolate, it mourns; but we are jovial, and drink Wine in Bowls, and stretch
our selves on our Beds of Ivory, and chant to the sound of the Viol, etc. which
presageth worse still to come, than yet we feel. You have by your insensible
sottish carriage under all the dealings of God, made great Graves for a great
many good Men, and good things, and you will make a greater for all the rest
that remain, and roll a stone upon the mouth of it, that the whole City may be
desolate, the whole Land be desolate, and no remedy; If ye do not lay things to
heart.

Third Motive is this, lay to heart present mortal strokes, or else you will be
surprised with those that are to come, else the evils approaching, will justly
overtake you unawares. You will (as the fool) be singing a requiem to your
souls, Soul take thine ease and be quiet; thou have got a good Air to dwell in,
and all Neighbors about us be well yet, there is not one sick of the Plague in
all the Parish; and thou have got an excellent receipt against the Plague, such
and such used it all the last great Plague, and were all well, on some such
Lees will you settle, and so be surprised with God's Visitation. I will visit
them that are settled upon their Lees, says the Lord; and a Visitation when
People are thus secure, will be a Plague with a vengeance, to Soul and Body, an
Eternal Plague, that by dying you will die. This Plague is spoken of, Isa.
29.9. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out and cry, they are drunken, but
not with Wine, they stagger, but not with strong drink, for the Lord has
poured cut upon the Spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, your
Prophets and Rulers, the Seers has he covered, and the vision of all is become
unto you as the wonder of a Book that is sealed. I am afraid that this is the
Plague of the Plague that is upon us. A spirit of deep sleep is poured upon all
ranks, wherefore cry out, and cry if ye can, ye handful, which are here this
day, yet in the Land of the living, that ye with all the rest be not surprised,
with the Evil that is yet to come.

Fourthly, You are the Men and Women which have seen afflictions, as the
Prophet Jeremy said, I am the Man that have seen affliction by the Rod of his
wrath, Lam. 3.1. You have not only read the Bills, but you have been at the
Burials, you have been of the Mourners that have gone about the Streets: You
have seen the black trains of dead Corses, going by Sixes and Tens to their
long home, therefore your eyes should affect and afflict your hearts; Alas, if
we here in the midst of so many Thousand deaths, be Soul-dead, and lay nothing
to heart, how is it likely that they in the Country, which see none of these
Sermons, should be deeply affected. They have scarcely the Word to quicken them
in many places, and you have the Word and the Rod, and the Marks of the Rod
upon your Bodies, and upon the Bodies of yours, the Marks of the Lord Jesus
wrath, you that have such feeling Sermons, and not feel, how will this be cried
out upon! GOD that is come so near to judge, you that have been so near the
Grave, if not Hell, that have dwelt in Golgotha, among nothing but Tombs,
Graves, Sculs, and lean walking Ghostes for so many Months this Year, when
others have been out of the sight and hearing of all these things, if you weep
not to them, it is very unlikely that they will weep unto you.

Finally, This duty of laying to heart the promiscuous mortal strokes of God,
is a duty, wherein God will help you, and succeed you, therefore up, and be at
it. God has promised to take away the heart of stone, and to give a heart of
Flesh: and that with weeping, and supplication he will lead us: And therefore
we should wait upon the Word in these his ways, because he will meet us, and
assist us in the work of this day. And God will not only assist, but accept and
prosper this work of humiliation. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus,
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: God does surely
hear all bemoaning penitent sinners, and makes a book of remembrance. They
which go forth weeping, sowing precious seed, shall doubtless return with
rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them. And then will you be called the
repairers of breaches, and the restorers of Paths to dwell in. I conclude all
with the saying of one -- Vt valet quisque accipiat. Let every one weigh well
what has been said, and receive these things as he sees good, and live in
this dying day as he should, or as he will.

FINIS.
THE DESCRIPTION OF A FRIEND.
Being A SERMON ON Prove. 17.17. A Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is
born for adversity.
Prove. xvii. Verse. xvii. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born
for adversity.


THe condition of the Lords People is very necessitous and yet like to be much
more, it may not be therefore now unseasonable to Preach unto you the Doctrine
of neighbourly love, that we may be stirred up to become helpsul one to
another, as the state of times does, or shall call for at our hands.

The nature of friend^hip, and the use thereof in distressed conditions, are
the two main things of this Verse to be looked into. The nature of friendship,
is to love, -- A friend loves, etc. Love is as much the formality of a friend,
as rationality of a Man. Humane nature begets a kind of Kindred between all
Mankind, which state supposes love. -- Cum natura quandam cognationem inter
homines constituat, alterum alteri insidiari nefas est, says the Civilian.
Whereas nature makes a certain Kindred between Men, for one to betray another,
is most wicked. Now, if nature make a kind of Kindred, and so consequently
love, much more friendship makes a kind of Kindred, yea near Kindred, a
brother. A friend is, as my Text says, a brother, as a very near Kinsman, or
as a nearest Kinsman. And you may as well say a brother, is a brother without
love, as say a friend is a friend without love.

A friend loves, etc. that is, purely. Pure love is that which springs from
pure Principles, which are two, love to GOD, and love to Man, as some way or
other bearing his Image, either by Creation or Regeneration, and so not upon
any self-account. Thus David loved Saul, and was much pleased with the Men of
Jabesh Gilead that buried Saul, and much offended with the Amalechite that
killed him, although he was his great and implacable Enemy. And thus Jonathan
loved David, although David dethroned him. Jonathan was grieved that his Father
had done David shame, so Jonathan arose from the Table in fierce anger, and did
eat no meat the second day of the Month, for he was grieved for David, because
his Father had done him shame, I Sam. 20.34. A friend loves a friend upon his
honor, as he would be found answering the will of God, and the Creatures true
good, and for no bribe of applause or profit.

The Men of Israel were angry with the Men of Judah, for stealing David home
from his exile without them. And the Men of Juda made this ingenuous reply. The
King is near of Kin to us, Wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? Have we
eaten at all of the King's cost? Or has he given us any gift? 2 Samuel 19.42.
Have we (as if they had said) any self-end in our kindness to David, but
showing pure love, as such a near Relation requires.

The love of sympathy is pure love. The Iron moves to the Lodestone, not from
knowledge, consequently not from design, but from some hidden similitude in
property between them, which is as love in rational Creatures, and from the
hand of the first mover, which inclines this Creature to that, as pleases him;
and no more else can be said, of the matters of friendship, no gifts, nor this,
nor that make it: We love not yours but you, says the Apostle.

Secondly, A friend loves, etc. that is really, not in word only, but in deed,
as the Apostle says. And David said to Abiathar, I knew how it would be, when
Doeg the Edomite was there, I have occasioned the death of all these Persons of
thy Fathers house, abide thou with me, fear not, for he that seeks thy life,
seeks my life, but with me thou shall be in safety, I Sam. 22.23. I will take
care of thy life and livelihood, as of my own, as of he had said. A friend is
alter ego, another self. Hushai is called David's friend, and he made David's
case and condition his own, and adventured himself far, as far as his life, and
laid down his life for his friend.

Beasts love one another, and will fight for one another to the death, whose
friendship is but a love of sympathy. There are in England 9725 Parishes, how
many thousand Souls may be in these Parishes? If I should be asked by Men in
Place, what is true friendship to all these Souls? I would answer, To love them
really: What is that? I answer, To love them in words and in deeds, to do as he
we read of, (in the Acts of the Apostles,) He loved our Nation, and built us a
Synagogue, to provide able and faithful Preachers for every Parish through
these Kingdoms, that is, to love their Souls, and to feed them, and so to love
their Bodies, who are in want, and to feed them, and to cloth them, my meaning
is* to set good Ministers and good Magistrates over them, this were to love
really, and so to be a true friend to the Nation, and to all in it. To give
titles of honor and complements, this is not that which fills up the
definition of friendship. Cannot a City, and all Places study plaucibility of
carriage, and must this by and by be called friendship?

But as Absalom said to Hushai that stuck not to him in his distress, Is this
thy kindness to thy friend? to talk and to give goodly complements? Why wentest
thou not-with thy friend? 2 Samuel 16.7. A poor Widow, a Ministers poor Widow
(of which there be many now) complained to the Prophet Elisha, and he became a
friend to her, what was that? Answ. He loved her really. And Elisha said to the
Widow of the Prophet. -- What shall I do for thee? 2 Kings 4.2. and did do for
her to purpose, as much as her condition needed. Set her out of debt, and gave
her and hers wherewith to live upon. Pliny tells us of a Sea that does,
Accipere amnem in rotam sed non recipit. That is, takes in such a River, but
does not connaturalise it self with it, does not incorporate it as with other
waters, but as it goes in, so it goes out: And just so do we open our Doors,
and Gates of our Houses and Towns, and accipere, take in poor Ministers and
poor People, but do not recipere, receive them, i. e. welcome in, with -- What
shall I do for you and for yours? and make their wants as our own, and mingle
tears, and sighs, and cares, and travels, and spirits, and purses with them.

Thirdly, A friend loves, etc. that is, strongly or unexpressibly. I am
distressed for thee my brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto me,
thy love to me was [wonderful] passing the love of Women, 2 Samuel 1.26. Niphla
from Pala, it signifies (says the Critic) high and hidden, such as Man's
power cannot reach nor perform, nor reason attain unto. Used Exodus 33.16. For
wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy People have found favor in thy
sight? Is it not in that thou go with us? So shall we be separated, I and
thy People from all the People that are upon the Face of the Earth. --
Separated, this is the word, that is, so shall we be a People above all
expression, admired, and beloved, and honored, etc. So did Jonathan honor and
esteem David, beyond all expression. And such is the love of a friend it should
seem, as set forth to us by the Word.

There is a Hawk which they call accipiter humipeta, because it lies hovering
over Mice and little Vermin on the Earth, and petty small Birds, as they peep
in Hedges and Furrows, and uses not to soar and seek any noble and great
Game, as some other kind of stately Hawks do: So there is a love of Man to
Man, attended with some small realities of action, giving some small Money as
one goes the Streets, and broken meat from the Table, and such like little low
things, of kindnesses and love, which may well be spared, and no prejudice; but
this kind of love, though it has a reality in it, and does good, and would
there were more of this in these times, yet it does not denominate the Person,
which so does a friend, according to the sense of my Text, and yet he is a
friend in a large sense, or rather in a little sense.

A friend is a Man of a noble Spirit, that soars high and far, to fetch the
biggest and best prey, to feed and supply want. Hence it is that one compares
friendship, to marriage; because friendly love is stronger than that, which
runs in any other Channel.

Now how wonderful for strength! and how unexpressable for pleasure and
pleasantness! Is marriage love? as we have some signature of it through
Solomon's love-Song, where the word Friend is used, to express Marriage-love,
and the highest love which passes between Mankind. -- His Mouth is most
sweet, yea he is altogether lovely: This is my beloved, and this is my [friend]
O Daughter of Jerusalem, Cant. 5.16. And proportionable to such a great love,
is all industry and expense to help and bless with the best and most precious
things. As Araunah brought friendships like a Prince to David, and yet but a
friend and a stranger, a Gentile. And the wise Men of the East, what Presents
they made to Joseph and Mary, and their Child, or else they had had nothing to
flee with all into Egypt to save their lives. And our Savior who was
Lazarus's friend, how he sighed and groaned to make a Resurrection of Him, so
that standers by beholding his carriage, his sighing, his weeping over Lazarus
Grave, said, Behold how he loved him! which is written, that we might have a
right pourtraiture of a friend, So Christ called Lazarus -- Our friend Lazarus
is dead. And Martha which was Christ's friend, What a deal of care, and how
taken up to provide all that possible could be for Christ, and thought she
could never provide what was good enough.

And so Pharaoh, when he became a friend to Joseph, he thought he could never
do enough for him, he set him up next to himself, over all his own Nation and
Relations. And so the Persian Emperor advanced Daniel and Mordecai. A friend is
a favorite, and a favorite is a signet set on the heart, by the finger of
God, than which, What is of more estcem?

At such a great and unexpressableness of love, as the true form of a friend,
points that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 13.6. And observe well the words, at what a
height a friend is put, even by the Lord himself, in some sense it should seem,
above all relations. If thy brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son or thy
Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy Friend, which is as thy own Soul;
entice thee. The meaning of all these high expressions, is, that the love of a
friend is very strong, unexpressable, no relation, nor thing in this World,
dear enough, nor full enough almost to express it. A Brother, a Son, a
Daughter, a Wife, yea ones own Soul; a Friend is as near, as dear, as any of
these, and being brought in in the close, when he had named all near Relations.
-- Or thy Friend which is as thine own Soul; he would seem to give pre-eminence
of love to a friend, and set him, as Pharaoh did Joseph, next indeed to his own
Soul and Life. And if of due there go such a deep Channel of love to the
Creature, O! what an Ocean of love is due to Christ our good friend.

Fourthly, A friend loves thus, as I have before-said and loves thus, not for
a spurt and away, G^colampadi^s and Capito: Their friendship lasted as long as
they lived.
but he loves thus -- at all times. A friend loves [at all times.] Cum dives
eris plures numerabis amicos! Whilst we need no friends, we shall have more
than a good many.

But the love of friendship, is as the motion of the Sun, all the year, and in
all weathers, Winter and Summer. Brutes love one another, only whilst together,
and whilst they see one another, but when parted, they utterly forget one
another; and thus do most love, which shows it to be short of the love of
friendship.

A friend loves at all times, when sick, and when well, when poor as when
rich, when absent as when present, when dead as when alive. And Naomi said unto
her daughter in Law, blessed be he of the Lord who has not left off his
kindness to the living, and to the dead, Ruth 2.20. yea, or any that are of
him, as David did Mephibosheth, the Son of Jonathan, He shall eat at my Table,
and be as mine own Children. And Jonathan said to David go in peace, for as
much as we have sworn both of us in the Name of the Lord, saying, the Lord be
between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever, 1 Samuel 20.42.

The love of friendship has a kind of Eternity in it, a for ever: The Lord be
between my Seed and thy Seed for ever: It Is a love like the love of God, a
kindness like the kindness of God, as David expresses it, that lasts to the
Third and Fourth Generation. Is there any of the House of Saul that I may show
the kindness of God to him? that is, an everlasting love, 2 Samuel 9.3.

It Is noted by Historians of Queen Elizabeth, that as she reformed corrupt
Religion, so corrupt Coin. There is nothing so corrupt in these last days as
love, both toward God and toward Man, as appears by the instability thereof
toward both, which involveth both Tables of the Law, and so all Religion; and
this is above all powers to reform, but God.

Fifthly, and Finally, A friend loves at all times, that is, most tenderly and
compassionately, and especially in adversity; which is the meaning of this
significant and emphatical expression, which follows -- And a Brother is born
for adversity. The reading should be, says some, -- And he is born a Brother
in adversity, that is, through his exceeding tender compassion, he become as
the nearest natural relation, and so is by his tender love, and tried love,
born and brought forth, as it were a new near Kinsman, on purpose created of
God, to serve the poor Creature in this strait; as a Creature new made, and now
made, which what a great honor it is to him, to whom God gives a merciful
heart? he is as a Creature then extraordinarily and purposely born, for such a
great and acceptable service.

Abimelech the Priest loved David at all times, but most especially when David
was at a plunge, when he and his followers were ready to starve for want of
bread, then he gave them the Shewbread, which was the Bread out of his own
mouth, beside the hazard he ran in it, of his life; and did not only give him
hallowed bread on which the Priests lived, but observe how he takes his life in
his hand, and speaks for David to Saul, to blunt the edge of his fury against
him. And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the Kings
Son in Law, and goes at thy bidding, and is honorable in thy House? 1 Samuel
22.14. Did not his most tender and natural affection, beget him, and render him
rather a brother, than a friend to David in this strait?

The like instance is Ittai the Gittite, an alien. Return says David to him,
why should thou go up and down with me, seeing I go whither I may? 2 Samuel
15.20. And Ittai answered the King and said, as the Lord lives, and as my Lord
the King lives, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in death or
life, even there also will thy servant be. What Brother, or what Child, or
Father, could more tenderly and naturally have spoken and done? Had not his
friendly affection begotten him a near Kinsman, a Brother to David in his
adversity?

Plato endeavored that meum and tuum, mine and thine, might not be heard of,
in that Commonwealth wherein he was.

And this was the friendship of the Primitive Churches and Christian World,
without which they could not have subsisted under such bloody Persecutions. And
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one foul, neither
said any of them that ought which he possessed was his own, but they had all
things common, and so with great power gave the Apostles witness, Act 4.32.

The Historian says, that Queen Elizabeth commanded the whole Ocean, and laid
out all to the support of the Protestant Interest, against the Papists every
where. By this tender and friendly love to the poor persecuted Protestants, she
was (in that season of the Churches adversity) born a Sister, or a Mother in
Israel, as Debora is called for like reason.

First, That friendship is more than complement, a how do you, vain visits,
frothy, foolish diversions, as carrying to Stage Plays, which make calamity
return more heavy, when Persons are gone, which know to fhew no better
friendship. And Joab fell to the ground on his Face, and thanked the King, and
said, now I know that I have found grace in the sight of my Lord the King, in
that the King has fulfilled the request of his Servant: 2 Samuel 14.22. Absalom
was a banished Man, and Joab was his hearty friend, and he did not understand
Court-complements; But, when things were done that might fully answer the
distresses of his friend, there he understood it. Now (says he) I know that I
have found favor, now thou have fulfilled my requests, and done things that
may fully relieve the distressed. Joab was born a Brother, as it were to
Absalom in his adversity by his friendly love, and this written doubtless by
the Holy Ghost, to let us know that friendship had much more than slight
service in it; It has much, and through following and serving distressed
causes and conditions, till Petitions with God and Men be granted, and some
thing to purpose done, that will arise to full relief.

The Heathen when they would make one another believe, that there was more than
words in what they said, would use to cite their strong god Hercules, as their
Author -- Vt de Hercule accepimus, as we have heard from Hercules; therefore
surely it will be accomplished. A friend is a distressed Man's Hercules. My
friend has said, he will take care for me in this, and in that distress,
therefore surely it will be done, he will never cease petitioning God and Man,
he will never rest Night nor Day, till he has done some thing, and some thing
to some purpose to relieve my distress.

We have found a friend no where so deficient, as where it has been supposed
to be most abundant, says Seneca. Some have all their best gifts in their
tongue, these are unfit to make friends, and yet the forwardest to pretend it.

Mephibosheth which had not dressed his Feet from the day that David fled, till
he returned, and came so undressed to meet him, is a fit Reproof of
Complemental friendship.

Secondly, Learn from this Description of a Friend, that a Friend is a rare
Jewel. If we have hit the Description of a Friend rightly, we doubt we shall
not easily find the Person. All of you have conspired against me this day, and
there is none that shows me, that my Son has made a League with the Son of
Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or shows unto me that
my Son has stirred up My Servant against Me: 1 Samuel 22.8.

To him that is afflicted pity should be showed by his friend, yea by any
body, by an Enemy, but ye do nothing but play the censorious Persons against
me, said Job. And truly in great distresses, this is the Vinegar, Gall and
Wormwood, which even Friends give, in stead of Cordials, in stead of
compassions, and pains, and expense to make relief. A great many severe
enquiries.

How did he come into such want? surely he is an ill husband, he did not follow
his business: How did he come into all this trouble? Surely he was a busy
body, he meddled with that which he needed not have done: His Wife and Children
go too fine. A thousand holes are picked in the Man's Coat quickly; and the
reason, because so poor, and needs some to help him, and none of these holes
found in his coat whilst it had a good nap upon it, as long as he had no need
of friends. So that they that go for Friends are the worst of Enemies, and
afflict in stead of comfort, and more afflict than an Enemy would do.

And yet alas this is commonly the friendship of this World, yea of such too
much whom God has called out of this World, and off of this World; which is,
as if one should see a Man or Woman in the Field, and bleeding to death, and
should spend nis time in curious enquiries how it came, and who did it, and why
would he go that way alone, and be out so late, and never do any thing to stay
the Man's bleeding, or do any thing to save his life.

All People almost make distress and calamity the subject of censure, and not
the object of compassion and friendship.

Either it is thus, or else it is, I will show kindness to Hanun, as his Father
showed kindness to me, 2 Samuel 10. I will invite such, for they invited me, and
I will visit such, for they visited me, and these kind of Friends there be, and
few at any higher rate.

A Samaritan is a rare Man, who though a stranger, and upon no account in the
World, but as the wounded Man needed him, fell in with him unasked, and gave
him a full relief, and what is more needed, put that upon my account, said this
stranger. And now, says Christ, which is the neighbor and friend? Such a
Neighbor now, and Friend, I fear, is hard to be found.

A Friend, says Seneca, is not only rare in a House, but in an Age. Aliter de
amore atque est accipis, says one. -- Thou think otherwise of love than it
is; and so we think otherwise of friendship than it is; we think it a slight
cheap cold business, and so think that the World is full of friends and
friendships, till we come to want a Friend.

We think they are friends, which serve us as the Welsh -- Witch served Teolin
the Second Prince of North Wales, who told him that he should ride through
London with a Crown upon his Head, and this was to comfort him; whereupon he
(...) ^o be vexatious to the borderers of England, till at last he was in
Battle overthrown, and his Head cut off, and fixed on a stake, and adorned with
a Paper Crown, and was by a Horse man carried triumphantly through London.

And, if People do but put some pleasing foolish things in our Heads, and
flatter us, this is for your honor, and 'tother thing much for your interest,
though never so destructive, these are friends, and embraced, and prefered. And
so do this and do that, and ye shall have a living, and any thing that I can do
for you: and so the friendship has some ill condition in it, which to be
embraced, might outwardly advance peradventure, but inwardly cast down
certainly; yet these which put these Paper-crowns upon our Heads, would be
accounted great friends, and so they are to an ill Interest.

Learn that the Providence of GOD is much to be reverenced, for he makes
friends, and most an end of strangers, and others fail us, on whom our
expectation most is, that we may the more reverence GOD and his Providence.

Jeremiah's Kindred failed him, and God raised up Ebedmelech, and Ahikam, and
both at such times, that surely Jeremiah had otherwise lost his life: he had
been starved to death, had it not been for Ebedmelech. -- My Lord the King,
these Men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the Prophet,
whom they have cast into the Dungeon, and he is like to die for hunger in the
place where he is, for there is no more bread in the City, Jer. 38.9. which
kindness of his God will reward, see Jer. 39.16. By which it is evident he had
starved, had it not been for the friendship of this stranger. And he had been
hanged, or beheaded, or some sudden violent death done to him by Jehojakim, had
not the hand of Ahikam been with and for Jeremiah. For the King at the same
time, had fetched Vriah out of Egypt, a Prophet who prophesied the same that
Jeremiah did, and slew him with the Sword. -- Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam
was with Jeremiah to save him, Jer. 26.24. It is brought in with a
nevertheless, to show the admirable Providence of God, who did raise up this
friend, to stick so close to a poor helpless Man.

And the poor Criple which had lain at the Pool long, of a Disease of 38 Years,
and then he had lain till he had perished in likelihood, but that Christ came
there, and became a friend to him, to show us, that the Providence of God is
much to be reverenced, for he brings forth Brethren for adversity, he creates a
Brother for the day of adversity.

David was a stranger to his Brethren, and an alien unto his Mothers Children,
Psalm. 69.8. And yet well known to Gittai a stranger, that would live when he
did, and die when he did, and this questionless, that David might see the Man
of God's providence and special care, and remember it.

For had we our reliefs still, from such as are some way engaged to be helpful,
either as some way related, or as some way by our kindness to them obliged to
us, it would make us take our escapes in danger, our supplies and helps in
straits, more slightly, and forgetfully.

Course usually are the kindnesses of near relations, sometimes as Reeds they
run into our hands, and so far from being merciful, that they are unjust.

As Joseph's Brethren to him, and God had a Sovereign hand in all that, that he
might raise Brethren to Joseph himself, yea that he might make Joseph a better
Brother in adversity to them, than they had been to him.

The last Use of this Point is for Exhortation, Do you become such friends,
Brethren, for this Day of Adversity. Be pitiful, be kindly affectioned, be
tenderhearted, be clothed with humility and bowels, stoop and wash the Saints
Feet, yea to pull thine Enemies Ox out of the Ditch, and to lift up his Beast,
if fallen down under his burden, though thy cruel heart would pass him by. But
as for me when they were sick, my clothing was Sackcloath, I humbled my soul
with fasting, and my Prayer returned into mine own bosom. I behaved my self, as
though he had been my friend, or brother, I bowed down heavily, as one that
mourns for his Mother, I was rewarded evil for all this good. Psalm. 35.12,
13, 14.

If ye be friends to friends, What singular thing do ye? Be friends to
strangers, yea to the poor and friendless; such as whose Persons you do not
know, only their cases are well known; yea be friends to enemies, yea though
illy requited: So was David, so was, and so is Christ to Thousands and Millions
every Day, among which it may be you are some. They lacked not any thing, in
the first Church of the Gospel, Act. 4.34. They fulfilled the Law of
brotherhood; If you become friends, you become brethren, upon such brethren,
born for such extremities.

And if ye take the name of friend, remember that you are created Brethren in
the day of adversity, and fulfill the Law of your adopted and chosen relation.
Let not the distressed want, if you can help them; I cannot exhort you yet to
sell to be merciful, but I would I could first exhort you to buy some thing
here and there, that you might be substantial friends to many in distress,
Ministers and others, Ministers Widows and others, the Widows and the
Fatherless, and the oppressed, and the oppressed and ruined in many Towns and
Places, who are eaten up with Vermin, and have no helper, no friend.

But one says he will help, and he will be a friend, and he eats the flesh;
and another he says, give him but a good Fee, and he will help, and he will be
a friend, and he takes the poor Carcass that is best, and he picks the bones;
and of these friends there are great store, but few such as my Text describes,
for which I fear the Land mourns, and much more will.

Be friends to the distressed be so simply. Is there any of the House of Saul,
that I may show the kindness of God to him, 2 Samuel 9.3. And Ziba that Wretch
said, Jonathan has yet a Son that is lame of his Feet; and would not so much
as give his Name, nor put the least word of respect, as if he would have
insinuated to David, that this Criple was not worth the looking after, by such
a Man of honor as David. And such self-seeking Wretches, great Men have at
their elbows, which keep them from becoming simple and sincere friends. For
simple friendship is to look after Criples, and beggars, blind, and lame, and
halt, as Christ does. To invite them to our Table, which have scarce nothing to
eat at their own Table, who to be sure cannot invite us again; and to be Legs
to the lame, and Eyes to the blind, etc. But these are so unthankful, that who
can have any heart to do any thing for them? I answer, Such whose hearts are
simple, and who as David show simple friendship, they will look upon Criples as
Criples, and blind as blind, lame and blind in their Souls, as well as in their
Bodies; and, if you would have People be thankful, be simple in your kindness,
let them see that you do not seek theirs in the least but them, every way the
relief of them. Mephibosheth was never like to make a Man of use to attend upon
David, to honor his Table; this had been rather to have sought a friendship,
than to have showed one. It is a Custom amongst the Turks, not to believe a
Christian's, or a Jew's complaint against a Turk, without a Turk's witness too,
and that is the reason, why in such Cases Justice is much corrupted, and so
little to be had; I only allude to this: The cases and conditions of many
oppressed poor and mean ones is such, that unless they can get such and such as
are great to witness to their cause, and own them, and stick to them, their own
complaints will not be believed nor heard; not indeed will any take it in hand,
unless they see that which may be good self-encouragement, and advantage; so
that falls out to be true, which that great Statesman observed in his Days.
-- The rich have many friends, not only one friend, of which the poor would be
glad, but many friends, and the Poor is hated of his own Neighbor, Prove.
14.20. And, Prove. 19.4. Wealth makes many friends, but the poor is separated
from his neighbor. When ye see a gold Ring on a Man's Finger, there you take
him up, and his cause is good, as Absalom said, and ye do but want one well to
plead it, and I will do it, and I will do it: and what a many friends the
wealthy Man, and the Man with the Gold Ring, and long Hair has! but a poor Man
that has but one Ewe Lamb, as Nathan's Parables, is, but a little estate left,
and that in danger to be all taken away too, who strives to plead this Persons
case? and to own, and to cleave to such a helpless one? Wherefore I exhort, be
simple in your friendship, as purely born for adversity.

Secondly, Be tender and strong friends, that is, not in word only, but in
deed, and in the greatest actions, and labors, and deeds, which distresses
need to relieve them. What a friend Barzillai was to David in his distress,
against Absalom beyond Jordan, How brought he him all Provisions for Himself
and Followers, which David much remembered, because it was so seasonable. And
what a friend was Obadia to the Lord's Prophets, when the violence of Ahab and
Jessabel was great, who hid them by Fifties in a Cave, when it must needs be
with the peril of his life. And our Savior seems to grant such a strength in
friendship, as to lay down the life for a friend. Joh. 15.13. Greater love has
no Man than this, that a Man lay down his life for his friends. Our Savior
seems to grant such a height in the love of friendship. And the Apostle says,
we ought to lay down our life for a brother. And a friend is a created Brother
of our own Creation, and created of purpose for a plunge. Therefore it will be
lovely, to get all the heights of true friendship in this evil Day, because
distresses and plunges are so high, and hard, and great. Nothing less almost
will relieve some poor distressed People, unless we do much expose our selves
as Obadia, and the Brethren which rescued Paul out of the Tumult, when he was
knocked down, and all thought he was dead. And Rizpah the Daughter of Aiah took
Sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the Rock, from the beginning of Harvest
till Water dropped upon them, and suffered neither the Birds of the Air to rest
on them, by Day, nor the Beasts of the Field by Night, 2 Samuel 21.10. Rizpah
made a covering over her of this Sackcloth, and sat under it day and night,
with those dead Corpses of Readiness Family, which friendship was very strong, and
tender and painful, and David took it wonderful well at her hands. And if she
did so watch with the dead, that no violence might be done by Birds, or Beasts;
It was strong friendship in him, which said come and let us go and die with him.
'Twere well if we could watch with the living, and that we could play the
friends so, to many in Prisons, and bonds, and extremities, which are not dead
Corpse yet, but almost so, and many of them worse than so, that is, worse than
if they were dead; my meaning is, that where distress is great, we would become
great friends. -- Our Rule is to covet the best gifts, to be most eminent and
excellent in every Grace, and be you in this, of friendship.

Hyram King of Tire sent his Servants unto Solomon for he had heard that they
had anointed Him King, etc. for Hiram was ever a lover of David. 1 Kings 5.1.
This is the Property made of friendship in my Text -- A friend loves at all
times. Had Hiram been a lover of David only sometimes, and when David had no
need of him, doubtless David would have been cautious of him, and not have put
him among the number of his friends; but; he was always a lover of David. And
it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great Woman, and
she constrained him to eat Bread. And so it was that as often as he passed by, he
returned in thither to eat bread. Not once or twice coldly invited, but she
constrained him, and as often as he passed by, and that she might be sure of him
always when he went that way, -- She said to her Husband, behold now, I
perceive that this is an holy Man of God, which passes by us continually, let
us make a little Chamber in the Wall, and let us set for him there a Bed, a
Table, a Stool, and a Candlestick, and it shall be when he comes to us, that
he turn in thither, 2 Kings 4.10. Friendship is a natural thing, and what is
natural is durable. I have none that does so naturally care for me, says the
Apostle Paul of Timothy. A friend becomes a Brother. -- that is, naturally
affected; as if flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and it is supposed in
nature, that natural relations are natural always; as hand, and the foot to the
head, and the head to the hand and foot are tenderly and strongly careful and
affectionate always. Jonathan went to David in the Cave, and strengthened his
hand in God, as well as when David was in favor with Saul; and that their
friendship might be everlasting, how solemnly they swore one to another, that
their friendship might run along from Generation to Generation, and yet
Jonathan was a Brother to David by marriage, and yet he rather chose to stick
and trust to the bond of solemn friendship, a Brother as made so, by becoming a
friend.

Now for Motives to press you, to become such friends: First, This may be said;
God looks for it. I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty and ye
gave me no drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed
me not, Mat. 25.43. I was a stranger and needed a friend, and could find none;
This complaint against Nabals at the great Day, shows that GOD much expects
this, that we should be friends to such as are in distress, and have no help,
nor cannot help themselves. Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor oppress him;
for ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt; ye shall not afflict Widows or
Fatherless Children. If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all to
me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill
you with the Sword, and your Wives shall be Widows, and your Children
Fatherless, Exodus 22.21, 22, 23, 24. The reason why the Lord would not have
strangers, nor Widows and Fatherless abused, and that he will take it so ill at
our hands to do it, is, because these usually are friendless, and have none to
help them, whereas he expects therefore that we should (and ought to) be
friends, and help these, and not do as all do, or as the most do abuse them, or
at least not look after them. By which it is manifest, that God looks that we
should be friends to our friendless, it is their due, and therefore the
friendless may look for it too, as well as God. With hold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it, Prove. 3.27.

Many need friends in this day, therefore become friendly. And when Absalom's
servants came to the Woman to the House, they said, Where is Ahimaas and
Jonathan? And she said, they be gone over the Brook of Water. And when they had
sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem. And it came to
pass after they were departed, that they came up out of the Well, and went and
told King David, and said arise, and pass quickly over the Water, for thus has
Ahitophel counseled against you, 2 Samuel 17.20, 21. Many of the Lord's People
in these evil Days, need friends to hide them, the Antichristian World is so
full of Achitophels pursuing of them; be therefore as this Woman, friends, with
your Houses, with your Estates, with your Interests. The Disciples let down
Paul at a Window in a Basket: Alas, ah, and alas! the straits which many have
been put to in this day, and how many may yet be, who knows then how much it is
needed, that you become friends to the distressed. For many of us Ministers, it
may be said of us, as Livy. Pastor accola ejus loci, a Pastor that dwells, hard
by that Place. And so we are Pastors, which live by our Places, some of us, or
rather indeed die by them, but cannot live in them; and more then many can do
that, To live by their places, but must hide their heads one while, and wander
here and there another while, to get Bread for them and theirs, and well when
they seek it, if they can find it. And not a few Ministers and others in this
condition, how many then need friends.

Thirdly, Consider the great service that you may do for God, and for his
People, this way. And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in
the harvest time, unto the Cave of Adullam; and the troop of the Philistines
pitched in the Valley of Rephaim. And David was then in an hold, and the
Garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem. 2 Samuel 23.13. And Adullam was
but a little from thence, and yet David's three Worthies came to him, and
relieved him in the face of them all, Troop and Garrison of the Philistines, and
so did him the service of Threescore, or Three-Hundred Men. So one friend to a
poor David in a Cave, in a Prison, one Ebedmelech to a Jeremia in a Dungeon, is
worth a Thousand Courtiers with all their fine words, and a Thousand Citizens,
with all their Where is he? And How does he do? And shall we never see him
again? Be kind to Barzillai, and show favor to his Sons, and let them eat at
thy Table, for [so] they came to me when I fled, because of Absalom thy
Brother. 2 Kings 2.7. David sets them down with Emphasis, [so] they came to me:
when I fled from Absalom thy Brother, who was like to have carried away all
from me and thee too, and when few did stick to me on the other side of Jordan,
where the fight was between Absalom and his Father, and in that side of the
River, where friends were thin, and very tickle which side to take to, then did
Barzillai and his Sons own David, and did at that strait a World of service in
a little time, David puts a [so] upon it, and cites it upon his Deathbed. --
For so they came unto me. One says of Friends, that they are such Jewels, that
Kings can have none, meaning no faithful friends, and yet David had one
Barzillai, that did so come to him, and help him. Know your seasons, your
objects, and become such friends, and therein know your use.

Fourthly, You may obtain great blessings in this way, both here and hereafter.
David charged Solomon that he should take Barzillai's Sons to Court with him,
and make them to eat at his Table. The Lord built the Midwives Houses for their
friendship to Moses; and what a reward did he give Ebedmelech, for his kindness
and friendship to Jeremiah, see Jer. 39.16, 17. Jeremia has a Prophecy on
purpose from the Lord: -- Go and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethi^^^^, (...). Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, (...) God of Israel behold I will bring my words upon
this City for evil and not for good, and they shall be accomplished in that day
before thee, but I will deliver thee in that day, says the Lo^d, and thou
shall not be delivered into the hands of the Men, of whom thou art afraid, for
I will surely deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by the Sword, but thy life
shall be for a prey unto thee, because thou have put thy trust in me, says the
Lord. What God will do with Cities and Nations of the World, in these last and
most sinful times, who can tell? O how glad would ye all be, that in such a
doubtful day of common danger, if any could secure (and if it were) but your
bare life; how much more if any could secure you and yours, your Families and
Estates; and in probability Ebedmelech did share in this also, as far as any
did, for the manner of God is not to give barely what he says, but something
more, and oft-times much more. And what a kindness in this World did the Lord
give the Shunamite when Elisha had kindness, he gave her a Child, and then
when dead, gave him to her again, and then after that warned her of the Famine
that was to be Seven Years, and willed her what to do: and then at the end of
that time, when she returned, God so ordered in his Providence, that Gehazi
telling the King the stories of the Miracles which his Master did, whilst he
was telling, how he raised the Shunamite's Child, that the Shunamitish Woman
came in, and so had all her Estate again, and the profits thereof for the time
that she was absent in the Famine. Accrevit pectori caespes, you may get a
Fence Breast-high, against all danger; yea Head-high, safety to your lives, to
your Children, to your Estates, by becoming as the Shunamite, friends, and as
Ebedmelech, friends; think of it.

Then shall the King say to them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father; inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World,
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink,
I was a stranger and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye
visited me; I was in Prison and ye came to me: then shall the righteous answer
him, Where saw we thee thus and thus? And the King shall answer, Verily I say
unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto the least of these my Brethren ye
have done it unto the, Mat. 26.40. The Rule is to do good to all, but
especially to such as Christ will call his Brethren at the great Day; but we
may have rewards in Heaven, for being kind and friends to them which never
shall come there. Hence it is that Christ elsewhere says, Make to your selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive
you into everlasting habitations. He that is faithful in that which is least,
is also faithful in much* and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in
much; if therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon Who will
commit to your trust the true treasure? Luke 16.9, 10, 11. If you be friends
with your estates, your estates will be great friends to you, your transitory
riches will receive you into everlasting Habitations, they will make a large
entrance for you into Heaven, though may be none at all for them to whom ye
show kindness, for they may be unworthy, yet ye shall in no wise lose your
reward. 'Twere well if friendships would convert all, to whom they are showed,
as they may do some for ought I know; but, if they do not convert any, yet you
shall have your reward in Heaven, your riches by being made friendships to the
distressed, make themselves your friends, and will receive you into everlasting
Houses. But observe what follows, If ye be unfaithful in this unrighteous man,
that is, the riches of this World, with which* and for which, many make
themselves unrighteous, if ye do not show friendships, as good Stewards of a
little Talent. Who will give higher gifts to you, as grace and glory? So that
you may shut up Heaven, or open Heaven, as to all ends and purposes, as to
grace and glory, or no grace, nor no glory, as ye become friends to others, or
not friends with what you have; now take your choice, show to the distressed of
this Age, that ye were born for this day to be friends to them, or else it had
been better ye had never been born. The Ravens will rise in judgment against
you, who did spare the Meat out of their Mouths, to feed Elijah in his
distress, and became friends to him.

Finally, If we should be Friends as Brethren born for the day of the adversity
of one or two, then surely we should be friends to the whole Church of God; and
if we should be friends to this and that particular Person, than much more to
the whole Nation, and to the public compages of all. Christ needs friends,
such as Abraham, who was a friend of God, and so does his Church and People
need friends, faithful friends, in this Evil Day, wherein many prove false; we
are all born for this Day of adversity, to save the whole from the wrath of
God, from Pestilence, Sword, and all the Evils which do assault us. David was
troubled at the Elders of Juda, which should have been Leaders, that they were
the last to bring the King to his House, 2 Samuel 19.11. So may him whom that
King typified, Jesus Christ be troubled, that the great Ones put not their Neck
to his yoke, but are the last which set their hands and hearts to any works of
the Lord, to show themselves friends to him, and to the Church and States in
which they live. You have Ten parts in the Nation, over what inferior and poor
Persons have, and so has the Church and State Ten parts more in you, than in
others; and therefore one of you should be Ten Friends, twenty friends in this
Day, to lift up Jacob which is low* to relieve the Widow, the Fatherless, all
the oppressed, and to see that Magistrates and Ministers faithfully keep the
charge of the Lord; and so make up the breaches of the City of David, which are
many, and lie in the Gap, and not make gaps and breaches, by violence, and
rage, and bad example.

FINIS.
GOD'S Troops Invading MAN.
Being A SERMON ON Psalm. 42.7, 8: 7. Deep calls upon deep, at the noise of
thy Water spouts: all thy Waves and thy billows are gone over me. 8. Yet the
Lord will command his loving kindness in the Day time, and in the Night his
Song shall be with me, and my Prayer to the God of my Life.

Psalm. 42.7, 8. Deep calls upon deep, at the noise of thy Water spouts: all
thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord will command his
loving kindness in the Day time, and in the Night his Song shall be with me,
and my Prayer to the God of my Life.


GReat afflictions, and great Faith to see through them, are the two great
Things considerable in these two Verses. Afflictions are set forth by a
Metaphor, taken from the Sea, when The Winds raise the Seas, and take them at
their backs, says Seneca.
Winds and Rains are tempestuous, which are God's Water-spouts above; these
make the Seas roar, and beat, and break to, and again, which are his Water
spouts below; which Metaphor is to show, the great and vast nature of
affl^ctions; they are as the Abyss, or bottomless Sea, that cannot be fathomed;
such are the miseries which God inflicts sometimes, upon the Sons of Men; yea
upon his own Children.

Secondly, This Metaphor is to set forth, the numbers and troops of trials,
wherewith God punishes his sometimes; and the number can as well be numbered,
as the nature be fathomed: you can as well fathom the bottomless Ocean, as
number the Waves and Billows, which beat up and down in it.

Thirdly, This Metaphor fetched forth the continuedness of affl^ction. Deep
calls upon deep, or calls for deep. That is, one Wave beats up and
beats on another, Undam undaque pellit, or unda sequax, as Virgil says.
through the Tempests which God raises. Afflictions unfathomable, innumerable,
and very durable, fall sometimes upon the People of God.

Yet the Lord shall, etc.

Secondly, The potency and invincibleness of faith is showed unto us, by that
attribute in God, on which faith fastens, and that is his Sovereignty, which
commands all other wheels to go. -- The Lord will command his loving kindness,
etc.

Thirdly, Faith in the potency and invincibleness of it is* showed us by its
excellent issues and effect which it does produce, which are two, Prayer, and
Praise, and in every dark state. -- And in the Night his Song shall be with me,
and my Prayer to the God of my life: in which is involved peace, and joy, and
all good.

That God sometimes makes all his Waves and Billows to go over Men, yea good
Men. The Psalmist thus complains, not once in my Text, but in Psalm. 69.1, 2.
Save me, O God, for the Waters are come into my Soul; I sink in deep Mire,
where there is no standing, I am come into deep Waters, where the Floods
overflow me; I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail whilst
I wait for my God. David was a Man after God's own heart, and yet says he, The
waters are come into my Soul, and I am come into deep Waters, which overflow
me, and I cry to God, and he lets me cry till my throat be dried, and can
obtain no answer. Elsewhere he speaks of himself, and others. Thou sellest thy
People for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price, (alluding
to Slaves) thou make us a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn and derision to
them that are round about us; my confusion is still before me, and the shame of
my face has covered me, Psalm. 44 12, 13, 14. There is a great distance between
the Planets, they cannot dart one to another, says Seneca. But it is not so
with afflictions, these will dart, and reach one to another, when pain is on
the body, it will reach unto the Soul.

First, All afflictions for kind and quality, that is, spiritual and temporal;
Spiritual afflictions GOD brings upon Men, yea upon the best Men. The loss of
Ordinances. When I remember these things, I pour out my Soul, for I had gone
with the Multitude to the House of God Psalm. 42.4. As the loss of Ordinances:
So, 2. The loss of God in Ordinances. Why are thou cast down O my Soul, etc. O
my God, my Soul is cast down within me, therefore will I remember thee, from
the Land of Jordan. So Job complains of the loss of God. The Arrows of the
Lord are within me, and the poison of them drink up my Spirit, Job 6. And what
a Man was he for integrity? I acknowledge my sin, and yet mine iniquity is ever
before me, Psalm. 51.3. Mine iniquities are gone over my head, they are a heavy
bu^den, too heavy for me to bear; my wounds stink and are corrupt through my
own foolishness, Psalm. 38.4, 5. A storm cannot raise it self above the Moon,
much less as far as the Stars, says the Philosopher: and yet spiritual storms
raise themselves in the Soul above all, Sun, Moon, and Stars, above all the
graces, gifts, and endowments the Soul has, and eclipse and darken all. My
heart is sore pained within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me,
fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me,
Psalm. 55.4. So Haman, whilst I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. And then
God is gone indeed, and Sun, Moon, and Stars overwhelmed.

Secondly, Temporal afflictions does God bring upon Men, yea upon the best of
Men. How our Savior was afflicted in Spirit, we read, his Soul was heavy to
death; how he cried out and roared, because of God hideing himself: and as to
all outward miseries and injuries, what was not inflicted on him, that Man or
Devil, yea or the Justice of God could inflict? His visage was marred more than
any Man's. He had no House nor home; He was in the Wilderness worried by
Devils, and wild Beasts: He had no Bread, no Bed, no Friends, forsaken of all,
even of all his Disciples. So Haman, how he complains of Bodily afflictions.
-- I am afflicted, and ready to die from my Youth, Psalm. 88.14. He had not a
well day in all his life, as we say; and yet lived in an ill time to be sick,
namely when our Fathers were in their conflicts in Egypt, under Pharaoh. And
yet mark what he says then, -- Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in
darkness in the deep! thy wrath lies hard upon me, Ps. 88.7.
and thou have afflicted me with all thy Waves, Sela. As if he had said, that
it should be done thus, to and poor Creatures, such a season as this, when
under the tyranny of a Foreign Enemy, let it be wondered at by all the
Creation, Angels and Men. So Hezekiah, how afflicted outwardly with a great
Army of merciless Men, insulting and besieging him, and no sooner that over,
but sick unto death of the Plague and other infirmities, as you may read by his
complaints. -- Mine Age is departed like a Shepherds Tent, it is removed, I
have cut off like a Weaver, my life, he will cut me off with pining sickness,
which is many thousand deaths, from Day even to Night he will make an end of
me: I reckoned that as a Lion, so he will break all my bones, Isa. 38.12.
Comets appear in the calmest Air, and yet are very prodigious things: So
corporal calamities break out upon Men, when in the greatest calm of ease and
content. When David said, his Mountain was strong, and that he should never be
removed, by and by you hear him cry out, I am troubled, I am bowed down
greatly, I go mourning all the Day long, for my loins are fil^d with a
loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh, I am feeble and sore
broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart, Psalm. 38.8.

Secondly, As God brings all afflictions, for kind and quality, on Men, yea on
good Men, that is, afflictions spiritual and temporal, inward and outward, on
soul and body: So he brings all afflictions for quantity and degree; that is,
afflictions very great, and of long continuance, Were they not great and sore
things done against Job? Whilst he was yet speaking there came another, and
says, the Fire of God is fallen from Heaven, i. e. A great Fire, and has
burnt up the Sheep, and the Servants, and I only am escaped to tell thee. Poor
Job now indeed, that Fire and Brimstone, from the Lord out of Heaven, should be
rained upon him, as upon Sidom, that so he might judge himself to deserve, no
better than the wicked Sodomites did; What a degree of high Trial, and what a
great Twig in the Rod was this? Yea, God says of the Devil, that he moved him
against Job, without cause, to swallow him up, Job 2.3. that is, says the
Margent, when the Devil had naught against him, nor able to bring his own
malicious designs to pass against him; yet read Satan's Second Commission; So
went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils
from the sole of his Foot, to the crown of his Head, and he took him a potsherd
to scrape himself withal, and sat down amongst the ashes; and then his
friends poured Gall and Vinegar into his Cup: which altogether made his
afflictions of the greatest magnitude indeed, the greatest. I think, that ever
mere Man had. David tells us of the Lion, and the young Lion upon him, Psalm.
17.12. and of such as did set their mouths against the Heavens, and bark and
bite all good Persons and things, and therefore the Lord's People returned
hither, that is, when they could get no shelter from the wicked, and Waters of
a full Cup were wrung out to them, Psalm 73.10. And full Cups of misery, speak
the greatest punishments for degree and quantity.

Secondly, God brings afflictions upon Men, yea upon the best Men, as great and
sharp, so of long continuance. It has been a sharp Winter this, and of long
continuance; so does God make in other matters, some times. Some Rivers As
Nilus that ancient River.
had their beginning with the World, and so it may be will have their end, not
till the World ends. And some afflictions have their beginning as soon as we,
and will have no end till we have; yea, some Rods extraordinary begin with some
good People, as soon almost as they begin to be, and end not till they end
their lives. It is God's threat, that if all his Laws be not observed, and his
glorious and fearful Name. -- The Lord thy God, be feared and reverenced, (And,
who can call God his God, but God's Children?) that then he will inflict upon
his People great Plagues and of long continuance, and such he did inflict, and
such he has said in the new Testament also, will fall out, great troubles, and
of long continuance, so long, as if he heard no Prayers, that every ones faith
and patience shall faint and fail. When the Son of Man shall come, shall he
find says upon the Earth? Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter, I did
mourn as a Dove, that is, always, so the next words expound it, -- Mine eyes
fail with looking upward, GOD gave no answer, that his faith was quite spent; O
Lord I am oppressed, and bear all the burden alone, Undertake for me, lend me a
hand. What shall I say, he has spoken unto me, and himself has done it, and
therefore it will never be undone, I shall go softly all my Years in the
bitterness of my soul, Isa. 38.14, 15. That God inflicts punishments, great
punishments, and of long continuance upon good People, read 1 Kings 22.27. And
the King of Israel said, put this fellow in the Prison, and feed him with the
bread of affliction, and the water of affliction, until I come in peace. His
warrant (you see) had a long date. Thus God sometime let loose wicked Men upon
the best of his, to fasten their teeth, and scarce ever let go their hold, till
they have plucked out their throats; to lay them fast in all extremities, like
Joseph, and there let them lie long till even their skin and bones rot. And as
God lets Men deal thus with their body; so he lets the Devil sometimes deal
thus with their Soul, worry them, and worrry them long, even all their days.
It Is but GOD's Commission given to the Devil, and he will do it; as it is God's
Commission given to wicked Men to torment, and then they do it, and without his
Commission, a Dog could not bark or show his teeth against any child of God.
The Plowers plowed upon my back, and they made long their Furrows, Psalm. 129.3.
And woe is me that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar, my
soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace, Psalm. 120.5, 6. God
excommunicated Nebuchadnezar Seven Years, and made him a Companion for Beasts;
and so sometimes he excommunicates his own People, and makes them companions
(as David in Arabia with Black mores) with Devils, those black Fiends of the
lowest Hell, and so long.

The Reasons of this Point are these: First, That God may show his Sovereignty,
I will not say h^s Justice. We have all sinned, even the best Men, and therefore
God may bring all afflictions and miseries upon the best. But I rather choose
to say, that God may show what an absolute Lord of all He is, and can set up
what Man he will to be his mark to shoot at, and then take him down, and set up
another. Mine iniquities are more than the hairs of my head, says David, Psalm.
40.12. Usually less than this number are our afflictions when most, and
therefore where God shows sovereignty, he also shows justice. Israel would
none of me, Psalm. 81.11. Therefore where God pronounced to Ammi, I will have
none of this People, he was just as well as absolute, and peremptory in his
will. Sometimes God smites a sinner, as Joab smote Amasia under the fist Rib,
so as that he smites him not again, makes an utter end at a blow, and no cause
visible no more than in other of the Sons and Daughters of Men, and of his
People: This properly we call sovereignty: Thus may be smite any one: for we
have not (any one of us all) the privilege of Antwarp* who have two marts
lasting six weeks apiece, during which time no Man in his Person or Goods can
be arrested. No man has such privilege for a day, in order to God: he can
arrest Person, Goods, and Life when he pleases, and yet in all so, that none
can charge him with injustice.

Secondly, Does thus, bring all afflictions upon Men, yea upon the best Men, to
try integrity. The Sea pulls up from its bottom all excrements, as well in
fair weather as in fowl, says Seneca; but so does not the Soul. Thou have made
a Hedge about Job, Does he serve thee for naught? No, thou do give him much,
and so hire him to serve thee, do but take away as thou have given to him, and
he will curse thee to thy face, so says God, all he has is in thine hands,
and then again says, touch his Bone and his Flesh, and he will curse thee,
etc. Take away Estate, and take away health, health and wealth, and then
questionless he will forsake such a hard Master: and yet Satan was deceived,
Job held his integrity, and now Job goes for current Coin in the Lords account.
Have thou considered my Servant Job, that he is a just Man and upright, etc.
Though thou have moved me against him without cause, such an instance is David.
-- Thou did thrust sore at me (that is) Satan, because he says, that he
thrust sore at him, that he might fall, but the Lord helped me, Psalm. 118.13.
God afflicts sore sometimes, and then the Devil thrusts sore, to shipwreck
Conscience some way or other, and thus does God try Men sometimes, to know all
that is in their heart. There is a Nursery at a great Dukes seat abroad, which
is called Schola illustris. Great afflictions are the great God's Schola
illustris, that in and by which, he makes the integrity of Men appear, that is,
all the graces of Men in their true glory. -- According to that, 1 Pet. 1.7.
That the trial of your faith being much more precious, than that of Gold that
perishes may be found unto praise and honor at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
Barbils taken among Rocks are brave Fish, and have their right color.

Thirdly, God brings all afflictions on Men, yea on good Men, to humble and to
mortify. Our Fathers were worried with all afflictions in the Wilderness forty
Years together, as to prove them, so to humble them, to pull down pride and
stubborness, and to make them long much for Canaan, the Land of Rest. And Job
was kept at such a distance in all his conflicts as to try him, so to humble
him and abase him, for his heart was too high, What good Man's heart is not?
The Sacrifices of God are a broken and a contrite spirit, such sacrifices in
Religion God likes well, Psalm. 51.17. He does not despise low, humble, bleeding
sinners, that is, he does not worry and slight to see them, because they are
as Wheat ground small enough to be Bread fit for their Masters Table. David,
when his bones were all broken, that is, soul and body much afflicted, then he
begins to talk of a broken spirit; when our conditions are high, our spirits
are so too: and to bring the one low, the Lord is forced to bring the other low
too. Paul that was a high confident Man, God was fain from Heaven to fell him
to the Earth, and afterward to keep him low and humble, was fain to let loose
corruptions of nature, and buffitings of Satan, that by these thorns in his
sides he might prick out and let out all the swelling windy conceits of
himself, and of his own holiness, and goodness, and usefulness, which fluttered
in his heart. -- Mephibosheth being a Criple, how humbly he speaks! -- And he
bowed himself and said, What is thy Servant that thou should look upon such a
dead Dog as I am, 2 Samuel 9.8. So when God Criples us in all things, wherein we
may be of use to him, estate, health inward and outward, and yet keeps on a
secret support and kindness though not sensible, Oh how humble it makes the
Man! What a dead Dog am I, that the Lord should regard me to do the least
favor for me! the ground is too good to bear me. Naturali praevalet
accidentale. Sometimes accidental things prevail against natural; accidental
rods and punishments, prevail against Natural Corruptions and Sins.

Secondly, As God does bring all afflictions to mortify pride, so to mortify
other sins, to which our natures are too too prone, to pluck up all sin by the
roots well, especially hypocrisy, with which we do best play with, in the
matter of humiliation and mortification, and renewing faith and repentance,
till the Lord swinge us indeed with all his Rods, and long. David, though a
good Man, was beaten till he roared, and made to roar all the Day long, and
Night and Day was God's hand heavy on him, and his moisture turned into the
drought of Summer, to make him acknowledge and confess some special sin, which
lay hid and was kept close, till a Fire was kindled in his bones, then he
confessed, and spit out the sweet morsel which he tumbled in his mouth so long,
Psalm. 32.5. In some bad matters, we are very bad and naught, and ready to make
excuses and defenses, and to hide our sin this way, as Adam, it is but a little
one, and I do not use it, it is but now and then, when I meet with such bad
company. All afflictions and smart Rods are but few enough in these cases to
make us speak out, and do out as we should, and to make such clearing our
selves in these bad matters as becomes Penitents. Sometimes of the year in
Ethiopia when most hot, their Silver waxes Lead, and no cover of any rich
matter can endure says the Historian; And truly I may more fitly spiritualise
it; sometimes when the entisements of some sins most suitable to our nature are
strong and hot through Satan's Fire-Darts, all our silver becomes lead, (1) All
our graces. Faith and love, and courage fails, and become corrupted and bribed
by the sin which so easily besets; and then is God enraged, and lays about
him as a jealous God, and taken up all his Rods, and lays them on, as with
all his might, and all little enough, to kill pleasing sin and beloved sin at
the Root, to dis-heart it well. He makes a great Fire, to purify well, and make
the scum come all out as it should. When the Children of Ammon saw, that they
stank before David, then they sent to him the Syrians, 2 Samuel 10.6. So, till a
Sinner by the many punishments of God, sees that he stinks in the Nostrils of
God, he does not raise forces against his sin as he should, (1) He does not set
hmself to repent of it, and clear and cleanse his afflictions thoroughly of it,
as he should, by faith in the death of Christ. They say of the Spaw Waters
broad, that they are not so pleasant as wholesome; so I may say of afflictions,
that they are not so pleasant as wholesome. Inutile per inutile perimitur.

Thirdly, As God brings afflictions upon Men, yea upon good Men, to mortify sin
well! so to mortify them well to all the natural good things of this World, and
so to make them indeed dead with Christ to all here. As the Nurse puts bitter
things on her breasts, to take off the Child from the sweet milk, and put his
mouth out of relish, and no other way to do it: so does God imbitter our
conditions in this World, that so all the sweets which we have here, we may use
them as if we did not, and possess them, and they not possess us and our
hearts. David had many bitten upon his condition before he could say, I have
behaved my self as a weaned Child. When the World was first crucified to Paul,
then at length he became crucified to the World; when God whips us in this, and
whips us in that; takes away this, and takes away that, then by degrees he
takes away our hearts too, and sets them upon better things, but usually good
things first die from us, before we become so good as to die from them. There
is no labourer in Egypt that lifts up his eyes to Heaven; they are almost angry
with the Sun, it does so scorch them: Few laborers in and after this World, do
lift up their eyes to Heaven much, whilst the Sunshine of prosperity is hot
upon them, but rather angry and vexed, and cumbred with one thing or other,
that the World does not tumble in fast enough. Few in health and wealth are
heavenly. -- In those days was Hezekia sick unto death, Isa. 38.1. In those
days; When was that? see the Chapter foregoing. As Soon as he had obtained that
great deliverance from the Assyrian by Prayer, and all quiet, now least he
should grow as David, when his War was ended, sensual and wanton, God smites
him with the Plague, and bids him set his house in order, for he must die.
David being hunted up and down as a Partridge, and poured from Vessel to
Vessel, what a Heavenly Man is he; and when this is over, what a carnal Man is
he! I am tossed to and fro, as the Locust; mark what follows, My Knees are weak
through fasting, Psalm. 109.23. When we are tossed much, then we fast and pray,
and go to Heaven much upon our Knees. We read in History of an Emperor
strangled putting on his Royal Robes; nothing more choke the seeds of Grace and
Heavenly life, than the prosperity of this World; and therefore usually, one
way or other, God kills all things here, to kill us thoroughly to all here. The
Apostle bids us endure hardness as good Soldiers. In hard states and
conditions grace best thrives, and the most noble things and souls to be found.

I will have mercy upon the House of Juda, and save them by the Lord their God,
and will not save them by bow nor by sword, nor by battle, by Horse nor by
Horse man, Hos. 5.7. As God saves without bow or sword, so he can destroy
without bow or sword, even with his own hand from Heaven many ways. Of which I
will say, as one does of Mary's being with child by the Holy Ghost. Mirari
licet, rimari non licet. Such dealings of God may be wondered at, but curiously
searched into they may not. It may be said of God and the Engines he uses
against Men, as Hushai says of David and his followers. Thou know that
David and thy Father be mighty Men, and they be chaffed in their minds as a
Beat robbed of her Whelps in the Field, 2 Samuel 17.8. God sometimes, when he
sets upon the Sons of Men, is as fierce Creatures chased and chafed, and robbed
of their young, very fierce, and so are all the Engines which he uses. How
fierce was Shimei against David, and threw Stones and cursed him. God has set
him on, says David. We are made a spectacle or Theater, says the Margent, to
Angels and to Men; and I think God has sent us forth last for this sad
service, as appointed to death and slaughter in all that is dear, 1 Cor. 4.9.
It may be God has appointed the best of Men in these last Days, to the worst
of deaths and calamities, to close up a long and evil Day, and that the Pit
should as it were shut its mouth upon the Christians of these last times, as
the Whale upon Jonah. Which should make us tremble, and stand in awe daily, to
consider what a great and holy God we have to do with.

Secondly, Learn what need we have of grace, who are liable to such floods of
Evils; yea of much grace. Noah moved with fear, being warned of God, prepared
an Ark, and went into it; and where else could he have lived, in those great
storms and floods which came upon the World? Surely Gods storms and waves will
beat much in these last Days; If all of them may come over any Man, then all of
us need an Ark, and to have unto it; that we be in a state of favor with God
by Jesus Christ. All our estates may fail us; a Fire of God from Heaven may
consume them. All our Friends may fail us, yea all our hearts may fail us, Men's
hearts failing them for fear. What then will be a Cordial to keep us, but the
favor of God, and a state of grace, that the Lord Jesus Christ be with our
Spirits? Nine several times in the Ten first Verses of Paul's first Epistle to
the Corinthians, is Jesus Christ named says one, that has well observed, to
note who it is that is all in all in storms for a Savior, yea indeed in all
conditions. It is Jesus (as the same Observator says) that is made Mel in ore,
Bernard.
melos in aure, Jubilum in Cord. Jesus Christ in all conflicts is honey in the
mouth, Something like that terrible Monarchy of the Greeks (...) before
Christ's coming in the Flesh will be before his coming again.
harmony in our ear, a Jubilee or great joy in our hearts, when all the waves
and billows of afflictions beat upon us, yea when these Waters come into our
Souls, when Prophecy, and prosperity failed the state of the Jews, they had
nothing to live upon but that promise; that the desire of all Nations should
come: -- The Echo, and the Pool of Bethesda, under the great Tirannies of
Antiochus, and the Greek Monarchy; these were the stays of their hearts, that
Christ would come, and so by faith did bear up, and he did come. Floods may,
yea red Seas may break out, and we may flote in our own blood, therefore an Ark
is very needful, and that we be in it, well in it by faith; nothing but Christ
can be a Jesus, a Savior to us all, other things will but rather hasten and
heighten the Floods upon us, as the more riches and honor, and the things of
this World we have, the more shall we be a fit prey for evil times and Persons.
What got the Caesar's by their high advances, Nisi ut citius interficerentur.
Grace therefore is necessary, and speedily necessary. The Flood which swallowed
up the first World, is called a Dart. Methusalah the Dart comes; so I believe
will the Flood of these last times surprise and come as a Dart, as a Wall
swelling out, to use the Scripture expression. Actus morientium non possunt
esse in suspenso. It Is the speech of them that study Nature. Death when once it
begins to knock, beats down all apace, and cannot be stayed.

Learn what need we have to beg, Jona was beat upon with all God's billows, and
likewise Job, how they both broke out and cursed the day wherein they were
born! and how David in like plunge fained himself mad, and drivel'd at Gath. A
tempted Soul, with all temptations, will have much ado to bite in blasphemy. I
said in my have all Men are liars, yea even Samuel, which from the Lord had
told him that he should be King. Some dead Men's bodies putrified turn into
Serpents. See holy Ainsw. in Genesis 3.19. Truly the better we are, when overborn
with temptations, we become much the worse; what Serpents and Scorpions some
have become by these things, in these times, more fiery and worse than others,
who yet knows what may be in their hearts as to the main, we know not. How
earnestly Christ desired that the Cup might pass, and yet was not in danger of
sin as we are, how much more should we so desire, who have not a body to bear,
being so cracked by sin, but much less, not such a Soul to bear trials, as
Christ, being so wholly defiled and immersed, with sin. This on which I am now
makes me think of David's speech to Jonathan, who as you know he loved dearly.
If there be iniquity in me, slay me thy self, 1 Samuel 20.8. as if he had said,
let me dye by the hand of one that loves me, and then I shall dye but one
death; but if I dye by the hand of such as hate me, I know not how many deaths
I shall die. (There is a kindness in the Hangman) nor how many sins I may
commit under such cruelties and inhumanities. If the Cup may not pass, ye^ beg
that you may be delivered from the evil. I pray not that thou should take
them out of the World says Christ, but that thou should deliver them from
the evil. Upon this insist, that you may have the benefit of Christ's
intercession, that no Wave may over-whelm any Grace, or hide the face and
favor of God a moment from you. Peccatum tametsi non bonum, tamen in bonum,
etc. says Augustine. Sin, though it be not good, yet it may be ordered to good:
So afflictions, though in themselves not good, nor joyous, yet God can order
them to work about the peaceable fruit of holiness, and so to make them very
good, and very joyous.

(...).
which are hard-hearted, close fisted, without Man-friendship, such as you read
of, Psalm. 69.26. They persecute him which thou have smitten, and talk to the
grief of him whom thou have wounded, they gave me gall for my meat, and in my
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink Job's friends sat down by him Seven Days,
and said nothing to him, for they saw that his grief was great; and when they
did speak, it had been better much they had held their peace, they did so talk
to the grief of him whom God had wounded. A sore evil we are apt unto, when all
God's billows pass over any, to have many hard things to say against them, but
very few merciful deeds to do for them; May not their case become yours? May
not you whole, become sick? and you rich, become poor? and you Londoners, may
not you be driven here and there, as well as they in the Country? See therefore
and take notice of all the lurking places of David, and see where he hides
himself, and come tell me, says Saul to the Ziphits. 1 Samuel 23.23. You
Londoners have been some lurking places for the Lord's hunted ones long; May
not some Ziphits discover these lurking places, and make you run and lurk for
it too, where you may? And would not you then be glad when such billows beat
over you, to be pitied and sheltered? then think how much it becomes you, to
show pity to wounded souls, and distressed bodies, and to pour out your
spirits and Purses to them whilst ye can. A storm fulfils its course in a
round, and then bursts with its own violence, says Seneca; and indeed the
storm which has been in diverse parts of the Country, will I believe, fulfill
its course in a round, in which Circle this City will have its share; and
therefore take heed that that be not true of you, which David complains of some
when in his Cave, Psalm. 142.4. I look on my right hand, and behold, but there
was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, and none cared for my Soul.
Several bleed in soul, and I doubt but few of you care for these bleeding
sinking Souls to support them, with your experiences and with your prayers.
Many flee to Caves and Dens to hide here and there, and have not to put bread
in the heads of them nor theirs, and few I doubt visit David in his Cave.

Learn from hence, that we should not sentence our Eternal condition, by our
temporal. All God's Waves may pass over the best Man in this World. Christ was
exercised with all trials and miseries in this World; was poor, was hated, was
murdered; was inwardly tormented, his Soul was heavy to death, and in a great
Agony; and so was Job; and therefore were judged hypocrites, and deceivers, and
accursed of God. Paul, when the Vipers was on his hand, they judged him a
Murderer, and when he threw it off and had no hurt, then they would have
worshipped him for a God. There is no judgment of God's love or hatred by the
things of prosperity or adversity, but rather by our carriage in them. Many
will say, who will show us any good, but Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance, and thou shall put more joy into my heart, etc. Many can make no
other estimate of Man's eternal felicity, but as he is so and so prosperous in
this World. Crowns which begirt the Sun or the Moon last not long, says the
Philosopher. All the Crowns and adventitious Rays of riches and honors which
begirt the Saints in this World, to give light and conduct to it, by Day and by
Night, they last not long, some tempest or other blows them away; and then when
those painted Crowns are vanished away, to judge and censure that therefore
their Eternal Crown and Glory, is gone too, is to judge amiss of the Generation
of the righteous. Discord in the matter of exhalations, makes storms and
tempests; so discords in the matters of God's dispensations, make storms; not
discovered in his affections to his People. Now God dispenses riches, anon
poverty, but both with the same spirit of love. Now he dispenses peace by his
spirit to the soul; and anon terror and upbrading, and both by the same spirit
of Fatherly affection: So that storms arise from a discord in the matter of
God's dispensations, and not from a change in Gods love: for God is immutable
and changes not, and whom he loves he loves to the end.

Heaven, between all these is very narrow. The Sea is broad enough, and yet the
winds and storms may be such, as to make the passage to such a Port narrow
enough, and hard to hit and make. The ways to Heaven are very spacious, and in
themselves very pleasant, but there arise so many storms, within and without,
these, these make them narrow and hard to hit, and make, and walk in as we
should. I am counted with them that go down into the Pit, I am as a Man that
has no strength free among the dead, like the s^^ne that lie in the Grave,
whom thou rememberest no more, as they that are cut off from thine hand, Psalm.
88.4, 5. They had almost consumed me upon Earth, but I forgot not thy Precepts.
Psalm. 119.87. The ways of God are broad, and large, and good, but there are so
many slaying consuming evils on both sides, these, these make them narrow, and
hard to hit, and to walk well in. One mischief almost consumes us, and then get
of^ that a little, and presently another evil worse takes hold of us, and this
quite breaks us. Before we can swallow our spitle, waves beat so thick, that we
know not which way to steer. The superior bodies which are fixed are pure and
clear, and never change their complexion not course; If it were thus with our
graces, then though storms and troubles did arise, we should see and make our
way well enough, we should make the favor of God, Christ, and Heaven at
Midnight. But our graces change, when our conditions change; and when our
bodies are weak, our faith is weak; when our outward condition is low, our
graces are all low too, and this makes the way of Religion hard, and
difficult, and narrow.

My soul is continually in my hand yet do I not forget thy Law, Psalm. 119.109.
Some, there is continually but a step between them and some mortal malady, and
yet how patient, how believing, how heavenly, able to comfort others; and
others are more afraid than hurt, as we say, and fancy their case for misery
more than really it is, and yet how disconsolate, how unbelieving, how froward,
how troubling wife, husband, all the house! Some their cases are as sad as sad
can be, like those which have a sentence of Death at the Bar, that sit like
sentenced Men on the Lader, waiting when the Execut oner will do his office,
and this I doubt is the case of many, and some not only as to all their welfare
in this World, but as to all their welfare in the World to come. And that we
should make ado about this and that, when the life and soul and eternal welfare
of such and such, hangs thus in doubt before them.

Learn that they have much cause to bless God, who find any calmes, and lueida
intervalla, considering what continual storms and calamities attend our
condition here. It Is incredible that a storm should mount as high as
Mid-heaven, and whirl it self among the Spheres, which move so peaceably and
regularly; and yet it is most incredible, if every one of us do not find storms
assault us, in our highest graces and enjoyments. What Clouds gather still
after the Rain in this Climate! What fenny, boggy places our spirits are,
yielding matter of storms continually, and therefore what cause have we to
b^ess God if we have any tranquillity, or health, or liberty, or soul-peace in
this World. We value the favors of God as we do a Companion in the way, no
longer than he rides our way; we value the favors of God as ^e do the paring
of our na^ls, they have served our use, and so we throw them away. Linen does
not receive a skarlet die, there is not a deep and fit foundation for such a
noble color; So it is with many Souls, they are as thin Linen, not deep and
substantial enough to receive a right impression of Gods favors. For pains in
the Head, you must use great frictions and rubbings of the inferior parts of
the Body to draw down. And truly discontent and unthankfulness is an evil in
the head and heart too a slightness and misunderstanding of the great mercies
of God, and to cure it, things must be rubbed much upon the conscience, that
lower Court of judging and condemning things amiss, for we are less than the
least of all Gods favors.

here, and all things are so often sloted in this World, that it is necessary our
Souls be much upon the Wing, and much aloft in that upper World, Procul
negotiis should be the Saints Motto. Far from sin, nay far from the troublesome
business and matters of this World, and much else where, to wit, in Heaven,
where we say our Treasure is. How precious are thy thoughts unto me, how great
is the sum of them when I awake I am still with thee Psalm ^9.18 When all Gods
waves over flowed the old wicked World, the Dove flees to the Ark; so should
the great and continued troubles of this world make us retreat much to Christ,
and to that good and quiet place above, where he is at the right hand of his
Father and we are great gainers by all our losses and troubles, if they produce
a Heavenly spirit. Servus per^se, non est persona, sed res, and possessio
Domini sui, says the Civilian. A Servant that is under all considerations
servant, cease to be a Person in a sort, and is a Man's goods, and the
possession of his Master. We are under all considerations the servants of God
and therefore we should be as his House, and as his good and possession, our
Souls should be swallo^^d up in Him and in Heaven; we should not be our own in
any thing, but his altogether, and attending still upon Him with all our
thoughts, words and actions, as Servants which are not their own. Let us make a
virtue of necessity; Where can we be quiet in this world, or how long? and
therefore let us be much in Heaven with Christ, which is best of all.

FINIS.
GOD'S Troops Invading MAN.
Being A SERMON ON Psalm. 42.7, 8. 7. Deep calls upon deep, at the noise of
thy Water spouts: all thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. 8. Yet the
Lord will command his loving kindness in the Day time, and in the Night his
Song shall be with me, and my Prayer to the God of my Life.

Psalm. 42.7, 8. Deep calls upon deep, at the noise of thy Water spouts: all
thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord will command his
loving kindness in the Day time, and in the Night his Song shall be with me,
and my Prayer to the God of my Life.


I Have been already on these words, and have given their sense, and have made
one Observation upon them, and pursued it to an end. Another Observation I
purpose to make at this time, which is that I especially aim at, which is this,
That Faith looks thorough the darkest, and most dismal, and difficult things;
All troubles (says this Prophet) do as the Sea swallow me up, and yet the Lord
makes an escape for me, I shall have opportunity to praise him, and pray to
him, as the God of my life; That is, he who has saved my life, the life of my
Soul and Body: David was as much disappointed from Men of all help, as
exercised by God with straits and difficulties; Surely Men of low degree are
Vanity and Men of high degree are a lie, Psalm. 62 9. And yet observe how he
speaks, viz. How long will you imagine mischief against a Man, You shall be
slain all of you, as a tottering fence, and as a bowing wall shall ye be. When
he was left in the lurch by every one, high and low, yet he saw by faith the
downfall of all his enemies, yea, he saw that it was near, and that as a
swelled rotten wall, they would soon throw down themselves, though none should
touch them nor thrust them. Before your Pots can feel the thorns, he shall take
them away as with a Whirlwind, both living and in his wrath, the righteous
shall joy when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked, so that a man shall say verily there is a reward for the righteous,
verily there is a God that judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58.10. What a great fear
the whole Host was in, when Goliath came forth daily and insulted, and
blasphemed, and yet then David by faith saw over him, yea saw his speedy
downfall. Then said David, thou come to me with a Sword and with a Shield,
but I come to thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of
Israel, whom thou have defied, this day will the Lord deliver thee into mine
hand and I will smite thee, and take thine Head from thee* and will give the
Carcases of the Hosts of the Philistines this day to the Fowls of the Air, and
to the wild Beasts of the Earth, that ye may know that there is a God in
Israel, 1 Samuel 17.45 Moses saw all the fin and misery that Israel would plunge
themselves into after his death, how they would wax fat, and kick, and run to
new gods, and that all manner of miseries would come in upon them at this Door,
and that they would bring themselves into an utter lost condition, as to all
outward appearance, and yet then says he, the Lord will do like himself, The
Lord will judge his People, and repent himself for his Servant, when he sees
that their power is gone, and none shut up nor left, Deuteronomy. 32.36. This great
and free goodness of the Lord shall shame them, for trusting in Idols, and
abusing such a gracious and mighty God, which is the sense of the following
words. Holy Mr. Ainsworth, upon Psalm. 1^0.4. observes, that Coals of Fire may
be kept under Juniper ashes a whole Year together; and surely there be things,
if we could skill them, by which soul-heat and life, and so all the senses
which belong to it, might be preferred long and very strong, not only for a
Year, but always, and able to encounter all cases and conditions, though never
so dark and difficult.

I will open this Point particularly to you, and show you the truth Per Parts
by Parts. Faith can look through matters temporal, though of the darkest and
most difficult nature. 'Twas a great Flood which drowned all the World, all
Gods waves then passed over Mankind indeed: And yet Noah by faith stem'd that
Tide, and saw another World, and his safe landing in it. 'Twas a great strait
and temptation to Abraham, when called to leave his Country and Kindred, and to
go to a Country so remote, and so wicked as Canaan was, and to live alone in
the midst of such a People, and yet by faith he saw his way, and God before
him, and that he should live then more safe than in h^s own Country. Likewise a
great Temptation it was when God called him to offer up his only Son, and yet
by faith he saw through that thick Cloud, and that God was able to raise him
from the dead. It was a dark Day with David when Absalom was up against him,
an: Ahitophel his Wives Grandfather, Bathshebas Grandfather, and yet turned
against David to the Conspirators, by which the conspiracy grew strong; yet by
faith he saw thorough this, and was quiet in the midst of this great tempest,
as you may see, Psalm. 3 5, 6. which was Penned upon that occasion. I laid me
down and slept, I awakened for thou Lord sustainedst me, I will not be afraid
of ten thousands of People, that have set themselves against me round about.
Arise O God and save me, for thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the Cheek
bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. By which it is evident that he
saw the ruin of that great Army, and his own safety in the midst of all that
danger, and this by faith. The Waters of the Flood abated but one Cubit in Four
Days when they began to abate, and yet Noah by faith knew he should see them
quite down at length, though long first. And surely through his faith these
waters hasted away to their proper places, for in the last day they abated
eleven Cubits, which abated but one in four Days before; By this which has
been said, we see, that Faith looks through matters temporal, though never so
dark and difficult.

Secondly, Faith looks through matters spiritual, though never so dark and
difficult. As the power of natural corruption, the sense of God's wrath, etc.
Faith can look through the power of natural corruption, than which what is a
greater Mountain, in the eye of an enlightened Soul? O wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 7.24, 25. Faith has a strong and clear eye that can look
through such a big and black Mountain, as the body of death is. Satan and
corrupt nature are called the strong man and his goods, Mat. 12.29. and Christ
spoils them both, and this faith sees, when both natural corruption and Satan
are at strongest. But I see another Law in my members, willing against the Law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my
members. O wretched man, what a wretched state am I in. And who can, or who
will deliver me out of this slavery? and faith answers this hard question. I
thank God, Christ can and will, he that is mighty to save, on whom help for me
is laid. To this may properly be added, Romans 6.11. Likewise reckon ye your
selves also to be dead indeed to sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Faith does reckon the body of fin dead, and all the Powers of it,
because that is done by Christ's death to procure it, a Cure that never failed.
What shall we then say? if God be for us, who can be against us, or what can be
against us. But God be thanked ye were the servants of fin, but now ye have
obeyed from the heart the form of Doctrine, into which ye were delivered.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother warm me; behold, thou
desire truth in the inward parts, and in that inward hidden part thou shall
make me to understand wisdom, that is, experience the power of grace, for by
wisdom is meant grace, Psalm. 51 5.6. By wisdom is meant grace, and by knowing
of wisdom, means, experiencing of grace. Which shows to us, that he by faith
saw through the power of natural corruption, and all the grieving operations and
prevalencies of it; and that the state of his inward man which was so
ungracious and which had so deceived him, and betrayed him in that matter of
Vriah, should notwithstanding be brought to a better and a more sincere frame
for time to come. Hence it is likewise that the Apostle Paul speaks of the work
of Mortification as done, which yet is still but a doing as long as we are on
this side Heaven, as seeing by faith, every accursed thing in his heart slain.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
That is certainly they shall. The Beasts of the Field shall honor me, the
Dragons and Owls, because I give this and that in the Wilde^ness, Isa. 43.20.
That is, Creatures by Nature as blind as Owls, and yet as confident and fiery
as Dragons, these shall see and become as tame that a little Child may lead
them. Jacob blessed Ruben that went up to his Fathers Bed, and Simeon and Levy
which had been such Brethren in evil, and this he did by faith, says the
Author to the Hebrews; which shows that he saw through those corruptions,
wherewith they were over-taken, the one with lightness, the other with passion
and fury, and that God would change all their hearts, both of the one and of
the other and make them gracious; and doubtless in his light the Children come
at length to see light, and by his faith were helped to believe.

Secondly, Faith looks through the sense of God's wrath, which is he darkest
and most dreadful thing or all. Christ did so, and he did it by faith, when he
cried, My God, my God. etc. David's sin in the matter of Bathsheba, as much
clouded his Soul as any thing and filled his soul with the sense of Gods
displeasure, and yet he saw through that dark Cloud by faith, as you may see, 2 Samuel 12.23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him but he shall not return to me. By faith he saw God
reconciled as to this foul business yea reconciled to the Child that was
smitten dead, or else he would not have wiped his eyes, and have said, I shall
go to him, but would have continued weeping and after, the death of the Child
most of all, as he did for Absalom, whom he gave up for a castaway. They made
the figure or the Sun upon Joshua's Tomb, to preserve the Memorial of that
great Miracle of causing the Sun to stand still. Therefore also the place of his
dwelling was called Timnath Serath, or Here Is, which wit^ some Letters
transposed, is as you should say, the sign of the Sun: upon the Tomb of a
believer you may make the figure of Gods face and favor, for when he is in the
belly of Hell, as Jona, yet from thence he espies a reconciled God, and his own
everlasting mercies sure, though these here be all uncertain. Will thou be
angry with us for ever, will thou draw out thy wrath to all generations? will thou not revive us again, that thy People may rejoice in thee; I will hear what
the Lord God will say, for he will speak peace to his People, and to his
Saints, but let them not return again to folly, Psalm. 85.8. The People of God
were very low at this time, even as in their Graves and Tombs, and yet there
is the figure of Gods countenance even on their Graves, they saw peace, when
there was nothing but War. Who will bring me into the strong City, Who will
bring me into Edom? Wilt not thou O God which had cast us off? and thou O
Lord which did not go forth with our Armies, Psalm. 60.10.

Thirdly, Faith looks through matters National, as well as Personal, though
never so dark and difficult. Thou will save the aff^^^cted People, but wilt
bring down high looks, for thou will light my Candle, the Lord my God will
enlighten my darkness, for by thee I have ran through a Troop, Psalm. 18.27. This
Esalu^ was made (says the Title) when David was delivered out of the hands of
all his Enemies, and out of the hands of Saul; so that it has a National
reference and respect. David saw through all National conflicts, as to the
godly, that how much distressed soever they were, yet that God would own them
and save them. For thou will save the afflicted People, but wilt bring down
high looks. They that seek my Soul to destroy it, shall go into the lowest
parts of the Earth, they shall fall by the Sword, they shall be a portion for
Foxes; but the King shall rejoice in God, every one that swears by him shall
glory, but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped, Psalm. 63.10, 11.
Noah came out of the Ark about November, the very beginning of Winter, when
nothing was to be had, but what he had in the Ark for support, and to begin the
World withal; and yet he looked through this great strait, which respected not a
Nation, but the whole world, and sacrificed at the beginning of the new world,
as Adam did at the beginning of the old, and so did cast all his care on
Christ, who well cared for him, and for all the matters in his hand, which
respected the constituting of this World.

If you ask me how a believer does make such prospect and perspect? I answer,
by these four things. First, By the Promise. The best Men's eyes fail in dark
days, and it is well they do so, for then he betakes himself to the promise,
and by this Trunk beholds afar off. A foolish or weak action failing, Action
inepta succumbens; recurrit ad aptam.
makes way to an action that is valid. A believers own sight failing, makes
him to have recourse to the promise, and by this he makes prospect through
all. The Title of the Fifth Psalm tells us, that it was made when the
Philistines took David in Gath, mine Enemies would daily swallow me up, for
they be many that fight against me; but how did he look through this Cloud? I
answer, by the promise, as you may see, Verse the 6. In God I will praise his
word, in God I will put my trust, I will not fear what Man can do, thou tellest
my wanderings, put thou my tears in thy Bottel. In God I will praise his word,
verse. 10. This word which he so much speaks of, was that which we read, 2 Samuel
23.5. By which he looked through sin and death. These be the last words of
David, although my House be not so with God, ^et he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my
salvation, etc. that is, inward and outward, temporal and spiritual. The
promise is so ordered and made in all things, that in all matters whatsoever
faith may see by it through and through; be it sin of what kind soever. Such sins
as David committed, before or after conversion; or be it punishment spiritual
or corporal, desertion of Soul, sickness of body, distraction and troubles in
the affairs of this World; bad Family, bad Kingdom, as never any Man could have
greater plunges of all sorts than he, and yet by this promise so ordered in all
things, he saw still through all. To the promise is added the Seal and Oath, to
make a strong and clear sight in the darkest case; And this also David made use
of, when he fought with Aram Naharaim, and Aram Zoba, Psalm. 60.6. God has
spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide Sechem, and mete out the
valley of Succeth, Who shall bring me into Edom, wilt not thou which have cast
us off? God has spoken in his holiness or by his holiness, that is, has
engaged himself by oath, and surely he will not break his word, and his oath.
The Church likewise makech use of this Medium, to see clearly and strongly
through trials, Psalm. 89.35. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of my mouth, once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David. And in what a dark case the People of God were then, we may see
by the following words, -- But thou have cast us off, and abhorred, thou have
made void the Covenant of thy Servant, (this is the Prayer of the Church,
urging the Covenant and Oath to David) Thou have broken down all his hedges,
all that pass by spoil him; thou have made his glory to cease, and cast his
Throne down to the ground, Psalm. 89.44: Thus did the Church look through their
dark condition, by the Promise and Oath.

Secondly, By Christ does a believer look through all difficulties of what kind
soever, inward or outward. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand,
till I make thine Enemies thy Foot stool. What enemies? Ans. All Enemies,
inward and outward. The Psalmist by virtue of Christ saw natural corruption,
guilt of sin, and all Men and Devils opposing, destroyed. By the death of
Christ, he saw guilt in all the Elect destroyed; he shall drink of the brook in
the way, that is, the black Book Kedron, meaning that he should undergo a
cursed death, and so satisfy the justice of God, and therefore in the Person
of all the Elect, lift up his head. Likewise by the life, intercession, and
ministry of Christ he saw all corruptions of nature destroyed in the Elect. Thy
People shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness,
that is, by the administration of thy holy Ordinances, Thou have the dew of thy
youth, to supply them and to moisten them. Likewise by the death of Christ he
saw all outward enemies vain and Devils destroyed. The Lord at thy right hand
shall smite through Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall judge among the
Heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead Bodies, he shall wound the
heads over many Countries, Psalm. 110. Many things have their greatness, not
according to their nature, but according to their skill and humility, says
Seneca; so a believer has his greatness and honor, not according to his
nature and birth from Men, but according to such a skill which God has given
to him, to make use of Christ* and to renounce still all in himself, and by
virtue of this he is very great and mighty, and able to do all things. I can do
all things through Christ, says Paul, and so can see through all things by
him. 'Twas through Christ that the Church saw through that dark state before
mentioned, Psalm. 87. When all that passed by spoiled, and all hedges down, Then
thou spakest in a Vision, to thine holy one, and said I have laid help upon
one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the People, with whom mine
Hand shall be established, mine Arm shall strengthen him, the enemy shall not
exact upon him, nor the Sons of wickedness afflict him, and I will beat down
his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him: which though true of
David, yet specially and principally of Christ, and him did the Church then see
in David, as he by whom all their enemies inward and outward should be
destroyed.

Thirdly, By experiences does a believer look through all difficulties and
miseries, Faith can help it self by reason. What Father, if his Child want
bread, Experiences.
will give him a stone? This is reason. But much more can faith help it self by
experience. I am a man in authority, and I say to one man go and he goes, and
I say to another come and he comes, etc. This is experience, and faith is
wonderful weak indeed, when it cannot thus help up it self, experiences are
such sensible and such impressive things upon all powers within and without. O
ye of little faith, do ye not remember the five loaves, and how many Baskets ye
took up, Mat. 16. Christ takes it for granted that faith is very little and
very weak indeed, when it cannot help it self by experiences, things which the
Man has had done for him in his wants. He delivered me from the Lion and the
Bear, and he will deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistim. The Lord, even
Jesus who appeared to thee in the way, he has sent that thou might receive
thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 9.17. Doubtless that
experience which he had of such an escape going to Damascus, advantaged his
faith all his days, to look through, and to run through all the storms and perils
which afterward he met withal. Some great sickness the Apostle Paul had, by
the ill usage of Men who oppressed him, and yet God preserved, and how he
raised faith by experience to look through all evils present, and to come, see 2
Cor. 1.9, 10. We would not have you ignorant of the troubles which happened
unto us in Asia, how that we were pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired ever of life, but we had the sentence of death in
our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the
dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver us. Mordecai is called Pethakia, because says
the Jews, he opened and expounded all matters; and understood 70 Languages.
Experience may be called Pethakiah, it does so interpret all Ridles, and dark
matters both of the word and works of God, it explains and interprets 70 and 70
Languages, if there be so many worth the interpreting; it makes a Man with ease
and triumph to look through and over all before it, though never so dark and
difficult, as David over Goliath, and Zerubabel over that great Mountain which
was before him, and Joshuah the High Priest over sin and Satan's occasions, --
Is not this a brand plucked out of the Fire.

Fourthly, By Prayer does a believer come to this good eyesight, to look
through all dark and difficult matters. When I cry to thee then shall mine
enemies turn back, this I know, for God is for me, Psalm. 56.9. David had cried
to God, as one once did a little before an engagement, and he knew he should
have the day, and that his enemies would turn their backs; great clearing of
fight is made by prayer and tears in dark days, to see through matters. A little
wind overthrows not only Houses, but States and Kingdoms, says Seneca. A
little of this wind, I mean the pantings and prayings of God's People to
Heaven, overthrows Persons and Nations indeed, and is a sure prognostic of
good, to whom a praying spirit is given, and makes in the heart an assurance of
good coming. My soul follows hard after thee, thy right hand upholdeth me,
(then observe what he saw) Those that seek my soul to destroy it, shall go into
the lower parts of the Earth, Psalm. 63.8, 9. Whether that were Hell, or the
Grave, or both, 'twas well the Church and David were rid of them. Prayer is an
Ordinance, by which the Soul goes to Heaven, and then gets a new life and
strength before it comes down again. Christ found the blessing of this
Ordinance often, and has surely sanctified it to all his for the same end, to
lift up their heads and hearts above all troubles. He shall cry unto me thou
art my Father, my God, the Rock of my Salvation, and I will make him my first
born, higher than the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89.26. The whole course of
Nature began with the motion of the Heavens, and continues still vigorous,
according to the continued motion of them. Now as the motion of the Heavens is
to the whole course of Nature, so is Prayer to all the graces of the Soul, and
to the whole course and state of the new World; it is this that sets all graces
a going, and going true and strong, let weather be what it will. Hence are
those pertinent words of David. Trust in the Lord at all times; ye People pour
out your hearts before him, God is a refuge for us, Selah, Psalm. 62.8. He
makes these subservient one to another, faith to prayer, and prayer to faith,
as indeed they are. Would you trust in the Lord at all times, then pour out
your souls to God: Would you pour out your souls to God, and pray always, then
trust in the Lord at all times. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul, when he had
spoken at a great height of faith. Who has delivered and does deliver, in whom
we trust that he will yet deliver, etc. You also helping together for us by
Prayer, 2 Cor. 1.11. Prayer mounts faith upon its high places, and faith mounts
prayer, and makes one pray in his praying. Unbelief is soul-fainting, and
prayer is a fetching fresh life from the Fountain of Life. Have mercy upon me,
O Lord consider my troubles, which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that
liftest me up from the gates of death. Psalm. 13. that is, Soul and Body.

little trial will sinck them, in whom is no faith, I cannot well give the
reason of it, some things contemptible are very vertual to cure great diseases,
of which none are able to give a reason. Unless this, that faith twines it self
with God to do for Man, and all other natural abilities bear up little, because
they lead not the sinner out of himself, but to trust in some thing of the
Creature, and very little burdens will break the back of a mere Man, though his
reason and parts, and outward helps may be many. Saul was bid to stay till
Samuel came to him, and Samuel stayed but a little beyond his time,
(consequently his trial was but little) and he falls upon things and ways
unlawful to his ruin. He that believes not will make have, because he cannot
see through any strait. The Philistines were near, and thou did not come, and
therefore 'twas in vain for me to wait, so Saul reasoned within himself, and so
will every Man that is destitute of faith. Achan having no faith could not
forbear, but would be providing for himself, when as God was before them, and
providing for them and protecting of them, and therefore his trial was nothing,
only his lust. It Is true, the issues of War are doubtful, and Casus fortuitus
non est sperandus, a doubtful case is not to be hoped; this may be good talk in
humane matters, as we have to do in common bargening, but in divine matters as
are to be confidered in order to God, it is not good so to reason; yet thus and
no otherwise in all fortuitous and hazardous matters, will Men which have but
mere reason; they will say there is no hope, and so fall to the use of their
wits, and make have to some evil or other, if God do not mightily prevent.
Though the promise be exceeding great and precious, and though there be many of
them, as the Apostle Peter says, yet a Man in whom is no faith, can see by
these no relief at hand, but still a dreadful sound is in his ear, he believes
not that he shall return out of darkness, Job 15.21, 22. This stop of trade
will beggar me; these crosses and losses will certainly undo me; these and
these Bags will be quite emptied by and by, and then what shall I do for more?
And so instead of hoping to the end, the distressed Man never hopes at all, but
universally down, and thus at every straw and strait. There was a universal
darkness over the World for twelve hours, then was light created in this upper
horizon, says a great Scholar: but where faith is not, there is a universal
darkness for more than twelve hours, even all the days of the Man's life, and
nothing can create light, neither the word nor works of God, but always and in
all cases the Man cries out, like that Rockwood (which was a great stirrer up
of Persecution against the Martyrs, and being smitten in conscience, was
exhorted to seek mercy from God, and to hope therein, and all that it could do
was) -- All is too late, all is too late; meaning that all their good
Exhortations were too late as to his case. So when faith is not, talk of what
one will to support and bear up, the distressed will cry out still, all is too
late, and to no purpose as to him.

Invincible we may be, but un-assaulted we cannot be, says Seneca. Assaults,
how many do we meet withal in such days as those are, and what a shield is
that above all shields which makes us invincible, not to be hurt by any
assault from Man, or Devil; and such a shield is faith. All Nations compass me
about, but in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them; they compass me about,
yea they compass me about, but in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them,
Psalm. 18.10, 11. And the Devil struck in with all these, so he says, v. 13. --
Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall, but the Lord helped me. Surely
it is the Devil which thrusts us, to make us fall. And yet against all
Nations of Men, and against all Nations of Devils, Did David by faith stand?
How excellent an Engine then is faith, and how invincible! when Joab fought with
Edom in the Valley of Salt, he had a hard bout, as appears by the Psalm which
David made upon that occasion. -- Thou have made the Earth to tremble, thou
have broken it, heal the breaches of it: thou have showed thy People hard
things, thou have made us drink the Wine of astonishment; yet observe what
faith says, in the very next words, Thou have given a Banner to them that fear
thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth, Selah; that thy beloved
may be delivered, save with thy right hand. Thou have given a Banner, (1.) Thou
certainly wilt give a Banner, because of the truth, the certain truth; so says
the Original, and means the Promises, says Ainsworth upon this place. And
these being certain, faith is still at a certainty, and sees beyond all evil.
It Is thought that our Parents in Paradise knew of the good Angel, but knew not
of the fall of the bad, and so took that voice in the Serpent, to be the voice
of a good Angel, and so were led by him, and fell about Noon, that being the
eating time, and lay comfortless till Three of the Clock in the Afternoon,
which is called the cool of the day, and then were visited by God, and Christ
revealed to them. We may have cheats put upon us in these days by Devils
instead of Angels, and I fear we have too many of us; but faith heeds nothing
but the certain truth, namely, the promises of God which are infallible, and so
puts no cheat upon any, nor makes any ashamed. It may be distressed Persons
may lie longer disconsolate than three Hours, and yet it may be no longer, for
as soon as they believe they enter into rest: this gives a vision of Christ, and
so of pardon, and of release from distress certainly to follow, which is rest,
and so is indeed, an excellent Balsom for such an unwholesome Climate as we here
live in.

Amos 7.4. Meaning, exceedingly scorch and wither, and kill all. Or suppose
that not only Famine should be, but the Sword also, yea as prevailing and as
devouring a Sword as the Famine, and that God should make that good against us,
which Job says of his condition, Job 16.11. God has delivered me to the
ungodly, and turned me over into the hand of the wicked; I was at ease, but he
has broken me asunder, he has also taken me by the Neck, and shaken me to
pieces, and set me up for his mark. Verse. 12. How near such things may be, God
knows; and what then, when all is gone? What shall we, or what can we live
by, but by faith? Then faith is as necessary to our Souls, as life to our
Bodies, or as our Souls to our Bodies. Elihu was sensible that Job was full of
complaints of his hard condition, but alas, faith he, Brutes and Beasts when
hard used, will cry and roar, but what is this of a godly Man? or what will the
great God regard such carriages? By reason of the multitude of oppressions,
they make the oppressed to cry, they cry out by reason of the Arm of the
Mighty, but none says where is God my Maker, which gives Songs in the Night,
who teaches us more than the Beasts, that is, only to roar and cry out, when
we are beaten and over-burden'd; he teaches us to believe, and to expect Songs
to be given in the darkest Night. Job 35.9. The true state and life of man, is
not to be shaken with tumults and distresses, nor be lifted up with prosperity
and ease, said the Heathen, and what can poise, and even the Soul thus in all
conditions but faith? by which we know how to abound, and how to want, how to
be high when low, and how to be low when high; if faith have its perfect work,
so will patience, and then the Soul is entire, and wants nothing, no though
all the things of this World he wanting.

Likewise we may learn from hence, For lo they lie in wait for my Soul, the
mighty are gathered against me; they return at Evening, they make a noise like
a Dog, and go round about the City, behold they belch out with their mouth,
Swords are in their Lips, for who says he does hear? But thou O Lord shall
laugh at them, thou shall have all the Heathen in derision, because of his
strength will I wait upon thee, for God is my defense, Psalm. 59.9. The God of
my mercy shall prevent me he shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.
Things were very bad indeed, when the wicked were at this height, that they
could belch out any thing, and run every where as Dogs, and tear God and Man,
and yet David was not quite ruined. -- Because of thy strength I will wait upon
thee. A believer is strong enough, as long as God is strong, and wise enough,
as long as God is wise, and rich enough as long as God is rich, and lively
enough as long as God lives. Hanibal offered himself, to make War with the
Romans without an Army, says Seneca. And truly a believer will himself make
War with all enemies in the World, and without any Army, only by the strength
of God, and is never at a loss for an Army, nor Counsel, nor Provisions, but
says as that Father of believers, God will provide, God will fight for you,
and ye shall hold your peace, said Moses in a great strait. Cain was not
utterly lost, when he had committed murder, for so had David done. But when he
rejected the offer of grace, and desired death as a despairing Creature. He had
a most glorious offer of grace, Genesis 4.7. And if thou d^st well shall thou not
be accepted? or certainly accepted, and though thou do not well, yet a
sin-offering lies at the door, so it should be read says a great Scholar, in
the Languages of the Scripture. Dr. Lightfoot.
And this great offer of grace he despised, and so forsook his own Mercy, and
desired Death through a proud dogged spirit, having lost the honor, which was
given to Abel. Now therefore let it be, that any one that fudeth me may kill
me. So should these words be read, says the same Author. And now and not till
now, was Cain quite undone.

As for the Jebusite the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Children of Israel could
not drive them out, but they dwell there to this day. Judge. 15.63. David along
while after drove them out. And why could not these lame and blind be driven
out? It was their unbelief. The enemy had gotten a strong Fort, and the
advantage of that City Jerusalem, and yet had they had faith they might have
looked through these Forts and Rocks of Jerusalem, and have conquered it, as they
did Jerico and other places as strong, by faith. Their sin was the same with
Rubens, Dan and Asher. Sisa^'s Host was great, and therefore they could not see
through them, and over them. For the divisions of Ruben there were great
thoughts of heart. Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and why did Dan abide in Ships,
Ashar continued on the Sea shore, and abode in his breaches. Judge. 5.16*17.
Distresses are of several magnitudes but yet how great soever they be, faith
should be such as to master them and look through them, but when it is not so,
then men betake them to their selfish shifts, and every one is but for one. Why
did Ashar abide in [his breacher?] It Is a grand evil of this time, every Man
seeks his own, and stands with all he has to make up his own breaches but as
to the public and the common calamity of others, Who has a Heart or a Purse
or a Hand? which speaks plainly our unbelief, and that we do not see through
the dark Clouds which are come upon us* but say in our hearts, as David, I
shall one time or other surely perish by this and that great trial, and these
Sons of Anack are walled up to Heaven, and no dealing with them. Necessity
(says one of the Heathen) makes us more violent than valorous. There are
amongst us, through many necessities, many violencies both inward and outward,
spiritual and corporal, unto great hurt every way, but little true valor, that
which flows from faith, which is that that does business, as we have seen.

Secondly, This Scripture reproves giving way to unbelief. We flatter our
selves in our unbelief, as Jona in his passion, and in many cases very
desperately, we think we do well to be unbelievers; whereas the greater the
difficulties be, the more our duty is to believe. Curse ye Meros, curse ye
bitterly, that they came not out in a plunge to help the Lord against the
mighty Judge. 5.23. If thou think some great trial shall encounter thee, (^aith
Seneca) do not flinch, but comfort thy self with this, that surely thy death
and suffering is of some great importance Great distress is no warrant for us
to make great consult with flesh and blood, but great consults with the
promises, and with our own experi^nces, and to call much upon a cowardly and
deceitful heart. Why art thou cast down O my Soul? hope in God: for, I shall
yet see better things than these. If unbelief were as profitable, as it is
self-pleasing, and that it would further escapes out of distresses, one might
through self-love give way to it, as Men do to many gainful sins; but it does
not this, but rather obstruc^e ca^^s as our Fathers unbelief in the Wilderness
upon every occasion, it caused God to swear against them, that they should dye
in the Wilderness. It is not the giving way to unbelief, but the exciting
faith, what ever the difficulty be, that is the likely way to make escape. As
Caleb and Joshua said, We be well able to deal with them, for God is departed
from them and they are bread for us, and this is called following of God fully,
which God took well, and honored them with escapes from all dangers, and they
enjoyed the good Land. To this agrees that, Psalm. 37.40. And the Lord shall
help them and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save
them, because they trust in him, If giving way to unbelief in the least, had
been pleasing to God, he would not have made the promise first to our Parents,
before he came to pronounce the curse upon them.

Now giving way to unbelief, consists in two things construing all things in
the worst and hardest sense; our own matters toward God, and God's matters
toward us. I have been a stubborn rebellious ^retch, and surely God will never
have mercy upon me; Observe Moses upon th^s theme. Destroy not this People
remember Abraham, Isaac and Jacob look not on the stubbornness of this People,
nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin, Deuteronomy 9.27. Ne respicias ad dutitiem;
the hardness, that is, the ^m^e^^tency of this People, but thy Covenant with
Abraham. And this is the great thing only to be eyed by poor guilty wretches. O
sirs, such and such sins were nothing, if I could be humbled for them, but I am
of a very hard heart. Be it so, yet should you believe in the word of promise,
that is in that God which has said he will give a heart of flesh. This People
has finn'd, and they cannot repent, (says Moses) do not therefore look upon
them, for there is no loveliness in them but look upon thy promise to Abraham
to be a God to him and to his Seed, and what cannot a God do to mend the heart
of man? Lamech having made himself guilty of Polygamie, reflected upon the sin
of Cain, as is thought, of which Loin he was, and consters himself a far more
guilty wretch than Cain, for that Cain had only slain one, and that only his
body, but Lamech had destroyed many, soul and body, both by his evil example
which now so generally was followed in the World, and a hastner of the worlds
destruction, so that if Cain was to be avenged sevenfold for his fin. Lamech
surely for his fin was to be avenged seventy times seven fold; this is the
sense of this Scripture, as an able Expositor judges. Sure I am, that thus do
poor guilty wretches please themselves, to look upon all their sins, in a very
multiplying glass, and to see them greater than any others, and so conclude,
that if such and such despaired, I have much more reason, and this is no other
but giving way to unbelief. The Jews observe much, how the providence of God,
complied with the fire upon the Altar, that it never went out, they say that
the Rain of Heaven, though never so great, never did put it out; so we should
much observe how the Lord by his Providence in his Word and Works, complies
with the weakness of our faith, to strengthen and to preserve it, that it go
not out, quite out; and not be severely catching at every thing, to weaken and
to destroy our faith, as if God's thoughts were as narrow as ours.

Secondly, Way is given to unbelief, when all wit and parts are used, to argue
down faith And the Angel of the Lord did wonderously, and Manoah and his Wife
looked on. But the Angel of the Lord did no more appear to Manoah, nor to his
Wife, then he knew it was an Angel of the Lord And Manoah said to his Wife we
shall surely die, because we have seen God, Judge. 13.19, 20. God sometimes does
wonderously own us in all our ways, and holds up our hearts ev^n by sense, he
is so for us in every thing. Another while he seems to be as much against us,
and Manoah that did look on and see God do wonderously, sees him no more; and
now the improsperous Man concludes that he shall die. And just thus do many,
when God upholds them not by sense, but with draws, and seems to be as much
against them as for them, then conclude surely, God is our Enemy and will
destroy us, and all is naught. Sineca says that there is no universal thunder:
I may say so in morals. When God does most against wicked Men, yet some things
of kindness he does, as we see in the example of Pharaoh; And so on the other
hand, there is no universal Sun shine: when God does most for any Child of his,
yet he shall have exercise and trial enough one way or other; and therefore to
argue when things do not run so stilly and calmly as they did, that therefore
God does not respect us, is to give way to unbelief. The people of Israel as
they were espying out their way, met with many difficulties, And they turned,
and went up the way of Bashan, and Og the King of Bashan went out against them,
and all his People. And the Lord said to Moses fear not, for I will deliver him
into thine hand, and all his People, and thou shall do to him as thou did to
Sihon King of the Amorites, Number. 21.33. It Is just thus spiritually; as a
tempted Christian is spying out his way to Heaven out starts some Og, some
strong lust or Devil, and then is he ready to fear and despair, and mistrust
all, and conclude all is naught, and will be worse and worse; which is arguing
down faith from sense, and giving way to unbelief. The High Priest was trained
up against the day of expiation, to learn how to take up his handful of
Incense, and lay it one the Altar, and so how to order himself in every thing,
and was kept in a Room of purpose separated with abstinence; so should you
rather conster, that you are training up to your Priestly work by your trials,
how to take up your handful of Incense, I mean the Promises, and lay them on
the Altar, Christ, and so make a sweet Savior of rest to God, and to your
Souls.

That you may not upon any account give way to unbelief, know that you cannot
do so and be innocent, that is, free from sin in so doing. There are two things
that are indispensable duties as long as we live, and that is to wait on the
Lord, and to keep his way, to which the blessing is certainly fixed, and no
difficulty shall make it void. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks
to slay him, the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he
is judged. What is the use to be made of this? read the next words. Wait on the
Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land, when the
wicked are cut off thou shall see it, Psalm. 37.32, 33, 34. There are two parts
in Religion, faith and obedience; that we walk in all Gods ways, and yet not
rest in this, but in Christ by faith; and this we ought in all weathers to do,
and the good event of these, is certain. -- God will exalt us to inherit the
Land flowing with Milk and Honey. (i.e.) All good, God will give us a lift to
the possession of all that he has promised. And therefore it is to destroy all
Religion, and the recompense of reward too, to give way to unbelief. They that
do not wait on the Lord, will surely not keep his way, and they that do not
keep his way will not be exalted to inherit the good Land. Heathenisme began at
Babel; when the Hebrew Tongue was lost, at the confusion of Tongues only to one
Family was God and Salvation preached. And when this was lost, Religion was
lost with it, and all the Earth became strangers to God, and so lay 2203 Years,
till the gift of Tongues at Zion began to be given, to preach the Gospel in
every Language we may in this Glass see our black face at this day.) So I may
say, that all transgression even unto Heathenisme, begins at unbelief; What
will not an unbeliever be drawn unto? and consequently all misery begins here
too; and neither the one nor the other begin to be removed, till God begin to
work faith in the Soul. And therefore I say again, and say some thing more than
I did, you cannot give way to unbelief, and be innocent, you cannot give way to
unbelief, but you give way to all sin, and unto all misery, See Romans 11.23. And
they shall be graffed in again, if they abide not still in unbelief.

Try your selves therefore by this Point. Do you believe? Do you look tho^^^
the dark matters o^ your condit^o^? And behold a Woman which was diseased with
an issue of blood Twelve Years came behind Christ, and touched the Hem of his
Garment, for she said within her self, if I may but touch his Garment I shall
be wh^le. Mat. 7.21. What talk within your selves have you, touching your
d^st^^sses inward and outward where^n you are? If I could lean in the ^^ast on
this wo^d of prom^se, surely I should enter into rest, surely I should be ma^e
whole of this wickedness, and that Running issue which has run in my nature
above Twelve Years without Cure. I will name only one Promise for instance.
Romans 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, I here shall
come out of Zion the Deliverer and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob for
this is my Covenant with them when I shall take away their sins. What a deal of
scarlet guilt is upon the Jew! And as for natural corruption, how wilfully
blind, how stubborn in and their sins! and yet the Apostle Paul by virtue of
the Promise, looks (...) wall, and sees the condition of these forlorn
sinners a condition remed able that it is ^^t Immedicabile Vul^us. Do you in
your reading the Scriptures, make a stand at any promise, or ^^u^able word to
your condition, and say within your selves, O that I could but touch this Hem
of Christ's Garment. If I could but believe in this word I should be whole, I
should overcome such a sin which has so often overcome me, all my ungodliness
both of guilt and filth would be turned away Whi^st Simeon he just lived, the
Fire on the Altar ever burnt pleasantly, but when he dyed its force abated,
says the Jewish History. Simon the just was a great believer, and did
Miracles, says Euschius, and very Holy and Heavenly. Where faith indeed is
that Heavenly Fire of love and zeal to God, will burn in the heart very bright
and clear, according to that excellent speech of David, I have hoped for thy
Salvation, and do thy Commandment, Psalm. 119.166. And as faith fails, so this
Heavenly Fire on the Altar goes out, so a Man's skill and his conscience to
please God dye both together.

Secondly, Are you able to look through outward troubles and difficulties, and
dark matters, as they lie now in these and other Nations? Can you stand on your
high places, and see now beyond this thick Cloud of the Pestilence and other
evils that are upon us? Can you say, O thou Enemy, destructions are come to a
perpetual end, or says the margent, The destructions of the Enemy are come to
a perpetual end, -- The^r Cities have tho^ destroyed.
Psalm. 9 6. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God,
(there they will be quite out of the way) For the needy shall not always be
forgotten, the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever, v. 17.18. The
Ticle of this Psalm, is Muth Labben, the Death of some great Enemy, which
Ainsworth says to be Anti Christ. Antichrist is now more alive than ever in
all the parts of Christendom, he is a man of good eyes that now can see his
death and downfall and all his Cities, even Rome it self, that great City which
Rules the Nations. The first thing that dyed in the World was Christ in the
offering of our first Parents, whose skins clothed them. And the last that
dies in the World will be Antichrist, who cloatheth himself in scarlet with
the skins of the Saints. Hence was Christ called a Lamb, slain from the
beginning; and therefore may Antichrist be calle^ a Bear or Beast slain in the
end of the World: But who sees now in this dark and dismal Hour, the death of
this Monster? I remember not long since, in the days of the great Armies, then
we all talked of the downfall of Antichrist; But, who sees his downfall now?
There is no Rain so great that waters the Earth above so far, Ten Foot deep,
says the Naturalist. I think the storms which have fallen of late in these
parts, have soakt our Souls, and Bodies, and Estates, and all that is dear
clear through, yea, our faith, and all our graces, for we can scarce look
through any thing well, But when exhorted to trust in the Lord at all times as
David says we are ready to say as the Princes of Succoth to Gideon, are Zeba
and Z^lmunna now in our hands, that we should do so and so, Judge. 8.6. Who
says Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither f^uit be in the Vines
th^ugh the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat,
the Flocks shall be cut off from the Folds, and no Herd in the Stalls, yet will
I rejoice in the God of my Salvation Hab 3.17, 8 Yet this is no more but the
proper acts o^ faith.

If you say you do not thus believe, so as to look through dark cond^t^ons and
things, neither spiritual nor temporal. Let me ask you do you not thu^
sometimes? No not at any time can I thus believe. Elian compares Tyrants to
Swine, which if a Man but touch, they cry* think^ng they shall be ki^led* Is it
thus with you, when God does but touch you in this and that? Do ye cry as if he
m^ant to kill you in al^? What do you do then in your trials? throw off al^?
David was not wont to do so, but when all things failed, to call upon his Soul
to trust only in God I will^^g in the st^ength of the Lord God I will make
mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only and will hope continually and
will yet praise thee more and more, Psalm. 71.14, 15, 16. Whether the Gods be
pleased or displeased. We must dye, said one of the Heathen: so say I, whether
God be pleased or displeased with us, (to speak with reverence) we must
believe, as the Cananitish Woman did, when Christ called her Dog, or else we
sinck and perish.

because of his own Word. Job. 4.41. And so to set your Seal to his Word and
Works, and by this be able to espy light in darkness, which God is most ready
to give. Righteousness shall go before him, and he shall set us in the way of
his steps, Psalm. 85. ult. Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and
Righteousness shall look down from Heaven: which words (surely) point at Christ
and the Gospel, by which God trains up sinners to believe in him, to their
Salvation in this World and in the World to come. God preached Christ to Adam,
and taught him to take hold of him, to his temporal and eternal Salvation. Adam
named his Wife Eva, or Life. And the promise is that we shall all (i.e.) Jew
and Gentile, be taught of God to this thing, to glorify the word of the Lord,
that is, the essential word Christ, and the written word the Scriptures. God
taught Noah to build the Ark, concerning which, one thing is most remarkable,
that the Door into the Ark was in the lowest story, and so was under Water all
the time of the Flood, which surely was done on purpose, to make and exercise
faith purely in him which shut him in.

Seek faith in this height, which my Text and Doctrine spoke of, (1) That you
may be able in the greatest darkness, to make light and sight. The Jews in
their daunces would say, Blessed be thou O my Youth, which have not shamed my
old Age, and these were called Men of Performances. Others would say, Blessed
be thou my old Age, which have gainsaid my Youth, and these were called Men of
repentance. Both would say, Blessed is he that has not sinned, and he that has
sinned and is pardoned. Seek such a faith, that thus you may see cause to bless
God in every condition, in Youth, in Age, in sickness, in health, when down,
and when risen again; when you do not sin, and when you do sin, as being able
to apprehend Christ and your pardon. Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, and whose sin is pardoned, blessed is he to whom the Lord will not
impute sin, surely his Salvation is near them that fear him, that gl^ry may
dwell in our Land, mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace
have kissed each other, Psalm. 58.9, 10. What this kissing of Righteousness and
Peace means, you may see, Verse. 2. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy
People, thou have covered all their sin, Selah. The Psalmist by faith saw peace
in Heaven toward the Lords People, and that peace. (i e.) All good should be
on Earth to them also, which keeps the heart in a ready cheerful frame to serve
God, and to bless him in every state, and therefore such a faith should be
sought for.

Jews; so he that never saw the joy of faith, which is called unspeakable and
full of glory, never saw joy in all his life; and therefore you that have this
faith, and the great and unspeakable benefit of it, preserve it all you can,
and make no shipwreck of faith and conscience, and there you save all, though
you lose all beside. Hence it is that David begs that God would draw out his
loving kindness to them that knew him, and his righteousness to the upright in
heart, with thee is the Fountain of Life, and in thy light we shall see light,
Psalm. 36.9, 10. By which, he means that God would more reveal Christ to him in
his word and works, for the better establishing of every grace; and thus let us
p^nt all our days, that in his light we may see light, and have our faith and
integrity preserved, for they live and dye together. He that did bring the
World by the Flood in o^ics first Chaos, covered all with Water, he can and is
ready to bring our fa^len state, by Christ (the greatest piece of which is
unbelief) to some degree of restoration, and bear up the Pillars thereof, faith
and every grace, and all by his own hand. And he that enabled Noah in Seven
Days to furnish the Ark with all Creatures for a whole Year, both for
nourishment an^ for sacr fice, to weather it in all that dark time, he can
quickly enable us to store our Souls in this dark day with every grace, to
weather well this evil time and to stand complete in all the will of God.

be well now in such times, to have such a frame of spirit to keep up, and to
fear none ill, to be able to say, as David, The Lord is my light, and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid, though an Host encamp against me, my heart shall not fear,
though War should rise against me in this will I be confident, for in time of
trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion, in the secret of his Tabernacle shall
he hide me, and now shall my head be lifted up above mine enemies round about,
Psalm. 27.1* 2, 3 Many Clouds are up, and more still arising, and some are
already over-shadowing you; Would it not be well if you were able indeed to say
thus? Though Wa^s be, though Famine, though Pestilence, though Imprisonment,
Banishment, yet in all these will I be confident, over these shall I be a
Conqueror, for in the times of these troubles, the Lord will hide me, and it
may be now, as dark and as dismal as things look, shall my head be lifted up
above all mine enemies round about? God promised (after the Flood was over)
that Day and Night should no more cease; Genesis 8 22. which intimates, says one
upon that place, that during the Forty Days Rain which made the Flood, that the
Day was as it were ceased and turned into Night by the great and thick Clouds,
and Tempests which were all over the World (and Clouds and Darkness are usually
joined together, in the Scripture Phrase.) Our Day through many Clouds and
Storms is very dark, especially to some; and yet the Day may more cease, and
become universally dark, that what it is to any one at this Hour for calamity,
that it may be universally in one sense or another. And when things are thus
universally dark, that every ones day is ceased, it will look like a Doomsday
indeed; and if you cannot look through the Clouds of your condition now, How
will ye do then? If ye cannot run with the Foot, how will ye run with the
Horse? The Jews hold, that such as made not use of the Flood, but continued in
their unbelief, were punished with scalding Water in Gehinnom; And surely they
that make not use of present Clouds and Storms upon their condition, to get
faith to wrestle well with these, and to fit them for worse, will be scalded
indeed with those Waters, which yet may overflow us. The woe Trumpets are for
the Idolatry of the Christian Empire.

Amos 5.12, 13, 14. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty
sins, they afflict the just, they take bribes, they turn aside the poor in the
Gate from their right, therefore the prudent shall keep silence, for it is an
evil time, hate the evil and love the good, establish judgment in the Gate, it
may be the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph. Sins
are now in the Christian World mighty and manifold, oppressions of the just
(surely) were never greater, and yet must be silent, must not Petition nor
complain; and all this is done Ex anima, heartily, yea with great malice and
rage, that reaches up to Heaven. God's wrath and rage is so provoked by this,
as we feel at this day, that it is doubtful who of us will escape, when he
shall go on in his judgments for these things. Therefore thus says the Lord,
wailing shall be in all Streets, and they shall say in all the Highways, alas,
alas, and they shall use the Husbandman to mourning, and all Vineyards shall
mourn, hate the evil, etc. It may be the Lord God will be gracious to the
remnant of Joseph. Sinners are so mighty in the Christian World, and so many,
and repentance and faith so rare and scarce, hating the evil, and loving the
good, etc. That judgments when they further come, Famine, Pestilence, Sword,
surely they will sweep clean, that we shall have cause to use the Prophets
ph^ase, Wailing shall be in all Streets* and they shall say in all the
Highways, alas, alas, and it may be some of us shall escape. If such as have
most faith, be brought to their may be by reason of such general calamity, what
will they be brought to who are wholly destitute of faith, when such Floods
overflow? The other Scripture to set out the state of the Christian World at
this day, is, Rev. 13.6 7. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to
blaspheme his Name and his Tabernacle, and them which dwell in Heaven, and it
was given unto him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them, and power
was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations, and all shall
worship him whose Names are not written in the Book of Life. The Antichristian
world is at these heights of sin, blaspheming the matters and People of God,
and at War with them, shedding their blood, and their success it seems will
be general, power will be given them over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations;
and then when there is no Nation to flee to under Heaven, when the Earth, and
the Sea, and the dry Land (i e.) all places and corners of the World shall be
shaken, what need will there be of faith to flee to God. In the Generations,
when the Son of David comes (say the Jews) the Scholars of the wise shall be
rare, and as for the rest of the People their eyes shall fail for sorrow, and
grief, and great afflictions, and soar decrees shall be so renewed, that before
the first is ended, the second shall come Says others of them. In the week of
Years, in the which the Son of David shall come, the first year, that shall be
fulfilled, to wit, I rained upon one City, and not upon another, Amos 4. In the
second year, The arrows of Famine shall be abroad: In the third year, the
Famine shall be so great, that Men, Women, and Children, yea good and godly Men
shall die, etc. I do not make this as Scripture, but as I see a congruity in
them to the Scriptures, they are not be slighted. Now what of all this is
approaching upon the Christian World, and at the Door, I know not; sure I am,
faith, yea the faith of David in my Text, against such a dark hour, would do
well.

Thirdly, Get faith, this faith I am treating of, or else you will be of little
or no use, one to another. When Senachetib came into Judea, Hezekiah sets
Captains of War over the People. And gathered them together to him in the Gate
of the City* and spoke comfortably to them, saying, Be strong and cou^agious,
be not afraid, nor dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the Multitude
that is with him, for there be more with us than with him, with him is an arm
of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us and to fight our Battle.
And the People rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah King of Juda, 2
Chro. 32.6, 7. How wonderful useful was Hezekiah by his faith, to the whole
Nation in that strait! He put a fresh life and soul into them: had he sunk,
they had all sunk with him, and so the enemy and the wrath of God had justly
preyed upon them all. The Arabians, if their King be sick, all fain themselves
sick too, as Homines ad Jervitatem parati, says the Historian. When Persons in
place are sick of unbelief, of a faint weak spirit in difficult matters, all
about them, more than fain themselves sick too, they are so in earnest, and
more down than ashes. And truly ones use lost, is more than the loss of ones
life. What a dead living Man is a useless Man! and yet so shall we be, unless
we get the faith of this Scripture I am upon in some measure, and the faith of
this evil time wherein we live. The evil spies made the hearts of the People to
melt. The Levites which kept the Doors were to try the offerings, and God will
try every Man by his offerings, that is, by his use.

Quest. If you now ask me, How shall I obtain such a faith?

A. I answer, It is the proper adjunct of such a sta^e, a renewed state. The
eyes of the Lord are on such as fear him, on them that hope in his mercy, Psalm
33.18. The Pome-citron grows besides all waters, and the taste of the wood, is
like the taste of the fruit, says the Naturalist. But I cannot say so of faith,
of this faith that I am upon, that it grows in every soul, though almost every
one will pretend to it. This Flower grows in a Garden of Flowers, in a state
renewed in knowledge, in repentance, in wounds healed. Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, Psalm. 6*
8. One cleares his eyes, to make this excellent eyesight by contrite weeping.

Isaiah saw his own sin, and the Peoples, his heart sank, Woe is me, for I am
undone, says the margent, cut off, then there flew one of the Seraphims to
him, having a live Coal in his hand, which he had taken from the Altar, and he
laid it on my mouth, and said this has touched thy Lips, and thine iniquity is
taken away, and thy sin is purged, Isa. 6.8, 9. How helpful the Angels may be
to others in such matters I cannot tell. Consult Isa. 8 18 and peruse the Dutch
Notes upon these words. -- Behold I and the Children which thou have given me.
The true Emanuel, Christ, speaks to the Prophet in these words, and comforts
him in his suffering by his own example, and so all God's Children who are all
liable to like troubles. So that we are to app^ehend that Christ is ready in
strong trials, to g^ve us strong instruction, and to comfort us with the same
comforts, wherewith he himself, and God's Children in every Age, have been
comforted, though this may be to some more, and to some less, as Christ
pleases. I saw by Night, and behold a Man riding upon a red Horse, and he
stood among the Myrtles in the bottom, Zech. 1 8. This phrase, I saw by night,
signifies (says Interpreters) that they saw their restoration, but it was
but darkly, and it was by the help of him that appeared among the Myrtles in
the bottom, which was Christ.

Finally, By the wickedness of the wicked, the People of God get up to this
height of believing, to look through all the dark Clouds of their condition.
Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart, do thou go in
to possess their Land, but for the wickedness of these Nations, does the Lord
thy God drive them out before thee, and that he may perform the word which he
swear to thy Father Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 9.5. That which is the reason of
God's doing a thing, may be the reason of our faith and hope, that it shall be
done. Now the very notorious wickedness of the wicked, is the reason why he
cuts them off, and puts others in their place, and therefore from the
wickedness of the wicked, may faith be strengthened, and helped to see their
overthrow, and consequently the escape of the godly. Hezekid saw his escape,
and the downfall of the enemy Senacherib, by this very thing, namely by their
wickedness* their great out rage and blasphemy, and malice against God, his
People, and worship at Jerusalem. And they spoke against the God of Jerusalem,
as against the Gods of the People of the Earth, which were the work of the
hands of Men. For this cause Hezekia the King, and the Prophet Isaiah prayed
and cried to Heaven, and the Lord sent an Angel and cut them off 2 Chro.
32.19.20. It Is good History to compare with this, 1 Maccabes 7.41. Nicanor
carried himself against the Lord and his People, as Senacherib, and abused the
Priests of the Lord, and laughed at all their worship, and threatened, that if
they did not deliver Judas Maccabeus into his hands, and all his Host, he would
destroy the Temple, and Priests and all the People. And by his height of
wickedness, the poor Jews, saw his fall, and went to God by prayer, and urged
the story of Senacherib to him, saying, O Lord when they that were sent from
the King of Assyria blasphemed, thine Angel went out and smote an hundred four
score and five thousand of them: even so destroy thou this Host this day, that
the rest may know that he has sp^ken blasphemously against thy Sanctuary, and
judge thou him according to his wickedness. And as they prayed, so God did
destroy them all, and they smote off Nicanor's Head and right hand, and hanged
them up toward Jerusalem. So let all thine Enemies perish, O God, and so let
all thy People learn to pray, and to believe.

Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by Dorman Newman at his Shop at the King's Arms and Bible in the
Poultry.
Quarto.
THe Christian Man's calling, or a Treatise of making Religion ones business;
wherein the Christian is directed to perform in all religious duties, natural
actions, particular vocations, family directions, and in his own recreations in
all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all Men, in the choice
of his company, both of evil and good, in solitude, on a week day, from morning
to night, in visiting the sick, and on a dying Bed. By George Swinnock.

Mr. Caril's Exposition on the Book of Job.

Gospel Remission, or a Treatise showing that true blessedness consists in the
pardon of sin, By Jeremiah Buroughs.

An Exposition of the Song of Solomon, By James Durham late Minister in Glasgow.

The real Christian, or a Treatise of effectual calling; wherein the work of
God in drawing the soul to Christ being opened according to the holy
Scriptures, some things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right
preparation for Christ: and a true closing with Christ, which have caused and
do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due
respect to those worthy Men brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, there
weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words concerning
Socinianism. By Giles Firmin sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex.

Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven, being an Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Tho Case
sometimes Student in Christ Church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel.

The virtue and value of Baptism. By Zach. Croft^n.

The Quakers spiritual Court proclaimed; being an exact narrative of a new high
Court of Justice also sundry errors and corruptions amongst the Quakers which
were never till now made known to the world. By Nath. Smith who was conversant
among them Fourteen Years.

A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence occasioned by the 12. Months fasting of
Martha Tailor, the famed Darbyshire Damosel; proveing, that without any miracle
the texture of humane bodies may be so altered that life may be long continued
without the supplies of meat and drink. By John Reynolds.

Octavo and Twelve.
Vindiciae Pietatis, or a vindication of godliness r^m^^e imputation of folly
and fancy; with several direct^ons for he attaining and maintaining of a godly
life. By R. ^llin.

Heaven on Earth, or the best Friend in the worst times: to which is added a
Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mosley Apothecary: By James Janeway.

A token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway.

Justification only upon a satisfaction. By Rob Ferguson.

The Christians great Interest, or the trial of a sav^ng interest in Christ
with the way how to attain it. By William Guthry late Minister in Scotland.

The virtue, vigor and efficacy of the Promises d^splayed in their strength
and glory. By Tho. Herderson.

The History of Moderation; or the Life, Death, and Resurrection of Moderation,
together with her Nativity Country, Pedigree Kindred and Character, Friend, and
also her Enemies.

A G^ide to the true Religion; or, a Discourse directing to make a wise choice
of that Religion Men venture their Salvation upon. By I. Clappam.

Rebukes for sin, by God's burning anger; by the burning of London; by the
burning of the World, and by the burning of the wicked in Hellfire: to which
is added a Discourse of Heart fixedness. By T. Doolittle.

Four Select Sermons upon several Texts of Scripture wherein the Will Worship
and Idolatry of the Church of Rome is laid open and confuted. By William Fenner.

The Life and Death of Dr. James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of
Ireland.

A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul: by
William Cooper Bishop of Galloway.

The C^nons and Institutions of the Quakers agreed upon at their General
Assembly at their new Theater in Grace-church street.

A Synopsis of Quakerism; or, a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers. By Tho. Danson.

Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative of that late horrid murder committed
by Mary Cook upon her Child. By Nath. Partridge; with a Sermon on the same
occasion: by

The welcome Communicant.

Six several Treatises by Nicho. Lockie^ Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Dorman Newman.
THe present State of Russia, in a Letter to a Friend at London, written by an
eminent Person residing at the Great Tzars Court at Mosco for the space of IX.
Years: Illustrated with many Copper Plates.

Misterium Pietatis, or the mystery of godliness, wherein the mysteries
contained in the Incarnation, Circumcision, wise Men, Passion, Resurrection,
Assention of the Son of God, and coming of the Holy Ghost are unfolded and
applied, By W. Annand.

Fellowship with God, or 28. Sermons on the 1st. Epist. of John chap. 1st. and
2d. By Hugh Binning late Minister in Scotland.

The mystery of Faith opened, or some Sermons concerning Faith: By Andrew Gray
late Minister in Glasgow.

Lazarus Redivivus: or, a discovery of the Trials and Triumphs that accompany
the work of God in and about his people, with an Essay tending to clear up
those mistakes men have about it; Laid open in several Sermons: By Nicholas
Blakit Minister of the Gospel.

A Token for Children, being an exact account of the conversion, holy and
exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children: By James Janeway.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. and 3. for that, read if. p. 6. that, f. if. p. 9. Lord f. law. p. 18.
most liberal, f. most to be. p. 19. Root, f. roof. p. 22. sign, f. sight. p.
24. roots f. rock. p. 26. hill f. hell. p. 27. so f. to. c. theirs f. others.
p. 37. threw f. throws. p. 64. with f. wise. p. 74. soon f. soar. p. 81.
willing f. killing. p. 81. our f. them. p. 104. wonder f. words. p. 104. word
f. Lord, p. 105. of f. if. p. 120. Teolin f. Leolin. p. 126. man f. more. p.
126. best f. left. p. 130. our f. the. p. 138. man f. mammon. p. 140. fetches
f. sets p. 146. and 147. Haman f. Heman. p. 148. Sidom f. Sodom. p. 153. To
ammi f. Le ammi. p. 153. so f. lo. p. 154. best f. but. p. 157. afflictions f.
affections. p. 158. bitten f. bitters. p. 159. flat f. flote. p. 160.
discovered f. discord. p. 168. preferred f. preserved. p. 178. willing f.
rebelling. p. 180. Book f. Brook. p. 187. rain f. men. p. 187. ever f. even. p.
190. Pethakia f. Pethakiah. p. 190. occasions f. accusations. p. 195. Savior
f. savor; p. 207. Joh f. John. p. 213. hill f. hell. p. 215. ex anima f. ex
animo.

Then for there, and when for where are frequently and mutually mistaken by the
Printer, which the Reader i^ desired to rectify as he meets it.


