THE HONOR OF THE MAGISTRATE ASSERTED.

IN A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes holden at Lincoln on Monday, March the 23.
1673/4.

BY THOMAS LODINGTON, M.A. Sometimes Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge,
and now Rector of Welby in the County of Lincoln.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock, in St. Paul's
Church Yard. 1674.

TO HIS Much Honored and Dearly Beloved Brother, JOHN LODINGTON Esquire High
Sheriff of the County of Lincoln.
Dearly Beloved Brother,
THough I have ever been desirous to avoid all Occasions of public appearance,
yet when your affairs required, I did immediately and cheerfully undertake
this Service; choosing rather to expose my abilities for performance to
censure, then to give the least suspicion of any unwillingness to serve you.
Nor was it only my great affection to you, and your great kindness to me, that
did move me hereto (though either of these considerations, had been prevalent
with me,) but that great respect and love, which I have for many years observed
you to bear unto the Orthodox and Loyal Clergy. And being encouraged by the
Approbation this Sermon had from many judicious and worthy persons of that
Honorable and great Assembly to which it was preached, to make it yet more
public; the same reasons which moved me to undertake the composing and
preaching of it, do also direct and determine me in the Dedication of it.

I have in this discourse endeavored to give the Magistrate his due Honor,
and that happy Government, under which we of this kingdom live, it is due
Encomium. You have, in the late times of trial, by your suffering the plunder
of your Estate, and the evil entreating and imprisoning of your Person,
manifested your esteem of, and loyalty to, that Government, which then was most
injuriously (to say no worse) affronted and spurned at, but is now happily
restored and established* and will therefore (I presume) be ready to
countenance any attempt, that is made, for the further advancing of what you
have suffered so much, to preserve and maintain, I mention your Loyalty, not
only to represent you a fit person to undertake the Patronage of a discourse
of this nature, but also to perpetuate the memory of it, to the deserved
Praise, of your self, and those many other worthy persons in whom it was found.
For though, that now, through the mercy of God to this Kingdom, his Majesty
having power restored to him, both to command and reward obedience, it is no
special Commendation to any Person to be a dutiful and loyal Subject; yet then
was it signally praiseworthy, to dare to be Loyal, when, so to be, had such
dreadful effects attending upon it.

That Almighty God would bless you in your Person, in all your Relations, and
in all your Concerns, is the hearty desire and earnest Prayer of

Your most affectionate and much obliged Brother, Tho. Lodington
Welby. June. 27. 1674.
AN Assize-Sermon.
Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said, ye are Gods: and all of you are Children of the
most High.

But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.


MAN, by reason of his discursive Faculty, and that way peculiar to himself, of
communicating the Conceptions of his mind by speech, does naturally desire
Society: And since Sin and Lust have depraved his nature, and Satan has so
enlarged his Empire in the World, that He that departs from evil makes
himself a prey, as the Prophet speaks, which the Punick Proverb thus
expresses, nisi lupus sis, luporum pradam te esse oportet; this natural desire
is turned into absolute necessity; that good men, who cannot admit of that way
of securing themselves, by joining themselves into the combinations of evil
doers, may enter into mutual associations and confederacies among themselves,
the only lawful and availing means to preserve themselves from rapine and
violence.

This natural propensity to it, and that great necessity for it, made the
Hebrews to express their desire of society by that Catholic saying, Aut
societas, aut mors.

Societies cannot be framed, much less established and preserved without
Government; and that must be settled upon certain Rules and Laws, and be
managed by them. To this is required, that there be certain persons quallified
and authorized to enact Laws, and to execute the same. These are Magistrates,
whom God, the supreme Lord* has exalted and ordained to be his Vicegerents in
this lower World, to act by his authority, and according to his will, in
governing the world in righteousness and peace. To this end God has armed them
with a Sword, to put the Laws in Execution, that they may be, not only
wholesome Rules to direct unto all good Conversation, such as shall think good
to make use of them; but powerful Commands to require obedience from all sorts
of persons, and to inflict due punishment upon the disobedient.

And to signify to the World, what honor God has given to Magistrates, and
what service he requires at their hands, he has called them by his own name,
set them on his own Throne, and armed them with his own Power. I have said, ye
are Gods, and all of you are Children of the most High: But ye shall die like
men, and fall like one of the Princes.

The People of Lystra, when they had beheld the persons of Paul and Barnabas,
and seen the kindness done them, in the miraculous cure of their impotent
neighbor, lifted up their voices, saying, The Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of men.

When we behold the persons of our Magistrates, and see the happy effects of
their government, that every man sits under his own Vine, and under his own
Fig Tree in peace, and is preserved in his just rights, religious and civil, we
may say of them, The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men: Or in the
Phrase of the Text, Though as to their persons they are Men, yet in respect of
their office, they are deservedly reputed Gods, seeing they are so styled by
God himself, and have those blessings to dispense to us from God, of which God
alone is the disposer.

In the Text there are two General Parts.

1. The high Honor, great Authority and Power of the Magistrates, declared and
avouched under that most splendid and magnificent Title given unto them by God
himself, I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the most
High. 2. Their infirmity and low condition, in respect of their nature. Though
they are Gods by office, yet they remain men still by nature, and are of the
same mortal frame as they were, and as other men are. But ye shall die like
men, and fall like one of the Princes. Their advancement to the name and office
of God, does not divest them of the nature of man. Their sitting upon an
Farthly Tribunal, to give sentence upon men, and their causes, does not
privilege them from standing at a Higher Tribunal to receive a sentence from
God upon themselves.
The Discretive. But, limits the Title given in the former verse. The Chaldee
Paraphrase reads the whole Text in a lower strain. Thus the Latin version,
Velut Angeli, vos (...) retutati; A double allay in the style; instead of Gods
they are called Angels; and instead of their being, they are but reputed
Angels. Attamen in veritate, siout homines moriemini. Though you are in
reputation Angels. immortal creatures, not obnoxious unto death; yet in reality
and truth, you are men, and shall die like men: (...) like Plebeians, men of
lowest quality, and frailest nature, who have the lest helps to preserve life
and prevent death.

Ego dixeram Deos esse vos: nunc autem siout homines moriemini: thus the
Syriack is rendered. God seems to revoke his large Commission given to
Magistrates, and to take away the Honor he had bestowed on them, upon supposal
of their male administration of Government; and because they do not live and
act like Gods, he will now have them to die like men.

The like revocation, as this seems to be, God makes of his gracious Grant to
Eli, concerning the succession of his Family in the Priest's office, 1. Sam.
2.30. I said indeed that thy House and the House of thy Father should walk
before me for ever; but now the Lord says, be it far from me, for them that
honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
And likewise to King Saul, concerning the establishment of the Kingdom in his
House. 1. Sam. 13.14. But now thy kingdom shall not continue.

But I do not take the latter verse to be a repeal of the law in the former,
which constitutes Magistrates, Gods; but an Interpretation and restriction of
it, how far and in what sense they are to be so taken.

And thus the most wise and gracious God knowing that the sacred Ordinance of
the Magistracy will be spurned at, and the persons of Magistrates affronted, as
King Saul was, by men of Belial, he provides for their security, by giving them
such a Title, and such a Power, as is able to set them above the reach of all
attempts.

The Crown of thorns set upon the head of Christ, was done in mockery by the
Soldiers, as if such a Crown were good enough for him, who in their esteem was
a person of low degree, and had no other Title to a Kingdom than a bold
pretense; and sit for him who was going to suffer a painful and ignominious
death. Yet is it a Hieroglyphick of the cares, troubles, and dangers that
attend Crowns; which, foreseen and considered, are able to cause wise men to
refuse the office of a Ruler, and to say as the Trees in the Parable, Judge. 9.
Should I leave my fatness, Should I forsake my sweetness, Should I leave my
wine, and go to be promoted over the Trees?

Therefore to encourage such Persons, whom in his providence he calls to sit at
the Stern, to undertake government, and to strengthen their hands to it; and
also to east an awful regard both of their Persons and Commands upon all men,
God puts upon them the name of himself, Who is the blessed and only Potentate,
the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

Again on the other hand, God knowing how apt the corrupt nature of man is to
advance too high, under great Titles, and to abuse great Trust unto actions
unworthy of their place; He gives timely check to such high towering thoughts,
he puts his own construction upon his own words, and sets limits to that his
large Pattent, by which he conferrs such great Honor and Command upon them,
But ye shall die like men.

1. That Magistrates, whom God is pleased thus highly to honor, may in the
Psalmist's phrase. Be put in sear, and may know themselves to be but men, and
may consider, that though their office be great, their employment honorable,
their abilities for discharge eminent, yet they are not advanced out of the
rank of men, nor exempted from that law which all men are under, Heb. 9.27. It
is appointed unto all men once to dye, but after this the judgment. No
circumstance of Title, Place, Trust, or Ability, will set any any above the
reach of that Law of Nature and Decree of God. That so when they come to lay
down their great Office with their frail nature, this may be said to their
honor in their Funeral Orations, which Pliny in his Panegyric says of the
Emperor Trajan, non minus hominemse esse, quam hominibus praeesse, meminit:
That he himself was a man, was no less in his thoughts, than that he was a
Prince over men. 2. That People may know what Honor and what Obedience to give
their Magistrates. Render to all their due: Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor.
As well what, as to whom, is to be considered.

We must honor and obey Magistrates, as men, whom God has honored, and will
have us to honor: Men, called by the name of God, invested with his authority:
but yet remaining men still, and therefore must not be adored as God, and
obeyed with active obedience as God himself in all Commands whatsoever.

We must not Idolize men, and from a Sense of the high merit of able and
faithful Rulers, advance them higher in our hearts, then God has presented
them before us. On this account came into the World most of the Heathenish
Idolatry: Those ancient Heroes, who by their clemency, magnanimity, and
Victorious success, did famous acts for the delivering, preserving, and
enriching their People, were by them, partly out of gratitude to such noble
benefactors, partly to recommend their Virtues to the imitation of succeeding
Princes, exalted to the style of Gods. And some victorious Kings, lifting up
themselves upon the high thoughts of their successes and enlargments of
dominion, have affected the Title and Worship of Gods.

I shall confine my self to the First General part, and therein observe Three
Particulars.

1. Who it is that speaks: I have said. The Pronoun Feo has no lower reference
than to the most High God. He has said, who may best, even God, who has a
natural Sovereignty over all Creatures by right of Creation. 2. To whom does
God speak: Ye. As the former Pronoun relates to the Greatest in Heaven, so this
to the Greatest on Earth. God the supreme Lord speaks to Magistrates his
Vicegerents. 3. What is spoken by God of Magistrates. Great honor is given to
them; they are entrusted and employed in the great affairs of the World.
I have said, that ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the most High.

All things Concur to put a special remark upon the whole matter, Magna eis in
h^^ Pronomne h^e. But when every word is Emphatical, there must be a great
force in the saying to command our attentions: when the great God speaks great
things to the great men of the Farth, great notice is to be taken of what is
said.

1. Of the First Particular: I have said. To prove that it is God, who here
speaks, I shall produce one Authentic testimony, which alone is so sufficient
proof that it might supersede all other. It is that of the Son of God, Joh.
10.34, 35. Jesus answered them, is it not written in your Law, I said ye are
Gods. If he called them God's -- If God called them God's -- so the Persian
translation reads it. Thus the Latin version. Si de eis loquens, ad quos ^^rmo
factus est, Deus illos Deos dixit.

To strengthen the reputation of this version, I shall mention a place in the
Law, where God calls Magistrates Gods, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the
Gods, nor Curse the Ruler of thy People. Idem bis dictum: the latter Clause is
Exegetical, and puts a construction upon the former: Rulers are called Gods.

I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1. Thus God speaks expressly to
Moses whom he intended to make his Captain General to bring Israel his People
out of Egypt, and his Viceroy to govern them.

I have made thee a Prince to Pharaoh; I have made thee a Lord in the business
of Pharaoh; so the Fastern Language read it. And that he might not want a meet
Attendant of a God, God appoints Moses a Prophet; Aaron thy Brother shall be
thy Prophet.

So known a thing was it to the People of Israel, that God did call Rulers by
the name of Gods, that they themselves also called them by the same name, Exodus
32.1. When the People saw that Moses delayed to come down -- they said to
Aaron, Up, make us Gods, which shall go before us: for as for this Moses, the
man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of
him. They do not say (as the learned Rabbis observe) make us Gods, whom we may
worship, but, Gods which may go before us.

They asked a Captain and a Governor that might rule over them in Military and
Civil affairs. For whatsoever they asked, it was to supply the absence of
Moses; but him they never had for a God, but as a Prince and a Captain.

And St. Jerome gives this Etymology of the name of Samuel (...) nomen ejus
Deus, to signify, that he, who by his mother was dedicated to God, to serve
him in the Tabernacle, was designed by God, to serve him in the State, as Judge
over Israel.

God has said.

1. Then there is a Truth and Reality in the thing. It is not a Complement
passed upon Magistrates, ascribing that to them that does no way belong to
them; what God says they are, that they are. Dictum facium: with God no sooner
said but done. The whole World was made by the word of God. He spoke the word,
and it was done. Psalm. 33.9. It Is so in his Ordinances; God, in calling
Magistrates Gods, does thereby constitute them such; He advances them above the
condition of the other men, and does thereby associate them with himself in the
Government of the World; and authorize them to be, and to act as Gods.

2. A Candid Construction must be given to the style: For he that says of
Magistrates, Ye are Gods, says elsewhere, Besides himself there is no God. And
it is the first Commandment in the Law of God. That we have no other Gods before
him. So unless that an Interpretation and Restriction be put upon the Text, we
shall be cast upon the blasphemous mistake of Murcion, who observing God to
Command his People to rest on the Sabbath day, and at the Seige of Jericho to
go round about the City Seven days together, one of which must needs be the
Sabbath; he accuses God of inconstancy in his will, and inconsistency in his
Commands. Judais fixit legem, non sibripsi, so Tertullian answered him; and so
must we our selves: He who restraines us from making to our selves any other
Gods, does not restrain Himself from setting such over us, who shall be as
Gods, to us, and honored as such by us.

3. God has said; Therefore is there an answerable Expectation in him that
Magistrates be what he has made them; and carry themselves worthy of their
style: that they execute Justice and Judgment in that Sincerity and Constancy,
as God himself would do, did he govern the world by his own immediate voice.

The like Expectation has God from the People, that they reverence, fear, love
their Governors and be obedient to them, actively in all lawful Commands, and
Passively in all other: considering whose Name they bear, and whose Authority
they have.

2. To whom: Magistrates. The Scope of the Psalm evinces this, which sh^ws,
that Order and Government is of God: Magistrates is his Ordinance: Magistrates
are by him designed and advanced to their office. God is present with them to
observe, assist, and prosper them; to punish their Miscarriages, and to reward
their faithful Services.

3. What is spoken, Ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the most High.
Gods

1. Not Essentially such. Not Gods of the same infinite Nature and Excellency
with the Lord Jehovah, the God that calls them Gods. The Redemption of the
World was a work of that difficulty, and so pleasing unto God, that the
glorious Person employed in it, is God indeed, in the literal sense, without a
Metaphor; The God of Heaven did then come down to the Earth, and dwelt amongst
men, in the likeness of man.

The Government of the World, though a great and difficult work too, is
executed and managed, not by God made Man, but by men made Gods. But to these
we may suppose God speaking, as Pharaoh did to Joseph, whom he made Ruler over
all the land of Egypt; According to thy word shall all my People be Ruled; only
in the throne will l be greater then the; Genesis 41.^. God does not deliver up
his Sovereignty to them nor divide it with them. Magistrates cannot (...) to
themselves, what the flattering P^^t gives unto (...) cum Jove Ca^ar habet.
Absolute Sovereignty is too much for the noblest Creature to re^ and for the
most beautiful God to give. Its inconsistent with the (...) finiteness of God's
nature to constituted (...) sense. God advances no Creature so (...) any
Service so much, as, with Her^d, to (...) the half of his Kingdom.

2. Nor fi^tions, imaginary (...) have no other De^ty then what then fond
worshipper (...) falsely ascribe to them. (...) Gods are (...) king, the Gods
of the Text are Gods of (...) as the word in the former sense carried the (...)
too (...) to be given to any mortal man, so in (...) it lays it too low, to
apply to such excellent and useful persons as Magistrates are.

3. But Gods constituted and ^ined by God, substituted under him, to act for
him in governing the World. Vice-Gods, representing the Person and Maj^ty of
the true God* invested with his Authority, and doing his office, in giving Law
to men, and Executing the same, to maintain Order Justice, Equity, and Peace
among men. D^, non propter J^^^tatem naturs, sed (...) effi^. Gods
(...)-Gerents his L^tenants, whom he has called by his own (...) and set (...)
own S^t. The Magistrate is as Th^ret says of C^, exalted to the right hand of
God, (...) (...), made Co-asse^r with God in the throne of Judgment. And as
Christ grants to the Saints, who are made Kings and Priests unto God, to sit on
his throne, and with him to judge the World at the last great Assize^; so does
God take Magistrates into fellowship of government with himself, and sets them
on his throne in these lower Courts of Justice, that they may with him and for
him, judge the World in Righteousness.

Thus Solomon is said to sit on the Throne of the Lord, (...) King, instead of
David his Father, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. (...). Thus Justin Martyr. I have given you
my own Honor, my own Place, my own Name; therefore do you judge the People, as
I my self would judge them. (...), the Servant of God, so the Magistrate is
called by Plutarch; and by St. Paul, (...), Romans 13. He is the Minister of God
to thee which Title does not only maintain the Honor, and keep inviolable the
Soveraignity of God, but also adorns, and adds to the Royal Titles of the
greatest Monarchs on Earth. Nor is it the piety of Christian Kings only, which
accounts it their greatest honor to be the Servants of God in governing the
World, but the Policy of all Kings to glory in this, that they receive their
Authority from God. Numa Pompilius one of the first Kings of that, afterward,
flourishing and victorious City Rome, laid the foundation of its greatness, in
possessing the People of this persuasion, that he received Laws immediately
from heaven.

I have said ye are Gods, -- And all of you are Children of the most High.

Here Is no accumulation of Titles, upon Magistrates, but an Embellishment of
the former.

To be called Gods, is so magnificent and comprehensive a Title, that it needs
none, nor admits any other, to follow it. This latter Clause of the verse is
Exeg^cal, and further declares the sense of the former. And where there is a
Reduplication of Expression, and more words are used to represent the same
thing, it puts a greater remark upon what is spoken.

1. As Children, associated with God in the Government of the World; as some of
the Emperors took in their Sons to be their Colleagues in the Empire. 2. Dear
unto God, as Children, whom he will protect, defend, and guide, while they, by
his appointment, are employed for the protection, defense, and Government, of
his People. 3. Made like unto God as Children; not only, as they are through
the dignation of God, made like him in Honor, Majesty and Authority; but in
Wisdom, Magnanimity, Clemency, and other abilities for Government. (...), The
lively image of God; so the Magistrate is called in respect of accomplishments
for government.
The Images of the Heathen, consecrated by their Priests, were believed to be
Enlivened by Those whose Images they were, and so were worshipped as gods.
Magistrates made Tutelar gods to us, to defend and govern us, are accomplished
and fitted by God, whose Image they bear. for the Service they are appointed
to. God gives Saul another heart, 1 Samuel 10.9. C^r aptius adregendum Cives.
Pharaoh discernes in Joseph the Spirit of God; the Spirit of a Magistrate. God
bestows on Solomon, Wisdom and Royal Majesty. 1 Chronicles. 29.15.

Vos omnes -- And all of you. What is said Indefinitely before, is now
expressed Universally made to concern All Magistrates, as well Subordinate as
Supreme, both in the privileges and obligations of the Grant. So that he that
sits in the lowest seat of Judicature, must know himself associated with God in
Government, and obliged to act as God and for God in his place. Having thus
showed in what sense this great name, put upon Magistrates, is to betaken: I
shall now show in what respects it is applicable to them and wherein stands the
Analogy betwixt their Office, and their Title.

Magistrates may be truly called gods, in respect of,

1. Their unlimited Authority. 2. Their mighty Power. 3. The Vnaccount ableness
of their actions. 4. The Peoples necessary Subjection.
To make good these Particulars I must premise Three things. 1. That
Magistrates be taken Collectively, and in a complex sense, for the whole order
of Magistrates, supreme and subordinate. 2. That God's Sovereignty be reserved
to him Entire. 3. That what Comparison is made, may stand betwixt the
Magistrate and the Subject.
These supposed: The Magistrate has such Authority within his Dominion, as
none can set bounds to; The Legislative Power has no restraint, saving what it
puts upon it self, but may enact what Laws it pleases for the well governing
and protecting the People.

And as none can control the Authority of the Magistrate, so none can resist
his Power. There is a kind of Almighty power in his hand. The Posse Comitatus
is great, but the Posse Regni is far greater, having no Competitor, to compare
with it, nor Adverse Power to oppose it. The whole force of the Kingdom,
Military and Civil, is of right lodged in the Magistrate. Resistance is not
only impious, being expressly against the Ordinance of God, but imprudent too,
for it certainly makes men obnoxious to eternal punishment; for so the Apostle
says, -- They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation; and it does
almost as certainly expose men to temporal punishments; for seditious practices
are rarely prosperous, and if they be, those seldom hold that power long which
they wickedly wrest out of the Magistrates hand: and then they fall under his
justly incensed wrath.

But supposing the subordinate Magistrate not wanting to the Supreme, either in
diligence, fidelity, or courage, there is scarce a possibility, much less a
probability: of resisting the Power with success.

Nor can any call the Magistrate to account for his carriage in his office. The
subordinate Magistrates owe an account to the supreme and the supreme to God
Almighty, who alone is his superior. To take an account (...) an act of
Authority; the Subject therefore having no Authority over the Magistrate,
cannot exact of him an account of his government. Where the word of (...) there
is power, and who may say to him, what do^t thou? Eccl. 8.4. Dei, non
subd^t^rum judu^ et c^ura obn^us est. is a good gloss upon the place. To affirm
this is not to abandon Religion, Liberty, and Property, to tyranny and
oppression: for the Magistrate is tied up by Law how to govern and by Oath to
govern according to Law. And though the supreme Magistrate owe an account to
none but God, yet seeing he act by subordinate Power and one subordinate Power
may call another to account before the supreme, all is in safe condition. And
that which adds to our security under Chri^tian Magistrates is this, that they
account it the greatest obligation to discharge themselves worthily in their
place, that they stand accountable to God, the righteous judge who has
entrusted them in the great affairs of Government.

Lastly, The People (...) does yet bring the Magistrate to a nearer resemblance
of God. Ye m^ needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake; Romans 13.5. St. Paul presses subjection to the Magistrate upon a double
principle, his Just Authority and his mighty power. The Subject owes obedience
to the Magistrate; active obedience where his commands are lawful, that is, not
contrary to the commands of God: otherwise it is not to be paid; That matter
has been determined in a full Council of the Apostles, Acts. 5.29. Then Peter
and the other Apostles, answered and said, We ought to obey God rather then
men. And the Equity of the thing seemed to them so great, that they dared to
appeal to their adversaries in it, Acts. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. The Commands of a
Subordinate power cannot prejudice the Authority, nor evacuate the Commands of
the Supreme: and such are all earthly powers in respect of God's; and therefore
must the commands of God stand valid, however oppugned by any Commands of men.

Passive obedience is to be paid where Active cannot. Where the Magistrate's
Commands are thought to be, or indeed are, unlawful, there must be a silent,
patient yiedling to them; so far, as to bear quietly such punishment as shall
be inflicted for default of Active obedience.

These Prerogatives annexed to his Office do draw the Magistrate so near to
God, that he is pleased to honor him with his own Name.

Having now passed through the several Particulars of the Text, let us make
some reflection upon the whole matter; and

1. Give glory to God, and Congratulate our own happiness, that we live under
the kind and benevolent influences of such terrestrial gods, as are able and
willing to defend and protect us, and to dispense to us the best advantages of
Government.

Government has been found bereficial and necessary by experience of all ages;
but what kind of Government is best, has been hotly disputed both by Sword and
Pen; Some liking, others disliking that most, which themselves were under. The
happy Government we of this Kingdom are under, gives an instance, not so much
to decide as compose the controversy. Ours though a Monarchy* calls in both
the Competitors of Monarchy, to it is assistance, and makes use of what is
useful both in Democracy and Aristocracy, and rejects what is not, and so makes
up one Government of them all three; and this one so compounded is better, and
more conducing to the best ends of Government, than any of the three distinctly
taken. To the high commendation of it, we have the suffrage of a late able
Statesman, Philip Comines, who declares, that amongst all the Seigniories in
the World, England was the Country, where the State was best ordered, and where
there was the least violence and oppression upon the People.

And to complete the praises of our Government, and our rejoycings under it, we
may say of England as Josephus did of Israel, Deus in Isracle non tam
Monarchiam quam Deiarchiam instituit. We live under a Theocracy, not only in
the common notion, as all the whole World does, that Government is God's
Ordinance, and he is the supreme Potentate: not only in the notion of the Text,
that Kings and Princes and subordinate Magistrates are Gods Vicegerents, and
honored with the name of Gods: But for this also, that the Laws of this
Kingdom, by which the government is measured, are so agreeable to the holy Laws
of God, as if they had been given, as the Law was to the Jews, immediately by
God himself.

We are bound also to Congratulate our happiness, in you, My Lords, and the
rest of the honorable and Learned Judges of the Land, who twice by the year
bring the Execution of the Laws and the Administration of justice even to our
own doors; where justice may be most duly executed, and with least charge to
the People. We acknowledge this a happy kind of Polytheism, that we have so
many gods, as a the Text styles you, placed on our Tribunals, to whom we are to
pay, though not divine, yet such civil worship, as is due to those eminent
Persons, whom God has sot upon his own seat, and to whom he has committed the
care and protection of his People.

2 We will bring our selves up to a just veneration of the Persons and
Authority of our Magistrates, and resolve to obey their Commands and submit to
their sentence; that our esteem, love, fear, of them, may bear proportion to
that relation God has taken them up unto himself. The name of God put upon
them makes their Persons and their Office sacred; and ought to secure their
Persons from all injuries, affronts, assaults, and their Office from being
invaded by any; Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, Eccl. 10.20. The
safety of the Supreme Magistrate is there provided for: And curse not the rich
(viz. the subordinate Magistrate) in thy bedchamber, for a bird of the air
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. Angelus
it volans in acre caeli -- So the Chaldee Paraphrase. Magistrates are declared
gods, and Angels are at their service, to make timely discoveries of most
secret conspiracies against them.

Crimen laesae Majestatis was by the Roman Laws of highest nature; And to
assault the Person, and resist the Power of the Magistrate, is in the sense of
the Text, to fight against God.

Philo de legibus does greatly aggravate the Sin of Murder, because it is
committed against a person made after God's own Image. It Is called, says he,
(...), but it is, (...). It is Sacrilege* and the greatest Sacrilege, because
there is nothing of all the most precious possessions in the World so Sacred
and so like unto God as man is. The aggravation of the sin would be carried
much higher, if committed upon the person of the Magistrate, for so it is (...)
Deicide, a killing of one advanced to the style of God.

To depose Magistracy it self, by false opinion, as they do, who hold it
unlawful for a Christian to bear the office of a Magistrate, and, that
Christians need no other Laws than those of Christ, and no other King than King
Jesus, is a kind of Speculative Civil Atheism; and to put such fond opinions in
practice, is Practical Civil Atheism; and to set up others in competition with
the lawful Magistrate is Civil Idolatry. For Magistrates are g^ds, not
Nuncupative only, having the name of God and no more, but Gods indeed,
invested with the authority of God, and armed with his power, to govern the
World.

This should give a check to all aspiring minds, and put a stop to all
seditious councels, and rebellious practices. The charge Moses brings against
Corah and his seditious company, is, That they were gathered together against
the Lord: the same is justly to be brought against all seditious and rebellious
persons, that rise up against their lawful Prince.

And seeing Rulers are called Gods, the Devil is an unfit Instrument, and
wicked artifices are undue means, to advance any person to any, especially
supreme, Authority. The Devil's counsel and assistance, to make man equal with
God, succeeded ill to the Protoplasts; for in stead of being advanced to
equality with God, they were levelled with the Devil, both in Sin and Misery.

But if any ambitious Spirits shall try the experiment, and prosper; where they
owe their advancement, there they ^^ll pay their homage: Such will prove, if
gods, those of the ^^er Region, Diabolical Deities, to torment, oppress,
tyrannize over the People.

And now, my Lords, and you Gentlemen of the Magistracy, the matter requires,
that I make my Application to you, as to the Persons treated of in the Psalm,
and advanced in the Text.

But I should transgress the limits of my own duty, should I take upon me to
admonish you of yours. For though I stand here in the place of God, and am of
those who are Ambassadors for Christ, and might therefore use great boldness of
Speech: yet I must remember, the Text advances you much higher, and ranks you
with God himself; and so sets you far above the reach of my Instructions.

As I have therefore, my Lords and Gentlemen, by warrant and authority of the
Text, set you in the place of God, I shall address unto you as unto Gods, in
behalf of my self and this People, with out humble Petitions and Supplications,
That you will be Gods to us, to defend us in our just rights, both Religious
and Civil, to execute justice and judgment, for the preservation of Truth and
Peace amongst us.

Religion is the chief thing in our esteem, and must have the first place in
our Petition. Civil affairs will succeed better, when Religious are first
secured. (...); Ante omnia sit tibi cura rerum divinarum; was a Maxim in the
Politics of the Heathen.

We call not for Innovations in Religion, but for the Presevation of it, as now
by Law established, being fully satisfied in it, both as to Substantials, and
Circumstantials. The Doctrine, Discipline. Government, and Ceremonies of this
Church of England* are agreeable to the Holy Scriptures: And Religion is in no
other Church, professed in greater purity than in this of ours; and this, some
of the Reverend Fathers of our Church eminent for Piety and Learning, have to
the Glory of our C^ declared dying.

That the True, Reformed Christian Religion, (...) it is now by Law established
in this Kingdom, be preserved and we be protected and encouraged in the
profession and practice of it, is our earnest Petition.

Our blessed Savior, in his Personal sufferings, was crucified betwixt two
Theives: ^^t they were only sufferers with him, not actors in his suffering.
Now in his Mystical Body the Church, he suffers betwixt two sorts of People,
which, had they power, I fear, scarce either of them would deserve a softer
name: and these are not sufferers with Christ, but actors in his Suffering. The
one sort are those, who by their many corrupt and erroneous doctrines,
complained of, and not reformed, did force our Forefathers to use such lawful
means as the Constitution of this Kingdom put into their hands to reform
Religion and to depart from their Communion.

The other are those, who, like unskilful Physicians, never leave purging,
till, with the Corrupt humor of the body, they take away the Life also.

These without any lawful Authority, or any pretense thereto, withdraw from our
Communion, because as they think, we have not withdrawn far enough from the
Church of Rome.

These two Factions, though distant from each other in their heads; holding
opinions dissonant if not contrary: yet, like Sampson's Foxes, are joined
together by the tails, to draw lighted firebrands into our Church and State,
to destroy both.

They are, like Herod and Pilate, enemies to each other, but easily made
friends, to become, both, greater enemies against Christ.

The latter take their measures for their Confidences and Insolences, from the
growing hopes of the former, by whom they are thought to have been at first
formed, and now secretly abetted. So that if the one be held within due bounds,
the other is not like to prove a dangerous Enemy.

The Papists are the more formidable Enemy, as having a settled Church, under a
government, and being counseled and aided by men of great parts, Learning and
Interests, and large Conscience; and chiefly from that pretense they have to
Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, of which they make great use, to gain Proselytes
and to hold weak Converts.

A fatal thing it has been (as a person of learning and honor observes) to the
City of Rome, to usurp over the World; first, by holding in a temporal
subjection, all the Countries of her neighbor Princes; since, by bringing into
thraldom the Hearts and Consciences of Christians. First, by intruding upon the
inheritance of men, then by encroaching upon the heritage of Christ's own
purchase.

To speak of the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, would be too long a
discourse to insert here, and too great a digression from the matter before us;
I Will only say this. The Title of Universal Bishop of the Church, was given to
the Bishop of Rome, by an Emperor, who ascended the Throne by treason and
murder, and made that Bishop (although the Title had been lately not only
disclaimed but bitterly declaimed against, by his almost immediate Predecessor)
Head of the Church, that he might abett and assist him, who had made himself
Head of the State.

And for his Jurisdiction in England, it was gotten, partly by intrusion and
usurpation, and partly by imposing upon the facile nature of some in high
place, which having been, in several ages since, complained of and declared
against, was at last justly cast out, not by Popular fury and faction, but by
the deliberate Counsel of pious and learned Divines in Convocation assembled,
by the express Authority of the King then reigning, and ratified by the three
Estates in Parliament.

The Protection we crave against these men, is not against their arguments, but
their cruelties. They do, without cause, complain of our sanguinary Laws
against them; but we have too much cause to complain of their sanguinary
Doctrines, which as occasion has served, have been put in practice, by
barbarous and savage cruelties against us. We know in what account the reformed
Christian stands with them, and how persons so reputed, are dealt with by them;
which makes us justly dread the thoughts of coming again under their power, and
to beg of you, my Lords, that Protection which the Law provides for us.

If they shall please to call this Persecution (as they are apt enough to cry
out, not, as we say, before they are hurt but if they may not hurt us,) and to
call that, Persecution against them, when their hands are tied, that they
cannot persecute us, we are content, so far to be reputed Persecuters.

As to the cause of Religion, we desire you, to use the Civil Sword to protect
us of the Clergy, in the Profession and Exercise of it, no further than we
shall be able, through the grace of God, to use the Sword of the Spirit, to
defend the Doctrine of it against all adversaries whatsoever.

We are so well assured of the goodness of our Cause, and have of late been so
well awakened by the insolences of our adversaries, that the weapons of our
spiritual warfare, that before lay in their rust, when no adversary appeared,
are now furbished up, and appear able to desend us. But against their cunning
contrivances, and secret conspiracies, against their bloody massacres and open
violences, we have no means to defend our selves; only our Prayers are unto
God, who is a God of truth, and delights in the safety of those that stand up
for the truth. Our Prayers are also unto you, whom God has styled Gods, under
your shelter we betake our selves. Vmbra Principis est umbra Dei, So the
Arabic Proverb: Under your shadow we hope to be safe. You are Gods, not
Titular gods, who have the name of God and nothing else, but Tutelar Gods, to
whom our defense and safety is committed.

There is another sort of People yet remaining, who are a dishonor to
Religion, and hinderers of it, both in the public exercise and pious practice:
I mean the Atheist and Profane; I put them together, for they both live without
God in the World: the one, impudently with his mouth, the other Sinfully in his
heart and life, says, There is no God.

The emptiness of our seats in our solemn assemblies proceeds chiefly from
these men's contempt of the holy Ordinances of God. The greatest profanations of
the Lord's day are from these.

The ancient Heathens, not understanding that the Sabbatical rest was
appointed, not to satisfy the flesh with ease and sloth, but to make way for
work of e higher nature and greater concern, to be performed by the whole man,
derided the Institution of the Sabbath. And Seneca, as St. Augustine observes,
does unjustly accuse the Jewish Sabbath, as depriving men of the seventh part
of their time; and as devoting that to idleness which might be profitably spent
in their lawful employments: and, as if the God of the Jews, wearied out with
his six days labor in creating the World, did devote the seventh day to his
ease and refreshment.

Our moderu Heathens, by their loose observance of the Lord's day, seem of the
same opinion with the Ancient, while they either grudg to have it give
intermission to their secular affairs, or else spend it wholly in sloth and
carnal pleasures.

Your severer Eye, my Lords, upon these persons, might happily cast an awe upon
them, to spend the Lord's day, with more conscience, or at least less scandal.

Our Givil rights come next into our thoughts, and present themselves to you,
my Lords, in our Petition,, that Justice be administered, for the preserving to
every man his right in possession, and the recovering it, where he is disseized.

And here all persons concerned in this Court, either in bringing any Cause to
trial, or in preparing it for judgment, are to be earnestly requested, that
they do what truth and justice requires of them.

You that bring the action, do not bring trivial matters before my Lords the
Judges, for they fit on the tribunal of the great God. Do not more vexations
Suits, to disquiet your neighbor without Cause. The Law is good, as the
Apostle says of the Law of God, if a man use it lawfully, namely, to preserve
or recover his just right. Do not bring an unjust Cause, in hopes of good
success, either through the wisdom and eloquence of your Council, or
favourableness of your Jury, not to mention any other more S^^ister means. For
as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King to discern good and had: and, my
Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel; this is said of David, and
may be applied to others, whom God has placed on the seat of Justice.

It would make much for the honor of the long Robe, and give check to
contentious Spirits, if the Learned Council would refuse the Patronage of such
Causes, as appear unto them manifestly bad. I do believe some causes, are
declined by those worthy Persons, upon this very account, because their
integrity and generous minds, will not suffer their choice parts, and great
accomplishments in knowledge and eloquence, to engage against the truth, least
they should serve too happily to bear down a Righteous Cause.

And many times where Persons of integrity and worth are retained in
unrighteous Causes, the blame may justly be cast upon the Client, who out of a
natural partiality to himself, misreports his Cause, and puts such a disguise
upon it, that the blemishes of it are not seen by his Council. He declares his
cause before his Counsel as before his Judge, not as to the person who is to
edvise him in it, but as to him, who^^ to give Sentence upon it.

Witnesses have a singular usefulness in judicial proceedings. If they
prevaricate, and attest what is false, they are an unavoidable obstruction of
justice: judgment proceeds secundum Allegata et Probata: it is the proof that
gives weight to the allegation; and that lies upon the witnesses. If they give
false evidence, the very nature of the thing is thereby changed; a being is
given to that which is not, and taken away from that which is. For in Courts of
Judicature, the appearance is more than the essence; Quod non apparet non est;
and what is made appear, though by false evidence, is supposed and adjudged to
be. Therefore false witnesses do, in the Prophet's Expression, Justify the
wicked, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.

Jurors are as much coucerned as any, in the administration of justice, and
therefore must be addressed to in our request. The Law takes them for good and
lawful men, and if we make them participants in the style of the Text, though
in the lowest degree, we advance them much higher, and they indeed are the
judges in all causes: though they sit not on the Seat, yet do they the Office
of the Judge; They bring to the Bar, that sentence which the Judge pronounces
on the Bench.

Act like your selves, like men of repute, as men advanced to great employment
and trust. The lives and estates of others are in your hands; stand upon your
credit, and do nothing base and unworthy.

Look not now upon your selves as you are in your private capacity, but what
you are in your public employment. You are summoned hither upon the credit of
your abilities, and integrity; you are impannelled into Juries, and so made
Judges, in matters criminal, betwixt the King and his People; in matters Civil,
betwixt man and man: show your selves, in your present service, persons worthy
of such eredit and such trust.

Here are no (...), no mute persons, as in Comic affairs, whose bare
appearance on the Stage is their whole service. These judiciary proceedings are
solemn actions; every person employed has his necessary use. Here are not
Twelve men impannelled, that Eleven of them may stand as Ciphers, and the
Foreman do the whole service; He for order and decency speaks, but it is the
Sentence of the whole Jury, not his own single judgment.

Jurors and Witnesses are both under strongest obligations to discharge their
duty. They are Sworn in the presence, in the name, and to the service of God,
who is a righteous God. You are all of you to take that Oath solemnly, with
understanding, consideration, reverence, and (...) solution to observe it, and
not only as a thing done in course and out of custom. Witnesses are bound by
Oath, to give evidence according to the truth so far as they know, and Jurors
to give sentence according to their evidence. Neither the one nor the other
must be by assed by sinister affections or ends, but both make it their
business, that right may be done; the one that truth appear; the other, that it
prevail.

Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause, Exodus 23.3. God does
not give this Command, to cast the poor out of the protection and care of the
Law, and to expose them to oppression without remedy, (for the gracious God
delights to be the helper of the helpless) But that the merits of the cause,
and not the necessities of the Person be looked upon. (...). Here is required,
says Philo, an inflexible rigor and inexorableness against supplications from
the poor, and commiserations in our selves of them.

And if not the Cries of the poor, which are the most powerful charms, if these
must not prevail to pervert Justice, then much less any thing else, as fear,
favor, hopes of reward. If God will not have justice obstructed, for the sake
of his greatest favorite much less will he, for any man else.

Non ornabis causame jus phaleratis verbis: the precept, thus glossed on, seems
chiefly directed to the Council: they must not, by witty insinuations and
eloquent language, put a fair color upon a foul cause, no not when a poor
man's concern is in it, and by that means baffle the Witnesses, and blind the
eyes of the Jury.

There is no respect of persons with God, nor must there be with you, who bring
the causes of men before those, that sit on the Tribunal of God. Gifts and
hopes of reward are great preverters of Justice, and must be avoided by you as
Snares cast in your way.

In Criminals, be very tender of the lives of men. Let Witnesses be well
assured, that it is the truth only, and not any ways aggravated, which they
give in evidence; and Jurors that they have sufficient, clear evidence, for
such sentence as touches life.

Yet, because the life of the offender is at stake, let not fond pity move the
Witnesses to suppress, or the Jurors to oppress the truth.

Punishment is oftentimes medicinal, and reclaimes malefactors; but if the
medicine proves so Sharp as to kill the patient, it usually hits of another
happy effect, and becomes an Antidote to many.

One ill effect of fond pity is this; what is pity toward one, is cruelty
both to him, and many more: It justifies him in his sin, and multiplies the
number of offenders, and their outrages upon the persons and estates of the
innocent. For he that comes off well upon an indictment for Felony, or Murder,
or any other crime, will be ready to pass as favorable a sentence upon
himself, as his Jury has done, and so instead of repenting, he justifies
himself in his sin; and in hopes to find his next Jury as kind as the present,
he runs into like wicked Courses, and draws in others into confederacy with
him. There is another thing yet, considerable in this matter: whosoever shall,
as a false witness or perjured Juror, acquit a guilty person wittingly, besides
that he does a thing abominable to the righteous God, juslifie the wicked, he
makes himself a real great offender, to make the malefactor seem an innocent
person: he makes himself guilty of perjury, to acquit the other of his theft,
or other Crime.

But being desired, where I might have been Commanded, to be short, I will no
longer detain this Honorable and great assembly, from the important service
that attends them.

I shall now make my humble address to Almighty God, That he who has called
you, my Lords, by his own name, set you on his own throne, and employed you in
his own work, would be graciously pleased, to protect, direct, and prosper you,
in these your great affairs: And that he will also so guide and overruled the
Body of this County, met here this day to assist your Lordships in the
administration of Justice, that every one may carry themselves in their several
employments at this Assizes, with that diligence and faithfulness, as those who
are to give an account of all, at the last and great Assizes, where Christ
himself shall sit upon the Throne of Judgment.

FINIS.

