blazon or coat of arms of the City of London Commune Concilium tentum in
Camera Guildhall Civitatis London, die Jovis, quinto die Septembris, Anno Dom.
1672. Annoque Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi, dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. vicesimo quarto; coram
Georgio Waterman, Milite, Majore Civitatis London, Ricardo Chiverton, Milite,
Thoma Allen, Milite and Baronetto, Johanne Frederick, Milite, Johanne Robinson,
Milite and Baronetto, Locum-tenente Turris, Johanne Laurence, and Ricardo Ford,
Militibus, Aldermannis, Johanne Howel Milite, Serviente ad Legem ac Recordatore
dictae Civitatis, Roberto Hanson and Willielmo Hooker, Militibus, Roberto
Vyner, Milite and Baronetto, Thoma Davis, Francisco Chaplin, and Jacobo
Edwards, Militibus, Aldermannis, Patiente Ward, Armigero, Aldermanno, and
Roberto Clayton, and Johanne Moore, Militibus, Aldermannis and Vicecomitibus
dictae Civitatis, necnon majore part Communiariorum de Communi Concilio
ejusdem Civitatis tunc and ibidem assemblat. An Act for the Settlement and well
Ordering of several Public Markets within the City of LONDON.
FOR the better Order and Regulation to be had of the Market at Leaden Hall,
and the Greenyards there, with the other Market Grounds thereunto belonging;
and of the Market at Woolchurch, and the Market of Honey-lane, or Milk-street,
as also the Market near Newgate, and all other Common Markets already settled
and appointed, or which hereafter shall be settled and appointed within the City
of London: Be it Enacted by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the
Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in this Common Council Assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, That the Rules, Orders, and Directions hereafter
prescribed, be duly observed by all persons that are or may be concerned
therein.

And First, whereas by former Acts of Common Council, the sale of Beef has
been restrained and appointed to be only in Leaden Hall, and the Greenyards
there; which if now observed, would be very inconvenient to the Inhabitants of
this City, in regard the late Butchery of the Stocks, and St. Nicholas-Shambles
(which heretofore furnished with Beef and other Flesh Victuals, those parts of
the City) are now removed and otherwise disposed of: Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every Butcher and Butchers, Poulterer and
Poulterers (other then such as are hereafter excepted) Country Farmer,
Victualler, Lader, or Kidder, who keeps no Butchers, or Poulterers Shop, or
Shops within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, or within two Miles
distance of the Liberties of the same City, may from and after the publication
of this Act, take to Farm, or hire Standings, Stalls, or Places, in any the
aforesaid respective Markets; and there sell, utter, and put to open show, or
sale, his or their Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pork, and other Butchery or
Poultry Wares, or other Provisions, upon the four days of the week, in manner
as is hereafter expressed (viz.) upon Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays weekly,
between the Feast of the Annun^iation, and the Feast of St. Michael, from six
of the Clock in the Forenoon, until eight of the Clock in the Evening of the
same day; and between the Feast of St. Michael, and the Annuntiation, from
eight of the Clock before noon, until five of the Clock in the Evening of the
same day; and upon every Saturday in the Week all the Year long, from the
aforesaid respective hours of six and eight of the Clock before noon, until
eight of the Clock in the Evening of the same day, for so long time only as he
or they shall furnish the said Stalls, Standings, and Places with wholesome
Flesh and other Provisions in his or their own right, and not as Servant or
Servants, or otherwise, in behalf of any others; any thing in any former Act of
Common Council contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That no Butcher, or Poulterer whatsoever who keeps no Shop
or Shops within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, or within two miles
distance of the same City, shall in the said respective Markets, sell, utter,
or put to open show or sale, his or their Butchery or Poultry Wares upon
Mondays and Fridays weekly, upon pain that every such Butcher, or Poulterer
shall for every time he or they shall sell, utter, or put to open show or sale
in the said Markets his or their Butchery, or Poultry Wares, upon Monday, or
Friday in any week, forfeit the sum of ten shillings.

And to the end the respective hours aforesaid may the better be observed in
the said Markets, It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that a
Market Bell in all the several Markets within the City of London, shall Ring
twice every day, (that is to say) the first Ringing from the twenty fifth of
March, yearly, until the twenty ninth day of September, at seven of the Clock
before noon, except upon Monday, and then the first Ringing shall not begin
till eight of the Clock in the Forenoon: and from the twenty ninth day of
September yearly, until the twenty fifth day of March, at eight of the Clock
before Noon, and not before, except upon Monday, and then the first Ringing
shall not begin till nine of the Clock before Noon; and that the second Ringing
of the Market Bell for raising of the said Markets shall begin to Ring from and
after the twenty fifth of March, yearly, until the twenty ninth day of
September (except on Saturdays) half an hour after four in the Afternoon, and
to continue Ringing till five of the Clock, and from and after the twenty ninth
day of September, until the twenty fifth day of March yearly, (except on
Saturdays) to begin to Ring half an hour after three of the Clock, and to
continue Ringing until four of the Clock in the Afternoon: and that the second
Ringing of the Market Bell upon Saturday weekly throughout the year, shall
begin half an hour after seven of the Clock, and to continue Ringing until
eight of the Clock in the Evening of the same day. And if any Butcher, or
Butchers, Poulterer, or Poulterers, Victualler, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder,
or other person whatsoever, shall sell, or put to open sale any manner of
Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions in the said Markets, before
Ringing of the Market Bell at the said several hours and times in the Mornings
respectively; such Offender, or Offenders shall be proceeded against, as
forestallers of the Market, as by the Law in this case is directed and
appointed. And that no Butcher, Poulterer, Victualler, Country Farmer, Lader,
Kidder, or other person whatsoever, shall sell or put to open sale, any
Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions, after the end of Ringing the
Market Bell at the said several hours in the Afternoon respectively, but shall
then depart from the said Markets, upon pain that every person selling
Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions after the said respective hours
in the aforesaid Markets, shall forfeit the sum of ten shillings for every such
Offense. And if any Butcher, Poulterer Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other
person whatsoever, shall sell, utter, or put to open sale in the said Markets,
any manner of Fleshmeat upon any other day or days then is before hereby
limited and expressed, such Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder,
or other person shall for every such Offense forfeit the sum of twenty
Shillings.

Provided always, that no Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or
other person whatsoever, shall upon the Saturday in any week bring into any of
the said Markets, any manner of Flesh meat, after six of the Clock in the
Afternoon, between the twenty fifth of March, and the twenty ninth of
September, yearly; nor after four of the Clock in the Afternoon, between the
twenty ninth of September, and the twenty fifth of March, upon pain of
forfeiting the sum of ten Shillings for every time any such person shall bring
into any of the said Markets any manner of Flesh meats, after the said
respective hours.

And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Stall, Standing,
or Place within any of the said Markets shall from and after the publication of
this Act be letten or allotted to any Butcher or Poulterer, who does or shall
keep any Butchers or Poulterers Shop within the City of London, or Liberties
thereof, or within two miles distance of the Liberties of the said City, for so
long time as he or they shall keep any Butchers, or Poulterers Shop within the
limits aforesaid.

And further, That no Butcher, Poulterer, or other person whatsoever shall have
and enjoy more then two Stalls, Standings, or Places within any one of the
Markets aforementioned, at one time.

Provided always, That the Country people and others resorting to the said
Markets, being not Butchers, not Poulterers, nor selling any manner of Flesh
meat, or Poultry, may stand, or sit and vend their Herbs, Fruit, Eggs, Butter,
and other such like Provisions, and Commodities in the Markets, upon every
working day in the week, between the Feast of the Annuntiation, and the Feast
of St. Michael the Archangel, from seven of the Clock in the Morning, until
five of the Clock in the Evening of the same day: and upon every working day
between the Feast of St. Michael and the Annuntiation, from six of the Clock in
the Morning, until four of the Clock in the Evening of the same day, so as the
same persons that bring them first to Market do continue the selling thereof,
and do observe the Ringing of the Market Bell or keeping the said hours
accordingly.

And it is also further Enacted (in regard that the Market is most principally
intended for the benefit of Housekeepers, who buy for their own use and
behoof) That the Retailers and Traders of this City, who buy to sell again,
shall not enter into any of the aforesaid Markets, to make their Provisions,
and buy of any of the Market people there, to carry the same to their several
Houses and Shops, until the Afternoon of every day, to the end that
Housekeepers may provide themselves in the morning of every day at the first
hand and pay moderate Rates for their Provisions; upon pain that every such
Retailer, or Retailers, or Traders, shall for every time Offending herein,
forfei forty shillings.

And forasmuch as all dead Flesh meat and other Victuals, and Provisions of all
sorts of Fruits, Herbs, Fish, and the like, ought to be sold in open and common
Markets, allowed and appointed, and not under private Stalls or at Tavern
doors, or in any Street or Common Passages, or in any private Places, or
carried up and down, and sold by way of Hawking; by means whereof, much
unwholesome Provisions, dangerous to the Health and Bodies of his Majesty's
Subjects, may be uttered and sold: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, Victualler,
Gardener, Fruiterer, Fish-seller, or other person or persons whatsoever, shall
from and after the publication of this Act, sell, utter, or put to show or
sale, by way of Hawking, or as a Hawker, or in any otherwise, any Beef, Mutton,
Lamb, Veal, Pork, Poultry, Butter, Cheese, Fish, Fruit, Herbs, or other
Victuals, or Provision whatsoever, in any private House, Lane, Ally, Inn,
Warehouse, Street-stall, or Common Passage, or other place or places
whatsoever, within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, but only in his or
their open Shop, or Shops, or in the public Market place, or places, and in
Market time only, according as is before appointed, upon pain that every such
person so carrying, or offering to put to sale, by way of Hawking, or in any
otherwise, any Flesh meat, Poultry, or other Victuals whatsoever, as aforesaid,
in any private House, Lane, Ally, Inn, Warehouse, Street-stall, or Common
Passage, or other places whatsoever, being not his, or their open Shop, or
Shops, or the Common Marketplace, shall forfeit the same Goods so offered to
sale, without any manner of favor, according to the ancient Custom of the City
of London, used and approved; and the same so forfeited, shall be disposed of
to such Prisons within this City of London, as the Lord Mayor for the time
being shall direct and appoint.

And to the intent that Forestalling, Regrating, and Engrossing of Victuals,
and other Commodities may be the better prevented, and the Laws made against
the same more effectually observed, It is Declared and Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no person, or persons, from and after the publication of this
Act, shall buy, or cause to be bought, any Victuals, or other things
whatsoever, within the said City of London, or Liberties thereof, coming to any
the Common Markets of this City, or make any Bargain, Contract, or Promise, for
the having and buying of the same, or any part thereof, so coming as aforesaid,
before the same shall be brought into one of the said Markets, ready to be
there sold: And also, That no person, or persons that shall by any means
Regrate, Obtain, or Get into his or their Hands, or Possession, in any the said
Markets, any Victuals or other things whatsoever, that shall be thither brought
to be sold, shall from henceforth sell the same again in their Shop, or Shops,
or any of the Markets, or other places within this City and Liberties thereof,
or shall Ingross, or Get into his or their Hands, by buying, contracting, or
otherwise, any of the things aforesaid, in the said Markets, with intent to
sell the same again, in the same, or any other Markets, or places within this
City, and Liberties thereof, upon pain that every such Forestaller, Regrater,
and Ingrosser, shall for every such Offense, forfeit forty shillings.

And whereas, for Accommodation of Market people, with Stalls, Boards, Shelter,
and all other like things necessary for their Standing in any of the
Marketplaces within the City of London, and cleansing and keeping clean the
same; and otherwise for defraying the incident Charges of Repairing and
Maintaining the same Markets, and to Gratify and Reward the Care and
Attendance of such persons as shall be employed therein, there has always been
given and paid certain reasonable Rates for the said Accommodations and
Charges: And to the intent that the said Rates may be ascertained and made
public to all Market people, whereby the persons that shall from henceforth,
by Order of the Committee for Letting of the City Lands, with Approbation of
this Court, be employed therein, as Collectors, or Receivers of the same Rates,
may be prevented from Demanding, or Extorting more then is allowed, as is
herein after expressed: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every person, and persons, resorting to any of the said Markets, to sell, and
vend their Commodities, shall from henceforth pay unto such person, or persons,
as from time to time shall be thereunto appointed, as aforesaid, to take and
receive the Profits of all, or any of the said Markets, to the Use of the
Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, of, and from all Market
people thereunto resorting, for their Stalls, Standings, and other
Accommodations, in the several Marketplaces aforesaid, after the Rates
following (that is to say) for every Stall, or Standing of the length of eight
Foot, and breadth of four Foot, used or employed for sale of Flesh meat, or
Fish, for every day eight pence, or two shillings six pence per week; and for
every such Stall or Standing, used or employed for sale of any other
Commodities, for every day four pence, or eighteen pence per week; and for
every Stall, or Standing of the length of six foot, and breadth of four foot,
used or employed for the sale of Flesh meat, or Fish, six pence for every day,
or two shillings per week; and for every such Stall, or Standing used for other
Provisions, or Commodities, for every day, three pence, or sixteen pence per
week; and for every Standing for Tanned Leather, six pence per day; and for
every raw Hide, an half penny; and for every Horse Load of any Provisions or
Commodities not upon Stalls, three pence; and for every Cart-load of such
Commodities, six pence.

Provided that all Gardeners, and Country people, and others resorting to the
said Markets, early in the Morning, to sell Herbs, Fruit, and other like
Commodities, and there continue for no long space, quitting the Markets at
eight or nine of the Clock in the Morning, shall pay for the Larger Places or
Standings, only three pence, for every time they resort thither; and for the
Lesser Places, or Standings, only two pence.

And that the said Collectors, or Receivers shall not Demand or Require of the
Market people more then according to the aforesaid Rates, without the free
Consent and Agreement of the said Market people, for some extraordinary
Convenience, or Accommodation, unless in Leaden Hall Market, where other and
larger Rates have been anciently paid for Stalls, or Standings therein; and
that no person, or persons Inhabiting in or near to any the said Market places,
or other person or persons whatsoever, upon pretense of any right whatsoever,
other then the Receivers, or Collectors of the said Rates and Duties, shall
from henceforth provide any Stalls, or other Accommodations in any of the
aforesaid Marketplaces; or directly, or indirectly take, require, or exact any
sum, or sums of money, or other Reward of the Market people, for any Stalls,
Standings, or Accommodation of their place, and station in the said Markets;
upon pain that every person offending herein shall forfeit and lose, for every
time so doing and offending, twenty shillings.

And for the better Order and Quiet of the Market people, and the reconciling
all Differences that may arise therein, betwixt them and the Collectors, or
Receivers in the aforesaid Markets; as also that the Rates and Duties may be
the better collected, and certainly paid into the Chamber of London, without
fraud, and the said Markets, more effectually supervised; for prevention of
Abuses and Disorders that may arise therein, Be it Enacted, That the Committee
for Letting the City Lands for the time being, shall and are hereby Authorized
from time to time, by and with the Approbation of this Court, to appoint
fitting persons for Overseers of the said respective Markets, and Collectors,
or Receivers of the Profits, or Duties arising, or growing out of the same; and
to Treat, and Agree with the said persons, and allow them for their Care and
Pains, such part or portion of the said Profits, as in their discretions shall
be found requisite: provided the said Allowance exceed not the tenth part of
the whole clear Profits (all necessary Charges being deducted) upon condition
that the said Overseers and Collectors, or Receivers that shall from time to
time be thereunto appointed, by order as aforesaid, do give sufficient security
to the satisfaction of the said Committee, for their Diligence and faithful
Performance in their Office, and overseeing the Orders and Provisions
aforesaid, observed, and giving a just and true account of their Receipts and
Payments of the Moneys every week into the Chamber; and that the said Committee
do once in every week meet together at the Guild Hall, and then and there
audite the Accounts and Payments of the said Overseers, and Collectors, or
Receivers, for prevention of any abuses that by neglect thereof might arise or
happen; and also endeavor, upon any Complaints, and Grievances of the Market
people, against the said Overseers, and Collectors, or Receivers, or otherwise,
to compose and redress the same as soon as possibly they can; that so all
disturbances to the Market people, and unnecessary Suits at Law may be avoided:
and that the said Overseers and Receivers, or Collectors shall frequently
attend, and be in the said Markets, during Market time, and diligently oversee
the same; to prevent with their best care, any abuses or disorders that may
happen, or be committed therein; and also to take care that the Provisions and
Penalties appointed by this Act against all Offenders, contrary to the same, be
duly and constantly put in Execution: and if any of the said Overseers, and
Collectors, or Receivers shall be remiss, or corrupt herein, then they shall be
forthwith displaced, and disabled of any Office, or Place touching the said
Markets.

And be it further Enacted, That in case the aforesaid Committee for Letting
the City Lands, shall at any time hereafter and it most fitting, and
advantageous for the benefit of the Chamber, to let the said Markets, or any of
them to Farm; that then the Committee aforesaid, for the time being, shall and
may treat with any person, or persons for Letting the same to Farm, upon the
best terms they can, and report their proceedings unto this Court for their
Approbation therein.

All which Pains, Forfeitures, and Penalties, Sum and Sums of Money to be
forfeited, by virtue of this Act, shall be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
or Plaint to be Commenced and Prosecuted in the Name of the Chamberlain of the
City of London, for the time being, in the Court holden before the Mayor, and
Aldermen in the Chamber of the Guild Hall of the City of London; and that the
Chamberlain of the said City for the time being in all Suits to be prosecuted
by virtue of this Act, against any Offender, or Offenders, contrary to the
same, shall recover the ordinary Costs of Suit to be expended in and about the
prosecution thereof; and if the Suit pass for the Defendant, then the said
Defendant to recover his Costs; and that the Chamberlain for the time being
shall not have power to take less of any Offender then herein is limited to be
forfeited for every Offense.

And further, That one moiety of all Forfeitures to be recovered by virtue
hereof (the Costs of the Suit for Recovery of the same being deducted) shall
after Recovery, and the Receipt thereof, at or before the twenty fifth day of
March yearly, be paid and delivered unto the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital to
be employed toward the Relief of the Poor Children, to be brought up and
maintained in that Hospital; and the other moiety to him or them which shall
first give Information of the Offenses, for which the Forfeitures shall grow;
and prosecute Suit in the Name of the Chamberlain of the said City for recovery
of the same, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas the Sergeant, and Yeoman of the Channel, and Yeoman of
Newgate-Market, and Foreign-taker, while the Common Markets were kept in
Leadenhal-street, Cheapside, and Newgate-street, did take care for sweeping and
making clean the said Streets where the Market people resorted, and paid for
carrying away the Soil thereof; as also for furnishing the Market people with
Boards, and other Accommodations. In consideration whereof they received some
certain allowance by consent of the Market people for their care and pains
therein. Now forasmuch as the said Markets are removed out of the Streets, and
made Commodious, at the public Charge of the City, and that the Revenue
thereof ought to be improved for the benefit of the Chamber: Be it Enacted,
That the several Officers aforementioned, shall from henceforth be wholly
discharged from the Charge of Cleansing and Carrying away the Soil of the said
Markets, and providing Boards and other Accommodations for the Market people,
and likewise from any ways intermedling with the Receipt of any Duties, Fees,
or Profits, or taking any Money of any Persons resorting to, or standing in any
of the Common Markets aforesaid, upon any pretense whatsoever; but that instead
thereof the Sergeant and Yeoman of the Channel for the time being shall, during
their Continuance in the said places, each of them, have and receive out of the
Chamber of London, the sum of three pounds weekly; and Richard Robinson the
present Foreign-taker, and Yeoman of Newgate-market, the sum of three pounds
every week, during the term of his natural Life: All which sums respectively,
and none other, shall be paid by the Chamberlain out of the Profits arising by
the Markets, to the persons aforesaid, in full satisfaction of all their Right,
Title, Claim, and Demand whatsoever, to any part or share of the Profits to be
Collected of the Market people.

Wagstaffe.

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, at his
House in Aldersgatestreet. 1672.


