Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guild Hall Civitat' London die Lunae 29o die
Aprilis, Anno Domini 1667, Anno ue Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi, Dei
Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', etc.
decimonono, Coram Willielmo Bolton Milit', Majore Civitat' London, Thoma Adams
and Richardo Brown, Militibu^ and Baronettis, Aldermannis, Johanne Frederick
Milite, Aldermanno, Johanne Robinson, Milite and Baronett', and Locum-tenente
Turris Civit^t' London, Johanne Lawrence, Thoma Bludworth, Roberto Hanson, and
Willielmo Hooker, Milit' and Aldermannis, Johanne Moore Armigero, Aldermanno,
Roberto Viner, Milite and Baronetto, and Josepho Sheldon Milite, Alde^mannis ac
Vicecomitibus ejusdem Civitat', necnon majore part Communiariorum de Communi
Concilio ejusdem Civitat' tunc and ibidem assemblat'. An ACT declaring what
Streets and straight and narrow Passages within the City of London and
Liberties thereof, burnt down in the late dismal FIRE, shall be enlarged and
made wider, and to what proportion; for notification thereof to the Owners o^
Parties interessed in the Ground to be taken away for the said Enlargements.
WHEREAS in the Act of this present Parliament for Rebuilding the City of
LONDON, the Lord Mayor Aldermen, and Commons of the said City for the time
being, in Common Council assembled, are empowered and required to enlarge all
and every the Streets and Places hereafter mentioned, where and in such manner
as there shall be cause, by and with the approbation of his MAJESTY, and not
otherwise. That is to say, The Street called Fleetstreet, from the place where
the Greyhound Tavern stood, to Ludgate, and from thence to St. Paul's
Churchyard; the Street leading from the East end of St. Paul's Church into
Cheapside; the Street and Passage at the East end of Cheapside leading into the
Poultrey; the Street and Passage out of the Poultrey leading into the West end
of Cornhill, at or near the place late called the Stocks; the Street called
Blow-bladder-street, leading from the West end of Cheapside toward
Newgate-Market; and to enlarge the Street and Passage from thence toward
Newgate-Market, by laying the Ground where the Middle Row in the Shambles there
lately stood into the said Street; and in like manner to enlarge the Passage
from Newgate-Market toward Newgate, by laying the Ground of the late four
Houses between Warwick Lane end in Newgate-Market and the late Bell Inn there
into the Street; and in like manner to enlarge, as there shall be cause, the
Lane called Ave Marie Lane, leading from Paternoster Row to Ludgate Street;
and the Street or Passage at the end of St Martin le Grand toward
Blow-bladder-street aforesaid; and also the Passage from St. Magnus Church to
the Conduit in Grace Church Street; and the North end of Grace Church Street;
and also Thamestreet, from the West corner of St. Magnus Church aforesaid to
the Tower-Dock; and to enlarge Old Fishstreet, by laying the Middle Row there
into the Street?

Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained and Declared, by the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in
this Common Council assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
Streets ^^d Places before mentioned shall be enlarged as hereafter follows,
his MAJESTY having already given his Gracious Appr^^^^^ thereof: that is to say,

That the said Street called Fleetstreet, from the place where the Greyhound
Tavern stood to Ludgate, and from thence into St. Paul's Churchyard, shall be
farther Enlarged to be of the Breadth of For^^ five Foot.

That the said Street leading from the East end of St. Paul's Churchyard into
Cheapside, shall be farther Enlarged to be of the same Breadth of Forty five
Foot.

That the said Street and Passage at the East end of Cheapside, leading into
the Poultrey, shall be ^^larged to be on a level Line Forty Foot broad.

That the said Street and Passage out of the Poultrey leading into the West end
of Cornhill, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Forty Foot.

That the said Street called Blow-bladder-street, into Cheapside, shall be
Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Forty Foot.

That the said Lane called Ave Marie Lane shall be Enlarged to be of the
Breadth of Eighteen Foot.

That the Street from Aldersgate through St. Martin's le Grand into
Blow-bladder-street, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Twenty four Foot.

That the Passage from St. Magnus Church to the Conduit in Grace Church Street,
shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Thirty five Foot.

That the North end of Grace Church Street, from Leaden Hall, shall be Enlarged
to be of the same Breadth of Thirty five Foot.

That Thamestreet, from the West corner of St. Magnus Church aforesaid, to
Tower-Dock, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Thirty Foot.

That the Ground where the Middle Row in the Shambles stood, and the Ground of
the four late Houses in Newgate-Market, between Warwick Lane end and the late
Bell Inn there, and also the Ground where the Middle Row in Old Fishstreet
stood, shall be laid into the Streets, according to the said Act of Parliament.

And whereas in the same Act it is contained, that the said Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, shall and may enlarge and
make wider any other such straight and narrow Passages as are less then
Fourteen Foot in Breadth, so as notice be given to the Owners or Proprietors
interessed in the Ground to be so taken for the Enlarging thereof, on or before
the first day of May the next following, and whereas the said Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons are also enabled to make, or cause to be made, a New
Street, leading and extending from the Guild Hall of the same City into
Cheapside, of such Breadth and wideness as they shall judge meet and convenient:

Be it farther Enacted, Ordained, and Declared, by the Authority aforesaid,
That there shall be a New Street made from the said Guild Hall into Cheapside,
of the Breadth of Thirty six Foot.

That Pannier Alley, between Paternoster Row and Newgate-Market, shall be
Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Nine Foot, and paved with Freestone for a
Foot-passage.

That St. Paul's Alley, between Paternoster Row and St. Paul's Churchyard,
shall be also Enlarged to be of the same Breadth of Nine Foot, and paved with
Freestone for a Foot-passage.

That Pissing Alley and Queens-head Alley in Paternoster Row shall be
severally Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Nine Foot.

That Grocers Alley, in the Poultrey, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of
Eleven Foot.

That Scalding Alley, there, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Nine
Foot.

That Old-Swan Alley, in Thamestreet, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of
Fourteen Foot.

That Love Lane, in Thamestreet, shall be Enlarged to be of the Breadth of Ten
Foot.

That the Cross Lane between St. Dunstan's-hill and Harp Lane shall be Enlarged
to be of the Breadth of Fourteen Foot.

And be it farther Enacted, Ordained, and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That all straight and narrow Passages not Fourteen Foot broad which have been
or shall be staked out by the Surveyour hereunto appointed by this Court, to
the Breadth of Fourteen Foot, shall be Enlarged accordingly and in such manner
as they now are or shall be staked and set out.

And this Court is farther consenting and desirous that all other straight and
narrow Passages, not before particularly mentioned, (which shall be found
convenient to be Enlarged for the common ^^nesit and accommodation, and shall
receive his Majesty's order and Approbation) shall and may be Enlarged and
made wider and otherwise altered before the twentieth day of May now next
ensuing, as shall be fitting for the Beauty, Ornament and Convenience thereof,
and staked and set out accordingly.

And that all persons concerned or interessed in any Ground so taken or to be
taken away, for the said Enlargements of any of the said Streets, may take
notice thereof according to the said Act of Parliament.

It is Ordered that this Act and Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published
in all convenient places within this City and Liberties.

Avery.

(...) LONDON


