AN EXHORTATION Given forth at the Requirings of the Lord, in tender Love to
all that have been in any Measure turned unto Truth, by the Visitation of the
Almighty, in his Spiritual Appearance; that they be faithful and Obedient
thereunto.
My Friends,
Great has been (and still is) the Love and Mercy that the Lord God Eternal has
Manifested unto the Children of Men, in that whilst they are in a State of
Disobedience and Rebellion against his Holy Law, in their Hearts; which by
Nature all Men and Women are, as says the Apostle Paul, We are all by Nature
Children of Wrath, yet such is the Love of God, that in this State, he is
extending his Grace, and he is visiting of Mankind by his Light and Holy
Spirit, in order to turn them from their Evil Ways to serve the Living and
true God, and to as many as truly obey his Call, and turn unto him with their
Hearts, they come to partake of Salvation and Eternal Life by him; And amongst
the many others, who in the day of Gods Visitation came to Believe in him that
Visited, the Lord was pleased to reach unto my Soul and to give me an
understanding of my State and Condition, whereby I came to know and Believe,
that it was the Lord that then called unto me to forsake my Sins and Evil
Deeds, and my heart was affected with his Goodness, and I was made willing in
some Measure to turn from my Inquity that displeased the Holy God, and to
forsake the vain Pleasures and delights of this Evil world, and to suffer
Afflictions and Reproach for his Names sake. But this is that which is now
Matter of Bitter Lamentation unto me when I consider thereof, that after the
Lord had thus been good and Gracious unto me, the Enemy of all Mankind, that
always seeks to destroy the Work of God, he was near unto me with his
Temptations and Allurements, and for want of keeping Low before the Lord, and
dwelling in the Sense of that Power that had reached unto me, and began my
Deliverance out of Bondage, I was again entangled in the Snares of the Evil
one, and thereby Darkness came over again, and Deadness and Dryness, as to the
Enjoyment of Gods Presence; So that although I kept in a form and Profession of
the Truth of God: Yet then I wanted the Enjoyment of the Life and Power that
would have saved me from Sin, and kept me from Disobedience in Unity and
fellowship with my Maker; and in this deplorable state I remained many Years,
walking in a Way that was not acceptable to the Lord, though as to the outward
I was a Zealous for the form of Truth, and exercised in diverse Services
thereof, as many others, and was owned and esteemed as a Friend of Truth; Yet I
wanted Peace with the Lord, and the joy of his Salvation. Now such has been the
Love of my God, that he followed me with his Judgments, and called unto me to
return unto him from whom I was fallen, and repent of my Iniquity, and he would
heal my Backsliding, and would love me freely; and at length through the
tender Mercy of God, who had long waited upon me to show himself Gracious and
merciful unto my Soul, I was again brought down into a Consideration of my
State and Condition, and of my want of the Enjoyment of the presence of the
Lord, that had so Mercifully dealt by me, at my first Convincement, and the
sense hereof became a Heavy Burden upon my Spirit, and the Lord raised up
Secret Cries in my Soul, Oh! that I might be delivered from my Sins, that now
Separated me from the enjoyment of true Peace and fellowship with my Maker; for
now I came to see my self in an undone State, without the Lord did appear again
to be my Helper, notwithstanding I kept in the outward Profession of the Truth,
and was constant in Presenting my body before the Lord; but it pleased the
Lord, after he had thus reached unto me, and let me see my State, to bring near
his Righteous Judgments into my Heart, and to condemn Sin in my Mortal Body,
whereby as I came to love his Judgments, and to submit thereunto, I was
brought down into the Death, unto that Life I had formerly lived in, and the
Terrors of the Lord I came to feel, and Witness Revealed in me against that
Nature that had disobeyed the Lord, and which was not Subject unto his Holy Law
(neither indeed can it be) and therefore it was to be Crucified and slain by
the Sword of Gods Spirit; and this was a day of great distress and Bitterness
of Soul: Oh! the Sorrow and horror that I felt in my Soul for my Iniquity, and
then the Enemy, he also was busy to keep his Possession in me, finding the Lord
at work to dispossess and cast him out of his Seat, where he had Ruled, and had
the Dominion, then he labored to persuade me that there was no Mercy for me,
but that the Lord had wholly forsaken me, and that was the Cause I was now in
Trouble; but after I had remained a little Season in this condition, it pleased
the God of all Mercy a little to appear, and to afford me some Glimpses of his
Love to bear up my head from sinking in the day of my Distress, and although
his Judgments were heavy upon me for my Sins, yet this I came to witness, in
Judgment the Lord remembered Mercy, as I was subject to him that Judged, and
gave up to answer him in the ways of his Judgments, and in due time the Lord
did manifest more and more of his Mercy toward me, and although I went forth
Weeping, bearing the Precious Seed, yet there was a hope begotten in me, that
the time would come I should return again rejoicing and bring my Sheaf with me.
And now Glory and Praise be given unto the Lord my God for ever, the day is now
begun to appear unto me, and in me, which is a day of Gladness, and of great
joy, even the day of my Souls Redemption and Salvation from under the Power of
Darkness, and out of the Regions and shadow of Death, and to walk before the
Lord in newness of Life; and now I am come sensibly to witness, that it is the
Lord alone that is able to keep us, and that we have daily need to wait upon
the Lord for strength and Power, and that we ought to be upon our Watchtower
every day, least the Enemy prevail again to draw us away from the Lord, for he
is a very subtle and busy Adversary to man's everlasting happiness, but as we
dwell in the Light, his Snares and Temptations are made manifest, and the Power
is made known and enjoyed, that delivers out of the same, and in the Sense
thereof we are bound to praise the Name of the Lord our God, who is the Keeper
and Preserver of all those that put their Trust in Him.

And now my Friends, the Lord having been graciously pleased thus to visit my
Soul with his Goodness, and make me in the Riches of his Love, a partaker in
some measure of his Salvation; and having also raised up a Hope in me, that as
he has begun this Work in my Soul, so also he will (if I abide faithful unto
him) carry it on, and perfect it to his praise, and to my Eternal Comfort; So
he has also begotten a concern upon my Spirit, to make known this his
Wonderful. Goodness unto others, that I should declare of his Mercies, unto the
Congregations of his People, that those that are faithful to the Lord may
rejoice on my behalf, and praise the Name of my Redeemer, and those that are
yet in that state wherein I was; even in Disobedience to the Light of Jesus,
and are set down at ease taking up a rest short of the true rest, which none
can ever enjoy but those that are faithful and obedient, that these may be
awakened and stirred up to consider their own states and Conditions, whilst a
day of Mercy is afforded them, for how know any Man or Woman how soon their day
may be over, and then Woeful and Sad will their state and Condition be indeed,
and whereas the Lord has made me sensible of his Terrors for my Disobedience,
a Travel lives upon my Spirit that others may be brought into Obedience unto
the Lord, that they might witness his Salvation before the day of Fierce anger
break for upon them.

And further my Friends I have been brought into a sense of the deep Trials I
am like to pass through, and the many Spirits to be tried with, and believing
that many may through their being unacquainted with the Work of the Lord in
themselves, be liable to pass a wrong Judgment upon me (as I have already
understood some have done) Judging the Work which the Lord has wrought in me to
be only the effect of some Natural cause, as Proceeding from Melancholy; and
therefore to inform such who have so Judged, and to prevent others from the
like mistakes, I am constrained to give this forth as a Testimony to the Lords
great Love and Goodness, and I hereby do declare in the sense thereof, That the
Work that has been wrought in me is the Lords Work, and the Praise thereof is
to be given to him alone. And I do also further declare and Testify, that the
Lord in this the day of his great Love to my Soul, has been pleased to Discover
unto me diverse things, wherein I had disobeyed his Holy Law Written in my
heart, and which he did require me to forsake and part withal; but that which
in particular I find a concern to live upon my Spirit to give forth as a
public Testimony unto others, is, that the Lord has manifested unto me his
displeasure against my being concerned in making any Figured and Gaudy Stuffs,
whose end and Service was chiefly to satisfy the Vain and Proud Minds of Men
and Women, that live in disobedience to God, and that those things have their
rise and beginning, and are invented by man, whose Heart and mind is gone
astray from the Council of the Lord; and therefore by such as come to yield up
unto him, and take Council of his Holy Spirit, they are to be denied and turned
from, and we are not to reason with Flesh and Blood about those things, saying,
If I leave this way I know not how I shall get such a Maintenance for my
Family, as I now can; and if the Lord would make out a way for me in other
things; I could willingly part with this, and so are preferring their present
Prosperity here in this short and Transitory Life, before their Peace and
Eternal Comfort and Felicity with the Lord for ever. O my Friends, it is better
to have inward Peace with the Lord, and the Seal and Testimony of Faithfulness
born witness unto us, and in us, though we do suffer in the outward, then to
enjoy outward Comfort for a l^ttle season, and want inward Peace. My Friends it
is the Faith the Lord has given unto me, that those that are obedient unto
him, and bear a faithful Testimony for his Truth against that Spirit of Pride
and Wickedness that so much abounds in this our Age, they shall not want that
which is necessary for their support in the outward, and on the contrary they
that refuse to obey the Lord, and answer his requirings, and think by
continuing in that which grieves his Holy Spirit, to gather together, and
increase in Riches, the Lord is able to blast all their Increase when he
pleases: Therefore let all be persuaded to be faithful to the Lord, and turn
their hearts and minds to seek him above all things, as said our blessed Lord
to his Disciples, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness
thereof, and all other things that the Lord sees good for as shall be added as
his blessings. Let us not content our Selves with an outside show or Profession
of Religion, but let us every one be concerned to know and witness for our
selves, and in our selves, a being quickened and made alive to God, by the
Power of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, revealed in us by his holy Spirit,
that he may fit and prepare our Hearts to be a fit habitation for himself to
dwell in. For unless we come to witness this for our Selves, all our Faith is
in vain, and we are yet in our sins unredeemed from Corruption, and Christ
Jesus, by all that he has done and suffered, for the Salvation and Restoration
of poor lost Man, will in the end profit nothing to such a Soul, without
Unfeigned Repentance.

My Friends, I found a concern to lie upon me from the Lord to Testify this
unto you, being fully satisfied that those that are faithful unto the Lord God
in their own Particulars, will set to their Seals, that this my Testimony is
the Truth, and unto the Witness of God in every Man's Conscience, that will give
a right and true Judgment, do I commit my self and what I have testified to be
Judged not being concerned what Judgment the Carnal minded man may pass upon
me, for I seek not to please man but to serve and please the Lord my God is
that which now I do desire and press after, and unto whom alone for all his
Mercies and tender dealings toward my Soul, I do at this time render and
ascribe the praises and thanksgivings and honor, for he alone is worthy, says
my Soul, for ever and ever, who is over all the Works of his Hand, God blessed
in himself for ever, Amen.

This is given forth by one whom the Lord has plucked as a Brand out of the
Fire, and has made as a Monument of his great Mercy, who in the sense of his
Infinite Love is made a Lover of the Souls of all People, and therein Travails
for, and desires the good and welfare of all, but more especially those who
have in measure been made partakers of his Love, but have not been faithful
thereunto, that they might return unto the Lord before his day of Love be over,
this is the breathing and Cry of the Soul of your Well-wishing Friend,

HENRY LOMBE
Norwich the 20th. of the 11th. Month, 1693. This to be Read in the several
Monthly Meetings of Friends, in England or elsewhere.



London Printed by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in Holy-well-Lane,
Shoreditch. 1694.


