THE CASE OF WARE and SHERLEY As it was set forth in matter of FACT And argued
in several points of LAW in the Consistory of Dublin, in Michaelmas Term 1668.

BY Dudley Loftus, J. U. D.

^^blin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, in Castle-street, 1669.

SIR.
WE have with a most strict regard observed all requisits, even to the least
Circumstance of our duty, in prosecuting the Contumacy of the Defendent in this
Cause, so fair, as right practice, and the known rules of proceedings in this
Court, has instructed us, insomuch that you have upon our humble motion
pronounced him Contumacious in not appearing upon due Preconization ad
informandum, and in panam Contumaciae, you have decreed a procedure to the act
of information Contumacia ejus non obstante, for my part, I wish he were
present in juditio, that I might represent unto his Penetential thoughts an
Histcricall view of his great iniquities and thence less injuries my Client
has received from him thereby to bring him to a true sense of his sins and his
duty in Confessing his delicts, which indeed are such that if he were present,
none but a Tertullus who Cares not how bad the Cause be so the fee be good,
would presume to speak in his behalf, for were he strengthened with the
patronage of the best Advocates in the World, and assisted with all other
advantages which usually make Victory hopeful, nothing could be said in his
excuse, yet thus much he may be assured of, that though he be Contumaciously
absent, he shall not be overcome by a Sopracargo or any advantage of
prosecution, hitherto, or hereafter to be taken against him, unless it be, by
the burden of his own Crimes, nor shall I take the freedom of saying any more
in the stateing of this Cause then I would freely utter were he present; for my
representation of things of this Nature shall never be disproportioned like the
Evening Shadows, longer then the just dimensions of Truth, which I have always
esteemed as the Rubricks of the Missall, whereunto as the Ritualists observe,
it is more dangerous to add then to omit any part thereof, nor shall I describe
it in the imagery of an Orator, for it is our advantage to set it before you
and this Congregation in the plainness of a clear and naked representation. I
shall therefore deceive the expectation of those who think I am come to this
place to suborn Common attention with bravery of expressions, or to tickle the
Ears of the learned, with refined subtilties of Law and Scholastic discourses
my chiefest aim being rather to satisfy the bench in a sh^rt Discourse, then
the Curiosity of the standers-by in an unnecessary profusion of words, for I am
of the Arabian Authors Minds who: says there is no benefit (...) etc. Viz:
that cause may be suspected to want the patronage of Arguments which is pleaded
for, only with multiplicity of words, St: Chrysostom makes his entrance into
one of his Sermon's with this preparation to attention, Attendite diligenter
non enim rem Vulgarem vobis pollicemur, I shall upon the like engagement desire
the heedful attention of every one who is within the Compass of hearing me this
day, for I promise you (...) not any thing that falls within the ordinary
Occurrences of affairs, but things so horrid and dreadful to human ears, that
I have not any exaggeration of words great enough to express their
Exorbitancie, things seldom read of in Pagan antiquity, but so extraordinary
and beyond nature prodigious, that they are sufficient to astonish Heathens, and
make the most Barbarous Nations even the wild Irish and the Clangregores in
Scotland to blush; things so strange that the bashful modesty of an Advocate
style cannot reach unto, nay so far above the expressions of the boldest Poets
that there is not sufficient efficacy in all the words that ever the world made
use off, from the first instant of its existancy to this moment of its decrepit
Age, to express the nature of them, and should we outlive the period and
obsequies of time I am sure we should never hear of greater Barbarismes,
amongst which there is one of greatest remarque, a crime above the rest so
heinously flagitious, that the very name thereof, carries to every man's
understanding such a notion of horror, as it requires as much faith in the
Hearers to believe it, as it did wickedness in the offenders who perpetrated
it, the relation whereof may perhaps wring Tears out of those pale faced and
obdurat walls, put the Bench into a Swett, make the Bar to groan, bind up the
senses of the standers-by in the Stupidity of a dull amazement, and transport
my self to the utmost bounds of a sober passion whilst I in the recital find
an unaccustomd horror, entering into the Marrow of my shivering Bones, and
unusual resentments invadeing every part of my soul. I shall say no more in
General to excite your attention, but betake my self to the narratio facti,
wherein I am to set forth not only the fraud and violence which the Defendent
used against the Plaintiff in a most Prodigious rape, but also the impudence of
his Calumny in the jactitation of Marriage with her which I shall make good by
proofs amounting to a pitch of evidence abovel all possibility of
Contradiction, and then we shall desire the advantage which the Law affords in
that case, as well by the Courts declaring that there was no Marriage lawfully
Contracted between them, as by inflicting on him the just severity of the Law,
for his Correction and reformation, and our due reparation. Before I enter into
a recital of the Cause I hope I shall not be reckoned amongst the Perditempi
if by way of introduction I open a prospect into the Contingentia facti,
briefly glancing on the persons for the Disparity of their Condition will be of
force not only to show the improbability of her consent to Marry with him, but
also if the saying of Ariminensis be true ( viz: that) ex vilitate personae
offendentis crescit gravitas injuriae will much aggravat the rape and the
Contumely of his most impudent jactitation, of Marriage with her, which like
word gives a deeper Color to his offense and makes it above all respects
inexcusable: for of all the reproaches that Satan the old Calumniator Could
rake out of the foulest Channels of Hell, none could be greater or sharper in
her esteem, and therefore the Lacedemonian, who in Commending his Sword said it
was (...) sharper then Calumny, if he had ever experimented so sharp a Calumny
as this would not have made that Comparison. Whilst I speak of the Defendent, I
shall endeavor to Imitate Johannes Mylaeus a famous Iurisconsult of whom it
was said, ita veritatem amplectebatur, ut dicendi acerbitatem vitaret; As for
his fortune, I shall say nothing, for I am none of those who measure the
Sutableness of Matches by the rate of the subsidy books, nor do I think that
my Client in the choice of a Husband will tie her self so strictly to the rule
of Logic as to hold that a quantitate res dicuntur pares aut impares, we shall
therefore allow his Patrimony better then his Education or birth, which as
reports inform us is very Inconsiderable and far beneath her Extraction, he
being a man lately drawn out of the Lees of Poverty, and the obscurity of a
mean Condition, but of his Original I shall say nothing nor shall I urge any
more in the representation of him at present then what appears out of the
evidences taken in this Cause, which denote him to be in his Nature not only
as an impostume ready to burst with a tumid Plethorie of self Conceit, but as
a Monster possessed with a Legion of excessive hopes for spes alit agricolas, and
a Glutinous desire to raise himself to an Estate, in prosecution whereof, his
ambition Ridd on without Reyns of restreynt, until at last per fas aut ne fas,
he became Master of some Acres of Land, but then the Transportations of so
unexpected a prosperity, carried him so far above himself, that he scorned to
subject his Appetite to the Y^ak of reason, or to confine himself within the
bounds of Moderation, for rustica gens nescit habere modum, he then knows not
how to measure the height of his Fortune; but by a Precipice, and so becomes
the Ingeneer of his own Misfortunes, as being neither wise in the Choice of his
purposes, not prudent in the use of means, nor happy in the employment of
Instruments he setts on work for the Acchievment of his designs. In his
Conversation he has showed himself so frentless a a plece of Impudence that
shamerfaceness never cast her Veil on his Forehead; And so little remorse of
Conscience possesses his Soul that no sin seems to trouble him which he can
Veil or Mask from human perception. And such has been the lowness of his
mind that the hope of Interest did prevail more with him then the horror of
perpetual Infamy; For he cared not how great mischiefs he attempted, nor with
how much disgrace, So that his Indirect ends might be attained. Furthermore in
his Conversation, he was of so morose an humor, as that he deemed all Civil
Compliance with other men's humors, a crooked deformity from his own, He was
often subject to wrathful discomposures of mind and frequently hurried by the
giddy and rapid Violence of his passions to such a pass; as that he could
neither speak sense nor harken unto reason; Whilst he Evapourated the heat of
his inflamed Bowels, he was of so obdurat an heart that you might as soon Pump
water out of the hardest Rocks or dissolve them into streaming Fountains, as
draw a Tear of Compassion or sorrow from him, for he esteemed the bitterest
Tears of oppressed Women but as the fluid dropps of a sickly rheum; Again such
was his disposition that he was apt out of stomachfull hatred and revenge to
Vomit out spightfull untruths, and to brand his Neighbors with Calumnious
Impressions; In his amors he was sodestitute of reason and so much drowned in
Sensuality that force and rigor were the only Arguments he used to invite
Consent, seeking ratherby the insolency of a rude Carriage and peremptory
menaces to Vex Women to a Compliance then by soft persuasions or the Courtship
of fair Language civilly to allure them, and when Lust Commanded the exercise
of his Libidinous Limbs, he had no regard to Maidenchastity. I know that
Praescientia non ligat res in eventum; Yet if it were Convenient by a Judicial
prognostication to foretell the tendency and success of affairs, I might
perhaps tell him that his Horoscope has cast so Ghastly a Glance upon his
Nativity as does portend a direful event, and would if published to his notice
like the Fumes of Mercury and Orpiment loosen his joints to tremblings and
distortions, and make him in your opinion like the Materia prima which as
Aquinas I. Par. q. 5. Art. 3. ob. 3. Says non habet rationem appetibilis sed
appetentis tantum, what I have said Concerning the Defendent is rather cross to
my Natural Inclination then a digression: for to speak to any man's prejudice
agrees noe otherwise with me then as Motion to light or heavy Bodies Quibus
non Competit moveri nisi secundum quod sunt extra dispositionem naturae. Aquin:
p: 1: q: 18. but the prosecution of my subject has directly led me thereunto,
and I finding so great a Concours of people took the advantage of so many
Witnesses to show you how little probability there is, that any Woman should
Consent to marry with a man so dangerously qualified, especially my Clyent,
whom I am now to represent unto you, as she is, and therefore, so different
from his Nature and qualifications, that you will easily conceive, that it were
as likely to bring two parallel Lines together as to conjoyne these two in
Marriage, for every one knows that a Judicious woman may be resembled to our
sense which as St. Thomas observes delectatur rebus debite Proportionatis and
that it is in Marriage as it is in Music Quo voces sunt propinquiores sibi
invicem, eo meliorem Conflant symphoniam for which reason it is said that the
Jonick and Hyper Jonick moods agree better in Music, then the Jonick and
Dorick, which agrees with justitia Condecentiae mentioned in the Schoolmen
which tunes up the hearts of Married people to a Melodious unisone; I am now to
draw the other line of the parallel in a true representation of my Client,
whereby it will appear the disproportion between them is too great to be
reduced to an adjustment and that she could not without renounceing the Honor
of her Birth, and putrisiing the memory of her Ancestors, level her Affections
to the meanness of his despised bed, which cannot be made Jsoperimetricall to
her quality, and that they were no more likely to agree in a maritall State,
then Contraries can be Lodged together in their most intent degrees; nor more
likely to be Conjoined in affections then the literae Illegabiles in the
Persian writings. To speak of her Birth and with my words to Magnify her in
remembrance of the many Virtues and honors which have shined with great
Brightness as well in her Mothers as in her Fathers family would be to no more
purpose then to show light to the Sunn, or to breath on a perfect Diamond, and
to speak of her fortune would be to publish that, which is already well known;
Therefore I shall trans-fer my self from that Consideration of dissimilitude
between them, unto her Education and Personal endowments, She had her Education
altogether under her Mother who was not only a great pattern of Virtue and
Modesty, but a severe instructor of her in the rudiments of Religion the rules
of Morality and all principles of Virtue and Honor, under whose Discipline she
was kept in as strict a regularity as if she had been a Carmelite or a
Carthusian, as is well known to many who hear me: insomuch that from her
infancy she was so brought up, as to esteem chastity the Richest Jewel of the
Femal Sex, wherefore she has been so well fixed by Education in the center of a
Chaste resolution, that she could never be drawn (by persuasions or any other
moral inducements of delight commodity or advancement that the World could
suggest unto her) to Yield to the bent of any exorbitant Lust or Immodest
desire, and since the death of her Good Mother, she has always professed that
she never thought her will could be carried in its proper Orb, but when it was
placed in the good likeing of her nearest Relations and discreetest Friends,
according to whose precepts and Admonitions she endeavored strictly to
conform her deportment in all things, she is not therefore like the young
Women of St. Frianos Gate in Florence, nor was she when the Defendent unhappily
knew her, like the practiceing Dames of Paris, who find nothing new or strange
the first night of their Marriage, nor was she any of those pretenders only to
Chastity, who have sold their Virginities as often as new made Priests do their
first Mass, but I may say in a very high degree of well grounded confidence,
that notwithstanding her late misfortune she is not only an approved example
but also a wonder of Chastity; The like whereof will not perhaps be left upon
the Records of this Age (all circumstances concurring) to the view of
Posterity, insomuch that she may be perfectly resembled to the pretty Ermin
which had rather expose its self to the hazard of Death by the Hunters
Violence, then seek the preservation of life in the ways of defilement; So
much of her Education in Virtue and modesty, which gives her a large claim to
the knowledge of a worthy deportment: And now I am to slide into the
consideration of some of her most remarkable qualifications which I shall
briefly set forth in the light of Truth but not in the splendour of Eloquence.
In the first place she having been instructed that an Estate without Virtue and
merit is but a Testimony of good Fortune and no Advancement to felicity, she
has not only endeavored to keep her self by a Modest retirement out of the
bad Customs which over whelmed this Age, but also has Labored the exornation
of her self, with all qualities belonging to a Gentlewoman; So that to speak
Negatively of her per remotionem imperfectionis, she is not blinded with
passion nor puffed up with Pride, nor precipitated by ambition, nor tickled by
vain glory, nor melted by pleasures, nor inflamed by Lusts, nor enraged with
revenge, nor turmoyl'd by Ambition; And again to describe her positively, for
the comeliness of her Statute, Figure, Port, Gate, Complexion, Countenance,
Promptness of wat, and a fluent Tongue the ready and clear inte peter of her
ingenuous conceptions, there are few of her Age who go beyond her; I am
resolved against inlargements of discourse otherwise I might speak diffusively
of all these her laudable indowments, as also of her affability which is the
Mother of affection, of her courtly accomplishments consisting in a
proportionable agreeableness and compliance with all commendable or tolerable
dispositions; If any shall object that the above recited qualities are baits
which float upon the water without a hook and do rarely catch Husbands, to this
I reply that she has in surplusage of these a noble Estate sufficient to
recommend her to the prime or at least the second rate of Husbands in the
Kingdom: and therefore putting all together, I leave it to consideration
whether a Lady so highly qualified and advanced above the Defendent in all
respects, could comport in Marriage with a man of so mean an Estate and so
contrary dispositions and habits of mind, in the mean time, I rest confident
that if he had been crowned with the Royal state and imperial command of all
the Kingdoms upon Earth in their most Flourishing condition and pacifique
possession, and if she by Marrying him might have enjoyed that universal
Dominion the length of the worlds duration she would never have consented to
the Fetters of his embraces.

I am now nearer approaching to the thing in hand, and am in the first place to
reduce into a succinct and Methodicall Narrative the beginning progress and
conclusion of the whole matter of Fact, as well for the information of the
Court; as to satisfy the curious inquisition of the People so far at least as
it is convenient to stamp a figure of so foul a fact in their imagination; for,
as it was wisdom in Galen not to leave behind him too subtle a Theory of
Poison, least he should thereby give occasion for the too ready practice
thereof, So I dare not be too particular in relating the many subtilties and
contrivances which the Defendent used in this affair, least bad inclinations in
others may be too fully instructed to act the like evils, If I should afford
them too broad an inspection extended to all circumstances, the (...) And my
first rise is, that the Defendent forgetting the aforementioned disparity
between him and my Client grew up to so high a conceit of himself, as that he
presumed to make adresses to her in the way of Marriage, which he seemed to
prosecute with very much instance and solicitation: but my Client, though she
was young, and not arbitress of her condition, yet knowing how to make a just
estimat of her self, and finding nothing in him that might fit him for her
acceptance, she immediately desired him to discharge his mind of such vain
hopes, and afterward he renewing his motion to the same purpose, she repel'd
him with severity and contempt; not out of a feigned unwillingness, but a real
aversion, and never after looked upon him but with a careless disdain loathing
and detestation, and withal assureing him that it was as easy to blow Flint
into flames with a pair of Bellows, as to kindle any flames of love in her by
the breath of his solicitations, for his fairest words were as harsh to her
ears as the noise of Pea-cocks, and she took no more delight to see him, then
sore eyes do to behold the Sun in its Meridional altitude, she hated him as a
Jew does Images, or a Nonconformist a Surplice, she feared him as a Monster
and avoided him as the Plague; Accounting his company as pestilential as the
infectious exhalations of the Dogs star, or the Malign influence of a Comet:
And indeed it many times happens that men advanced above desert from a low
degree are like those Exhalations which being raised from Dung-hills become
Comets of a direful influence: hereupon the Defendent finding that the more he
reinforced his attempts the more she stiffned the bent of her resolution
against him; insomuch that her softest answers were so far from giving him
hopes, that they did exceedingly increase his despair, and that there did not
remain in her disposition the least complyant softness which might be wrought
to his desire, And that nothing was to be expected from her but what an
inexorable necessity could extort, and he being rigidly resolved to use
arguments of force, where force of his arguments would not prevail, he sharpened
his revenge as a Persian Author says (...) on the Whetstone of his petrified
heart, and put himself upon a design as Barbarous and haynously flagitious as
the malice of a disappointed Ambition could invent, or the greatest cruelty
perpetrate; And that executed in such manner as never any man who had his face
washed at a Christian Font, especially a Protestant did own. I see ye begin to
wonder at what I say, but that your thoughts may be the less transported into
admiration, ye may be pleased to remember what Salvianus has said viz. That
some in his time were Christians only in opprobrium and Contumeliam
Christianorum, in such sense the Defendent may perhaps profess himself a
Protestant, but to proceed I must tell you how he advanced from design to
endeavor, and from endeavor to act the greatest violation and injury upon my
Client, that she was capable of receiving, (for the greatest torments that
Tyrants have invented, or Martyrs suffered, are not to be compared with the
Violation of Virginity) first of all therefore by a slye and crafty
insinuation, he winds himself into a familiar, though seeret Acquaintance with
her Maid whom then she took to be a plain faithful and obsequious servant, but
afterward in the event, proved a ci, ce, Medea, a Sphinx, a mere shop of
subtilties, a practiced Medianera or instrument in abomination: he proceeds so
far as to Bribe this Maids good will to the favoring of his lust in the
betraying of her Mistress, and draws her so far along with him, as that she had
at length not only a finger in his Plott, but was also engaged therein up to
the Elbowes; and with as much endeavor as secrecy, industriously served his
design, which was then as much hidden from the Plaintiffs observation, as is
the middle of a right line from our sight when the raye of Vision falls upon
the Extension, according to the diffinition of a right line thus given in the
Persian Language by Machmad Shah Cholgi (...) and after they had a long time
wrought in the Vaults of darkness, they contrive by a fraudulent abduction to
deliver her to the disposal of his force and Violence, the Maid therefore
pretends an importunat invitation from her sister to supp at her house in
New-street, as a Skreen to the private design of her abduction: my Client was
at first very backward in her Inclination to go thither, yet at length through
much persuasion she condiscended to that, which, so great an importunity had
urged her to, and promised to go; Whereupon a Coach was prepared, and thither
she went, where without the least shadow of suspicion, she was entertained
until about eight of the clock at night, and then as well out of her own
inclination, as out of a desire to conform to her Parents will, who could not
endure her being out late, she was desirous to repair homewards and betakes her
self to her Coach, which being put into motion (as she thought homeward) she
fell occasionally into earnestness of discourse with her Maid, which together
with the darkness of the night so surprised her animadvertency of the way, that
she never doubted whether she was going, until at last, hearing some noise she
put her head out of the Coach, and then though the night was mantled in much
darkness, she discovered that she was carried beyond Lt. Coll. Fernlyes house
in St. Cavans-street, and there besett with an armed Troop or Squadren of Horse
consisting of about eight Horsemen, who seemed to be as void of reason as they
were predigall of words, which together with their rude compulsion used in
hurrying on the Coachman intimating their intent on to carry her away by force
besides this she observed then in the Carriage of her Maid more then ordinary
cause to suspect her fide^ity, and moreover the appearance of the Defendent who
at the same time flash't terror out of the angry Caverns of his Pumified face,
cast the greatest injections of horror into her terrified fancy: hereupon cold
fear seized the blood in her veins, and hudled together her thoughts and
spirits in such a confused amazement, as that she lost the succors of her
usual reason, and knew not well what resolution to take, then thinking it too
Insignificant an utterance of her grief, to express it only in the common
evidence of tears or to sigh out the sense thereof with a moderate, Woe is me!
she according to the sharpness of her Resentments cried out with the utmost
extent of a roaring exclamation, imploring aid and pity, but they who would not
hear her with patience, nor answer her with respect, like the bloody
sacrificers of their Children to Molech in the fire, drowned her lamentations
with the greatest shouts and most obstreperous noyses they could make, least
her complaints being understood, she should be rescued. I leave you therefore
to imagine what strange impressions were now begotten in this weak and timorous
young Woman, affrighted with the dreadful face of a present confusion, and the
fore imagined forms of futurein creasing troubles, whilst they with their
Menacing incitations adding speed unto the Coach-mans pace, every step of her
rapid progress represented new horrors to her imagination, insomuch that she
being now carried beyond hope of succor from the Town, and destitute of all
assistance that could Minister defense or rescue unto her in the Country; And
there being then, no hope of escape to any Sanctuary, she being guarded as
strictly by these Ruffians as was the Holy Sepulcher by the Pharisees: She was
transported out of her senses into a deep soon, but shortly after returning out
of that Ecstasy, she Meditated deeply with her new recollected senses, which
advised her to fortify her fainting resolution, and rather to make use of the
force of reason then the Vehemence of passion; and thereupon she changed her
angry and loud Exclamations, into soft and mild persuasions, hopeing thereby to
alter the by as of their rigid Inclinations into a Compassionat sense of her
sufferings, and certainly had not their consciences been seared with the
hottest Iron in the Devils forge they would have been touched with a sense of
her grief, which would have wrung tears out of a Marble statute, but alas her
softness of speech served but as a burning Glass to inflame the passions of
some of them and the softness of her words where they most prevailed, were
applied as water cast upon a Smiths forge, which makes it burn inward with more
intension for a time, but afterwar^s break out with a greater eff^amation, she
then found the Arabian saying true which sounds thus (...) Viz. Where power is
wanting endeavor is vain she therefore remains groaning under the deplorable
increase of her miseries whilst they in a rude and unmercifull courage, force
the Coachman to incite his Horses to a swiftter course; by this time darkness
had muffled up the face of the world in a hood of obscurity as dark as Pitch,
she being then only happy in not being able to discern the Defendent, but much
more unhappy in wanting light how to avoid him, she then attempts the throwing
of her self twice or thrice out of the Coach, either to end her grief with her
life, or to escape by the obscurity of the night, but still she was prevented
by the strictness of the guard they held over her, wherefore being now
constrained to obey the overruling force of a violent and invincible necessity,
she must sit still in the Coach melting her thoughts into the bitter Juice of
tears, as if she had bin of the Hyades who wept themselves to death, and as
every step of her rapid course was a variation of her misery, so sometimes she
implores pity from them, and sometimes she cries aloud for help from the
Country, until at last in the swift course of so great a violence she was
drawn beyound the conduct of her own inclinations, so far almost as the Bridge
of Donogh-brook, where they forced her out of the Coach with intent to put her
behind one of the Horsemen, but then, she being transported beyond her
ordinary temper by so just a cause of Indignation, and being prepared to run
through all accidents of fortune, and desirous rather to precipitat her self
into a nee^er and more certain danger of death in resistance, then to be
carried away further into their merciless power, she managed that relics of
her remaining strength to the utmost of resistance, and though winter had then
cast its cold influence in great extremity on the earth, she cast her self into
the deep and miery Highway where she remained so long kneeling in the mire as
if her knees had bin rooted in that posture, and strugled with them in that
place, even to the Laceration and tearing of her Clothes and the loss of such
Ornaments as she carried about her, all which time she did with a loud and
shrill voice represent unto the affirighted Neighbors the sad accents of her
oppressed heart, expressing its self in sighs groans and most lamentable
outcries, proclaiming her protestations to the world against her going along
with them, or ever to consent to marry the Defendent, sed sola erat in agro,
Clamavit, and nullus affuit qui liberaret eam, at length they persuaded her to
a belief of that which they confirmed with many oaths, which was their promise
to bring her immediately to Dublin in case she would afterward permit the
Defendent to address himself unto her, and she being then tired even to the
loss of breath and unable to make any further considerable resistance, told
them that on the terms offered, she would admit of his addresses in Dublin,
whereupon she was put behind one of the Horsemen, but as soon as she was
mounted on horseback she found clearly that all promises though confirmed by
oath stood for Ciphers in their accounts, for she was immediately tied with
Tenacious knots of strong ligaments to one of the most Churlish and most
Robustious Horsemen amongst them, who with the rest of that Rude Company,
carried her away all that night, when according to their irregular revolutions,
of their sundry passions, and the variety of her interchangeable misfortunes,
sometimes a disturbed imagination stopped the passages of her speech, and
sometimes new and sharp resentments gave her a voice to cry out, at length that
no parcel of Calamity might be wanting to increase her misery, they declining
the highways as Heralds do in Italy, bring her through the solitudes of a
Country so ruinous and desolate, so void of enclosures and habitations and so
unfrequented that the highways were not distinguishable from the rest of the
land, not improperly resembling the Arabian deserts, where the Caravan Pilgrims
from Damascus to Mecca find out their way by the compass and Stars: at last
when she might have grown into some doubt of the School-mens doctrine, de
nemine desperandum in via, almost starved with hunger and cold, she arrived at
a Cottage about twenty miles from the City, where being taken from her horse, a
most every limb of her as it were complying with the unwillingness of her mind,
wanted sense and motion to carry her into the house, so that they rather out of
necessity then an officious civility carried her into that dismal Pagliarella
or Cottage, where, as before^ every stepp of her wandering abduction was but a
variation of her unhappiness; so now every minute of her abode in one place, is
to produce, if not more, at least greater misfortunes; for dureing his
Commoration in this place, she is encountered with necessities as well as
force, and inward perplexities of mind, as well as outward inconveniences of
body, in relation whereof I shall be brief, least they prove as troublesome to
you as they were grievous to her; For I am assured that neither you nor this
auditory could easily swallow the tediousness of my discourse should I handle
all at length, for long discourses will not be received by them so easily as
Welsh-women swallow down Flummery, nor would they all be as easily credited by
a tired auditory, for they are indeed much like the Cloisters of the Temple
whereof a Greek Author says thus (...) as incredible to those who saw them
not, as they were an amazement to those who did but much more to the aflicted
sufferer whose abode in that place was like that of Purgatory where durante
Commoratione there is nothing but torture and forment, for here she did not
only suffer under a total disfurnishment of all accomodations fitting for a
person of her quality, as want of competent fire to oppose the rigid season of
the year, food to uphold her, and convenient bedding to repose her self on,
but also she was Molested with terrors of death and other horrible
affrightments, but these were nothing in respect, of what she first suspected
in the agitation of her mind and afterward found too true in the event, for
not only the care of preserving her Virginity pierced her Brain, but also the
fear of loosing it transfixt her heart, but what was worst of all is yet to be
spoken off whereunto I shall descend by degrees, hoping that you will pardon my
Language, if it chance to be sullyed in the representation of so foul a fact
for as it will not become me to adulterat truth in the description of a rape;
so I must not Mutilat my Clients cause in cutting off any thing that is
essentially requisite yet it shall not be said of me as it was said of Zazius,
Verbis inquinatis significantibus tamen utebatur, noe, I shall rather decline
propiety of terms in representation of obscene actions for they are in some
sort like the verity of faith which as Actisiadorensis observes, auctores
melius exprimunt per vocem non significatiuam quam per vocem significatiuam, at
the first entrance into the house she found the now Defendent in a feverish
fervor of mind, as sullen as a Bull-finch, and as surly as a Lion,
evaporating like Elna or Mongibello out of his inflamed bowels the discontented
passions of his disapponted ambition, shortly after his countenace and undecent
gestures did interpret his design to violate her Virgin Modesty, which more
clearly after appeared, by the more express explication of his words,
soliciting her to unchaste embraces, whereby she feared, that he having gone so
far, would not find rest but in extremes, thefore her Caution put a strict
watch on his behavior all that day having as great a regard to every of his
motions as Astrologers have to the Planet Dominant, and and when night began to
wrapp them in darkness from the eye of the world, she being more willing to
prevent ravishing by Death then to survive ravished, and being as fearful that
her weakened body had not sufficient power to resist, as she was assured she had
not patience to endure the dishonor of a rape, she resolved to be her own
Executioner, choosing rather to cast her self headlong, into the dark-Dungeon
of the Grave, then to submit, as a tame sacrifice to his lust: wherefore she
made a shift to convey into the straw that was assigned unto her for her bed, a
Sword, with intention either to distroy him or her self in case he should
dangerously attemmpt her Chastity.

Observe I beseech you, Joseph did leave his cloak behind him (in a strumpets
hand, rather then he would yield to her lewd inticements, Lucretia suffered
Ravishment, and afterward became her own Executioner, but this grand exemplar
and sublime pattern of Chastity, whose fear did produce effects of courage,
being as willing to part with her life, as Joseph was to forsake his Garment,
to preserve her Chastity, the richest Jewel of the female sex, did so far
exceed Lucretia the wonder of Roman Chastity, that she did not only choose
freely to give up her life, by a Noble Anticipation, to prevent that mischief
which Lucretia survived, but also would rather have expired in a generous
resistance then suffer the hazard of a disgraceful Succubition and
Compression, I am not willing to arrest your attention with any long discourse
foraign to a bare Narrative of the matter of Fact, yet before I proceed further
therein I shall beg leave to interpose a short parenthesis in justification of
the Ladies intention in particular, and of their practice who have hastened
their own death, to prevent the intolerable disgrace of Ravishment, hopeing it
will not be accounted a troublesome or useless digression,

I shall therefore in a word or two humbly offer to your judicious censure,
what I conceive is at this time suitable to that subject, and may serve for the
future to conduct the conscience in any case where persons shall be reduced to
the deplorable election, of suffering Ravishment, or of laying violent hands on
themselves.

I know that the learned Tailor late Lord Bishop of Down, in his cases of
Conscience does so much cry down a voluntary dying to preserve chastity, that
he says it is no other thing then to sin to avoid sin, which he compares to
Fannius his case of fear, Mortisque timorem,
Morte fugant ultroque vocant venientia fata.
and making use of these words of St. Chrysostom to leap into the Sea for fear
of Ship wrack, and to dye before the wound is given, he at last concludes in
this comparison that to do violence to our body to preserve it chaste is as the
burning of a Temple to prevent its being profaned, he might have expressed
himself as elegantly in the words of the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in
another case, if he had resembled such an act by the starting horse, that to
shun a shadow lept into a precipice. I know also that St. Hierome on these
words, Jonas. i. Mittile me in Mare expresses himself thus much in favor of
that learned Bishops opinion, non est nostrum, mortem arriperesed illatam ab
aliis accipere, unde and in Persecutionibus nonlicet propria manu perire, that
is to say, we must not snatch death with our own hands, but receive it when it
is imposed by others, and therefore in persecutions we must not dye by our own
hands, so much St. Hierome in defense of the Bishop.

I cannot Justify the Ladies intention but in opposing the Bishops opinion,
and by answering the allegation of St. Hierome, which seems in the sound of
words to make so much for him.

To answer therefore the allegation out of St. Hierome is a thing that will
easily be done, for the limitation of his words by an exceptive clause
immediately subjoyned to what is alleged, viz, non licet propria perire manu
running in these precize terms viz, absque eo ubi Castitas periclitatur, brings
St. Hierome to my side, and declares him opposite to the Bishop, and therefore
if the judgment of that ancient and most learned Father, be as weighty a
testimony to Truth as the opinion of the Bishop; I need say no more to bring
both Scales at least to a Contrapeso or aequilibrium; but to weigh down the
same with more pressure of argument on our side, I shall cast in a soprapeso
compacted of Law, illustrious examples and due applause of those who in such
streights have hastened their death.

The Law is clearly expressed in the words of Paulus libro undecimo recited in
the ff. l. isti quidem. (). quod si dederit, where the subject being violation
of Chastity, it is said, viris bonis iste metus Major quam mortis esse debeat.
i. e. he that fears to loose his Chastity, fears more justly then he who fears
the loss of life.

As for presidents I shall not being into example those w^o for less causes
hastened their deaths, as the Prisoner of whom Seneca tells us that being to be
exposed to wild Beasts in the Theater, he broke his neck in the spondels of the
Wheel wherewith he was drawn; nor Sampson Saul or Razis^ who are usually
alleged as common Vouchers to prove that a man may hasten his own death.

Be pleased to recall into your Memory that which Bishop Tailor if he were
alive could not deny; That when the Muscovites, broke into Livonia, and in
their sacking of the City Wenden used all manner of Cruelties, and Barbarous
immanities to Men and Women, filling all the streets and houses with blood and
Lust, a great many of the Citizens then running to the Castle, blevv up
themselves with their Wives and Children to prevent those horrors and flames
of lust, which they abhorred more then death.

I am sure you cannot forget the example of Pelagia mentioned by St.
Chrysostom, which comes home to our case. Pelagia virgo quindecim annos nata
sponte sibi necem maturavit, parata quidem ^rat ad Cruciatus tormentaque and
omne suppliciorum genus perferendum, sed metuebat ne virgininatis Coronam
perderet, i. e. She being a Virgin of fifteen years of age, of her own accord
she hastened death to her self, she was indeed ready to have suffered all sorts
of most exquisite Torments, but she would not loose the Crown of her
Virginity.

So much may serve for the Legality and illustrious Examples, of hastening
Death to prevent Violation of Chastity.

I shall now make it appear that it is not only lavvfull and according to good
examples, but a so just and very commendable from the further discourse of St.
Chrysostom on that occasion, hence you may perceive says he, that the lust of
wicked Hangmen struck fear into Pelagia, and therefore from their injurious
lust the Maiden removed and snatched her self, having had a just cause by her
Voluntary death to prevent so great an injury, as the loss of her Virginity: it
is also reported by Laurentius Muller that the Act of the forementioned
Livonians who hasted their own deaths to escape the lust of the Muscovites, was
by the rest of their Countrymen, and even by the Muscovites themselves reputed
Excellent and admirable, and Bishop Tailor himself confesses that the
Authority of the book Macabees Commends with great applause the of Razia as
glorious and great.

I having thus showed you that the preservation of Chastity by Voluntary death
may be justified by Law practiced by Saints, and commended by great good and
wise men; I shall now only observe unto you that the last Consideration which
is commendation of good holy and learned men, is the prime Argument which the
same Bishop uses to legitimate the Stratagem of a lie, or the prevaricateing
with a sullen truth, to save a a man's life, in his cases of Conscience lib. 3.
cap. 2. n. 10.

And now I am to return from this digression into the direct path of
prosecuting my Narrative in which I may now justly tell you that her intention
had undoubtedly succeeded in execution had not her treacherous Maid now
apperaing an exercised Agent in the affairs of abomination privily took away
the svvord which was sheathed above the hilt in the Straw, whereby she
became disabled to offend him or defend herself. I observe that the Auditory is
already transported into admiration, but I shall say as did Charicleia in
Heliodorus (...) i.e. Do ye vvonder at these things? these are yet greater
which I am to relate: After this, she being much wasted by the abundant
shedding of tears which some Philosophers term the sweat of an afflicted
heart, and the excessive decay of her spirits by long wakeing, and relying upon
the sworn promise of her Maids watchfulness, and the presumed humanity of the
Family, she composed her self to a posture of rest, but alas the sleep of
Condemned Criminalls, and of women begirt with a straight Seige by a Barbarous
Enemy was not more disturbd then hers, for that which should have afforded her
rest to the reparation of her strength, served only to affright her
imagination: until at last in reality she found her self surprised by a
Barbarous attempt of the Defendent to ravish her, she then in that Conflict
sought for the Instrument of Death in the Straw, but found quickly that it was
subtracted by her Maid, she was then plunged into a most desperate perplexity of
mind, which had been enough to have swallowed all hopes of help had not her
Vigorous reluctance been seconded with an accident which happened at that very
time, which was a sud dain raging sire that took hold on the Thatch of the
house. Though she then escaped the danger by quenching the Luxuriant heat of
his imodest desires per jgnis appositionem yet you may well imagine what
direful impressions of fear and horror, were begotten in the timorous mind
of this distressed Lady, for then she wished that the happy accident which had
put fire to the house, had also put her adversary into a flameing combustion:
or that by a sudden incineration it had reduced her into Ashes. When the flame
ceased, and her afflicted mind remained under the terror of these
imaginations, her Treacherous Maid faced with the Vizar of a smiling
countenance persuaded her again to repair unto her rest, assuring her that she
would lie by her, and with her vigilance and assistance would secure her from
the violence of the Defendent. wherefore being ready to faint in her spirits
for want of sleep she suffered her self to be persuaded to yield to that which
she perceived unresistably seizing upon her, but the Maid which should have
been her preservation proved her destruction, insomuch that it was then with
her as it was once with the Jews in the Siege of Jerusalem according to the
words of a Persian Author, (...) remedium vitae causa mortis erat they both
therefore lie upon the Bed of Straw, and after a while, the Maid most
traitorously withdraws her self after the manner of Piantone which is partire
senza licenza e abandonare un amico, to part without taking leave; and like a
thorough paced Beast in iniquity yields her place to the libidinous Defendent:
who surprised the person of my slumbring Client with all endeavor he could use
to deprive her of her precious Virginity: she then awakned rather to an
amazement then out of Sleep resisted him with the greatest opposition she could
make, crying out for assistance, whilst her Maid behaved her self as an
unconcerned person, as if she had been one of the Daughters of Martinus Amelius
or of the Family of the Achtsniets the people of the house terrified by so
great a force as was then over them, gave noe help to her; but rather with a
Cowardly silence seemed to approve that villainous fact; which otherwise I
believe in common Charity they would have loudly declaimed against, dureing
which time also his accursed Accomplices not only encouraged him in the pursuit
of his lust by polluted discourses, more loathsome then the sulphurious
evaporations of Hell, useing such words as might have moved Lucretia Portia or
Penelope to Luxury, but also helped him and disabled her in such Barbarous
manner as that I may modestly express my self only in the words of Hydaspes to
Claricleja dicere non possum caeterum vobis relinquo Consider andum, at last
having benumbed her Senses with the bruising of all her limbs as if he had been
of the opinion which was tracqued to an eminent Person yet liveing by a
Curtesan of honor in Rome, called Nina Barcarola who not being so courteous to
that Person as to others, he caused her to be publicly whipped in Rome,
whereupon she writ a letter unto him setting forth that the reason of his
severity to her, was, that he might take the more delight in her, for as much
as Carne battuta was piu saporita flesh that was beaten was most savory.

Now the two Combatants as it were entangled in a Close, she was overmatcht by
the prevalent force of his Lust; which governed the functions of his Libidinous
limbs, and he like a stiffned pillar took such advantage of her imbecility,
that breaking the Seal of her secrets he blasted the verdent Laurel of her
Virginity by Carnal knowledge of her, in which act as it was said of Lewis the
12th of France his acting with his Queen, he did rather possess then enjoy her,
for I am most Consident upon the Credit of her own relation and other
inducements of belief, that She took no more pleasure in that Compression and
Coniungment, then a toothless Old woman would have done in chewing an hard
crust. Manycircumstances of this foul fact I am forced to put into oblivion for
want of terms to express them and my words fail me and I want expression to
set forth her resentments of them, yet it is easy for you to conceive in what
manner she lamented the rigor of her misfortunes reflecting as well on the
shame of her living friends as on the memory of those deceased: for as St.
Hierom said of Nepotianus, o Faelix Nepotianus qui haec non videt, so may she
say of her good Mother and her Honorable Grandfather lately deceased, whose
memory remains and will always be preserved in honor, that they were
seasonably taken off the Stage of this world before this misery might have
befallen them, for undoubtedly they would have shrunk into horror to have seen
this day.

The matter is not yet ended, much is reserved for the latter Scene of this
prodigious Tragedy, for the Accomplices of the Defendent do now boisterously
endeavor to persuade her, that the only means to remedy this Blemish and to
repair the ruins of her Fame, was to join the Ordinance of God to so foul a
fact and to marry with the Defendent; but she though in the depth of her
perplexities was judiciously convinced that to have married him afterward,
was, but to turn a green wound into a Fistula or an Exulceration, and therefore
protested against it with as great detestation as she could express, whilst the
Defendent seemed rather to boast of, then to blush at so foul a fact.

You are now informed of a rape so Barbarous, so prodigious, that if it were
possible to collect the voices of all Nations together, the Defendent would be
Condemned by the suffrages of all mankind, unless the Enormonsness of the fact
might authorize his Crime, or he might be made innocent, by the Circumstances
that did mainly aggravate it; or unless his force were as able to abrogate as
to break the Law: for of all vices appertaining to the Flesh says Ottauiano
Zuccaro, non e nissuno vitio checon esso seco porti piu puzzolente infamia.

I am now to inform you that the Defendent at last thinks it necessary to
overspred with forged pretenses, the broad face of so great a Crime, and
therefore he would palliat the rape under the color of Marriage with the
Actrix. Novatus consecrated himself a Bishop, and the Defendent might as well
have Married himself, if Conjugal relations might have been made up (...) but
that would not serve his turn, he wants two things, first of all the consent of
my Client, secondly Celebration of Marriage: the first he endeavored, but
found it too difficult to obtain, the latter he thought easy to Compass by a
forged License, he therefore in the first place applies himself to her by all
Arguments he could take from the ordinary and known topics of persuasion to
gain her Consent, but she refusing Compliance, he cast a dismal Frown on his
Counterance and in most furious accents of speech menaced her, sometimes to
send her to Gallway, and sometimes threatened her with expatriation, telling her
that he would immediately send her into France by a Ship then in her view, which
he pretended he had prepared for that purpose, all this did not prevail,
therefore he resorts to his instrument of force that incutiendo timorem, he
might at least screw her up ad consensum non contradictionis, and prevails by
what means I am unwilling to instance in, with a Priest, to attempt Marrying of
them, in pronouncing some words of the Office of Matrimony, which he did utter,
notwithstanding that she had by many absolute words and express and infallible
signs (and in particular as you have heard by throwing with contempt the ring
forceably placed on her finger into the chimny) made sufficient indications of
her dissent, even then when the Frowns of many angry and menaceing foreheads
would have restrained her from the freedom of a plenary Contradiction. The
matter being thus done, he knew well enough that it was not the loosing of
Virginity but conjugal alliance that made a Marryage: for it is a rule of law
that nuptias non concubitus sed consensus facit, he was also sufficietly
persuaded that the words of a Priest do not operat any thing as to the
Celebration of Marriage without the lawful consent and mutual union of wills,
and that the Priest could do no more without he consent in this case then if
Poncionello had acted the part of a Priest, yet he being desirous as I said
before to Cover his offense, and perhaps stirred up some what by his
disappointed passion, to consult with malice that restless Hag and Mother of
calumny, he endeavors by public impressions of Calumnious jactitations, at
several times and in sundry places to make the world believe that she was his
Lawful Wife, and to insinuate it with the greater verisimilitude into the
belief of the popularese he caused several letters to be written intimateing a
pretended Marriage, at last he brings her to the Town poorer then a Carthusian
and leaner then a Romish lent, with intention to keep her secretly within his
power until he might assure himself of her affection, but at her first
entrance into the Town she was by Gods providence so happy as to meet a
friend of hers, by whose happy assistance and the Lord of Arans favor and
prudence she was immediat-restored to liberty, and then she began to act her
Part. liberis habenis, and in the first place the same day she came to Town
maks a protestation against the force and Injuries offered her in Authentic
form of Law, which as it was not possible to do it sooner, so she could not
well have delayed it longer.

Sir: I know that Calumny is less regarded since it became so commonly
interwoven in the dialect of these times, and that it was never very operative
with wise men, where it was not accompanied with an opinion of sincerity in the
Author, and I likewise know that this Calumny of jactitation of Marryage with
my Client, is but a lying imputation proceeding from the disappointed ambition
of him, who is but a profligat person, whose breath is sufficient almost to
infect the air and stayn the glory of the stars, yet my Client seeming thereby
to be sullyed in her Credit, which touches her in in the tenderest and most
inward part of her concernment, and being as unwilling to conceal her
misfortune as she was unable to lie under the imputation of so foul a Calumny
in this Age, wherein most ears are as Credulous as his tongue is licentious,
applies her self to this honorable Court, as the proper and free streaming
Fountain of Justice, wherein she now casts her self to wash out the stains of
her wounded reputation, and hopes that the Defendent being overwhelmed at last
under the burden of his Crimes will find the Catastrophe of his pretensions
partly in the doom of this Court and partly in the just severity of the Common
Law.

Sir I have faithfully, though not curiously guided you by the Torch of truth
into the knowledge of the matter of fact, and in my relation thereof I am
confident that I have not abused any thing but your patience, with which also I
have complied, in the omitting of many aggravations more then circumstantial
against the Defendant, and though I should now by a clear showing forth of
evidence confirm every particular of what I have presented unto you, yet to
recompense in some sort the length of my Narrative with the brevity of what I
am to speak of, we are resolved to apply the evidence to no more points of
controversy then are absolutely necessary to determine the two great Articles
viz, that there was not, nor could be any lawful marriage contracted or
celebrated between the Actrix and the Defendant from the time of the (...) and
abduction until her restitution to liberty in regard of the force and fear
which continued all that time upon her, and that he is guilty of a scandalous
jactitation of marriage for which he deserves to be first chastised with the
severest rodds of Ecclesiastical discipline, and then to be transmitted a
Consistorio ecclesiae ad praetorium Regis. i. e. from the Court Christian to
the Kings Bench.

The Case of Mrs MARY WARE, and JAMES SHIRLY;

As it was argued, Relating to the several points of Law incident unto, and
emergent there out

By Dudley Loftus LL.D. in the consistory Court before Dr: Willam Buckley
Chancellor to the Arch Bishop of Dublin, in Michaelmas term 1668.

DVBLIN. Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Exellent Majesty
for Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castlestreet.

SIR,
WE have now reduced the matter of fact to its true species, and you may be
pleased to observe, that we have proved with legal and sufficient evidence so
much thereof in this cause as is requisite to the founding of our intention,
for we have established beyond all contradiction the verity of the following
particulars.

First the abduction of the Actrix by the Defendant and his accomplices vi armata
on the Twenty Seventh of January 1668. and that the Actrix or the vim passa
from the time of that abduction until her restitution to liberty in this City,
continued under the force and terror of the Defendant and his accomplices.
Secondly, That during the continuance of that force upon her, she was most
barbarously Ravished by the Defendant. Thirdly, That immediately upon her
restitution to liberty she did protest in due form of law against the said
force, and all Acts whatsoever done or suffered by her to her prejudice during
that inter-space of time as invalid, and of no force to bind an obligation
upon her. Fourthly, That the Defendant has in a most vain glorious Jactitation
boasted that a marriage was Celebrated between him and the Actrix during the
time she was under that force and terror.
I should now speak to such points of Law as are convenient to be applied and
fitly adjusted to the several matters of fact so proved; but in regard some
circumstances of what was acted during the force seems to rest upon the
Testimony of the Actrix, I shall first of all bring good Corroboration
thereunto from undeniable Authorities of law, whereby it will appear in great
visibility that (...) her own Testimony is sufficient evidence in that or the
like cases. My first argument carries with it the weight of an undeniable
Authority, which is the opinion of Hyppolitus de Marsiliis a famous Jurist
tractatu de fide jussoribus p. 614. number. 178, who says de damno dato statur
sacramento damnum passi.

Secondly, I know that a single opinion is usually accounted but the
superficial glittering of a slight argument, I shall therefore add unto the
former Authority the attestation of Panormitan. extra de his quae vi metusue
causa fiunt Cap. ult: where we have these words, probata violentia res amissae
probantur per juramentum, and secuto petentis juramento sit condemnatio.

Thirdly, I shall make use in the next place of the Authority of Chassanaeus in
his commentaries in Consuetudines Burgundiae p. 61. where he expressly declares
that Statur juramento Virginis contra deflorantem, which words are so apposite
and complete that they need no addition, and so evident as that they want no
interpretation.

Fourthly, I shall urge another Authority as clear and as full as any of the
former, but of more assured determination, and so powerfully convincing that
there can be no evasion from it, and that is taken from the Sacred leaves of
Holy writ, Deutrenomy the 22th and the 24th where Grotius in his annotations
referring to his book de jure Belli ac pacis lib. 2d. Cap. 1.12. says lex
Hebraea puellae de vi illata in agro credi vult.

Fifthly, Though so clear and full Authorities as I have premised need not be
supplied by former presidents or justified by instances of former judicial
decisions; yet because examples are indeed the life and light of natural
reason, and are the best fortifications in all controversies of this nature, I
shall produce one or two presidents, the first is the case of Bishop Januarius
2. q. 1. Cap. imprimis (.) Gloriosus, where Gloriosus Comitiolus was ordered by
decree, to restore and make recompense unto Bishop Januarius, whatsoever he
should prove, by his own Oath, to have lost or suffered whilst he was under
force and terror, quicquid praedictus Episcopus per violentiam atque
insecutionem ipsius expendisse, vel damnum pertulisse, dato sacramento firmave
rit iidem episcopo restituendum condemnetur, where you may observe the very
Image of our case, for the vim passus is admitted to prove his wrong and
interest merely by his own Oath, and the reason is well rendered in the gloss,
hoc ideo est, quia res talis aliter nequit probari, to the same purpose you may
consult the Code de fide instrumentorum l (.) ultima.

Sixthly, Again you have another the like case among those which are termed
casus longi Bernardi, extra de his quae vi metusue causa fiunt cap. super eo,
in these words, quidam dicebat se spoliatum fuisse a quibusdam adversariis suis
per violentiam, convenit illos in judicio, lite contestata* probavit solummodo
per proprie um juramentum, singula quae amiserat, sed de violentia sibi illata,
probavit per testes, and sic condemnati fuerunt, and this condemnation was
afterward confirmed in the decretals by Gregory the Ninth, I shall add no more
for proof of this point, for whatsoever is offered above the heaped measure of
a plenary probation is to be esteemed as no more then a learned extravagancie.

So much for the clearing of our evidence, there is one thing more which I must
offer to consideration before I proceed to the main descissory points of Law,
and that is the justification of our proceedings.

I know no objection of moment that can be raised against the regularity and
sufficiency of our proceedings in this cause, yet to answer the greatest Cavil
that has been made against us, I must take notice of what Doctor French has
spoken quoad litis ordinativa, I conceive it was a vast degeneration from
ancient and Canonical practice, that he should have had admission to speak in
the behalf of the Defendant not only pronounced Contumacious, but also
excommunicated if not outlawed, I do not mention this so much by way of
complaint, as to put you in mind of what he said in a word or two, for though
he spoke often yet he started but one objection, and that was only to oppose
the manner of our proceedings against the Defendant for that he was not
personally cited, this objection he often retrived and as passionatly urged it
against us, and no wonder, for it seemed like Sampsons lock wherein his whole
strength lay, it has been formerly dissheveled, and it is now to be cut off
by a total abscision, to the which end I shall bring it to the test of Law and
reason.

I shall never oppose any thing which I think is true, and therefore I must not
deny so refulgent a truth as is the necessity of a Citation in all judiciary
proceedings at least between party and party, which is not only founded in the
law of nature, but also by all other laws owned and approved of as fundamentum
juditii, for which reason the Clementine Pastoralis de sententia and re
judicata declares in the case between Henry the Emperor and Robert King of
Sicilia that sententia dici non meruit quae a judice in absent em nec citatum
legitime, ac inauditum, and per consequens indefensum lata fuit, which doctrine
is also most clearly expressed 33.92. cap. secularis and 36.96. Capite multorum.

But whether a personal Citation be necessary in all cases or particularly in
this, is the question, for resolution whereof in the negative, I might urge the
indulgence of the law (...) ff. de Excusationibus made by Antonius Augustinus,
which gives way to Cite persons (...) personaliter aut domi suae, which is as
we use to say personally or by a viis and modis.

It is apparent upon inspection into this law that I do not misalledge the
words, and that they sound clearly consonant to this note; that in caling of
persons to Judgment we may choose whether we will Cite them personally to
appear, or Summon them in by a viis and modis for the words are alternate (...)
personaliter aut domi suae and in alternatiues, it is well known that the
debtor, or he who is to perform the obligation is to have his election, for
says the law si plura alternative seu disjunctim adscripta sint unum adimplere
sufficit, ut obligationi satisfactum videatur.

But for as much as I should seem to strain this Law too far and urge it
further then our Case requires, by serueing up the sense thereof ad montem
literae (for it would be as absurd that the person should not be personally
Cited where he may be had, as it would be irrational to require that he should
be personally summoned where he cannot be found: I will therefore supply out of
the principles of right reason the interpretation of the Law where it seems
defective, and accommodat the the words to a perfect understanding, and
directly to our proper Case, by distinguishing between alternatues of simyle
Election, and alernatives of preorditat disposiion; an alternative of simple
Election is where a person or persons obliged to perform any two or more
things, may, without being Confined to any order of Election make choice of
which he will to satisfy his obligation, as for Example if I oblige my self to
pay unto Titius at a certain day, an hundred Barrells of wheat, or in
lieuthereof, an hundred pounds sterling: it is then in my Choyfe to pay which I
will, and by the payment of either I am totally disobliged(.)An alternative of
preordinat Election is when the payment or performance of one thing or an other
may satisfy the Debt, yet so as that the one is primarily intended and
required, and the other is not sufficient unless subsidiarily upon the failing
of the former, as for Example, by the Civil Law since the Epistle of Divus
Hadrianus, (the Emperor and not Pope Hadrian the 4th as Fuller in his
Ecclesiastical History misapprehends) became of force, the Creditor may sue
the principal Debtor, or his sureties, but cannot sue the surety nisi excusso
principali unless the fideiussor has renounced the benefit of that Epistle, so
it is in our Case, we had liberty to Cite the Defendent personally or by a
viis and modis but were limited by such course of preordinat Election, as that
we could not Cite him by viis and modis so long as we could have served him
personally, so that Panormitau Capite causam Extra de dolo and Contumacia n. 5.
says Citatio debet primo fieri in persona si possibile est, alias fit domi,
and therefore Histiensis quoted by Panormitantit. eodem says, si in provincia
est debet citari personaliter ubicunque reperiatur.

The question therefore will be whether the Defendent were to be found or no
for if he were not to be found in Provintia, it is most certain that a viis
and modis without any personal Citation may be deemed sufficient and legal
enough, as I shall prove by the subsequent allegations which are so clear and
manifest in the point, that no sophistry or prevarication can wrest them to
another sense.

I shall begin with Bouhick Capite causam. Extra. de dolo and Contumacia,
whose authority in this case is an evidence of uncontrollable Certainty, he
says si aliquis non potest inveniri personaliter ad citandum in provincia, sed
been extra. tune non est necesse eum personaliter citari, sed perinde est ac si
non possit alicubi reperiri.

If you will cast more weight into the scales you may add hereunto many other
Authorities as that of Panormitan. de dolo and contumacia cap: ultimo n. 1.
citatio fit ad ecclesiam citandi quando non reperitur.

Again the same Author affords another Testimony to the some purpose as clear
as the former, capite inter quatuor. de Majoritate and obedientia. pro Citato
habetur ille qui se occultat ut non possit Citari, and this agrees with the
Doctrine of the Decretal. cap: quoniam (.) porro, ut lite non contestata non
procedatur, Which is so clear that it will leave no place for further doubt or
scruple -- porro speciales causae possunt occurrere in quibus casualiter est
aliud observandum: ut verbi gratia: si super alicujus Electione, vel copula
maritali quoestio moveatur: tunc etenius no propter longam moram in
Spiritualibus and temporalibus patiatur ecclesia laesionem: vel viro seu
mulieri fornicationis occasio praebeatur: in huiusmodi casibus, si contumax
apparuerit is; in quem actio fuit dirigenda seu quia peremtoria citatione
recepta, venire contemnit: seu quia malitiose scipsum occultat: seu quiae
impedit ne possit a^l eum citatio pervenire: testes, lite non contestata, sunt
merito admittendi, and nihilominus si de causa liquat ad diffinitivam
sententiam procedendum, hence the gloss upon the word impedit observes, talis
habetur pro citato denunciatione facta public ad do mumsuam, and his
observation is there illustrated by several quotations Cap: ex tuae, de cle:
non resid: de dolo and contumacia cap: ult: and for further illustration he
there says and ita sufficit quod public edictum proponatur ad domum suam vel
ad ecclesiam.

Furthermore I conceive that where a litis contestation is not necessary,
there, a personal Citation for one who is extra provinciam is not requisite;
but in cases where there is a dispute de faedere Matrimonii, there is no
necessity of a Litis contestation as appears in Bouhick de lite non Contestata,
Capite. quoniam frequenter, by an argument taken a sensu contrario, for there
he says aut non agitur de faedere Matrimonij, sed de alio casu puta adulterio
vel hujusmodi, and tunc non est procedendum lite non contestata, whence we
may vvarrantably conclude, that in this case where a matter of marriage comes
into question, we may preceed lite non contestata, and therefore without a
personal Citation.

Moreover ubi mora sit periculum allatura there is no necessity of a Litis
contestation, but such a case as this will not suffer delay, for the law does
suppose there may be periculum fornicationis in case a young woman in fermento
juventuis should remain unmarried until the person were Cited personally, for
which reason says Boubick tit and cap. iisdem paulo inferius in causes
Matrimonialibus and ipsas tangentibus indistincte procedi potest lite non
contestata ad receptionem testium, the like you may see in the Clementine
dispendiosam de judiciis.

Furthermore that I may baffle all opposition that can be made against us in
this point, suffer me to add the Authority of celebrated Ruckerus in his
consilia Matrimonialia with his reason annexed, non est opus ut requiratur
absens extra provinciam seu civitatem, quia sic esset processus in infinitum,
and for this opinion he there quotes Bartholus and others.

This opinion has as you have heard the suffrages of the best Doctors and
Glossaries, I shall therefore make no further addition in Corroboration
thereof, for I think I have more reason to beg pardon for having said so much,
then to say any more to prove that a personal Citation is unnecessary in this
case; I having now removed the only objections that could be surmised against
our evidence and proceedings, I shall proceed to the main decissory points of
law, and enter into a more close and exact discussion of the Buisiness, and in
the first place I shall speak briefly de vi and metu and show you first how
they operat upon the will, secondly what operation they have in this case as
to point of law and impediment of marriage, as to the first give me leave for
your better satisfaction to recall into your memory some Philosophical notions
whereby the violence offered to the will may be the better understood.

The principles of every thing may be reduced to a tvvofold difference, some
are intrinsical as matter and form, some are extrinsical as the efficient and
end.

Now, whatsoever belongs to any thing according to its intrinsic principles
cannot be termed violent, but only that which arises from principles
extrinsick, so that there is a twofold extrinsick violence, one in respect of
the efficient, and another in respect of the end, that which is violent in
regard of the efficient, may be instanced in the motion of a stone or any
heavy thing upward, that which is violent in respect of the end may be
resembled by one who being in iminent danger of shipwreck casts his goods over
board, being not violentated by any one per modum efficientis, but only per
modum finis, for that he would avoid the danger and so preserve his life.

Now between these two sorts of coaction there is a great difference, for
coaction which is per modum efficientis is simply violent and involuntary
having nothing of free will, as a stone in its projection upwards against its
natural inclination.

But coaction which is per modum finis, because it participats somewhat of that
which is voluntary, is not simply or absolutely violent, but only secundum
quid and such a violence is called by the Philosopher voluntarium permixium and
as there is a twofold coaction so also is there a twofold agent capable of
compulsion, the one natural, and that only can be compelled per modum
efficientis, as is a stone, for such an agent, when it does not act by
coaction, acts by a form simply determined to one thing, the other is a free
agent and that cannot be violentated nor compelled per modum efficientis, but
only per modum finis, and such a coaction may consist with liberty simply,
this distinction you have in Aristotle in the 3d. of his Ethics, where after
his defining what is violentum, he gives an example of that which is violent
per modum efficientis, as when the wind carries away a man against his will,
an example of that which is violent ratione finis he subjoyns there viz, such
things as are wrought either by the fear of greater evils, or the love of a
greater good, and of this second not of the first does he doubt whether it be
voluntary or not.

Now the will which is a free agent has a twofold act viz, an immanent and
interior act as that of nilling and willing, and an exterior imperat act as
it is termed by the Schoolmen as the act of moveing the bodily members in
Locomotion, as to the first act the will cannot be compelled by any thing per
modum efficientis, but per modum finis, yet as to the exterior acts it may be
compelled per modum efficientis, for it is most clear that one may move the
members of another man's body against his will.

I have now made it appear how the will may suffer violence by fear and force,
in the next place I shall offer to consideration what operation vis and metus
have in this case as to impediment of marriage. I shall now handle them apart,
and first de metu, for quod metus causa gestum erit ratum non habebo says the
Praetor ff. quod metus causa gestum erit l. 1. but because Labeo says in this
law, metum accipiendum non quemlibet sed majoris malitatis. I will therefore
first define fear by the common suffrages of Doctors and the Gossaries to be
instantis vel futuri periculi causa mentis trepidatio, and then distinguish
thereof thus, there are three kinds of fear according to Zasius Institutionibus
de actionibus (.) quadrupli, the first is a Concussive fear which proceeds from
threats, and such was the fear that possessed the mind of the actrix when the
Defendent and his accomplices breathed out menaces to carry her to Galway, or to
transport her into France unless she would submit to his desire.

Secondly, an impressive fear which the Schoolmen and some Lawyers term metus
facti, as when blows are given or one is in restraint as my Client was when
guarded in the time of her abduction by the Defendent and his Marmidons.

Thirdly, a compulsive fear, which proceeds a vi armata, and this was the
terror that affrighted the Actrix, so she was first of all surprised and beset
in hostile manner by eight armed Horsemen, and by them or most of them guarded
in all places from the time of her said abduction until her restitution to
liberty, with swords and Pistols.

Thus much of the definition of fear and the several kinds thereof as observed
by Zasius, I am now to show you the operation of fear as to the annulling and
impeding several acts and particularly that of Marriage, fear excuses a man
from the tie of a regular profession, in so much that if one through fear be
made to enter into religion he may freely return to his former secular
condition cap perlatum extra de his quae vi metusue causa where fiunt Barnardus
Sums up the case thus, A certain Noble man holding his Wife in suspicion
Commanded some Soldiers under his Command that they should carry her to a Wood
and there put her to death, They accordingly bring her to the Wood, but the
sword being drawn to execute that Command, the Soldiers moved with a generous
and pious Compassion took pity on her, and spared her life on condition she
should betake her self to a Monastery and there assume the habit of a Nun;
whereupon she is led into a Monastery, the Knight her husband sent two Bishops
to the Monastery to impose on her the Veyle; the Bishops taking into their
grave Consideration, that she was a young woman and had a young Son, grew
suspicious of her change of life; they take her aside den anding the reason of
her transition into that State of life, she therefore declaring the whole
matter in order, told them that it proceeded merely from fear of death; and
that as soon as she could she would return into the world, the one of these
Bishops that he might seem to satissie her husbands cruelty feigneth the putting
on the Veil upon her, after wards this Knight dies, the Wife then immediately
leaves the Monastery, and takes another husbands wherefore the Bishop of the
Diocese at the instance of the Nuns Excommunicated her, the injured Lady
insinuats the matter to the Pope, whereupon his Holiness delegats a power to
certain Judges of absolving her and her husband from the Sentence of
Excommunication, she taking an oath eorum parere mandatis, and that then they
should call her, the Abisse and Nuns before them, and if it should appear by
lawful proof that she had entered the Monastery not through fear of death but
spontaneously, or that notwithstanding she had entered by fear of death, she had
ratified her profession after the decease of her Husband, that she should be
forced by Ecclesiastical censure to return into the Monastery, otherwise not,
whereupon the said Barnerdus makes this observation, votum timore mortis
emissum non tenet.

Again this fear excuses a man as to gifts promises, or release of actions by
him made, in so much that if a man through fear gives, promises or releases,
he may recover forbear or repeat Eod. Cap. 2. again fear excuses from the
obligation of an Oath for these are the words of Panorm. juramentum metu
Prestitum non est obligatorium, Cap. significavit de eo qui duxit etc.

Furthermore a man is excused by fear a renuntiatione sui juris, for whosoever
through fear renounceth a dignity or office, he may lawfully enter into it
again notwithstanding any such renuntiation eod ad audaciam; and for that
judged cases in law are the best interpretations thereof, you may be pleased to
take notice out of the Archives of the Registry of Armagh, of what was decreed
in the Church of St. Peter in Droghedagh Anno 1553. by a provincial Synod
even in the time of George Dowdall Archbishop of Ardmagh and Primate of all
Ireland concerning those Priests and Prelates who had celebrated the Sacraments
and other divine offices according to the rites of those who were then deemed
Heretics, diffinitum est quod omnes supradicti qui non voluntate sed metu hoc
fecerunt admittentur ad gratiam and absolutionem vid Canonem 6. whence it
appears that even Priests and Prelates may be excused by fear from such acts as
are deemed very great transgressions of law.

Lastly to come directly to our case, If a man or woman contract marriage
through fear they are excused a Contractu Matrimoniali and are not thereby
obliged.

The Canonists hold that there are three things considerable in marriage,
sides, proles, and significatio unionis inter Christum and ecclesiam, Fidelity,
Issue, and the mistical signification of union between Christ and his Church,
now every one of these three are overthrown or most likely to be hindered by
fear giving cause to a marriage, first the signification of the foresaid Union
is taken away by fear, for as Christ assumed human nature voluntarily, so
marriage which signifies that Union, ought to be voluntary, and therefore void
of fear, ut signum correspondeat signato.

Secondly fear is commonly an hinderance to issue in as much as that for the
most part propter displicentiam ortam a timore non intendunt procreationi
prolis as is observed by Antonius Genuensis in his praxis Neopolitana p. 278.

Thirdly fear is repugnant to fidelity which is the great preservative from
Adultery, for as the last Cited author writes propter metum seu invitas
nuptias de facili conguges labuntur in adulterium, nam quod quis non diligit
facile contemnit.

Moreover that nothing may be wanting to way down the balance on our side, I
shall cast in over and above the former reasons and authorities, the express
opinions in point of such other Lawyers, casuist's and Schoolmen as will give a
more ponderous then needful addition to what has been said, to prove that
timor inique incussus is a diriment impediment to marriage, be pleased
therefore to hearken unto Petrus Anchoranus in whose opinion you may safely fix
your judgment extra de his quae vi metusue causa fiunt. cap. absolutionis,
omnia gesta per metum sunt nulla, his reason is this quia metus continet in se
dolum dolus autem dans causam contractui reddit eum nullum as you may see l.
elegaenter ff. de do. so.

So that Azpilcueta the Spanish Casuist concludes well p. 249. in these words,
aunque los sacramentos que imprimen character Comoil baptismo, valgan, pero il
contrato del Matrimonio Contraydo per temor, no vale nada, proque anzi lo
ordino layglesia per muchos respectos and a a little after he subjoyns as
follows el Miedo obra esto no solamente, quando el Constrenido fingio
Consentir y no consentio enel casamiento, pero aun quando consenti^
verdaderamente, St. Thomas also is of this opinion, 4. did 19. I shall
therefore Conclude with Malettus whose words are as pertinent in this behalf as
his authority is Competent pte. 1. p. 586. Matrimonium metu cadente in
constantem virum injuste incusso contractum jure ecclesiastico irritum est,
this conclusion is clearly deduced from several places of the decretalls, ex
capite cum locum, ex cap: cum veniens ex cap. de Consultatione de sponsalibus,
and herewith agree the most famous of the Schoolmen Thomas of Aquin: in 4. did
19. quaestione unica Articulo tertio, Banaventure on the same place Art unico
q. 1. Richars dus Art: 2. q. 3. Durandus q. 2. Paludamus q. 1. Art: 3. Major.
q. 1. and the reason of this Conclusion is recited by Incognitu^ on the
sentences lib 4. Did: 3. and 31. out of the decretalls de sponsalibus cap
requisivit, in these words, quia invitae nuptiae dificiles exitus habere
Consueverunt.

1. ob: Perhaps it will be objected against us in extenuation of the fear
alleged and proved by us, that the Defendent and his Accomplices did not draw
their Swords nor make use of their Pistolls, to this I answer that the evidence
given by us makes it apparent that they drew both their swords and Pistolls but
put the Case (...) since prejudicio veritatis that they had made no use of
their swords nay that they had laid down their Arms at her feet, let it be
considered what we find written l. quoties Paragrapho qui in potestate and l,
in delictis in principio ff de noxa the words run thus, ibi sufficit terror
armorum utvideaniur deiceisse, idem dicendum est licet portans arma ea deponat,
cum enim possit ijs armis uti nihil little depositio Confert.

Ob. 2. It may peradventure be further objected, that it is not every fear that
is a sufficient impediment to Marriage, and this I grant to be true in several
instances, as for example, if Meius be not incussus a causa libera ad
exiorquendum consensum, but a causa naturali intrinsica, for which season a
Marriage Contracted by him whom the Physician could he should dye unless he did
sudenly marry a Wife, is good and valid, because the sear that forced him upon
marriage did arise from a natural intrinsic Cause.

Secondly, Si just incutiatur metus a lege vel a Judice for capite ex literis,
Extra, de stonsalibus we read si metus just incutiatur a lege vel a Judice
Praecipiente Matrimonium, tali metuminime infirmatur matrimonium, and there is
also the same reason Si metus juslus incutiatur ab homine privato, for if a
father shall threaten the Ravisher of his Daughter to accuse him Criminally
upon the Statute of King James of force in this Kingdom, unless he take her to
Wife, in this Case metus censetur just incussus, and a marriage so Contracted
and consumtrate is firm enough though it proceeded from sear of an accusation,
but these cases of Justus metus, and incussus a causa libera do not come within
the State of our Controversy, and therefore conclude nothing against us, nor
do they require any further answer then that the fear raised in the mind of
the Actrix was an unjust fear ex part defendentis.

Ob, 3. It may be objected that weapons not drawn out into use are not
sufficient to raise such a fear as may cadere in constantem virum, for answer
hereunto, it will be necessary first of all to declare what manner of fear it
is that may Cadere in fortem virum, which I shall do in the resolution of
Malettus, ad metum cadentew in fortem virum reducitur metus mortis vel
mutilationis, vel fustigationis, atrocis cruciatus, vel incarcerationis, vel
exilij vel servitutis, vel stupri, amissionis status honorifici, amissionis
omnium bonorum vel magnae partis, vel rei pretiosae vel metus infamiae tam
juris quam facti, Malettus parte^. malleatione 56. bractea 44. p. 589. Col 1.
but to give a more direct answer to the objection I shall betake my self to the
words of the Law l. 3. in principio, and quia armatiff. de vi and vi armata the
words are these, metus armorum cadit in constantem virum, licet portans arma
iis non matur, again a less fear then usually falls in constantem virum would
void the Marriage of my Client, by reason not only of the imbecility of her
Sex but also of the frailty of her tender years, the Law does much indulge
imbecility and frailty for which reason women ob fragilitatem sexus may
notwithstanding their obligations to Creditors, plead the privilege of the
Vellejan Senatusconsult for their immunity, as also minors ob imbecilitatem
ingenij, if they become bound for the payment of debts may plead the advantage
of the Macedonian Senatusconsult which sets them free from any such obligation,
both these concurred in my Client fragilitas sexus and imbecillitas ingenij at
the time of her abduction she was a Minor and under the age of Sixteen years,
and therefore a less fear then what may Cadere in constantem virum is
sufficient, Autonius Genuensis declares his opinion thus Minor metus excusat
magis mulierem quam masculum quandoquidem fragilior estratione sexus Cap.
indignantur 32. q. 9. but Abbas in dicto Capite cum locum says, ex part
mulieris requiritur metus qui cadere potest in constantem mulierem, and Minor
metus, quando concurrit in famina tenera aetas; cum concurrent duae qualitates,
sexus and aetatis, vide praxin Curiae Archiepiscopalis Neopolitanae p. 278.
Anno 3.

Ob. 4. It may also be objected that our former conclusion does suppose a false
foundation, and that there can be no such metus or fear as may Cadere in fortem
virum, for that Aristotle in the third of his Ethics Cap. 8. says (...) i. e.
fortioris esse in terroribus vacare terrore and perturbatione, and if no fear
or terror can befall a valiant man, how can such a pretension of fear be any
impediment to marriage.

Answer. To this objection, I shall answer first as a Philosopher, Secondly, as
a Critic. my first answer is agreeable to the ancient Greek Scholias, and the
latin Modern Comentaries viz, that Aristotle did not hereby require that a
constant or valiant man should be totally exempt from fear, but that such a
person should not fear any thing but what right reason should dictate unto him
as worthy of fear, nor in a higher degree then prudence should rate, now
certain it is what Doctor Parisiensis libro quarto says dictat recta ratio
plus debere timere mortem vel Carcerem quam actum Matrimonij alias
displicentem, my second answer shall consist chiefly in the true recital of
Aristotle's words in the Greek and a true translation of them the Greek words
therefore are these (...) id est fortioris videtur esse in improvisis
terroribus vacare terrore and perturbatione quam in perspicuis, the words
therefore as you may be pleased to observe in a true recital and a faithful
translation, do not run by way of opposition absolutely prohibiting all kinds
of fear, but comparatively set forth that a valiant man is less to dread
sudden and unexpected surprises of fear, then apparent or expected dangers. I
confess that (...) rather may be wanting insome Copies, yet the particle which
cannot relate to any other word then (...) or to one of the like import and
would be infignificant if the other were not either expressed or employed,
justifies the copies where it is used to be most perfect and authentic, hence
it follows that (...) or if you will not allow that word in the text, then
the particle: is to be rendered rather per magis comparativum then by potius
correctivum, and not as it is taken Galatians 4.9. where Erasmus says that
(...) or Magis hoc loco correctionem verius babet quam comparationem, the words
there are (...) nor, as it is rendered John the 3.19. (...) men loved darkness
more then light, that is they loved darkness and not the light, not
comparatively but oppositively, which sense of the word (...) though allowed by
most other translations, yet the Ethiopick interpreter renders it in a
comparative form, (...) yet so as the sense is the same for the Ethiopick does
not render the words according to our Greek Copy, (...) dilexerunt homines
magis tenebras quam lucem, but thus dilexit Deus mundum and elegit homo
tenebras potius quam lucem for the words in the Ethiopick run thus (...) and it
is clear that though we may love one thing better then another comparatively,
and so may love both together, yet we cannot choose after that manner but we
must take the one and leave the other, but by the way to justify the Ethiopick
translation it is most evident that Greek Authors do use the word (...) for
eligere as for example (...) I choose this before that, and whosoever reads
Appianus Alexandrinus de bellis civilibus will find that (...) and (...) are of
like signification where the words (...) are translated Malunt servire quam
aequo cum caeteris jure vivere but let it be supposed that the word (...), were
wanting in all eopies of Aristotle, we know it is a rule frequently made use
off in the interpretation of Scripture, that positivus nonnunquam comparative
debet intelligi, as in the Gospel of St. Mark Cap. 9. v. 43. the Greek runs
thus in the very same Idiom with Aristotle (...) where though the litteral
interlineary interprets (...) in the positive degree pulchrum yet the Persian
translation renders it comparatively by a word of the same sound and
signification with our comparative better, (...) melius tibi fuerit, and most
other translations render it comparatively the Armenian indeed translates (...)
in the positive degree thus laitse kets bonum erit tibi, yet the adjunction of
the particle kets makes up a comparative sentence thus laitse kets hell ikeansn
jaiptenits mtanel kan erchois tsern oinel erthal i chehen id est melius tibi
fuerit mancum ingredi in vitam aeternam quam habere duas manus and abire in
Gehennam, so that from what has been principally said in answer to this
objection it follows that the words of Aristotle alleged against us are to
be taken comparatively and not simply prohibitively viz, not but that a valiant
man may fear, but that he is to be less fearful in a sudden and unexpected
surprise, then in apparent and expected dangers.

Ob. 5. It may be further objected that though the metus or fear was a just
incussus at first, yet it was not so all the time they were together, I shall
with a ready answer unload the weight of this objection by offering unto your
consideration what is already proved viz, that she was altogether under the
power of the Defendent and his accomplices until the 2d. February, when she was
rescued from him in this City which in construction of law continues the fear,
for so says Sanches lib. 4. disp. 18. Anno 7. durat timoris causa dum durat
subjectio timorem incutienti,

But perhaps if the Defendent were present he would as impudently reply her
unto, as he has already falsely alleged else where that she seemed by the
indication of some exterior acts at the time of her feigned or pretended
marriage to be at liberty, to this I answer that she was there so far from
enjoying her liberty, that it is apparent she was under a great force, which I
make good by the words of Zanches de matrimonio lib. 4. disp. 18. Anno 9. which
are these, ut autem actus exterior inducat metus purgationem censeaturque
spontaneus desideratur ut omni ex part significet liberam and spontaneam
voluntatem quia si ullam aliam interpretationem recipere possi non censelitur
purgare metum, but put the case that as to all exterior acts she had seemed to
be at liberty, this had not been fufficient purgare metum so long as the first
cause of fear continued, for thus says Zanches lib. 4. disp. 18. Anno 7
durante causa metus, durat metus quamvis in actu exteriori appareat ommmoda
libertas, paria enim sunt quod quis compellatur vel compella possit l.
novissime ff. quod falso tutore auctore gesium esse dicetur.

Furthermore to show you how little any indications of consent do signify as
to the purgeing of fear in a case of marriage, I shall collect into as
contracted a brevity as I can, some undoubted pos^tions which I find in Earboza
his vota decisiva canonica, voto primo, delivered in a case of this nature
debated and decided in curia Matritensi between two noble personages viz,
Ludovick and Josepha which I shall apply in answer to this objection, the
positions are these.

1 Metus antecedens nor purgatur per hilarem vultum tempore contracti
Matrimonij extensum. Anno. 104. 2. Risus in actu Matrimonij contrahendi non est
indicium consensus Anno 107. 3. Metus praeambulaus non purgatur ex cantu and
risu puellae Anno 127. Metus non dicitur purgains ex osculo and refectione. 5.
Per verba sponte facio per metium passum tempore metus prolata, non purgatur
metus, sed geminatur, ibid. Anno 8.
Nay Alciat. goes farther resp. 5. idemest si matrimonio contracto subsequatur
dotis instrumentum, but Abbas in capite super hoc de renuntiatione gives one
reason which serves to maintain the truth of all the forementioned positions in
these words, etiansi puella risit dum desponsaretur raptori eumque osculata
est, attamen ex quo durabat eadem metus causa, praesumitur metu consensisse,
and risum illum finxisse, Bartholus also speaks to the same purpose l. penult
ff. de condictione ob turpem and injustam causam, and in l. 2. ( ob quod rieto
causa. I conceive there has been as much said already as may serve to take off
the force of the objection, yet to evict confession from any ingenious
adversary, I will make use of some judgments in the case wherein lies the
sinews of proof for res judicata pro veritate accipitur, in the month of June
1589. it being then debated in Rota Romana before the most illustrious
Seraphino, whether consent was given by the woman, to the man who claimed her
for his wife and urged in proof of a free consent, that she had paid and
defraid the expenses of them both for their diet, and that she had made several
bargains, and had written several letters unto him wherein she expressed her
self to be his Wife, the judgment was, that nulla fuit habita ratio ejus quod
uxor faciebat omnes expensas victus tam pro se quam pro viro, nec quod fecerit
varios contractus, and scripserit literas viro in quibus gerebat, se pro uxore,
cum non esset constituta in plena liberate, this judgment is related thus in
praxi Curiae Archiepiscopalis Neapolitana p. 282. where the Author says
further in these words, and in eadem causa 23. Junij. 1589. coram Seraphino,
neque fuit habita ratio de muneribus Jocalium hinc inde transmissis propter
radicem infect am metus precedentis.

And whereas it has been urged as a great indication of her fredom from fear
that she did declare her consent to Mr Archdeacon Rouse first I say there noe
proof made of any consent whatsoever expressed by the actrix to the Archdeacon.

Secondly, I shall show how little such a declaration of consent does operate
in the like case, from an Example which we find in the practice of the Arch
Bishops Court in Naples p. 282. die. 27. Ian: 1589. in eadem causa Coram Gipsio
fuit, neque habendam esse rationem quod matrimonium suerit Contractum in facie
ecclesiae ad interrogationem Archiepiscopi, quafi quod metus hoc pacto purgatus
conserctur, here the woman was married, not upon the interrogation of an
Archdeacon, but an Archbishop, not in a private Chamber guarded by the Accomplices
of a Ravisher, but in facie ecclesiae, yet was it not thereby to be Concluded
that she gave a free consent or that she was void of fear for it was thus
declared upon the heareing of the Cause, hoc locum sibi vindicare, si dilucide
ostenderetur, puellam adeo in liberate tunc temporis Constitutam fuisse, ut de
domo and Civitate ex animi sententia exire ac etiam a^fugere potuisset: vide
praxi^ curiae Archiepiscopalis Neopolitanae p. 285. but sure I am that the
defendent will not dilucide ostendere that the actrix was in so free a
Condition in the Chamber where Mr Rouse is said to have interrogated her as
that she could have gone away from them in plenam libertatem, nor will be prove
it usque in Calendas Graecas vel Idus Romanas.

Lastly I conclude with Baldus that noe spontaneuos act of the Actrix Could
purgare metum unless she were Constituta in loco tuto si enim non sit in loco
tuto semper praesumitur metus durare, Baldus de his quae vi metusue causa fiunt
if it shall be replied that Miltown was then reputed locus tutus, I answer that
they perhaps may think it a place safe enough to secure to themselves but
whosoever has a soul able to set open the windows of sense may easily
perceive that it afforded her noe safety from them, for as Baldus says,
arctatus sic quod non possit aufugere just timet, and qui just timet non est
in loco tuto.

If it shall be further objected that Matrimoninm Copula Consummatum may stand
valid though fear was the cause thereof, I I shall allay the unreasonableness
of such an objection with a double testimony to the contrary the one taken from
Zanches the other from Reginaldns Zanches. lib. 4. Dis. 18. n. 5. non solum
matrimonium ratum metu contractum, sed etiam matrimonium Copula Consummatum est
invalidum. Reginaldus lib. 31 n. 19 Copula enim nihil operatur ad validitatem
matrimonij nisi adsit Con-Consensus validus and liber.

If it shall be rep^yed that Ostiensis and Didacus as also Paludanus in. 4.
Did. 29 q. 1. Art 4, as they are quoted by Marcus Antonius Genuensis p. 281.
hold, verum perfectumque esse matrimonium quando subsecuta est ipsius viri
Carnalis Copula etiamsi metu and vi Cognovisse mulierem alleget, I cannot deny
the truth of those words unless I should prevaricat and deny my own knowledge,
Nay I shall grant for corroboration of them that Menochius de presumptionibus.
4. n. 27. says hanc veriorem esse opinionem, Yet I shall not yield any thing
of the cause, but give a satisfactory answer to what is alleged, first by
observing the true force of the words which import no more, then that a
marriage may be held true and perfect being seconded by carnal knowledge,
notwithstanding the allegation of the man that he knew the woman, as being
compelld by force and fear to act with her.

Secondly, By distinguishing between the Case of a man and woman, for as
Monochius says loco citato, in viro coeunte non possit metus aliquis
considerari, quia si metus adesset, cessaret desiderium, sine quo frustra
adhibetur coreundi conatus, so that a man being according to the opinion of
Menochius not subject to such compulsion, the allegation thereof, upon such
hype thesis will not serve his turn, yet a woman being subject to such
compulsion of Carnal knowledge as is Confessed by ad Lawiers, it may be alleged
by her as an advantageous exceptition against a forced marriage though seconded
with Carnal knowledge, the reason of the diference is, for that mulier invita
and coacta cognosci potest, at vir invitus and desiderio carens nec erigere nec
coire unquam poterit says Marcus Antonius Genuensis. p. 281.

But least it may seem to pass away with a tacit allowance that he had Carnal
knowledge of her after the said pretended marriage, we deny that he was with
her in carnis congressu after his comeing to Milltowne, but should I grant that
the Case were so, what advantage could the Defendent reap thereby, for put the
Case since prejudicio veaitatis that the endeavors of the Defendent and his
wicked Accomplices had prevailed so far with her as to persuade her that the
Marriage had been valid, whereas it was not, and that she had thereupon
voluntarily Consented to a Maritall Copulation, the Marriage would not thereby
have been ratified or Consummate the reason is qui^ nihil magis consensui
contrarium quam error Zanches. lib: 4. Disp. 18. n. 5.

ob. It may also be objected that regularly all things metu facta may be
reputed valid until rescinded by the action quod^ vi metusue causa or
otherwise, and that therefore this pretended Marriage is to hold until
rescinded by sentence of this Court.

To show the insufficiency of this Argument I must distinguish, between the
rule and the Case legally excepted from the comprehention of the rule, for non
ex regula jus sumatur sed ex jure est quod regula fiat, neither is the rule
complete without the exceptions, whence the Logitians say anomalia addita
analogiae complet regulam perfectam, therefore I shall confess that there are
some things metu facta which hold valid and are not to be rescinded at all,
insomuch that the ordination of a Deacon or Priest metu facta is valid by the
Cannon Law as to the Character though not quoad votum castitatis, and that
there are other things metu facta which hold their force until a legal hearing
and rescission, as for example, if Titius be forced by Compulsion to sell his
house and receive the money, the safe binds him until he institute his Action
vi and metus and obtain rescission thereof by Judgment of the President of
the Province Code de rescindenda action. l. 1.

Again a usurious Contract confirmed by oath may hold, nay cannot be rescinded
relaxatione Juramenti so says Bertachinus Firmanus, verbo Contractus yet for
all that which I have granted to fortify the objection against me, I must say
that matrimoninm metu habitum is invalid ab initio by dispositon of Law and
needs noe rescission and thus much I am warranted to say by Navarr, de his qua
vi metusue Cansa fiunt, eonsil 4. n. 6, and per cap. cum locum extra de
sponsalibus, and cap: significavit de eo qui duxit in matrim etc.

The reason is, because, where the substance of an Act which proceeds from fear
Consists in the liberty of the will there the Act is void ab initio, but so it
is, that the substance of Marriage abides in the liberty of the will as is
confessed by all Civilians Canonists and Casuists who hold that nvptias non
concubitus sed consensus facit, wherefore says Baldus ff quod metus eausa l.
si mulier. si dos etc metus impedit omnem actum in quo requiritur voluntas
spontanea, quia quando substantia actus est libertas volun tatis, actus metu
factus est mullus ipso jure, he adds aliter se res habet si non requiritur
talis actus, nec requirit percisam v^luntatem.

If it shall be demanded wherefore Matrimonium ex dolo contractum should be
more valid then Matrimonium metu contractum I shall give noe further answer
then to show the dissimilitude of both Cases perfectly represented in the words
of Baptista Zilet^ tus, quia matrimonium non bonorum accessione sed consensu
perficitur.

One difficulty more may be here interposed upon an instance from the Common
Law of the Land which is this, if a man meanace me in my Goods, and that he
will burn certain evidences of my land which he has in his hand, if I will
not make unto him a Bond, yet if I enter into a Bond by this terror, I cannot
avoid it by Plea, and the reason is says the Lord Chancellor Bacon, because
the Law holds it an inconvenience to avoid a specialty by such matter of
averrment, and therefore I am put to my Action against such menaces; though I
must confess the Law to be as it is recited in this instance; yet I shall
easily deliver my self from that difficulty if it may be so called, by
destinguishing between Menaces relating to ones Estate or his person, for the
Law is much different in the Case of menaces to ones person, and therefore if I
be restrained in my person as my Client was, or threatened with battery or the
burning of my house which is a safety and protection to my Person, or with
burning an Instrument of manumission which is an evidence of my
infranchisiment, if upon such menace or duress I make a deed I shall avoid it
by Plea, and upon this distinction the Law varieth as you may see 13. H. 8.15.
and 21. H. 7.28.

For if a trespasser drive away my Beasts over another ground, and I pursue to
rescue them, yet am I a Trespasser to the Stranger upon whose ground I came;
but if a man assail my Person, and I fly over another man's ground then am I
noe trespasser. Again if a Sherriff upon a Capias falsely return a Cepi Corpus
and quod est longuidus in prisona, there I may come in and falsify the return
of the Sherriff to save my Imprisonment, for it is a Maxim of that Law that
corporalis injuria non recipit estimationem de futuro, yet I confess with Sir
Frances Bacon in another Case that if a Sherriff make a false return that I am
summoned whereby I loose my Land, yet because of the inconvenience of drawing
all things to incertainty and delay, if the Sherriffs return should not be
Credited, I am excluded from any averment against it and am put to my action of
deceit against the Sherriff and the Summoners, and therefore it is said upon
the like ground that the Law in many Cases which do concern Lands or Goods does
deprive a man of his present remedy and turns him over to a further Circuit
of remedy, rather then to suffer an inconvenience, but if it be a question of
personal pain or tort, the Law will not compel him to sustain it and expect
remedy, because it holds noe damage a sufficient recompense for a wrong
which is Corporal.

I having now broke thurrough those objections which lay as it were in ambush
to intercept me in my passage, I shall proceed further to evince from right
reason and sound Authority, that a Marriage Contracted by fear cannot be valid,
nay that it is absolutely void ab initio without recission, and because weak
arguments do many times stiffen infidelty, I shall make use of none but what
are drawn from the Chiefest inducements of belief.

Be pleased therefore to observe a Case Clearly stated and determined in the
very same words by Panormitan, Cap. Abbas de his quae vi metusue Causa fiunt,
where you may find these words tenuit secundum matrimonium post primum
meticulosum, nulla prius petita recissione per actionem quod metus causa i. e.
the second Marriage was determined to stand good notwithstanding a former
marriage enforced by fear, not rescinded by action, now if the first had been
valid, the second could never have been adjudged good, without rescission of
the former for Panormitan says si valuisset primum matrimonium non tenuisset
secundum, primo non annullato, the reason is because matrimonium non potest
consistere inter duos.

Again to argue with ampliation to a stronger case, if the Actrix had ratified
such pretended marriage brought on by force with her oath, it would not have
been valid by law quiaper juramentum non suppletur defectus consensus and
therefore the casuist's say juramentum sequitur naturam actus supra quam cadit,
and sor titur conditiones illius, and therefore I conclude that as such a
marriage is invalid so also would the oath have been, and this is clear ex
capite qui duxit etc. Where with agree Zanches, Roderigues and Malettas
Malleatione 56 saying ideo opus non esse relaxatione juramenti quando
matrimonium per metum gravem celebratum fuit addito juramento, quia non opus
est relaxatione ubi non est vinculum there being no need of relaxation, where
there is no tie of obligation, so that I conclude with Doctor Parisiensis, olim
incognitus upon the sentences that a marriage contracted by a forced consent
cannot be ratified by an oath, and that for this reason, viz, that by such oath
is sworn aliquid praeteritum, aut aliquid praeseus aut aliquid futurum,
somewhat that is past, present or to come, first, if I swear what is past, it
is most clear, that my oath cannot ratify such a marriage, for I either swear
that I did lawfully consent, and so I am perjured, and periurium non facit
matrimonium, or I swear that I did not lawfully consent, and then would it be
less for the validateing of such a marriage.

Secondly if the oath be de presenti then I do either swear that I do inwardly
from my heart yield a lawful consent, and then I am perjured, and by force of
perury a marriage cannot be made good, or I swear that I do not lawfully
consent, and then it is much more invalid.

Thirdly, If the oath be de futuro, as for example I swear that I will consent
unto thee, it is most certainly true that a marriage cannot be contracted by
any such consent, because it requires consensum de praesenti verbis vel signis
expressu, as you may see extra de sponsnlibus cap. cum locum, and capite tua
nos, since therefore every oath must be de praeterito, aut de presenti aut de
futuro, and none of these can ratify a marriage contracted by fear, it follows
therefore that the pretended marriage being already proved invalid by reason of
fear, cannot be ratified by oath:

I need argue no more the invalidity of the pretended marriage from the
impediment of fear; or ratione timoris incussi, I shall therefore proceed ad
impedimentum vis illatae, which according to Duarenus l. 2. de eo quod metus
Causa, is defined impetus qui repelli non potest, and is so odious in the Eye
of the Civil and Cannon Law, that as all kind of force is thereby prohibited,
so also is there a most apt remedy and provision made for every kind of force,
and so says Johannes Eduensis, neque enim vim aliquam possumus infer
proximo, quin ei fit aliquo juris remedio succursum, and there is great reason
for it, for violentiam Coercere est legi opem far, cap: sicut, extra de
excessu prelatorum

vis or force is divided into these several kinds viz: vis inquietaua, vis
turbatiua, vis expulsiua, vis Cumpulsiua For that which is called vis
inquietativa you have the remedy of the Interdict quod vi and Clam, in. l 1. de
vi and clam.

If you be infested with the second kind of force which is vis turbativa, if
it be in immoveables the Law affords you the interdict uti possidetis, if in
goods moveable you may have the interdict called Interdictum utrobi

If you suffer a disseison, or disposession by the third kind of force which is
termed vis expulsiua you may have for your immoveables the interdict unde vi
and for your movables the interdict vi bonorum.

Lastly if you suffer under a compulsive force which is our Case, you properly
have the remeady of the action Called Actio quod metus causa as you may see in
the Code and ff. under that title, I having defined force in general and
divided it into its several kinds, I shall now apply my self to the last,
which is vis compulsiua, and show what influence it may have on our Case which
consists of a Rape and other violence offered or attempted by the Defendent to
enforce her to marry with him, but first of all I hold my self obliged to
describe the Nature of a Rape, and how repugnant it is to the Law, as to the
nature of it tria requiruntur ad raptum proprie, nimirum vit illata, abductio,
and ut fiat causa concubitus, vel alterius libidinis, Abduction is Clearly
proved, the vis illata is apparent in her unwillsngness and resistance to be
abducted, and their violent Carrying her away, and that it was concubitus causa
appears by the sadness of the event.

1. If there had been noe constraint upon her, and that she had gone away with
him spontaneously without the knowledge of her Father it had not been a Rape
but fuga voluntaria for says Candidus, requiritur ad raptum ut vis inferatur
ipsi vel hi^ saltem ad quos pertinet.

Secondly. Had she been removed by force from one Room of an house to another
only commodioris concubitus gratia it had been noe Rape, for he that forces a
woman to succumb to his lust whom he finds her in a certain place without
abduction to another place of some distance does not properly commit a Rape.

Thirdly. If she be not carried away libidinis causa sed redigendi in
servitutem, it is no Rape but plagium, or as they say furtum hominis, yet it is
not requisite to a Rape that there should be actualis concubitus, but it is
sufficient ut eo fine fiat, for says Altisiodorensis, voluntas progressiua in
actum pro facto reputatur.

So much may serve to describe the nature of a Rape, I am now to show its
repugnancy to Law, The Law of God prohibits it under the penalty of death to be
inflicted on the Raptor Deutoronomie the 22. where it is said in the Hebrew
Text (...) and if he lay hold on her he shall dye, the words seem at first to
be very strict viz. that whosoever shall lay hold on a woman shall dye,
therefore it will not be amiss perhaps to explicat the words (...) by the
several anoient and authentic translations of the Bible, the septuagint
renders it by the word (...), enforcing her, the Syriack has it (...) and
shall apprehend or hold her by force, the Caldy paraphrase of Onkelos expounds
it by the word (...) which though translated in the Biblia Polyglotta
apprehenderit clearly signifies to prevail by force or violence as in a
Conflict, and so the Samaritan Interpreter has expressed it in the word (...);
and though the Interpreter of the Arabic translation agrees with the vu^gar
Latin apprehends yet the Arabic word in that place is (...) and coercuerit eam
which sense it bears in Raphalengius Golius and Gigaeus, and indeed the very
same Hebrew word Fxodus the 9. and the 2. is taken for a violent detention and
is by Buxtorfius Translated vi detinens, and noe wonder, for that Abenezra the
Rabin expounds the word (...) thus (...) that is to say by holding them
forcibly by the hand or some other member, as if one should hold a dog by the
ears, Rabbi Solomon Iarchy also gives the like exposition of the word (...)
these words (...) I shall not render the words too familiar in the vulgar
English, yet take them in as modest terms as I can express them in latin,
idest apprehendens eum quasi per pudenda vi detineret eum, so much (as you may
be pleased to observe) an addition to the rigor of the word by a true
translation, takes by an equitable abatement from the seeming severity of the
Law, and indeed it might have been supposed too rigorous a Law, that a man
might not have so much as touched any any woman without undergoing so great a
penalty as death. But perhaps on the other side it might be thought a very
remiss law that a Ravisher should go unpunisht or at most be punished only with
that which is incident naturally to all men, even to the most innocent, which
is death, for the whole penalty here expressed is (...) and morietur he shall
dye, and so it is in our English translation, but the Greek has it (...) ye
shall put him to death, the Syriack also renders it (...) he shall be slain or
put to death, so also the Chaldy paraphrase and both the Samaritans, and
therefore it may be taken as an oversight in some of those worthy and learned
persons who were the publishers of the polyglott Bibles to render it by the
word morietur, for it is better expressed out of the Arabic Interpreter
interficietur, for which reason the Italian, the Spanish, French, and Dutch,
ought to be corrected as well as our English translation, all which follow the
vulgar latin morietur, from this penalty and the Critical Gusto that I have
given you the true sense of the word (...) you may clearly perceive that by the
Judaick law there could be no marriage between the Raptor and the Rapta.

I shall in the next place instanceint he Law of the twelve Tables, where I
find only a plain prohibition without any penalty subjoyned, for vim ingenuae
feminae infer caveto is all that I can observe mentioned in the remains of
that Law Concerning a Rape.

But the ancient Rom in Laws afterward sharpened their severity not only
against the Raptors, but also all accessories to that Crime, insomuch that they
are brought under the penalty of this Constitution, viz. Conscij vero aut
Ministri raptus paenae capitali subjiciuntur, sive nolentibus sive volentibus
virginibus hoc egerint, parentibus si patientiam praebuerint, ac dolorem
compresserint, deportatione plectendis, sed and si quis inter haec Ministeria
servilis conditionis fuerit compr ^hensus, entra sexus distinctionem
concremetur. vide Arnoldum de Herbolt de actionibus p. 642. and the Code de
rapiu virginis l. 1. this law as you may observe by the by concludes worse
against the treacherous maid of the Actrix, then the figure Bocardo wherein she
yet deservedly remains.

Nay the Canon Law punishes not only Servants but also all others, who are
any way accessory to a rape with Excommunication, infamy, incapacity for
dignities and offices, as appears by the Testimony of Gaspar Astete, libro
segundo del estado de las Lonzellas, where he says, el raptor y los que le
dieron favore, son descomulgados infames e incapaces de todas dignitades. Which
is the reason that by the Laws of Heraldry whosoever he be who ravisheth a
virgin, must bear his Escucheon reversed, and it appears further by a rescript
of the Concilium Aureliancuse, which was Celebrated in the time of Pope
Hormisda, that the Church would not allow Sanctuary to Ravishers.

My next instance shall be in the Law of the Saxons, l. 49. about the year of
our Lord 1032. where it is said in these words gif haw wudewan nyde name gebete
with bewere, gif haw meden nyde name gebete wet bewere i. e. qui viduam per vim
stuprarit, proprij Capitis estimatione compensato, nec mitiori Condition sit
qui virgini vim intulerit, by this law also of the Saxons, you see there could
be no marriage between the Raptor and the Rapta for gebete wet bewere he must
loose his life,

I might also give instance of the ancient Laws of Ireland in force about the
same time under the Government of Brian Borhaim, what the penalty of a rape was
then in this Kingdom by that Law, I cannot yet directly find out, but the
effect thereof shows that the Law against Rape was most strict in it self, and
as severely executed, for the Annalists say that in the reign of this Monarch a
single woman might have travailed from Thi^us thuaid to Thuinchliodna being the
whole length of Ireland and not meet one that would attempt to Ravish her.

Again what was the nature of this offense at the Common Law and what acts of
Parliament have been enacted in Declation, thereof I need not set forth at
large, for it clearly appears in my Lord Cook the third of the Institutes,
Cap. 12. who there referrs you to a large Margin with a long and numerous
train of Ancient and Authentic* quotations, he there also expressly recites
Cases out of the Parliament Rolls, and the Records in the Tower of London, to
prove, in how great detestation this offense was held in Ancient times and
parilcularly in the Cases of Isabell the wife of John Botiler: and of Margaret
sometime wife of Sr: Thomas Malefait.

But to be more particular, Rape is Felony by the Common Law, according to to
the Statute of Westminster the 2.34. and by the thirteenth of Edward the first,
the Ravisher shall have judgment of Life and member.

Nay this offense by the Statute Law is ampliated so far as to become felony
in the ayders and abettors as we^l as the principal, nay so far is it extended
in the words of the Lord Cook as to bring accessories aide^s and abetters
under the notion of principalis, for these are the words in the 3. of his
Institutes cap. 10. if any be present, abetting and aiding any to do the act,
though the offen"illegible"e be personal and to be done by one only, as to
Commit Rape, not only he that does the Act is a principal, but also they
that be present abetting and aiding the misdoer, are principal also, for proof
hereof I recommend to your Consideration 11. Hen. 4. cap. 13. Anno primo Ed. 4.
and shall further put you in mind that by the 11.12. and 13. Jacobi cap. 3.
Clergy is taken away in Case of Rape.

I have now shevved you the nature of a Rape and the repugnancie thereof to
the Law of God, the Law [of the twelve Tables the Elder Roman Laws, the
Ancient Saxon and Irish Laws before the Conquest of Ireland, and to the
Common Law, as also to the Ancient and recent Statute Laws.

I shall now dravv near to those Laws which are of most Concernment, to
show that there could be no Mrrriage lavvfully Contracted betvveen the Actrix
and Defendent by reason of the said Rape and the force that was upon her
dureing the time limited in the State of the Case, which was from the first
instant of her abduction until her restitution to liberty.

To this effect I shall make use only of the Civil Law and Canon Law, and
the Doctrine of the best and most renowned Casuists as being the best rules by
which things of this nature can be vvarrantably determined, and though those
replenisht treasuries might afford me abundant authorities and arguments,
proportionable to the Offerings made for the Tabernacle more then sufficient, I
have made choice of a fevv, yet such as will stiffly bear up the weight of
the Cause, and I shall take my rise from the Code. l. 1. de raptu virginum ( l.
1.) which book has as much reason to persuade as authority to oblige where
it is of force, the words are these raptores virginum honestarum vel
ingenuarum quasi pessima crimina peccantes, capitis supplicio plectendos
discernimus.

In the next place be pleased to consult the Authentiques collatione 9. tit.
25. novella 43. de raptis mulieribus where it is declared in these words,
matrimonium inter raptorem and raptam non tenet.

If there were need of a more enlarged authority with a further addition of
reason you might resort to Simon a Gronwegen vander made. cod de raptu virginum
( l. 1.) si vis publica raptum comitetur aliaeve circumstantiae crimen
aggravent. facinoris atrocitas publicam vindictam poscit, quae per subsequeus
matrimonium nequaquam tolli potesi aut aboleri, the reason which he gives is
most prevalent, for it is no less then an undoubted rule of Law, viz:
privatorum Conventio juri publico derogare non debet. There is an illustrious
Example hereof in the registry of the Low Countries, in the Case of Carolus
Audax, which directly suits with thelast recited authority.

If what has been alleged out of the Civil Law has not furnished you with
inducements, motives and arguments sufficient to decree, that there was not nor
could be any marriage lawfully or validly Contracted, between them dureing the
time of the (...), you may be pleased to consider further of what I shall
present unto you taken out of the text of the Canon Law, 36. q. 2. cap. 1. are
these words repleat with authority in the point, raptor in uxorem non potest
raptam accipere; but the reason subjoyned is yet more bigg with emphasis. Quia
eorum coniunctio auctoritate canonum sanctorum penitus prohibetur.

Again Extra 36. q 2. cap. placuit you have words of no less import then the
former allegation, placuit ut hi qui rapiunt faeminas, eas nullatenus habeant
uxores, quamvis eis postmodum Convenient, aut eas dotaverint, vel nuptialiter
eum Consensu parentum acceperint.

The council of Aquisgrane also did not only separate such marriages, but
would not allow that ever after they should be man and wife as we find in
Eurchard, and the same was verified in the Council of Melda which for its
warrant quotes a Synodall definition of St. Gregory to the same purpose.

Hence it was that Urban the 8th of later times ordered Constitutione sexta,
Regula Concellariae 49. that in all dispensations super aliquo gradu
Consanguinitatis vel affinitatis ponatur Clausula, si mulier rapta non fuerit,
though it was observed in rescripts of that nature long before in England and
Ireland, and particularly in the Case of Nicholas Dowdall and Ellen Dilane of
the Diocese of Armagh in the Reign of Phillip and Mary; for it appears in the
Black book of Armagh fol. 20, by a rescript from Cardinal Poole to dispense
with them in a then prohibited degree of consanguinity, he there inserts this
Clause in his letters to the then Archbishop of Armagh to absolve and dispense
with them, dummodo dicta mulier propter hoc ab aliquo rapta non fuerit, I find
also the like Clause in another rescript of the same Cardinal, in the behalf of
one Richard Bedlewe and Matilda Bathe. The Civil and Canon Law being so express
in the Case as I have already related, it were needless to offer any thing
further of authority, yet to show the Consent of other approved Authors, be
pleased in a word or two to hear the opinion of the Casuists to satisfy you as
well in point of Conscience as Law.

Emanuell Sa and Diana tractatu de Sacramentis p. 152. resolutione. 261. say
inter Raptorem and Raptam non potest fieri validum matrimonium, quamdiu est in
potestate Raptoris, and so the Congregation of Cardinals have often declared
says Diana.

Herewith also agrees Rodrigues Lusitano cap. de matrimonio p. 641. non vale el
matrimonio enter el que arrebata y la arebatada mientras ella esta en su poder,
furthermore. Carolus Mallettus Malleatione 57. Bractea 14. p. 605. tells us
that matrimonium Contractum inter Raptorem and Raptam dum sub potestate
Raptoris existit est prossus irritum.

We have now proved by Authority of Law and consent of Casuists, that there
could be no valid marriage between the Actrix and the Defendent: ratione metus
incussi and vis illatae, and particularly ratione raptus dureing the time which
passed between the abduction and restitution to liberty. This done, I should
immediately proceed to declare his punishment, for his false and Calumnious
jactitation of Marriage with the Actrix, but that I am necessitated to break
through the ambush of some few doubts which lie in the way. The first is a
supposal that the Actrix had given her consent to what was done, I answer, that
the Raptor can never be admitted to the proof of such an allegation, but for
better assurance of what I say, take the words of Pacianus de probationibus
lib. 1. cap. 50. n. 30. p. 262. Raptor nou auditur probare volens puellam
raptam spoute sibi Consensisse quando puella probavit violentiam.

I answer further, that were he admitted to such proof, nay could he make good
proof thereof, it would not avail him in that behalf, for says Navarr
Consilio 2. de raptoribus ( p. 319.) decideing the Case between John and
Brancaleona on the one part, and the Father of Brancaleona of the other,
consensus puellae ut raperetur, non sufficit. ut non dicatur rapta, quia ut
dicatur talis sufficit ut contra voluntatem patris sit abstracta, sieve id fiat
de voluntate puelle sieve Contra voluntatem ejus and the Doctrine of Thomas
Aquinas 2.2. q. 154. Art. 7. justifies this decision, you have also the same
Case and the like decision together in Martinus Azpilcueta titulo de raptoribus
in these words Johannes rapuit Brancaleonam patri, ipsa tamen volente and
consentiente cum qua contraxit matrimonium, postmodum mota lite a patre, fuit
lata sententia contra dictos Iohannem and Brachaleonam it is also said there
that rapiens non potest raptam ducere in uxorem nisi post quam separata fuit ab
illo. It will be objected perhaps that the arguments which we offered in proof
of her dissent and opposition to the pretended marriage viz. he^ weeping and
crying are but fallible and might have been feigned, for we read in the ancient
Annals of Ireland that Dearberguill the Daughter of Malaughlin King of Mead,
and not his wife as Cambrensis mistook it,) being for a long time enamored
with Dermott Mac Murrough then King of Leinster, she sent him word by a private
messenger, that her husband King Tighearnan was then gone a Pilgrimage to St:
Patricks Purgatory, and that she desired him without any delay to come for her
promiseing to become his wife, it appears also in the same Story that Dermott
Mac Murrough did embrace the motion and took hold of the opportunity which the
absence of her husband gave him, yet notwithstanding her amors, her invitation
of him and promises to come away with him without opposition, when he came for
her she put on a seeming unwillingness, and to give the better Color to her
dissimulation, she struggled wept and cried, as though she had never Consented
to have Eloped with him; but that he had violently forced her away against her
will and mind, so that the struggling weeping and crying of women are not
always certain indications of their mind.

My answer to this objection shall be to show the dissimilitude of both Cases,
for in the Case of my Client, it is not so much as alleged, that she gave any
encouragement unto, or was privy to the intention of the Defendent to take her
away, Secondly, my Client afterward made a protestation against the abductor,
which the King of Meath's Daughter did not; if therefore that Queen had not
invited Dermott Mac Murrough to that undertaking, or had she protested in form
of Law as my Client did, against it, her struggling weeping and crying might
have been presumed to have been as unfeigned symptoms as my Clients were real
arguments of her dissent.

If it should be alleged on the behalf of the Defendent that there is no full
proof that he had Carnal knowledge of her, and that therefore the pretended
Marriage does not appear to be void ratione raptus to this objection I should
make three answe^s, the first is that we have sufficiently proved the violent
Compression of her, the 2. is that in case we had no direct proof thereof
Fontanella says, upon a general presumption of Law, rapta mulier vix a nullo
creditur unquam integra exiisse a manu raptoris Clausula 5. where he instanceth
de Helena and rapin ejus a Theseo, My third answer is, that Carnal knowledge is
not necessary to the Consummation of a Rape, for it may be non intercedente
Copula and therefore Carolus Mallettus says delictum raptus in ipsa abductione
consummatur, Malleatione. 57. p. 605. all which agrees with what I alleged
before out of Altisiodorensis,

If it should be objected that Paulus that ancient and most learned Lawyer lib
2. sententiarum tit. 19. instanceth of some Marriages in case of Rape and
thereupon says matrimonia haec jure non contrahi, sed tamen contracta non
solvi, i. e. such Marages ought not to have been made, but being made they
cannot be dissolved, for answer hereunto, I must distinguish inter legem
perfectam and imperfectam. The imperfect Law is that which does not indeed
rescind the fact done contrary to its prohibition but inflicts a punishment
upon the transgressour, such as was the lex furia testamentoria, and such as is
the Law concerning forbidden Marriages against the Fathers will which are those
mentioned by Paulus the Lawyer, and which by the Civil Law comes under the
notion of a rape, now in this Case of Marrying without consent of the Father
the Marriage must stand, and the Married must abide the punishment, they being
notwithstanding in the valuation of the Civil Law reckned as Concubines, and
their Children Bastards, and there was neither Dowry nor Marriage Portion
allowed, so that though such Marriage was civilly null and made incapable by
that law of Civil benefits and advantages; yet it was not made naturally null,
and Paulus gives an excellent reason for it in these words, contemplationem
enim publicae utilitatis privatorum commodis anteferri, for it is of public
Concern that marriages naturally valid be not rescinded, but it is of private
Commodity and emolument that the Father should be pleased in the choice of his
Son in Law, but the instance out of Paulus concerns only a marriage without
the Fathers consent, but not against the consent of the ravished Party, for such
Marriage as I have already proved, comes under the other member of the
Distinction viz. lex perfecta, which either in its self or at least by the
ministry of the Magistrate, rescinds whatever was done against her prescript,
and herewith agrees the Law non dubium C. de legibus, where it is said nullum
Contractum, inter eos videri volumus subsecutum, qui contrahunt, lege
Contrahere prohibente, and furthermore the same Law denounces ea quae lege
fieri prohibentur, si fuerint facta, non solum inutilia sed pro infectis etiam
habeantur, me thinks that Doctor French who has spoken so much formerly should
now, rather then say nothing, desire the benefit of pro infectis habeantur
which I shall allow him in as large a manner as the gloss will afford, which
says, maleficia contra legem faecta, haberi pro factis ad incommodum
facientis, sed pro infectis ad commodum injuriam passae.

It may perhaps be objected further, that the Actrix has lost the benefit of
reclamation, for she ought to have commenced her suit immediately data
oportunitate recedendi, for qui vult se liberare ratione metus ab aliquo
vinculo debet illo cessante statim reclamare according to that old and
celebrated distich in the gloss, Effuge Cum poteris ne consensisse puteris
Nam si perstiteris illius uxor eris.


To this objection the main force whereof (if any there be) lies in the words
statim reclamare, I answer thus, that the word statim, though it be always
Confined to a short time, it does not every where import an instant but admits
of aliquod temporis intervallum and tempormentum, ff de soluto matrimonio, l
quod decimus. lib: 24. tit. 3. infor:) so that Lucas de Penna, on the Code de
erogatione militaris annonae. l. 5. ( lib: 12. tit. 37. says that the word
statim is sometimes extended adunum sometimes ad duos menses, within which time
our suit was Comenced.

I confess that Skene in his exposition on that part of the Laws of Scotland
which they call Regiam Majestatem, exposes himself in these very words that
the Complaint of a Rape should be made the same day and night in the quilk the
Crime is committed, quia lapsu diei hoc crimen perscribitur, Skene de verbo
Rape and hence it is I believe that Spellman speaking of the Consuetudes or
Statutes of Scotland says si ultra unam noctem expectaverit rapta ad habendum
concilium amicorum suorum ita quod recenter non faciat sequelam, and hoc
probetur, Defendens id est Rapior quietus erit, I think we are more concerned
in the opinion of Fleta. lib. 3 cap. 5. and praeterea whose opinion it is, that
conqueri oportet foeminam cui illata est vis intra quadraginta dies, which
termination of time as a good Antiquarie observes was derived from the Salique
Law.

But to make a more direct answer to these two instances, as for the
Constitutions of Scotland, they have no bindeing force on us, who are governed
by Laws of our own, and as for that of Fleta, I think it is not applicable to
our Case, but to an appeal of Rape at the Common Law, according to the first
of Westminster the first and the 13. and the 3. Edward 1. where we read that
any person may sue within 40. days, but if not then, the King shall have
Suit, furthermore the time of such appeal has been enlarged in after times as
appears by Stampford in the Pleas of the Crown, speaking of a shorter time
anciently limited for prosecution of an appeal at the Common Law, who writes
after this manner, tamen le ley nest issint prisa cest jour car si homme fait
fresh suit, Comeni que il ne Comensa son apel. denion tres Ans apres uncore
sera dit asses bon. i. e. The Law is not so taken at this time for if fresh
suit be made, although an appeal be not Commenced within two or three years, it
shall be good enough, wherefore to compare this case with ours, we say that she
did not only Commence her suit so soon as she recoverde her self out of the
amazment that this force brought upon her which could not have been done
sooner; but also immediately on the first night she came to Dublin, she made a
protest in due form of Law whereby she perpetuated her right both of action
and exception, for annulling the Marriage for want of Consent which is apparent
in the remarque of Antonius Genuensis p. 282. for there he says Notandum
praeterea protestationem puellae, multum removere Consensum, non obstante quod
sit Contraria facto, cum protestatio in his quae dependent a voluntate nostra,
removeat Consensum ab actu durante causa metus.

But let it be granted ex suprabundantia cansae that we were bound by the
words of Fleta conquaeri oportet faeminam intra quadraginta dies, or that we
were obliged by the Regiam Majestatem of Scotland in these words. Si ultra
unam noctem expectaverit rapta ad habendum consilium amicorum as also in these
words lapsu diei hoc crimen praescirbitur yet we have pursued the rigor of
boath (...) for she not only Consulted with her friends thereof but also made
a formal Complaint to the Magistrate, and had him thereupon Committed to Prison
the same night she came to Town; which was so short an interspace of time as
came within the strict confinement of a statim reclamare.

About the year 1^^2. there depended a cause of this nature between Simon Abrey
and Alsoon Knight before one William Thunder official of Roger Cross
Archdeacon of Dublin, which by appeal was brought into judgment before Robert
Waren then principal official of the Metropolitical Court of the Archbishop of
Dublin, it seems the official of the Archdeacon though the Marriage between
the said parties was contracted per vim and metum decreed them to Co-habit as
man and wife, and this sentence was confirmed by the Archbishops principal
official for which he gave the reason following, viz, quia dicta Alsona quam
cito potuit ab eodem Simone non effugit sed cum eo aliquandiu permansit, but
the said Alsoon upon this sentence pronounced, appeald from the Metropolitical
Court at Dublin to the Primatiall Court at Armagh, when John Archbishop of
Armagh delegated by special Commission James Leech one of the Canons of the
Cathedral of Armagh to hear and determine the said cause of appeal, where
having fully heard both parties at Termon Fechan, though he found that the said
Alsoon had Cohabited with the said Simon for a month, and her parents were
consenting thereunto; yet for as much as it appeared unto him that the Marriage
was contracted per vim and metum, and that she made reclamation against the
said marriage and fled from the said Simon, (as my Client did from the
Defendent) so soon as she could, he voyded and nullified the sentence of the
Archdeacon of Dublin his Official, and of the Archbishop of Dublins principal
Official, and decreed by his sentence definitive as folloeth.

IN DEI NOMINE Amen.
AVditis, visis, cognitis and before intellectis meritis and circumstantijs,
causae appellationis, and ipsius ^sae principalis, primo coram honorabili Viro
Magistro Gul. Thunder officiali Domini Rogeri Cross Archi-diaconi Dubliniensis,
inter Aliciam Knight mulierem, partem actricem ex part una, and Simonem Abrey
ejus de facto maritum, partem ream ex part altera, motae and aliquandiu
pendentis indicisae; deinde per viam appellationis, ad Curiam Melropoliticam
Dubliniensem devolutae, and ibidem finaliter terminatae, ac ad curiam
Metropoliticam A^machanam totius Hiberniae Primatialem denuo per appellationis
Viam devolutae, and nobis per Reverendissimum in Christo patrem and dominum
Dom. Johannem Dei and Apostolicae sedis Gratia Archiepiscopum Armachanum,
totius Hiberniae Primatem, fine Canonico terminandum commissae. Et quia nos
visis and rimatis actis and processibus causarum hujusmodi coram Magistro
Roberto officiali Curiae Dubliniensis judice a quo introductis, and coram nobis
judice ad quem productis, invenimusque per depositiones testium fide dignorum
coram nobis productoruni, contra quos seu quorum dicta, nihil pro part dicti
Simonis erat objectum, sive propositum, and alia legitima documenta animum
nostrum just moventia, memoratam Aliciam, suam intentionem, tam in
appellationum, quam in sui principalis causis, been and legitime fundasse. NOS
igitur Jacobus Leech Ecclesiae Armachanae Canonicus, partibus, and causis
antedictis Commissarius, per suprascriptum Reverendissimum Patrem, and Dominum
nostrum Dom. Johannem Archiepiscopum and Primatem supradictum, specialiter
deputatus: Christi nomine primitus invacato, and de juris Concilio peritorum ad
plenum deliberati, supradictam Aliciam been and legitime appellasse, ac judices
supradictos a quibus exstat appellatum, nulliter and nequiter, injusle and
inique sententiasse pronuntiamus, decernimus and declaramus; eorumque
sententias infirmamus, cassamus, irritamus, and annullamus, viribusque
vacuamus, and quia invenimus per depositiones testium fide dignorum, quod dicta
Alicia per vim and metum amicorum suorum compulsa, matrimonium cum dicto Simone
contraxit, and nunquam in eundem consensit, imo verius dissensit, quodque quam
citius potuit, ipsius comitivam effugit, matrimonium igitur de facto and non de
jure, inter dictos Aliciam and Simonem contractum, quatenus de facto and non de
jure processit, cassamus irritamus, and annullamus, cassum, irritum and nullum
dejure fuisse and esse pronuntiamus decernimus and declaramus, eosdemque ab
invicem separamus, and divortiamus, ac dotes and donationes propter nuptias,
paraphernalia inter eosdem praefata sive donata, decernimus hinc inde fore
restituenda, ac utrique parti alibi in Domino nubendi licentiam impertientes,
per hanc nostram sententiam definitivam quam in his scriptis fecimus justitia
mediante, etc.

By these two sentences of the Archbishop of Armagh his delegat, and the
Archbishop of Dublin his principal official though of a contrary tenor each
to other it appears that the vim passa making that reclamation, and flying so
soon as she could did enough to avoid a marriage contracted per vim and metum,
they both agreed in point of law, that reclamation and flight quam cito potuit
was sufficient to that effect, for Robert Waren the Archbishop of Dublins
principal official being rightly informed in point of law though mistaken as it
seems in matter of fact decrees thus, quia quam cito potuit ab eodem Simone non
effugit sed cum eo aliquandiu permansit, igitur eandem Aliciam eidem Simoni
fore compellendam adharere decernimus and again James Leech delegated in the
same cause by the Archbishop of Armagh, being rightly informed as well in
matter of fact as of law decrees in manner following,

Quia invenimus per depositiones testium fide dignorum quod dicta Alsona seu
Alicia quam citius potuit dicti Simonis comitivam effugit matrimonium igitur de
facto and non de jure inter dictos Aliciam and Simonem contractum per vim and
metum, quatenus de facto and non de jure processit cassamus irritamus and
annullamus so that the Archbishop of Dublins principal official pronounced for
the marriage, because he thought that the vim passa had not made reclamation
nor fled so soon as she could, and the Archbishop of Armaghs delegat declared
it no marriage because he was assured by good proofs, as you have been in this
cause that the vim passa did make reclamation and fly from the Defendent so
soon as she could quod erat probandum.

H^ thereto I have proceeded in reference to the fear and force that was upon
her, whereby it appears as I humbly conceive that you ought in justice to
pronounce sentence against him, non declarando irritandum dictum matrimonium,
sed a principio irritum fuisse, for Panormitan holds in hujusmodi matrimonium
non est opus quod petatun rescissio but this is not all, we humbly expect and
desire that the Raptor be also Excommunicated, for Excommunicationis paena
Raptor una cum ei faventibus punitur cap. si quis virginem 36. q. 2. which is
the Constitution of Gregory the 2. in synodo Romana.

If it shall be objected that the Raptor is already Excommunicated and
therefore is not to be Excommunicated again in the same Cause for that it
would be vain and void of effect, to this I answer, true it is, that the
first Excomunication has more effects then the second can have, yet the second
is not without its effect, for there are three effects of Excommunication
first a declaration of being separated from God, the second a separation from
the communion of the faithful, the third effect is a strict retention of the
party without the communion of the Church, until he be absolved, I confess
that it is the third effect only that is wrought upon one excommunicated the
second time, so that though he should be absolved from the first
Excommunication, yet he is to be barred the communion of the Church until he
obtain absolution from the second Excommunication, for it is true what
Panormitane says de Iudaeis and sacracenis cap: ita quorundam ( p. 86.) ad
primos duos effectus secunda exeommunicatio nihil operatur, sed quoad tertium,
scilicet effectnus retinendi eum extra communienem donec fuerit absolotus, been
operatur, and idem dicendum est says Panormitan detertia, quarta and
nlteriori, where it is apparent that he may be Excommunicated and that to good
effect the second, third, fourth time or oftener, Again there is a tvvofould
Excommunication the one for a Contempt, the other propter delictum, vel
injuriam alicui illatam, the Defendent being Excommunicated already for his
Contempt, may be absolved upon his appearance, submission and security given
parere mandatis ecclesiae, but if he be once Excomunicated propter delictum he
cannot obtain absolution quousque parti laesae fuerit satisfactum, until the
party injured receive satisfaction. Wherefore in regard he may be legally
Excommunicated the second time and that is most just he should I conceive we
have good reason to desire it.

Much might be spoken to the aggravation of this Crime were the severity of
punishment my chiefest aim, yet I shall make use at present but of two
aggravations, the one is taken from the consideration of her being under the
guard and tuition of her father, for in the book of Ecclesiasticus Cap. 42. it
is said filia patris abscondita est, vigilia and solieitudo ejus aufert
son^num, ne forte in adolescentia sua adulter a efficiatur hereby it is easily
observed, that that offense which would have been noe more then fornication
in a young Woman at her own disposal is deemed adultery in her who is under
the tuition of her Parents, and the reason is very good, for it is founded in
the similitude betvveen such a young Woman and a Wife, for even as a married
Woman for as much as she is under the protection of her husband, and her body
is her husbands, if she have to do with any other man in congressu carnis
does by the injury hereby done unto her husband become an adulteress, so a
vitgin whilst she remains in the power of her Father and is his as to the
Custody of her person, when she yields though through fear her body to any
man, injures him, and as Gasper Astete says se puede llamar adultera may be
called an adulteress as she is termed Eclesiasticus the 42 whence it is
inferred by the Casuists, that, when she who is under the power of her Father
loses her Virginity even in the Case of Rape; it is such a circumstance as
must necessarily be mentioned in her Confession, for that it changes speciem
peccati, and is a sin of injustice as well as of Luxury, whereas a Virgin
not being under the power, of a Father but at her own dispose, if she loose
her Maidenhead, although it be a sin of Luxury, the Doctors say it is no sin
of injustice, noris it an offense to any other for so much as she is domina sui
Corporis.

The other aggravation is so well expres'd in the words of the Poet Catullus
that the recital of them in their Original, will be sufficient without
prostitution to vulgar understandings.

Vt flos in septis secretus nascitur herbis
Ignotus pecori, nullo succissus aratro,
Quem mulcent aurae, format sol, educat imler,
Multi illum pueri, multae optavere puellae,
Idem cum tenui captus defloruit ungue,
Nulli illum pueri, nullae optavere puellae:
Sic virgo cum intacta manet, dum chara suis,
Cum castum amisit, polluta Corpore, florem,
Nec pueris haec chara manet nec chara puellis.
There remains yet in arrear one branch of the Cause his jactitation of
Marriage which in the opinion of Grotius Deserves as great a penalty as his
other offense for in his annotations on the 22 Deuteronomy he says diffamater
par habetur inferenti vim virgini, andn owonder for the Rabins reckon
Calumniators amongst. (...) that is to say amongst those who are not to see God
in glory ( vid animadver: in Pirk p. 253)

This matter of diffamation is so clearly proved against him, and the Law is so
evident in daily practice as to that point, that shall not so much abuse your
patience and leisure, as to spend time and words in rendering it more evident,
nor shall I desire more of your justice therein at present, then to pronounce
him guilty of an unjust and temerary jactitation of Marriage with the actrix,
to impose on him perpetual silence in that behalf, and lastly to Condemn him in
all our expenses, all which we hope and humbly desire that you will immediately
pronounce, for that we are confident the Case is so Clear that it need not lie
longer in the balance of deliberation, and that whatsoever I have said in this
debate may be interpreted no otherwise then(...)

(...)

Short Advertisements given to the said Court and Auditory after sentence
pronounced, delivered in a speech by Dudley Loftus Doctor of the Laws etc.
MY promise has made me deptor to the expectation of this assembly for an
advertisment which I thought to have given then in the series of my former
discourse, which through have I then omitted, if therefore I may presume on
your favor and license, I shall take advantage of so many witnesses of good
note as are here present, to make a reflection in a word or two, on the
Plaintiffs case, wherein If I shall say any thing not agreeable to your
opinion, I shall in all the flexures of humility submit to your correction and
the regulation of your better judgment, me thinks I hear most persons declare
the satisfaction they have received in your most righteous judgment, yet some
seem to be of opinion that the splendor of your justice shines upon the Lady
no otherwise, then as the Sun profusely sheds its beams on blasted blossoms
which receive no benefit thereby, and others think that chastity without
Virginity is but as a Garland of Flowers that has lost its sent and color;
for my part I have already declared my opinion, that untouched Virginity is the
most precicus Jewel of the femall sex, and I do agree with Ariosto who says.

Non nobilita ne gran fortuna basta,
Se per nome e per opere non e casta.
And I confess that it was a great misfortune that the bud of her Virginity was
pulled from the stalk before it could spread or show it self in marriage, and
that she cannot receive an aequivalent exchange in satisfaction of that which
she has lost; yet I dare affirm that this loss has not brought her into
disgrace with prudent men, nor does her honor thereby go into diminution, for
she has no more stained her reputation then she has stung her conscience by
enduring that which she could not avoid, insomuch that I dare appeal to the
strictest tribunal on earth for judgment, whether she has received so much as
faniae vulnusculum by the force offered unto her; nay I am of opinion that some
unsuccessfull contests are to be preferred before some Victories for which
reason Tornay in France bears a Badge of Reputation to this day for that Caesar
confesses in his Comentaries that he found a more valourous resistance there
then elsewhere, I am confident the reason may be urged much more to the
advantage of the persons who made the resistance then the place where it was
made, and if so, I rest assured my Client has more reason to glory on the
Theater of a public appearance then to shrink into the shade of obscurity, or
to hide her self in the dark corners of a bashful retirement, for let us
consider her first of all ratione metus concussi, and then ratione vis illatae,
as to the first it is confessed that a married woman if she should yield to an
adulterous act by reason of fear, (though it were so great as might be incident
to a valiant man) she would in the opinion of the Casuists be held guilty of
adultery, quia metu mortis non licet contra legem agere quae est juris naturae,
eo quod intrinsicam habet malitiam, for not to preserve the fidelity of Wedlock
is against the law of nature and in it self in trinsically evil, and therefore
not excusable upon any consideration of fear though never so great: But a
Virgin, if she through fear consent (which my Client did not.) to a
constupration, she is not guilty of the formal evil thereof, for non censetur
Cooperatio in malo nisi ubi res est intrinsice mala non pendens a voluntate
Concurrentis says Candidus de Confessione sacramentali Artic. 23. Dubio. 12,
but malitia stupri does so depend on the will of the woman that illa
concurrente tollatur, but illa renitente ponatur, the difference of the two
cases consists in this, that the circumstance of the two cases consists in
this, that the circumstance of adultery does not depend ex voluntate faeminae
as that of Constupration does, so that if my Client had yielded through fear,
she had not been guilty of the evil of Constupration, (though the stricter
Casuists would perhaps extend it ad malitiam fornicationis) but the case is
otherwise with my Client for fear did not prevail with her, she was compelled
by force,

And ye know that force and imbecility are the great distinguishers of sin
insomuch that not to commit a sin through imbecility makes one guilty of sin,
whereas to be concerned in sin through imbecility excuses from sin, wherefore
says a famous Doctor of the Laws Johannes de Moutholon in affirmance of the
first position, qui sola virium imbecillitate desinit peccare reus peccati est,
quia ream mentem habet, vide Cap si cni etiam de paenitentia did. 1. and in
proof of the later position viz, that to be concerned in sin through
imbecility excuses from guilt, I shall produce a testimony from the very
fountain of the law, for Azo who is termed fons legum says in concurrence with
Baldus, toll voluntatem de medio and omnis act us erit indifferens, and
therefore Gabriel Biel expresses himself thus, in voluntariis neque
vituperamur neque landamur, which agrees with this saying of St. Austin,
violentia non violatur pudicitiae faeminae, quia violenter Compressa, Carne non
utitur, sed sine consensu toleratur quod alius operatur, that father is yet
more clear in this point when spaking of a married man who forced a modest
woman, he says duo in adulterio fuerunt unus commisit, the reason hereof may
be perfectly rendered in the observation of Nicholaus de Orbello, viz, that as
the understanding being under the Dominion of anger is nor sui juris, so
timentes vel vi oppressi non habent voluntatis plenditudinem nay rather velle
non dicitur qui metus causa vult vel vi oppressus succumbit, to this you may
add the words of Baldus Metus est participatio duarum qualitatum scilicet
voluntatis and noluntatis, cujus effectus declinat ad velle, and affect us
inclinat ad nolle. de his quae vi metusue causa fiunt, Cap. 1. n. 5. and
Accursius declares that voluntas meticulosa est tac^ta quaedam contradictio,
and mrgis accedit dissensui quam consensui.

Perhaps the foregoing arguments did not slide so smoothly into the
apprehension of the unlearned as I could wish, for they were taken out of the
knotty timber of School divinity, which for the most part rejects the plain,
yet I shall endeavor to make my self more inteligible to them in what remains.

I know that many ingenious persons do oftentimes insinuat false opinions into
the minds of the ignorant and do invade the persuasions of less discerning
persons by a licentious rayllerie which may be termed a blamable liberty of
practizing wit too freely, and that it is an easy matter for such ignorant
persons to be deluded thereby, who having no further recourse then to their own
imaginations will not remit such matters to the examination of reason.

Hence it is that this Ladies condition has been drawn into debate, and though
some persons and they of honor and judgment, hold it for as evident a truth,
as that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, that she
is no whit prejudiced by her late misfortune, yet others seem to be of opinion,
that she is thereby brought under the suspicion if not prest^mption of worse
dispositions, and a greater facility of temptation, and that therefore she is
notably damnified in her reputation, which opinion is promoted with too much
temerity by some of like mind with the Jesuists, who as the Franciscans say by
a dexterous manner of depressing other religious orders, seek to procure
grandeur to themselves, but do not consider that the best way to defend their
own reputation, is to be careful of the credit of others, for my part I shall
not precisely determine the matter to the tenet of either of those parties, for
we are not now in the blazon, are tricking a coat in Heraldry, where so small a
thing as a color of one hair makes a coat another thing, as in Erminites; but
I think that things of this nature are like to the time which the rules of
religion appoint for the recital of hours, which as the Casuists teach habet
aliquid latitudinis, the later opinion seems to me too severe and grounded upon
a temerary surmise, not to be warranted by any principle of piety or rule of
charity; and though the first opinion may be in courtship admitted as a
favorable mistake, for the Ladies advantage; yet I think it best to temper the
extremity of these two opinions in a middle way though Sub condition crucis,
my opinion therefore is that though she is not altogether as she was before to
every fancy, yet is she not really or considerably the worse in the opinion of
the most judicious and if there be any difference between the state of her
untoucht virginity, and her new confirmd chastity of mind, as to valuation it
is almost like that of the stars in the firmament whose different magnitudes
are not perceptible to the most clear seeing eye, so that I presume that a
ravished innocent, and an untoucht Virgin may seem to shine with equal splendour
in their respective! Orbs, and that this chaste Lady may be resembled to the
pure metal of the Crown pieces of the sometime Lords Justices of this
Kingdom, which though their stamp and impression should be altered, or lost,
would notwithstanding carry no less int^insick value in the same weight; the
Duke of Sommerset said that all his actings were blameless in the eye of
justice, so I may say that all her sufferings in the time of her abduction were
as innocent in the eye of honor, nay that the Heroic acts performed by her in
the defense of her chastity do exceed a volumn of their virtues who have
preserved the integrity of their bodies: quid enim prodest pudicitia corporis
animo constuprato says St. Hierome in Jeremiam lib. 2. cap. 7.

Again it is a thing agreeable to the ingenuity of all worthy persons to
observe that law which they impose upon others, and therefore l. ff. de pact is
it is said nihil tam humanae fidei consentaneum est quam ea quae placuerunt
servari, give me leave therefore in a modest fredome to ask the most virtuous
Lady amongst you what she could have thoug^t criminal in her self to have been
forced as that Lady was, I hope enough has been spoken to determine your
judgment in this affair so far at least as to clear her reputation, and I know
that to insist too much on the proof of so clear a truth would crush your
attention as flat as a (B) after a cliff, I shall therefore immediately coast
upon a conclusion and therein desire you rather to lament her late sufferings
with tenderness of heart then judge her present condition with severity of
censure, let no man discharge upon her innocence the misapprehensions of his
wild fancy or untamed wit, let no man make her Rape farther matter of
discourse, but rather let that misfortune be hidden under the vail of perpetual
forgetfulness, let the Garland of chastity remain unwithered on her brow let
her flowrish in an honorable reputation whilst the Defendant deserves to have
his goods confiscate and his Memory banished out of the world: and let her
virtuous mind enjoy the quiet of a Serene conscience, whilst his black Soul is
left during Divine pleasure to the dismal horror of midnight dreams, to the
terrors of the law, and the dreadful apprehensions of the day of judgment.

FINIS

