LAWRENCE MAYOR. Com. Council. tent. Vicesimo septimo die Januarii, Anno Dom.
1664. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. Decimo sexto.
THe Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, signifying unto this Court, that several
Complaints have been made to the Court of Aldermen, of the late Raising of the
Prizes, and abuses used in the Measure and Weight of Coals; And that His
Majesty has also taken notice thereof to his Lordship, and signified His
Pleasure, That some speedy course be taken for remedy therein. And that several
Judges of the Land, and other great Personages have discoursed and given advice
to his Lordship to like purpose.

And further, That a Committee of the Court of Aldermen, appointed upon this
occasion, have (upon a diligent inquiry into the causes of the said Complaints)
represented the same, together with some means for remedy thereof, in a Report
to the said Court of Aldermen; which upon desire of this Court, was now Read
for their better Information.

It is therefore thought fit and Ordered, That the said Committee of the Court
of Aldermen, namely, Sir William Turner, Sir Richard Rives, Mr. Alderman
Hooker, Mr. Alderman Thomas Bonfoy, together with Sir William Bateman, Sir
Arthur Ingram, Mr. Deputy Nevill, Mr. Deputy Fluellin, Sir Thomas Chamberlain,
Mr. Penning, Coll. Cleggatt, and Mr. Deputy Canham, or any two of the said
Aldermen, and four of the said Commoners, shall take further consideration of
the said Complaints and Abuses, and of the most speedy and effectual means to
remedy the same, for the general good of His Majesty's Subjects, in and about
this City, and parts adjacent, and vindication of the Government and good Order
of the same City from such Aspertions and prejudice, as (by relation) are
imputed to it, by occasion of the said Complaints and Abuses; And certify unto
this Court in writing under their Hands, how they find the same, and their
Opinions therein; and Richard Hind to warn and attend them.

LAWRENCE MAYOR. Com. Council. tent. Decimo quarto die Februarii, Anno Dom.
1664. Anno Regni Regis CAROLI nunc Angliae, etc. Decimo septimo.
THis Day the Committee appointed by late Order of this Court, to consider of
several Abuses complained to be committed by the Wood-mongers, in and about the
Price, Measure, and Weight of Coals, etc. And of Remedies for the same, did
deliver into this Court a Report in Writing under their Hands, how they find
the same, and their Opinions; the tenor whereof is as follows, viz.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his
Brethren, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
WHereas by a late Order of this Honorable Court, intimating the Complaints
lately made to your good Lordship, and the Court of Aldermen, of the excessive
Prizes and Deceits used in the Measure and Weight of Coals; and that His
Majesty had taken notice thereof, and signified his pleasure for some speedy
course to remedy the same; also that several of the Judges and other great
Personages had discoursed thereof, and given advice to your Lordship to like
purpose, which had occasioned an inquiry to be made into the causes of the said
complaints, by a Committee therefore appointed by your Lordship, and the said
Court of Aldermen; whose Report thereof, was then read in this Court for their
better information, and this Court was pleased thereupon to refer it unto us,
whose Names are subscribed, to take further consideration of the said Matters,
and of the most speedy and effectual Means to redress the same. Now We, the
said Committees, do humbly certify, that We have heard and received the
Evidence and Information offered by diverse knowing and credible Persons,
touching the said Complaints and Abuses, and (besides that many of the
particulars are notorious and obvious to common Experience) do find upon the
said Informations, which the Parties respectively do offer to confirm by their
Oaths, That the Citizens and Inhabitants of London, and Parts adjacent, do lie
under an intolerable grievance in the Cases above mentioned, brought upon them
by the Wood-mongers, as by a summary Account of their Practices and Abuses
contained in the ensuing particulars, more plainly may appear.

And first, Touching the Price of Sea-Coals, it appears, that the same is, and
is used and subject to be raised by the Wood-mongers, at their own pleasure,
and that by these several means and practices, especially, First, the
Wood-mongers pretending to the sole Trade of retailing Coals, and aiming to
compass the same, and to exclude all others, have, in order to that end, First
obtained diverse, and do take all opportunities to obtain more of the Wharfs in
and about the City, into their own hands, and do convert so many as can be
spared from their own occasions, to other uses, binding their Tenants under
strict Covenants and Limitations, not to employ the same, or but very
sparingly, for the Landing or Selling of Coals, That by depriving of others,
they only may have those advantages of Landing, Storing, and Selling of that
and all other Fuel.

Secondly, where they cannot obtain possession of any other Fuel-Wharfs in
their way, they deal with the Owners to change the same to other uses.

Thirdly, They disturb and hinder the Coal-Ships from Unlading at Smarts Key,
(as was formerly used) and other known and convenient Keys and Places, so to
compel them to their own Wharfs, whereby the Citizens and others, are
disappointed of Buying there at the first hand, and by the good Measure of the
Coal-Meeters, and of the ready carriage they were wont to have from those
places.

Fourthly, They labor to suppress all others that deal in Retailing of Coals,
denying them for Engrossers, and imposing upon the easier and meaner sort,
Arbitrary Fines, and prosecuting others at Law, denying to all the benefit of
Carr-rooms, or the use of the Town Carrs to serve their Customers, and
punishing the Carr-men with penalties and troubles, and seizure of their Carrs,
if they discover them in such Employment, so to constrain them to keep up their
stores to their loss, and the public damage, or to put them off to the
Wood-mongers upon their own terms, for their better advantage of raising the
Price, when they have engrossed the whole Store in their own hands. Whereas
indeed, the Buying and Selling of Coals, is but an accident to the Wood-mongers
Trade, and free for all men to use as themselves, and to encourage the
multiplicity of Traders in Victual and Fuel, (especially, that are not united
into one Society and Combination) has been ever held a most certain means to
keep down the Price of those Provisions, and at this time, we find those other
Retailers willing to Sell by the just Measures, and at much lower Rates than
the Wood-mongers do, if they could be supplied with Carrs to serve out their
Coals to the Buyers.

Fifthly, They generally obstruct their own Apprentices, after their times are
expired, from Setting up, by disappointing them of Wharfs, and denying them
Carr-rooms, as a further means to continue the Trade Engrossed in a few hands.

Sixthly, They deny their own, nor will suffer, but in all they can, discourage
and hinder the Town Carrs from carrying home the Coals of private Persons,
which are not bought of themselves, thereby hindering all persons of supplies
from the Ships at the first hand, where they would receive much better Measure,
besides the advantage of the Ingrain, and at far easier Prizes than are
afforded by the Wood-mongers; so that if these restraints be put upon the Trade
by the Wood-mongers, for their own private Gain, in a time of so vast increase
of Houses and Inhabitants, within this City, and parts adjacent, an advance of
the Price of Sea-Coals must necessarily ensue.

Secondly, The Wood-mongers having by the means before mentioned, so far
prevailed, to obstruct the Dealing of all others, and to obtain unto their own
hands the sole Trade of Coals, have used of late by confederacy (after they
have competently stored themselves) to withdraw and absent from the City
several days, upon arrival of the Summer Coal-Fleet, retarding the same at
dead Markets, in design to disappoint a Voyage, and so upon pretense and color
of scarcity, to raise the Price afterward at their own will. Whereas, If they
gave the wonted quick dispatch or discharge of such Fleets, the same might, (as
is credibly informed) make oftener returns for the store and supply of the City.

Thirdly, They agree (as may best serve their turns) in Summer time, to lay
aside a Carr-room or more a piece, to promote a Winter Trade, by restraining
and disabling themselves to serve out their Fuel in the Summer and cheapest
time, that by pretense of overmuch Work, they may deferr their Customers to
the later and dearer Seasons of the Year; and if any happen to make timely and
cheaper contracts, they often force them, notwithstanding, to pay the Rates of
the later or dearer Season, which themselves have chose for delivery of the
Coals.

Fourthly, It has been further observed of the Wood-mongers, upon their late
raising the Price of Coals, that thereupon, they also raised and dispersed a
Report and rumor, that a price was about to be set by the Magistracy and
Authority of this City, upon Sea-Coals, thereby to discourage and hinder the
bringing in of any more Coals, till they had uttered their own Stores at the
present dear or dearer Rates.

Secondly, Touching the Wood-mongers abuses in the Measure and Weight of Coals,
the same are evidenced in the following particulars.

First, That they Buy by the just and Lawful Measures of this City, and Sell by
the less and Unlawful Sacks, which are made by their own Order, Sized and
Licensed for Twelve pence a Set, at their Common Hall, and enjoined (with a
prohibition of the Coal-Meters) to be used by all the Company, whereby, and by
other Artifices, they make Twenty three, and Twenty four Chaldron of a Score.
And if by the Coal-Meters means, or any omission, or unskilfulness of their own
Servants, they are disappointed of those unjust advantages, they fall upon them
with evil and reviling Language, as the Authors of some unusual and great
injury to them.

Secondly, If any go about to Measure their said unlawful Sacks, (which
generally want three or four Bushels in a Chaldron) the Carr-men, if they
discover the Meters, will, to avoid them, drive away, and rather go far about,
and carry back their Coals, than subject them to be Measured. And the
Wood-mongers do give notice and an ill Character of such person in their
Company, that all may beware or avoid to serve him with Coals for the future.

Thirdly, They practice alike, or greater deceit in the Weight of Pit Coals,
which by some have been discovered to Sell under Weight above Four hundred, and
sometimes Six hundred in a Tunn.

Fourthly, they allure by Compositions and deter by vexatious Actions, and
Arrests, such as are employed, or go about to prosecute any Wood-monger for
deceit in the Weight or Measure of their Coals.

And no less are their abuses (as is likewise attested) in the Buying and
Selling of Wood, which contrary to Law, and many good Acts of Common Council,
they usually for their greater gain, go down and deal for in the Country,
allowing it to be Cut and made up under assize, conditioning to abate in Price
for the same accordingly; insomuch, that the Billets which they Buy at Eleven
or Twelve Shillings, they Sell again for Two and twenty Shillings a Thousand:
Whereas no Firewood ought to be Bought by the Wood-mongers, till it be brought
up to the City and viewed, and found to be of good assize, and the Price set
thereon by the Lord Mayor, and that it have lain upon the Water in Winter Eight
Hours, and in Summer Twelve hours, for any Citizen or Private Person to furnish
for their own use.

It is further complained and very evident, that there being about Fifty of the
Number of Carr-men of the Poorer sort, who had Carr-rooms, and were called
Pentioners to the Company of Wood-mongers, the said Company designing to
advance a Sum of Money for their common use upon the said poor Men, did propose
to them either to take Twenty Pounds a piece, and resign their said Carr-rooms,
or to give and pay so much to the said Company and retain them, and did
thereupon enforce the said poor Men to raise and pay Twenty Pounds a piece,
(amounting in all to a Thousand Pounds, or thereabouts) to continue the benefit
of their said Carr-rooms, which many of them were very unable to do, being in
want before, for the relief and livelihood of themselves and their Families.

Now, for remedy of the before mentioned Evils and Abuses of the Wood-mongers;
and First, of inhancing the price of Sea-Coal, We think fit,

1. That the Act of Common Council, made the Tenth of May, in the Year 1661.
whereby the said Company are reinvested with the Government of Carrs, etc. and
the Number limited to Four Hundred and twenty, and of them One hundred and
forty assigned to the Wharfs, for Carriage of Fuel, and by means of which Act,
the Wood-mongers (as is conceived) do assume the power and advantages of those
practices, be repealed, or so altered, that the whole Number of Carrs may be at
liberty (as they were before) for the Carriage of Coals and other Fuel; And
that it may not be in the Wood-mongers power to hinder, but that all that will
may Buy, either for their own use, or to Sell again, and have free liberty to
Land, Un-load, and Measure their Coals at any common Wharfs and Keys, or other
convenient places, and Carts to carry them home at their own pleasure.

Secondly, That there be some considerable stock of Coals, (by such means as
this Court shall think sit) provided yearly, (as has been formerly intended)
at the cheapest, and sold out at the dearest Seasons of the Year, to keep down
the Price upon any emergent occasion, especially for the help and relief of the
Poor.

Thirdly, That when it is found expedient a Price be set upon Coals, according
to the Custom of the City.

Secondly, To prevent the said deceits in false Measures, and Weight of Coals,
We think fit,

First, That the Wood-mongers be not permitted to keep any Carrs to their
Wharfs, but that all be Street Carrs, and employed for the Carriage of Fuel as
for any other Work.

Secondly, That the Wood-mongers, and all other Traders on Sea-Coals, be
strictly held for time to come, not to send abroad any Coals Sold or Contracted
for, in any Sacks, other than the Sea-Coal-Meters, and to carry along in their
Carts a Lawful Sealed Bushel, Nineteen Inches in Breadth, and Seven Inches and
a half in Depth, (and that like Sealed Bushells be kept in every Parish) for
every Buyer that will, to Measure his own Coals as they are brought home, as in
and by an Act of Common Council, made the Seventh of September, 1632. and many
former and other good Acts and Orders is more fully enjoined and directed.

Thirdly, That for avoiding deceit in the Weight in Pit-Coals, every Buyer may
use a Meter, who upon Request, is to attend to Weigh the Coals at the Buying,
or bringing home of the same.

And lastly, To remedy the false Size and high Price of Wood, We conceive the
same cannot be better effected, than by executing the Acts and Laws in force,
which expose all Billets and Faggots under Size to be Seized, and Forfeited,
and do forbid the Sale of any Firewood to the Wood-mongers and Retailers, till
the same be brought to such Key as the Lord Mayor shall appoint, and have lain
upon the Water Eight Hours in Winter, and Twelve in the Summer, for private
Persons to furnish themselves, and that the Lord Mayor have set thereupon a
Price, (as was heretofore used to be done) to be kept and observed under severe
Penalties and Forfeitures.

And so We humbly submit the Premises to the better Judgment and Consideration
of this Honorable Court,
this 14th day of February, 1664.
Upon Reading whereof, as also of a Petition of the Master, Wardens, and
Assistants of the said Company, and of some overtures touching the Surrendering
up the Lease made to the said Company, and of the Government of Carrs and
Carr-men within this City and Liberties; this Court does defer their further
proceedings thereupon till the said Company shall give their Answer touching
the Surrendering up the said Lease.

LAWRENCE MAYOR. Com. Council. tent. Decimo septimo die Februarii, Anno Dom.
1664. Anno Regni Regis CAROLI II. nunc Angliae, etc. Decimo septimo.
AT this Court, the Master and Wardens of the Company of Wood-mongers did
surrender up the Lease made unto the said Company, under the Common Seal of
this City, in the time of the Mayoralty of Sir Richard Brown, Knight and
Baronet, touching the Government of Carrs, Carr-men, and Carr-rooms, and the
counterpart of the same Lease, Sealed to the City, was delivered up unto the
Master and Wardens, and a Bond, under the Common Seal of the said Company, for
the payment of One hundred and fifty Pounds per annum to the use of
Christs-Hospital, for the term of Sixty and one Years in the same Lease
contained, and lately remaining in the Chamber of London, not being to be found
for the present, a Release of the same Bond under the Common Seal of this City
was Read and Sealed in open Court, the tenor whereof follows.

Whereas, the late Master, Wardens and Assistants of the Fellowship of
Wood-mongers, London, have by their Obligation under the Common Seal of the
said Corporation, bearing Date the Twenty third day of July, in the Thirteenth
year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Bound themselves and their Successors to the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of
the City of London, in the Sum or penalty of One Thousand Pounds, with
condition thereon Endorsed, for the true and sure Payment of the Sum of One
hundred and fifty Pounds yearly, and every year during the term of Sixty one
years, from the Twenty fourth day of June then last past, at two several
Payments, by even and equal portions, that is to say, At the Feast of the Birth
of our Lord, Seventy five Pounds, and at the Feast of St. John Baptist, Seventy
five Pounds, or within 40 days after each of the said Feast days, to the
Treasurer of Christ-Hospital, for the time being, for the maintenance of the
poor Children therein harbored, as in and by the said Obligation and
Condition, could the same be produced, more fully and plainly may appear.

Now know all men by these presents, That the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens
of the City of London, for diverse good causes and considerations hereunto
moving, have remised, released, cleared, and quit-claimed, and by these
Presents for them and their Successors, fully, clearly, and absolutely Remise,
Release, and for ever quit-claim unto the Master, Wardens, and Assistants, of
the Fellowship of Wood-mongers, and their Successors, the aforesaid Obligation
and Condition thereof, and all and all manner of Actions, and Causes of
Actions, Plaints, Process, Suits and Demands whatsoever, which the said Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens, against the said Master, Wardens, and Assistants, or
their Successors ever had, now have, or at any time hereafter may or might
have, by reason or means of the said Obligations and Conditions thereof in any
wise howsoever.

In witness whereof, The said Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, have caused
their Common Seal to be put to these Presents, Dated the Seventeenth day of
February, Anno Dom. One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and Four, in the Seventeenth
year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord, Charles the Second, by the Grace of
God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

And it was Resolved that the thanks of this Court be returned to the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and also to Sir William Turner, Knight and Alderman,
and the rest of the Committee appointed by this Court, for the management of
the aforesaid affair, for their great care and pains taken therein.

UPon this Report, etc. The Government of the Carrs was taken from the Company
of Wood-mongers; And by Act of Common Council, bearing Date the Twenty first
day of June, 1665. were placed in the President and Governors of
Christ-Hospital, and by that Act amongst other things is as follows.

And for the prevention of such Deceit hereafter, as diverse Wood-mongers have
Practiced in the Sale and Measure of their Coals, It is Enacted, That all
Sea-Coals hereafter to be Sold, or Uttered by Retail, by any Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall be filled and brought home to the Buyers in the
Sea-Coal-Meeters Sacks, or such other Sacks as contain the full Measure of the
Sea-Coal-Meters Sacks, and are and shall be Marked by the Keeper of the
Guild Hall for the time being, according to an Order of the Court of Aldermen,
made the Twenty fifth day of October, in the time of the Mayoralty of Sir
Thomas Cambell, Knight, deceased, and carried by some Street Carr or Carrs, of
Persons duly Licensed and Allowed as aforesaid, and bearing upon the same Carrs
the Mark of the Red-Cross, for a Note of their Allowance, as has anciently
been accustomed.

The Governors of Christ-Hospital, together with the Fellowship of Carr-Men,
have been at great Charges in Suits of Law, to bring the said Wood-mongers or
Retailers in Fuel to a compliance with the said Act of Common Council; They
with their Purses and Persons, have in all Courts opposed the same, some of
them well knowing, that if the Carr-men should be permitted to carry Fuel, they
should lose great sums of Money yearly, which they now get by the delivery of
short Measure, and several of them have been Indicted at Sessions for
delivering sometimes two Bushels, and sometimes three Bushels short in a Load
of Coals.

The Argument about this by Law in the Exchequer, and at the Kings-Bench-Bar
have not been yet determined, by reason some few things should be added to them
by Law, which the Governors do earnestly pray the Common Council to do.

The Honorable House of Commons, January the 29th, 1673. Ordered, That a Bill
should be prepared by a Committee then named, for the Regulating and
Ascertaining the Measure of Coals, and Abuses in the Sale of Wood.

The Sixteenth of February, 1673. The Committee Reports, They had prepared a
Bill, and delivered it in, which was Read, and Ordered a second Reading.

The Twenty fourth of February, 1673. The Parliament was Prorogued, so that the
Bill received no further debate at that time.

The Sixth of March, 1673/4. His Majesty was Graciously pleased to send to the
City this Letter following.

Charles R.
TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well; Whereas We are given to
understand, That in this last Session of Parliament, by Order of the House of
Commons, a Bill was prepared and Read, for the Regulating Abuses in the Measure
of Coal and Wood, within that Our City of London, Borough of Southwark,
Liberties of the Tower of London, St. Katherines, and East-Smithfield, but the
said Bill not having been passed into an Act, by reason of the Prorogation, and
the said Abuses still continuing to the great Oppression and Grievance of Our
good Subjects, We have thought fit hereby to recommend to you in an especial
Manner, the Regulation thereof, and as well the putting in Execution all Orders
already made, for and toward the Redressing all Abuses and Deceits of that
kind, as the making such Orders as may totally prevent the same for the future;
Wherein We cannot doubt of your particular Care, and so We bid you Farewell.
Given at Our Court at White Hall, this Sixth day of March, 1673/4. in the
Twenty sixth year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's special Command, ARLINGTON.

To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir William Hooker, Knight, Lord Mayor of Our
City of LONDON, and to the Aldermen and Common Council of that Our City.

HOOKER MAYOR. Com. Council. tent. in Camera Guild Hall Civit. Land. die Martis
decimo nono die Maii, Anno Dom. 1674. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi etc.
vicessimo sexto.
AT this Court was Presented and Read His Majesty's Letter, directed to this
Court, Dated at White Hall, the Sixth day of March, last past, setting forth,
That His Majesty had been given to understand, that in the last Session of
Parliament, by Order of the House of Commons, a Bill was prepared and read for
the regulating the abuses in the Measures of Coals and Wood within this City,
Borough of Southwark, Liberties of the Tower of London, St. Katherines, and
East-Smithfield; but the said Bill, not passing into an Act, by reason of the
Prorogation, and the same abuses still continuing, to the great oppression and
grievance of His Majesty's Subjects: Therefore His Majesty was Graciously
pleased by his said Letter, to recommend to this Court in especial manner the
regulating thereof: And as well the putting in execution all Orders already
made, for and toward the redressing all Abuses and Deceits of that kind, as
the making such Orders as may totally prevent the same for the future; This
Court in Obedience to the said Command, does nominate and appoint Sir John
Frederick, Sir William Turner, Sir Richard Ford, Sir John Moore, Knights
Aldermen, Sir Robert Jeoffories, and Sir Thomas Player, Knights, William
Fluellin Esquire; Mr. Pilkington, Mr. Tompson, Major Gunston, Mr. Short, and Mr.
Turgis Commoners, or any Two of the said Aldermen, and Four of the said
Commoners, to be a Committee, forthwith to meet and consult what is fit to be
done, for redressing the same Abuses, and Report their Opinions therein to this
Court, and William Bird to Warn and Attend them.

Wagstaffe.

PEAKE MAYOR. Martis 28. die April. 1668. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi
Angliae, etc. XX.
THis day the President and Governors of Christs-Hospital, London, to whom the
Rule, Oversight and Government of Carrs, Carts, Carr-rooms, Carters and Carmen,
within the City of London, and Liberties thereof, is committed by Act of
Common Council, made the One and twentieth day of June, One Thousand Six
Hundred Sixty Five, in the Seventeenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, exhibited
into this Court a Book of Orders, Rules, Directions, and Limitations, devised
for the better Regulation of the said Carrs, Carts, Carters, and Carr-men,
Humbly submitting the same to be allowed and confirmed by this Court, according
to the said Act of Common Council, and the Custom of this City; Whereupon the
said Orders, Rules, Directions, and Limitations were here openly and
deliberately read, and advisedly and maturely considered, and after some
alterations and amendments therein made, were well liked, ratified and
confirmed, and Ordered to be observed, executed and performed by all Persons
concerned in all Points, and in all times hereafter, until this Court, or the
Common Council of this City shall see cause to Order or Direct any thing to the
contrary thereof, or of any Articles or Clauses therein contained.

And it is further Ordered, That the said President and Governors may as they
see cause, use and publish the said Orders, Rules, Directions, and Limitations,
under the Title, and in manner and form following; That is to say,

ORDERS, RVLES, DIRECTIONS, and LIMITATIONS, Made by the Right Honorable Sir
William Peake, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, at a Court held in the Chamber of the
Guild Hall, London, on Tuesday, the Eight and Twentieth day of April, One
Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and Eight, in the Twentieth Year of the Reign of Our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc. for the further Direction of the
President and Governors of Christs-Hospital, London, in the Rule, Oversight,
and Government of the Carrs, Carts, Carters, and Carmen, within the City of
London, and Liberties thereof, and for the better Government and Ordering of
the said Carrs, Carts, Carters, and Carmen, within the said City of London, in
pursuance of an Act of Common Council, held in the Chamber of the Guild Hall of
the said City, the One and Twentieth day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred
Sixty and Five, and in the Seventeenth Year of His said Majesty's Reign.

WHereas heretofore (that is to say) in the Third Year of the Reign of Our late
Sovereign Lord King James, of England, etc. (and of Scotland, the Nine and
Thirtieth) the Carr-Men of London were Incorporated with the Company of
Wood-mongers, London, by His said Highness Letters Patents bearing date the
Nine and Twentieth day of August, in the Years aforesaid, since which time (to
wit) the Fifth day of December, in the Nineteenth Year of the Reign of Our now
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, the Master and Wardens of the said
Company of Wood-mongers, by their Writing under their Common Seal, and by them
acknowledged in Chancery, did surrender to Our now Sovereign Lord the King the
said Letters Patents, and by means thereof, are Disincorporated, by reason
whereof, the said Carr-men have humbly besought this Court, that they may be a
Fellowship, or Fraternity, as anciently, and such Orders made by this Court for
the better Regulating and Ordering the several Members of the said Fellowship,
as should be thought expedient.

This Court well weighing the desire of the said Carr-men, and considering,
that the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of this City, time out of mind,
have had the right of Ordering and disposing of Carrs, Carts, Carr-rooms,
Carters, and Carr-men, and of all other person or persons whatsoever, Working
any Carr or Carts within the City of London and Liberties thereof; And in
pursuance thereof, by the said Act of Common Council, made the One and
twentieth day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and Five, have placed the
Rule, Oversight, and Government of them, in the President and Governors of
Christ-Hospital, London, to Order them according to the Rules, Directions, and
Provisions in the said Act mentioned, and according to such other Orders,
Rules, Directions, and Limitations, as the said Common Council or this Court,
upon consideration, should make and provide in that behalf. And further
considering, that the said Act does not sufficiently provide for the Ordering
and Regulating such Persons as should be Members of the said Fellowship in
their labors,

Have therefore thought it fit and necessary, to declare how and in what manner
the said Carr-men shall be governed for the future, under the said President
and Governors, and what Orders and Rules they shall put in execution amongst
themselves.

And First, This Court does desire the said President, or Governors, strictly
to observe, and effectually to put in execution all such Orders, Rules,
Directions, and Limitations, as are mentioned and contained in the said Act of
Common Council, of the One and Twentieth of June, One Thousand Six Hundred
Sixty and Five, which concerns the Rule, Oversight, and Government of the
said Carr-men, and other Persons, working Carrs, and Carts, in the said Act of
Common Council mentioned.

Secondly, That the said President or Governors strictly observe and
effectually put in Execution all the Orders, Rules, Directions, and
Limitations, mentioned in an Order of the General Quarter Sessions, holden at
Justice-Hall in the Old Bayley, the Sixteenth day of January, in the Eighteenth
Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc. which
Order of Sessions does not only appoint what Rates the said Carr-men shall
receive, but does give further Directions how the said Carr-men shall be
Governed by the said President or Governors for the future. And the said
President or Governors, are not only desired to observe the said Act of
Common Council, and Order of Sessions, and the Orders hereafter following, but
also all other Acts of Common Council, Orders of this Court and Court of
Sessions, as shall hereafter be made concerning the said Carr-men.

Thirdly, The said President or Governors are desired by this Court, to take
care, that every Cart allowed by them to Work within the City of London, and
the Liberties thereof, contain in length between the Tugg-hole and the Fore-Ear
breadth Six Foot and Four Inches of Assize and no more, and in breadth, between
the two Raves in the Body of the said Cart, four Foot of Assize, and no more;
and in length, from the Fore-Ear breadth to the end of the Cart, seven Foot and
two Inches of Assize, and no more; And if any Carr shall be found of greater
Length or Breadth, that then the same Carr, may be taken up by the said
President or Governors, or their Officer or Officers, appointed for that
purpose, and be sent to the New Store-Yard.

Fourthly, The said President or Governors are desired to take care that all
Carr-men be Ordered with their empty Carrs to stand in convenient places of
this City, to be ready for Merchants and all other Persons that shall have
occasions to use them. And if any Carr-man shall not observe the Rule that
shall be made by the said President or Governors, for their standings in the
Streets for Merchants and others, every Carr-man so offending, shall for the
first Offense, pay Two Shillings and Six pence, for the second Offense Five
Shillings, and for his third, and every other Offense, Ten Shillings; And for
refusal or not payment of any of the said Fines, they to be by the said
President or Governors discharged from Working any Carr or Cart within the
City of London, and Liberties thereof.

Fifthly, That the said President or Governors shall take care, that no
Carr-man leave his Carr in the Streets, Lanes, or Common Passages of this City
or Liberties thereof by Night, whereby any person or persons may take harm,
upon pain of Forfeiting for every time he or they so leave his Carr in the
Streets by Night, the sum of Five Shillings, besides recompense to the party as
shall sustain hurt or damage thereby.

Sixthly, That the said President or Governors take care, that no Carr within
this City be heard to creak, or pipe for dryness, or want of Greasing in the
Nave, and every Owner of such Carr as shall be found so to do, shall Forfeit
and Pay for every day that his Carr shall be observed to creak, or pipe; the
sum of Two Shillings.

Seventhly, That the said President or Governors take care that no Carr-man,
within this City or Liberties thereof use or put into his Carr for the carriage
of any Merchandise whatsoever, any more Horses, than One at one time, except it
be up the Hill, or with Timber or Stone that cannot be divided, upon pain of
Forfeiting for every Offense, Two Shillings.

Eighthly, That the said President or Governors take care, that no person or
persons shall take up or carry greater Loads than was the ancient custom or
practice to do, which ancient custom or practice shall be declared by the said
President or Governors to all the Carr-men, upon pain, that every person that
shall so do, shall Forfeit and pay the sum of Five Shillings for the first
Offense, the second Offense Ten Shillings, and for the third offense, shall be
disenabled from further Working a Carr, within the City of London, and
Liberties thereof.

Ninthly, That the said President or Governors take care that no Carr-man, his
Journey-man, or Servant ride upon his Carr, or drives his Horse a Trot in the
Street, or otherwise, in a more speedy course or pace than is usual, upon pain
of Forfeiting for every Offense herein, Two Shillings.

Tenthly, That the said President, or Governors take care, that every Carr-man
lead his Horse by the Head, with an Horse Halter of three Foot and no longer,
with a special regard always before him as behind him, as well for Children as
for Aged people; and if he shall suffer his Horse to go in the Streets without
leading him, as aforesaid, for every time he shall so offend, he shall forfeit
and pay Two Shillings.

Eleventhly, That the said President, or Governors take care, that no Carr-man
within this City and Liberties thereof, shall appoint any Servant, or Journey
man to go with any Carr, or Cart, before he be presented to them the said
President, or Governors, and allowed by them, which Servant or Journeyman
shall be of the age of Eighteen Years, at the least; and whatsoever Carr-man
shall hereafter entertain and employ as a Carr-man, in guiding of a Carr, any
such Servant the full time of six Weeks before he be presented to the said
President or Governors, then he shall forfeit and pay for every Week that he
shall so entertain and keep him before such presentment, the sum of Five
Shillings, and that all the now Servants of Carr-men shall appear before the
said President or Governors with their Indentures, to be Allowed and Entered in
the Books of the said Governors, for which Entrance to pay Six Pence.

Twelfthly, Further, that if any Master Carr-man, or any other, using or
enjoying a Carr within this City and Liberties thereof, shall put away, or set
over his Servant or Servants so presented to the said President or Governors,
or shall bargain, or set over any year or years of any such Servant or
Servants, or any other person or persons, before such Carr-man has first
obtained and gotten the good will and consent of the President or Governors
aforesaid for the time being, so to do, that it may appear by their Register
Book kept by the said President or Governors, of the honest and lawful
departure, putting away, or setting over of every such Servant or Servants,
that then he the said Master Carr-man shall for every Offense to the contrary,
pay Six Shillings and Eight Pence.

Thirteenthly, Further, that the said President or Governors take care, that
no Carr-man within the City of London and Liberties thereof, have more than one
Apprentice at one time, and one Journeyman; and if it shall appear to the said
President or Governors, that the said Carr-man has any more than one
Apprentice and Journeyman, then the said Carr-man to lose his admittance of
Working any Carr or Cart within London, and the Liberties thereof.

Fourteenthly, Further, the said President or Governors are desired, that when
any Servant or Journeyman is presented to them to be allowed, and approved to
Work a Carr or Cart in London, and the Liberties thereof, then they to declare
to the said Servant or Journeyman, that the sole disposing of all Carrs to
Work, is in the Mayor, and Commonalty, and Citizens of London, and in such as
claim by, from, or under them, and that he cannot have any Cart to Work or
Hire, till one falls void, although he has served the term of Seven Years
Apprentiship.

Fifteenthly, Further, the said President or Governors are desired to take
care, that no such Servant or Servants, do at any time hereafter, mis-behave
him or themseves in the Street, and if any be found so to do, then they to
inflict such Punishment upon such Servants for such their Mis-behaviours, as in
their discretion shall be thought fit; And if any Free-Carr-man shall
mis-behave himself in the Streets, and proof thereof be made before the said
President or Governors, he the said Freeman, shall for his first Offense, pay
Ten Shillings, and for his second Offense Twenty Shillings, and for his third
Offense Forty Shillings; And for refusal of not paying of any of the said
^ines, to be discharged from Working any Carr within the City of London, and
Liberties thereof.

Sixteenthly, The said President and Governors are desired not to admit any
Person or Persons to work a Carr within the City of London and Liberties
thereof to their own use, other then such as have served Seven years
Apprentiship to the calling, and has a good testimony of his honest life and
conversation.

Seventeenthly, And further the said President or Governors are desired by
this Court, To call all such Carr-men before them as they shall admit or allow
of, four times in every year yearly, or as often as they shall think fit; and
to cause all the Orders that are now made, or shall hereafter be made for the
Rule, Oversight, and Government of the said Carrmen to be openly read to them.
And if any Carr-man shall refuse at any time or times to appear upon the
Summons of the said President or Governors, by any of the four Street-men, or
other Officers of the said President or Governors then they to lay such Fine,
Penalty, or Suspension, upon every such Carr-man so offending, as in their
discretion shall be thought most fit.

All which Orders before mentioned shall be put in Execution by the President
or Governors of the said Hospital: And by no other Person or Persons
whatsoever. And all the Fines arising by breach of the said Ordinances, be
applied viz. One Moiety to the relief of the poor Children harbored in the
said Christs-Hospital: And the other Moiety to the Use of the Fellowship or
Brotherhood of Carr-men.

Now follows the ORDERS for the FELLOWSHIP.
First, That all manner of Persons, who now are, or hereafter shall be duly
allowed by the said President or Governors of the said Hospital, to work any
Carr or Carts within the City of London, and Liberties thereof, shall be a
Fellowship, and Fraternity by the name of the Carr-men of the City of London,
to put in execution these Orders following, and no other. viz.

Secondly, That there shall be Three of the said Fellowship, in manner and form
following, in these Presents hereunder mentioned, chosen and named, which shall
be, and be called the Wardens of the said Fellowship of Carr-men of London. And
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Members of the said
Brotherhood or Fellowship, within some convenient time, to Choose and Elect out
of themselves, ^hree able and sufficient Persons, useing the Occupation of a
Carr-man, to be Wardens of the said Brotherhood or Fellowship, the space of one
whole year then next following, and from thence until a New Election be made.
And that the same Three Persons so Chosen to be Wardens, shall within
convenient time after their said Election be presented, by a convenient number
of the said Brotherhood, in the Utter Court holden before the Lord Mayor, and
Aldermen of the said City, to be Sworn for the true execution of such things as
shall appertain unto their Office, according to the good Rules and Ordinances
to them, to be allowed and approved by the same Court. And that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Wardens so Sworn as aforesaid, to call unto
their Assistance, the number of Twenty of the Members of the said Fellowship,
who shall be, and be called the Assistants of the said Fellowship.

Thirdly, That John Hill, William Turner and John Earl be the Three first
Wardens of the said Fellowship or Fraternity, to continue for one whole year;
and that William Standley, John Standford, James Rough-head, John Fox, Robert
Hardy, Edward Oxlad, Anthony Brown, Isaac Preston, John Clark, Thomas Haynes,
Thomas Smith, Thomas Hooker, John Cue, James Maw, Edward Benson, John Caines,
Alexander Sheppard, Edward Tucker, Edward Lucar and John Chitwel, shall be
first Assistants of the said Fellowship or Fraternity.

Fourthly, That the old Wardens and Assistants of the said Brotherhood, may
lawfully between the five and twentieth Day of March, and the four and
twentieth Day of June in every year then next following, assemble themselves
together in some convenient place, by them to be provided, within the City of
London, and there to choose and elect of themselves out of the said Assistants
of the same Brotherhood, Three able men that use the said Occupation, to be
Wardens of the said Brotherhood for one whole year then next following, and so
forth until Three others shall be elected and sworn into the said Office. And
the same Three Wardens so chosen, within Twenty days then next following after
their said Election, shall be sworn in the said Court to be holden in the said
Utter Chamber of Guild Hall, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time
being, truly to do and execute such things as shall appertain and belong to
their Office, according to the good Rules and Ordinances to them to be allowed
and approved by the same Court. And that if the said Wardens, being thus
Elected and Sworn, happen to die within the said Year that they should stand
Wardens, That then the Members of the said Brotherhood, viz. the said Wardens
surviving, and the Assistants of the Brotherhood, may choose so many more of the
same Occupation, to supply and serve in stead and place of him or them so
deceased, for the residue of the said Year, in form aforesaid. And in case any
such person or persons refuse to hold the said place of a Warden, so chosen,
the same peron or persons so refusing, shall pay for a Fine, three Pounds, to
be employed to the use of the said Fellowship or Brotherhood.

Fifthly, That within one Month next after the choosing of the new Wardens, at
the end of every Year in form aforesaid, the old Wardens which occupied and
stood in the Office, in the Year then next preceding, shall make and yield up
their Accounts to the Wardens then chosen, and to three or four other persons
of the said Brotherhood, such as the said new Wardens shall appoint to take
their Accounts; and shall truly answer, pay and deliver unto the said new
Wardens, to the use of the same Brotherhood, all that which shall be found to
remain in their hands upon that Account, upon pain of five pounds to be paid to
the use of the said Fellowship. And if the said Account be behind, and not
given up, and payment of what shall be found to remain in their hands, made as
aforesaid, That the old Wardens so failing (except they have a reasonable and
lawful excuse) shall pay for every Month, so long as their Accounts are not
given up, and satisfaction made within one Month after the choosing of the new
Wardens, the Sum of five Pounds over and above the aforesaid penalty of five
Pounds for failure of the first Month, to be employed as aforesaid.

Sixthly, That the said Wardens and Assistants of the said Brotherhood or
Fellowship, may have, choose or ordain one meet person, fit and able, to be
their Clerk; and one other fit person, or more than one, to be their Beadle or
Beadles, as their common Officers, to make Summons in the name of the Wardens
for the time being; and to execute other the lawful Precepts and Commandments
of the said Fellowship, as the Case shall require; the same Clerk and Beadle or
Beadles to have such Salary and Wages as the old Wardens and Brotherhood for
the time being, shall think fit, and allow unto them; to be paid quarterly
every Year. The same Beadle or Beadles to be of the Occupation aforesaid: And
that it shall be lawful for the said Wardens for the time being, to Levy,
Collect and Receive of the Members of the said Brotherhood, a competent Sum of
Money to be by them agreed upon, by the name of Quarteridge, toward the
Charges of the said Brotherhood, as in other Fellowships in this City is used;
so as the same Quarteridge exceeds not Twelve pence a Quarter for any one
person.

Seventhly, That as often as any person of the said Brotherhood or Fellowship,
hereafter shall be duly summoned by the Beadle of the said Society, to appear
before the Wardens of the said Fellowship for the time being, at a certain hour
assigned, and appears not at the time and place appointed, according to their
Summons, That the said person so summoned, making default (unless he have some
reasonable and lawful excuse) shall pay to the use of the said Fellowship, for
a Fine, such a Sum of Money as the said Wardens for the time being, shall
appoint, not exceeding two Shillings and sixpence.

Eighthly, That if any person, being a man of the same Fellowship, shall at any
time hereafter, use, or give any evil, opprobrious or reviling Language in the
Street, or elsewhere, to any other Freeman of the same Fellowship, that then
the person so offending, shall pay to the use of the said Brotherhood, the Sum
of five shillings. And if any Apprentice, Servant to any of the said
Fellowship, shall offend in such wise, That then the same Apprentice or Servant
shall be punished by the Order and Discretions of the Wardens of the said
Company for the time being.

Ninthly, That if any Freeman of the said Fellowship, shall strike, or fight
with any of the said Fellowship, that then he shall forfeit for every such
Offense, Ten Shillings, to be paid to the use of the said Fellowship: And every
Apprentice guilty of the like Offense, shall be punished at the discretion of
the Wardens, as aforesaid. But if any Freeman of the said Fellowship,
Journey-man or Servant, shall give evil, opprobrious or reviling Language in
the Streets, or elsewhere, to any person whatsoever, not free of the said
Fellowship, or strike, or fight with any such person, the said Brotherhood
shall have nothing to do therein; but the said Journeyman or Servant shall be
punished by the Order and Discretion of the President or Governors of Christ's
Hospital.

Tenthly, That for the preservation of Unanimity and Brotherly Love amongst the
said Brotherhood, no person of the said Fellowship whatsoever shall go to Suit
of Law with any other Member of the same, for any Cause or Difference
whatsoever, until he has first acquainted the Wardens of the said Company for
the time being, therewith; and obtained License of them so to do. And if any of
the said Fellowship shall at any time offend herein, he shall forfeit and pay
to the use of the said Fellowship the Sum of Forty Shillings.

Eleventhly, That if any person of the said Fellowship shall happen to forfeit
any Sum or Sums of Money for any thing in these Orders, or any of them
comprised, and then the same person refuse and deny to pay the same Money, it
being two several times demanded, if the party offending be of ability, then
the Wardens and Assistants of the said Fellowship shall complain to the Lord
Mayor for the time being, and the person so offending is to be punished after
the discretion of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

Twelfthly, That the Wardens of the said Fellowship for the time being, shall
not permit or suffer any Apprentice to be bound by them to any Freeman using
the said Occupation, until he do produce a Testimonial of Allowance from the
said President or Governors, or whom they shall appoint.

Thirteenthly, That every person of the said Brotherhood, within two Months
after he takes unto him any Apprentice, and has the said Testimonial of
Allowance from the said President or Governors, or whom they shall appoint,
shall present the same Apprentice to the Wardens of the said Fellowship for the
time being, and shall then pay unto the Common Box of the said Fellowship, for
the presenting of every such Apprentice the Sum of Twelve pence, and for the
Indenture Eighteen pence: And that none of the said Brotherhood or Fellowship
shall at any time hereafter, take an Apprentice for any shorter or lesser time
than Seven Years: And that such Apprentice at the end of the said Term, having
truly served his said Term, shall be made free by his said Master: And that
such Apprentice before his admittance into the Freedom of this City, shall be
presented again unto the Wardens of the said Fellowship for the time being, and
there before them, shall subscribe a Note whereby he shall undertake to the
Three Wardens to be contributary to all manner of Charges belonging to the said
Brotherhood to his power, and pay to the said Brotherhood for his admittance
into the Brotherhood, Six Shillings and Eight pence, and to the Clerk Two
Shillings and Six pence, and unto the Beadle Twelve pence.

The Oath of every Person at his first Admittance into the Brotherhood or
Fellowship of CARR-MEN of the City of London; To be Administered by the Wardens
and Assistants of the said Fellowship or Brotherhood for the time being.
YOu shall Swear, You shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, and His
Successors; You shall be obedient to the President or Governors of Christ's
Hospital, and to such in whom the City shall hereafter place the Government of
Carrs, by the Act of Common Council, and to the Wardens for the time present.
You shall not discover the lawful Counsel of this Fraternity. You shall not
take a Foreign man into your Service, but only such as use the occupation of a
Carr-man, or else an Apprentice duly bound without fraud; At the beginning of
their Terms or before, you shall bring and present them before the Wardens of
the said Fellowship for the time being, and here have the Indentures to be
made, and every such Apprentice to be Enrolled within the first Year, as the
Custom is. You shall not entice or withdraw any man's Servant of this Society,
until that reasonable departing be made with his said Master.

These, and all other good Rules made, and to be made not reversed; You shall
keep so near as God give you Grace.

So help you God, etc.

Fourteenthly, That no person being made a Freeman of the said Brotherhood,
shall take an Apprentice to be bound unto him until he has been a Freeman by
the space of four years (unless in case of Lameness and Sickness, and where a
Journeyman of the said Society is not to be had; and then the same to be with
License of the President or Governors of Christ's Hospital, and Wardens of the
said Fellowship for the time being) and after the expiration of the said four
years, then to take only one Apprentice and no more.

Fifteenthly, That if at any time, within the Term, any Wardens of the said
Brotherhood or Fellowship (which shall stand and occupy that Room) shall
neglect to put in execution, and duly to observe these Orders and Rules in this
Book to be kept according to the best of their power, and likewise to cause the
same Ordinances to be read twice a Year in some convenient place, to all the
Fraternity and Brotherhood; that then the said Wardens shall pay Twenty
Shillings for a Fine in that behalf to the use of the said Brotherhood.

Pet. Concord. cum Original. AVERY.
And this Court does Direct and Order, That Mr. Chamberlain shall take notice
of the said Carr-men as a Fellowship and Brotherhood of this City, and Enroll
and make Free their Apprentices, according to the Intent and Meaning of the
said Ordinance.

AVERY.



The General Quarter Sessions have from time to time set Rates for the Carriage
of all Commodities within the City of London and Liberties thereof, and added
some other Rules to be observed by the Governors of Christs-Hospital, and
Fellowship of Carr-men, etc. as for instance: Ad General' Quarterial' Session'
Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Civitat' London, etc.
WHereas daily Complaints are made by Merchants and other Citizens and
Inhabitants within the City of London and the Liberties thereof, of the
excessive Rates demanded and received by Carr-men, above what is reasonable and
has been limited and appointed for Carriages within this City and Liberties,
and upon due consideration had, as well of former times as of the present,
wherein several Materials of necessary and principal use to the Carr-men are
risen and consequently require some increase of Rates heretofore set for their
Labor and Carriage. Now the said Justices of Peace here assembled respecting
the times and other circumstances necessary to be considered, do, by authority
and virtue of the Statute in this case made and provided, order, limit, rate
and appoint the Wages for Carr-men within the City of London and Liberties
thereof, to be as hereafter follows.

First, That all Carr-men trading or working with Carrs in the City of London
and Liberties thereof shall and may demand and take for every Carriage or Load
of the Commodities under-mentioned the Rates hereafter following, and shall not
exceed the same upon pain to be strictly punished and proceeded against for
every Offense to the contrary, That is to say,

From any the Wharfs between the Tower and Londonbridge to Tower-street,
Grace Church Street, Fen-church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill,
and places of like distance up the Hill, with eighteen hundred weight, not
exceeding Twenty hundred Weight, Two Shillings two Pence.

And being above Twenty hundred Weight, Two pence for every Hundred.

Provided the Car-men for this Rate and all other Rates herein contained, do
help to load and unload their Carrs.

In which may be included

Two Puncheons of Prunes, two Bales of Mather, twenty Barrels of Figgs, two
Fats of Fustians, six ordinary Sacks of Cotton-Woolls of Smyrna, and three
Cyprus Bags, a Butt of Currants, a great Butt of Oils, three Chests of Sugar,
eight Bags of Alums, one Last of Flax, one Last of Hemp, and any other Goods
herein not named of the like Weight; for every Load Two Shillings two Pence.

And for Sea-coals the Load Fourteen Pence, every Load to be half a Chaldron;
and for one hundred Faggots the like Rate.

And from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Broad-street, Loth-bury, Old-Jury,
Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Laurence-Lane, Milk-street,
Aldermanbury, Cheap Side, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places
of like distance, for the like weight of Eighteen hundred, not exceeding Twenty
hundred Weight, for the Goods aforesaid, and other Goods herein not named of
the like Weight; for every Load Two Shillings Six Pence.

And being above twenty Hundred Weight, upon every Hundred Two Pence.

And for Sea-coals, the Load Sxteen Pence, every Load to be half a Chaldron;
and for one hundred Faggots the like Rate.

Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Smithfield-Barrs, Holborn-Barrs,
Temple-Barr, or any of the Bars on the North-side of the City, and places of
like distance up the Hill, with eighteen Hundred Weight, not exceeding twenty
Hundred Weight; for every Load three Shillings four Pence.

And going beyond the said places, the Parties to agree with the Carr-men.

Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Tower-street, Bishops-gate-street
within, Cornhill, and other places of like distance up the Hill, with fourteen
Hundred Weight, not exceeding eighteen Hundred Weight; Two and Twenty Pence.

In which may be included,

Twenty Pieces of Raisins, a Load of Raisins of the Sun, six Bags of Pepper,
six ordinary Bags of Galls, three great Bags of Galls, six Bales and Barrels of
Indico, six Bales of Grogram Yarn, six Bales of Turkey Silk, five Hogsheads of
Cloves, four Bales of Calicoes, three Hogsheads of Wines, two Chests of Sugar
or any other Goods of the like Weight, five Hogsheads of Tobacco, not exceeding
eighteen hundred Weight, Two and twenty Pence.

Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Broad-street, Loth-bury, Old-Jury,
Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Laurence-Lane, Milk-street,
Aldermanbury, Cheap Side, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places
of the like distance, for any of the said Goods of the same quantity and
weight, for every Load, Two Shillings.

Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Tower-street, Grace Church Street,
Fen-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill, and other places of
like distance up the Hill, with eight hundred Weight, not exceeding fourteen
hundred Weight, Eighteen Pence.

In which may be included

All Butts and Pipes of Wine, or a Pipe of Oil, Packs of Canvas, two Hogsheads
or three Tierces, a Fat of Fustians, and all other Goods of the like bulk and
weight, for every Load Eighteen Pence.

And from any the Wharfs aforesaid to Broad-street, Loth-bury, Old-Jury,
Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Laurence-Lane, Milk-street,
Aldermanbury, Cheap Side, Wood-street, Friday-street, and other places of like
distance, for any other Goods of like load or weight, for every Load, Twenty
Pence.

Also from London Bridge foot Westward to the Old-Swan, Cole-Harbor, the
Three-Cranes, Queen-hith, Broken-Wharf, Pauls-Wharf, Puddle-Wharf, the
Wardrobe, and to all other places not exceeding the Poultry, Cheap Side, or
Newgate-Market, for thirteen hundred Weight, not exceeding eighteen hundred
Weight; Two and twenty pence.

And for every Load of Sea-coals, fourteen Pence; every Load to behalf a
Chaldron; and one hundred Faggots the like Rate.

And from all other Wharfs and places between London Bridge and Temple-Barr to
the same and places of like distance, for every Load of Coals, fourteen Pence,
every Load to be half a Chaldron; and an hundred of Faggots the like Rate.

And to all the places Northward of the Poultry, Cheap Side, Newgate-Market,
Holborn-Bridge and Fleet Street, for fourteen hundred weight, not exceeding
eighteen hundred weight; Two Shillings two Pence.

And from Tower-street, Grace Church Street, Fen-church-street,
Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill, and other places of like distance, for
every Pack of twenty Cloths, for six Bales of Cloths and Kersies, six Bales of
Pepper, six Barrels of Indico, five Hogsheads of Cloves, and for other Goods
not herein mentioned, of like weight, to the waterside, Sixteen Pence.

And from Broad-street, Lothbury, Old-Jury, Bassishaw, Coleman-street,
Ironmonger-Lane, St. Laurence-Lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury, Cheap Side,
Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and other places of like distance to
the waterside for the like weight, Twenty Pence.

And for places nearer or of less distance, the Parties hiring and to be hired,
are to make Agreement answerably or proportionably to the Rates
beforementioned.

And if any Car-man shall take for his Labor and Hire, above the Rates before
limited and appointed, and the same be duly proved by the testimony of one or
more credible witness or witnesses before the Lord Mayor, or any two of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace or otherwise within the City of London, such
Car-man shall suffer Imprisonment by the space of one and twenty days without
Bail or Mainprise, according to the Statute in this behalf, and shall undergo
such further Pains and Penalties as by the Law may be inflicted for the said
Offense.

And to the end that all Car-men may be encouraged duly to observe the several
Orders and Rates herein before limited and appointed; It is further Ordered,
That if any Merchant, Tradesman, or others, shall at any time hereafter refuse
to pay to any Car-man or Car-men his and their Hire or Wages, according to the
several Rates herein before Ordered and appointed, that then it shall be
lawful: And it is hereby Ordered, That such Car-man and Car-men do make his and
their Complaint to the President of Christs-Hospital, for the time being, or to
any of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said City of London, who
are hereby desired to compel the Payment of such Hire and Wages, and to enforce
the due observance of all and every the Orders abovementioned, according to
Law and Justice.

And it is further Ordered, That it shall be free for all Merchants and others,
that have occasion to use Cars or Carts, to choose what Cars he or they shall
please, except such as stand for Wharf-work, Tackle-work, Crane-work, Shops and
Merchants Houses, which are to stand in order, and be taken in turn.

Also, That any Carman, who stands with his empty Car next to any Goods that
are to be Laden, shall on the first demand Load the same, without any delay,
or bargaining for any other Wages than before is limited, and the Owners of the
Goods so carried shall pay the same Rates.

Farther, It is Ordered, That if any Merchant or other person whatsoever, shall
cause any Car-man to stay or attend at his House, Shop, Warehouse, or Cellar,
with his laden Car, above half an hour before he unloads, such Car-man being
willing to help to unload the same, such Merchants or others shall pay such
Car-men after the rate of twelve Pence an Hour, after the said first half Hour
for his Attendance.

And whereas the Rule, Oversight, and Government of the Cars, Carts, Carters,
and Car-men, and of all other person or persons whatsoever working any Car or
Carts within the City of London and Liberties thereof, by Act of Common Council
of the one and twentieth day of June, 1665. is in the President and Governors
of Christs-Hospital; the said President and Governors are desired by this
Court forthwith to cause every Car or Cart which shall be licensed to work
within the said City and Liberties thereof to be numbered with Figures upon a
piece of Brass to be fixed upon every Car or Cart, and the Car-mans name in
such Figures to be fairly Registered in a Book to be kept in Christs-Hospital,
there at any time to be seen, to the end that if any Car-man shall not conform
to the Rates aforesaid, or shall refuse to carry Goods at such Rates, or shall
exact greater Rates or Prices than is before expressed, the Merchant or any
other Citizen or Citizens, or others, knowing what Figure is upon the Cart, may
the more readily find out who is the Worker thereof.

Further, If any Car-man or Carter shall not conform to the Rates aforesaid, or
shall refuse to carry Goods for such Rates, or exact greater Rates than herein
is appointed, or shall work without the aforesaid piece of Brass fixed upon his
Car or Cart, and the same be complained of to the said President and Governors
of the said Hospital or any four of them, upon testimony of or for the party
grieved, or any credible person on his behalf, they are hereby desired to
suspend such person from working any Car or Cart within the City of London and
Liberties thereof, until he has made satisfaction to the party grieved, and
fixed the said piece of Brass upon his Car or Cart.

And the said President and Governors, and any four or more of them, are
desired by this Court to meet every Tuesday, in Christs-Hospital, at Two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, to hear and determine all complaints that shall be made
by any Merchant or Citizen against any Car-man whatsoever.

And for prevention of future damages to the Merchants and others, and
suppressing of unruly and disorderly Car-men, and for avoiding of danger by
unruly Horses, it is thought fit and Ordered by this Court, and the said
President and Governors, or any four of them, are hereby desired to nominate
and appoint Street-men, such as they shall think fit, to be Overseers of the
said Car-men, to see and take care that Merchants and other Citizens Goods be
well and faithfully carried and delivered at the Rates and Prizes aforesaid,
without any exaction, hindrance or disturbance, and that able persons, none
under the age of eighteen years, be employed to manage their Horses or Carts.

And whereas several Differences and Controversies do daily arise between
Car-man and Car-man concerning their Work and Labor, to the great disturbance
of the Kings Liege People, and to the manifest hindrance and obstruction of the
present carriage of Goods and Merchandises; It is further Ordered, That the
Wardens of the Fellowship of Car-men for the time being, or any two of them,
having notice of such Difference or Disturbance, shall forthwith cause such
Car-man, between whom such Difference and controversy shall arise, to be
brought before them, who are hereby Ordered and Desired to hear, mediate, and
determine the same. And in case any Car-man or Car-men shall at any time
hereafter neglect, or obstinately refuse to yield Obedience to such Order and
Determination, as shall be by the said Wardens of the said Fellowship of
Car-men, or any two of them, made therein; That then and in every such Case, It
is hereby Ordered, That the said Wardens of the said Fellowship of Car-men for
the time being, or any two of them, by whom such Order or Determination was
made, do cause such Car-man or Carmen to be brought before the President of
Christs-Hospital for the time being, or any of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace within the said City of London, who are hereby desired to inflict such
Punishment upon such disobedient and refractory person and persons, as shall be
most agreeable to Law and Justice, or otherwise to cause such person or persons
to find Sureties personally to appear at the next General Sessions of the
Peace, to be holden for the City of London, at Justice-Hall aforesaid, then and
there to answer his and their Disobedience and Contempt, and such other
matters, as on His Majesty's behalf shall be then and there objected against
him or them, and not to depart the Court without License.

NOte, That all the Persons that live at St. Giles's, St. Katherines, and other
places forth of this City, and keep Carts, are under no regulation, and do not
only take away the Car-mens Labor, that are Freemen of London, but come into
London with two, three, and sometimes more Horses in their Carts.

The Traders in Fuel within and without this City, pester the Streets with
their Carts, take away the Labor of the Car-men, go with as many Horses as
they please, and are under no regulation whatsoever, Besides the stops which
Coaches make in the Streets.

If Carts were assigned for the Carriage of Fuel, out of the Number of Four
Hundred and Twenty, now allowed by the Governors of Christs-Hospital, no
Citizen of London would have cause to complain of the stoppage of the Streets.


