A SALUTATION TO THE CHURCH OF GOD The Spouse of CHRIST Coming out of the
Wilderness leaning upon Her BELOVED.

And more particularly to the Young and Tender Members of Her Body.

By one who travels in Spirit for the Preservation of Peace and Love, and Unity
among the Children of God, William Loddington.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cook, MDCLXXXII.

A Salutation to the Church of God, the Spouse of Christ coming out of the
Wilderness, leaning upon Her Beloved.
Righteous Household of God, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner stone! The Lord thy God
which has gathered thee from the barren Mountains, and fitly framed thee into
an holy Building, has in free Love and mercy been pleased, (Blessed be his
name) to let me see in my latter days, a glimps of thy, Beauty, and to taste of
thy Heavenly bread and living Water, sealed up from impure Hearts, and enclosed
as a Garden from the wild Beasts of the Forests.
THis Morning being the 4 of the 2 Mo. in the year 1682. even by break of day,
The sense of my Mercies, and thy Sorrows and Exercises, O Woman clothed with
the Sun, came so powerfully within me, that they kindled a Desire to salute
thee, and thy tender Children on this wise, before I put off this my Earthly
Tabernacle which in course of nature cannot be long.

But as I write, an inward kind of shame and dejectedness arises from the
thought of my former unkindness to thee, and would as it were cloud the Light,
and stop my Spirit, from this manifestation of my Love. Not that I ever openly
persecuted thee in railing Words or violent Actions; No I may rather say, I
was, as many now are, among the Number of thy more subtle and dangerous
opposers, who under pretense of Gospel Ordinances, Christ's Commands, and
Scripture Examples, do the more hurt, and grieve thy Spirit more than a profane
Enemy. I verily thought in my young Zeal for God thirty years ago, that I might
have done some things against thee: for I feared then, thy chief and Principal
Members, were Deceivers, I could not relish their Doctrine of beating swords
into Plow shares, and Pikes into pruning Hooks, in that day. But I obtained
mercy, because I disputed and argued Ignorantly against thee, being covered
with that vail, which is this day over the Hearts of many in reading the
Writings of Christ and his Apostles, as it was over the Hearts of many of old
in reading Moses and the Prophets.

But the Lord thy God, glory to his name, has rent much of the vail, and in
mercy given mea sense of another kind of war-fare and other Weapons, which
would the Beast-like Nature, and carnal Spirit incurably. Now I feel thy
Wisdom, and my own Weakness, thy Wisdom, or rather the Wisdom given thee from
aboye is first pure, and can by no means defend or contend for any unjust or
unholy thing, for profit, Honor, or affections sake. It is also peacable,
loving and kind, even to its Enemies: not rendering Evil, for Evil; but Blessing
for railings. O little flock! Thou art easy to be entreated. Some of thy own
professed Friends know it to be true. How tender have I seen thee, in
admonishing, entreating and reproving, when an airy, conceited, unruly Spirit,
has entered them. O thou beloved of the Lord! Thou art beautiful within: And thy
order is comely, wrought by the heavenly Wisdom, and not of Fragments and
shreads of man's Invention.

How do thy envious and subtle Adversaries fret and chafe to see thee
traveling in good order, even as an Army with Banners: Yea, there is a fear
seizes them to see thee walk wisely, 1 Samuel 18.15. Hence arise so many
endeavors so many devises to disorder thy Camp, and so to weaken thy Hands in
thy Spiritual Warfare. Sometimes profane high Spirits assault and carry away
thy outward Substance, abuse thy Friends and Imprison them often unto Death.
But when this roaring Lion sees he cannot hurt thee, then he craftily
transforms himself into an Angel of Light. And here I feel my Heart and Life
concerned for thy young and tender Babes, whose years in this World, as well as
in Truth, have been but few. These are in greater danger than those of full
Age, who by reason of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil, Heb. 5.14. These are soonest allured with fine Words, especially when
spoken by such as call themselves the Christian Friends, and can be as bold as
Hannaniah, Jer. 28.3. saying, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, when he says
no such matter, and under pretense of breaking the Yoke of Babylon, in a heat
endeavor to break off the Yoke of Christ thy Husband.

Dear young Sons and Daughters of New Jerusalem, now coming down from God out
of Heaven, having no need of Sun or Moon, for the Lord God is the Light
thereof; keep to this Light and it will keep you within the walls of this holy
City. I know there is a deceitful voice abroad, calling you out, while it bids
you look within, promising Liberty, it self being a Servant of corruption;
crying out against you Elder Brethren and Sisters sometimes as Babel Builders,
it self being in my understanding but a Painted Virgin Daughter of Babylon,
Isa. 47.1. And sometimes as Apostates, while it self is introducing an Apostasy
from the first Principles of Truth, seeking to limit the holy one of Israel
under color of keeping to that which first convinced you. It may not be
unservicable to tell you my own experiences of Gods Love in this very
particular. I had fell into the Snare, if the Lord had not stayed me. Let high
Spirits esteem it a reproach to acknowledge any weakness; There is great peace
in doing it, Psalm. 32.3. (Provided it be not done for any fear or favor of
Man) but in a true sense of mercy in the deliverance.

When I first heard Some among us, of no mean gifts as I thought, and for whom
I had more than common affection, cry out against Impositions, Innovations, and
formalities I confess it made a great impression upon me, having an old fixed
Zeal in me against all Persecution for Conscience sake. So the Testimonies
against Forms, ( Persecution generally springing from dead Forms) was so taking
and pleasant, that I did not in the least mistrust, any such Snake as Anarchy
lay hid under these flowers of Truth, wherefore in true affection to a true
Christian Liberty I writ to some Friends, among whom I observed some things,
that I mistrusted had a tendency to Imposition, and I worded it high with them
to prevent all Appearances of that Evil. And though I can truly say this was
the utmost of my Intention, yet some began to fear I was running into
Separation and Confusion. But I was in peace mistrusting Nothing, till I felt a
wrong Spirit catching at it, and about to make a further use of it, yea and
applying in Print (unknown to me) some things against Friends, which I had writ
against Popery, then I began to doubt some wrong thing was at work in me also,
and that I was not well informed.

And then I began more narrowly to mind and observe the Spirits on both sides,
and in the Light and Measure of Gods Wisdom given to me, to search to the Root
of the Matter (laying aside personal charges and discharges) and was satisfied.
So the Lord will by degrees enlighten and satisfy all whose hearts in
Simplicity are singly bent to honor him, and will keep them from wandering
either to the right hand or the left. The left hand Trials viz. Persecutions
of open Enemies, to bring you back to weak disanull'd Forms and Elements, I do
not much fear. The right hand Snares take most. These are laid by such as
pretend to be in the right way, for God, for Christ, for Scripture, yea for the
Doctrine of our Day, The Light within. And here the Enemy of your Peace and
Unity has crept in, under a specious pretense against Forms, Orders and
Impositions to divide and lay wast, by opposing good Order and Government. But
dear Friends, know there was never any gathering of People though into the
Power of Godliness, but they had also a form or Order, though many have had the
form without the Power. It Is true, the form to the Power may be valued but as
the shell to the Kernel: Yet we know the shell is servicable in its place, and
therefore not to be neglected or spoiled. The leaves of the tree of life have a
service, though not so much as the fruit.

Stand fast therefore in the living Power and form of Godliness which you are
already convinced of. And if any thing as yet be hid from you, the Lord in due
time will reveal it, if you keep Faithful, quiet, meek, and tender under your
own. Do nothing in bare Imitation, I know it will hardly stand a Trial for a
little profit, much less a Fiery Trial. Wait to feel a real service for God in
what you do. There is no insignificant needless things in the house of God;
though some things may seem to be so at the first Veiw to many as they did to
me.

Hence arises the great cry against Innovations, that is, making new orders,
forms, and changes. But though the design in this Cry is to reproach Truth: Yet
Wisdom ever was and will be justified of her Children. They know that the
Spirit of the Lord may now as well as formerly make Circumstances of Order and
Government, suitable to the present Occasions and Services of Truth. And
Submision to these things, cannot properly be called Submisions to men (there
lies the Common mistake) but to the Spirit of the Lord in them. And this is
Christ's Spiritual Government or Government by his Spirit over the Spirits of
his People. Here is no ruling by outward force and violence, but by an inward
power and Authority which the Lord gives to some according to his own Will, as
it is written, some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Teachers, some helps
and Governments, ( Helpers in Governing) and all for edifying the Body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Cor. 12. Were this Government well understood, all would
be contented in their Places the Lord has set them, in all whisperings and
evil surmisings would cease. There would be an universal bearing one another
Burdens, and so fulfilling the Law of Christ.

Little Children it arises in me to remind you of what is written 1 John. 2.19.
That such as go from us, are not off us, for if they had been of us, they would
no doubt have continued with us. I can never believe such have a right Spirit
renewed within them, that prefer not Jerusalem above their chief Joy Psalm.
137.6. If they had had but any true sense of the public Scandals of open
Enemies of the private mournings and heartbreaking Sorrows of their dear tender
Friends, of the stumbling Block in the way of Friends, sober inquiring People,
all which certainly follows and fallsheavv upon Separation, they durst never
have acted and Printed what I have read. Away with all Pretenders to Truth,
that are not tender of its Honor.

But what is the Substance (if any of you should inquire) of all these
Ont-cries and Complaints? In short, men are exalted and women are exalted. In
true Love I desire every such Complainers to search narrowly into himself to
see if there be nothing in him that thinks it self not high enough esteemed,
and therefore pecks at others. Surely no Professor of our blessed self denying
Principle dare like Herostrotus, fire a Temple to get a Name. Yet formerly I as
little thought such as threw down Lordly power, would have made themselves
Lords, as some now will be men of War, who in derision call others G. F's men
of War. But how are men and women exalted? By meeting apart: By having General
Meetings, to look to the well ordering of things among particular Meetings;
What hurt can be in all this. As to the first, consider which Women are most
exalted, and as it were eclipse the Head-ship of the man; Whether those that
desire to sit, and are taken in to sit in equal power and freedom to speak and
act, Pro and Con, among the men in all Businesses; Or those Women, who meet by
themselves, ordering all matters among themselves, suitable and proper for
them, according to the Wisdom of God given to them, and all in Submision to and
with the consent and unity of the men's Meetings. Methinks this very
Consideration is enough to satisfy any rational impartial Man. And as to the
General Meeting, What Evil has it done? Nay have not Friends generally had
great both Spiritual and Temporal Advantages thereby Pure Reason and Scripture
teach, that the more Counsel, the greater safety; even as the more Lights
gathered together make the greater Light. I know no visible thing not liable to
corruption; but methinks they that disliked this order, at first should and
would if they had been of a right Spirit have kept their place, and proposed
another more servicable to Truth, and less liable to be tainted, and then no
doubt others would have felt unity with them: But it plainly argues a
Contentious Spirit to find fault with what it cannot mend.

I know the matters pretended to be in Controversy, relating to Order, are but
as mint and Cummin if compared to the great and weighty Concerns of Truth,
which ought especially to be done, yet the other not to be left undone.

In Math. 23.23. Judgment, Mercy and Faith are recorded for the weighty things
of the law, Now put these to trial. How can he say he is for Judgment that
dispises the Judgment of his Brethren assembled in the Power and Wisdom of God
to give it? How is he for mercy, that for a thing indifferent (according to his
own Opinion) will Sacrifice Truth it self, and expose all its Friends to the
rage of an Ignorant violent Enemy? What Faith is that which would live in a
latitude to temporize with all; to have more names than the Fathers written
upon its Forehead? Pure Nature will not suffer any Vine to bring forth the
Fruit or Leaf of a Bramble. O the great abuse this day of that precious
Privilege, Liberty of Conscience! How many of an evil Conscience, will talk
fluently for its Liberty? How many strain it for advantage as if they would
have it signify, to be of any Religion, and therefore are fierce against any
visible Gesture or Form, that may distinguish them from others, crying out,
Imposition, Formality, Ceremony, Human Inventions, man's Orders, etc.

In tender Love I desire some would but Consider, how short they fall of the
Judgment and Reason of men of more inferior Principles, than what they pretend
to. Hear what the Author of A seasonable Discourse against Popery, says,
Printed by H. Broom, page 35. What conversation can there be with these men
(speaking of the Jusuits) who are under no obligations of Society, no Character
of notice or distinction, who at the same time are Priests and Hectors,
Casuists and Artificers, Presbyters, Ana-baptists, Quakers, (and why not
Episcopalians too) Theists, Atheists, and amidst all these very good
Catholics. Let any sober man, says he, judge what kind of Religion this is in
it self, and how fit to be encouraged and submitted to. --

Thus dear young Friends, you may see how this kind of liberty is condemned by
rational men, as unfit for Society among them, much more among you. Lord God of
purity, Peace and Heavenly Order preserve you, that we may all strive together,
and not assunder for the Faith and sound form of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.

If now any of you should desire to know what I understand by that liberty of
Conscience, which many, and I among them, have so zealously contended and
deeply suffered for. Know in brief, That it is a Liberty for every man to try
all things, as the Apostle exhorteh; yet not to be always trying, and never
satisfied; but when he has tried all, then to hold fast that which in his
Conscience he finds best, without being compelled by any outward force or
punishment to join or worship with any others. And so likewise, that every
body, Society, or Congregation of People have the same freedom of their several
religious worships and exercises without persecuting one another; all living in
obedience to the Civil Laws, that is such as tend to the welfare of outward
Concerns. And this is the true just liberty; and not a liberty for Members of
the same Body or Society to differ from each other, in things which destroy
their Character and Government among them. But seeing I am speaking of liberty
let me mind you of two things more. First of a plea I often meet with, that
there are good men and bad of all Religions. And so by consequence secretly
insinuating they are all alike: But I hope you easily perceive the Serpents
Poli^y in arguing thus for all Religions, that it is to make Peoples
Consciences pliable to any Religion that may come uppermost, or rather indeed
to be of no Religion, that so they may shun all sufferings upon Religious
Accounts.

Secondly, of a Spirit which thinks to justify its liberty by quoting your
ancient Friends, as Paul did the Athenian Poets for their Authors. Acts 17.28.

But as the case is different, so I trust the effect will be; for Paul quoted
the Poets for a right end and prevailed with some: But these, how can they
expect to turn you to that which the Author they quote yet living testifies is
not the sense of his words, nor the intent of his mind to have you turned unto.
To put a wrong Interpretation upon any man's writings, is a very bad sort of
Imposition.

Hold fast the profession of your Faith and form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
which you have received in the faith and Love of Christ Jesus; from which some
turn away: Of whom are Phygellus's that is, such as shun the eye or oversight
of their Brethren, and Hermogenes's, that is, such as are born of humane
Wisdom, 2 Timothy 1.15. Mark what a weighty signification is in these very names,
left upon Record for the Churches.

And as for the deceased Friends some instance, one of them viz. Isaac
Pennington I had often conference with. I have sometimes objected his own
sayings, yea and read them over face to face in great affection to vindicate
such a Liberty which I then verily ^hought might consist with Good order. But I
must do him right, I never heard him consent or give any Countenance, but
rather a kind of Indignation would arise against my sense of his words, which
was the same as some now put upon them. But their actions now make it manifest,
they drive at another end then I intended. And I verily believe he felt my
Innocence, as some others have done even in my opposing them: for he did not
cease coming to me when opportunity served, and when we met, and talked of
these differences, his labor still was, that I would lay aside that Wisdom and
Reasoning which run me upon those expositions.

I well remember the very place, where once as we were walking and discoursing
about Dissenters, I fell to pleading for a moderation and compliance with them
upon this consideration, that I looked upon them, and the others to be all as
Scholars in Christ's School; only some werein a higher and others in a lower
Class or form. But this Comparison he could not relish, his very Countenance
changed at it; and to this purpose he answered, That the difference was far
otherwise, and that there was a Spirit quite contrary to Truth subtily working
under their pretenses; but a tenderness and bowels of love and compasion was in
him toward the innocent among them.

And I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness
(Glory to thy name O Lord) that I have great heaviness and inward sorrow for my
loving Friends still under the like mistake as I was, who yet see not the
tendency of the dividing Spirits fine devices. And when I consider what sweet
comfort and Spiritual Refreshment we have had together in the service of the
Lord; O that life (not death Psalm. 55.15.) may seize upon them, says my soul:
that they may walk in the footsteps of Christ's little flock, and feed their
Kids by his shephards tents! For why should ye be (O dear Friends) as those
that are veiled, turning aside from the flocks of his Companions? Let all thy
Children (O God of Peace and love) daily more and more witness, how pleasant it
is for Brethren to dwell together in unity: And how fitly its compared to the
precious Ointment upon Aarons head, that ran down to the very skirts of his
Garment, viz. to every member of the body: And to the dew of Hermon, that
descended to all the mountains of Sion, viz the Meetings of Christ, for there
the Lord commanded (and does command) the blessing, even Life for ever, Psalm.
133.

So, tender hearted Friends, feel the sincerity of my Life in this Salutation,
Despise not my Spiritual youth, its fresh with unfeigned love (praises to the
Lord) and I trust will ever be so, for a Spiritual Unity, without which Truth
will not grow. My earthly Tabernacle declines apace, and hastens to its center,
but my love to Gods heavenly Building (blessed be his Name) by his power is
enlarged; and my Spirit rejoices in feeling a Remnant zealous for it, and
unanimous in promoting it through all oppositions.

I have seen the fruit of Discord among other Gatherings, and what hurt the
Spirit of Diotrephes has done among them: keep upon your watch, little flock,
hold up your hearts and stand in the unity of the heavenly life and Amaleck can
never prevail. No Weapon formed against you shall prosper; And every thing that
would be exalted over you, shall fall: But you that are willing and obedient,
even you who in Gods holy Order, are equally willing to obey or to rule, to
rule or to obey as he pleases to dispose of you, shall eat the good things of
his heavenly Land.

So with this I shall conclude desiring you dear young Friends to beware of
running too fast; its a great and common temptation in youth. A strong
Confidence may spring from the heat of your affection and may press you on to
many things, yea even to public Testimony, beyond your true Meafure of Life.
I have known and felt this to be true, and have deeply suffered for it. Peter
himself Fell under such a like Confidence, and was convinced, that it was a
wrong zeal which made him say, Though all should be offended, yet would not he,
Math 26.33. But he would say so no more, when Christ tried him with a question
directly to that purpose, John. 21.15.

But I can tell you by experience how you may know when any motion is beyond
your Measure. You will certainly feel (as when your bodies are strained beyond
their natural strength) a weakness and flatness, or as it were, a damp, fear or
fainting will fall upon your Spirits afterward; especially if by any Friend
opposed: But the true Birth and life brings with it, an inward Evidence of
peace and acceptance with the Lord, and feeling the inward Recompense of reward
(not expecting any thing from Man) is bold in speaking or acting what it
certainly knows to be just and true; and having so done, is bold and valiant
under all opposition against it.

So the God of love, keep you all faithful to your Measure, and diligent in
your place; all performing your Duties to each other in true humility and
tenderness according to Scripture: So shall the Mountain of the Lords house be
established over of all Mountains, (all Gatherings) and all Nations shall flow
unto it, Isay. 2.2.

To thy Name, blessed powerful God of Glory, who have redeemed us from the Iron
furnace, from the Law of sin and Death, who art now purifying and gathering to
thy self a peculiar People to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
be all the pure thanksgivings and holy praises returned for all thy mercies and
savours for Evermore.

One thing more arises, let not this come into the hands of such whom you feel
sinning wilfully after they have received the knowledge of Truth, who, like
Sanballet and Tobias, not only scoff at Gods Building, but also do their utmost
to hinder it. These will turn again and rent both this and you. But of some in
tenderness scrupling have compassion, making a difference. And if this should
happen to come to the Eyes of any of my old Friends and Brethren under former
Dispensations (for whom I can truly and heartily say I have as much, yea rather
more love then ever) who perhaps may look somewhat discontentedly upon it, as a
fruit of Apostasy from what we formerly believed were Gods Ordinances and
Appointments; let me desire them to consider how they will answer an Episcopal
man if he charge them with Apostasy from their Church, which they verily
believe is established upon as plain Scripture proof, as they believe theirs
is. And let them further consider, whether they themselves are of the same
Judgment in all things as they were trained up in.

I have often feared, That the very thoughts of being upbraided with Wavering,
Changing, Instability or the like, is a strong Snare to hold many in Bondage
under weak and unprofitable forms and Elements. I wish it have no influence
upon Some now standing in opposition to better Things.

I grant, that to be tossed too and fro (as many were in former quick National
Turns from Popery to Protestancy and back again to Popery) is shamefully
childish: But to press forward, and come to clearer manifestations of Christ
the Light, as the Lord brings them forth by his Power in every age, is every
man's Duty: And if therein he walk faithfully according to his Measure,
patiently bearing his cross, he shall receive the Crown of eternal Life.
Finally, Brethren, whatsoever Things are True, whatsoever things are Donest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovly, whatsoever things are of Good Report; if there be any Virtue, if there
be any Praise, think on these things.

W. L.

THE END.

