blazon or coat of arms
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guihald' Civitatis London die Jovis,
vicesimo quarto die Martii, Anno Dom' millesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo nono,
Annoque Regni Dom' nostri CAROLI Secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. XXIIo, coram Samuele
Starling Mil', Majore Civitatis London, Johanne Robinson Milite and Baronetto,
Locumtenente Turr', Johanne Lawrence, Willielmo Peake, Willielmo Turner,
Richardo Ford, Georgio Waterman, Roberto Hanson, Willielmo Hooker, and Josepho
Shelden, Mil', Aldermannis, Johanne Forth Armig', Aldermanno, Francisco Chaplin
Milite, Aldermanno, VVillielmo Fluellin and Dannetto Forth, Armig',
Aldermannis, Johanne Smith and Jacobo Edwards, Armig', Aldermannis, and Vicecom
dictae Civitat', necnon majore part Communiariorum de Communi Concil' ejusd'
Civitat' tunc and ibidem assemblat'.

An Act appointing the Exchange-hours.
WHereas by Act of Common Council of the 27. of August in the time of the
Maioralty of Sir Thomas Cambell Knight, deceased, the Exchange-hours are
appointed to be throughout the whole year, for the Noon-Exchange, from Eleven
of the clock until Twelve, and in the Evening, from Michaelmas until Lady Day,
from Five of the clock until Sir, and from Lady Day until Michaelmas, in the
Evening, from Six of the Clock until Seven, and not after those several Hours;
and the Exchange-Bell to be rung accordingly, to give notice to all persons for
their speedy and present Departure off and from the said Exchange after the
said several and respective Hours, upon the penalty in the said Act contained,
as in and by the said Act more fully may appear: It is now Enacted, Ordained
and Established, by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful
the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons, in this Common Council assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the Feast of the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary now next ensuing, the time for
Merchants, Tradesmen, Factors and Brokers, and the Servants of Merchants and
Tradesmen, to be and continue at and upon the said Burse or Royal Exchange, at
Noon, shall be from Eleven of the clock until One of the clock in that
Forenoon, and not after One; and that the Exchange-Bell shall begin to be rung
every day at three quarters of an hour past Twelve of the Clock at noon, and so
continue for the space of one quarter of an hour, viz. till One of the clock,
to give notice to the said Merchants and Tradesmen, Factors and Brokers, and
other the persons aforesaid, for their speedy and present Departure off and
from the said Exchange after the said hour, so that the said Burse or Exchange
may be cleared, and none there remain, after the said Bell shall have done
ringing. And if any Merchant, Tradesman or Broker whatsoever, or any of their
Factors or Servants, shall offer or presume there to tarry or abide after the
ending of the ringing of the said Bell, then every such person shall forfeit
and pay the sum of twelve pence of lawful money of England, to be recovered and
employed as in and by the said former Act of Common Council is directed and
appointed, of and for the penalties in the said Act contained; which said
former Act is to continue and remain in force as to all other particulars
thereof, any thing beforementioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

WAGSTAFFE.

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


