Modern CHURCH-MUSICK Pre-accus'd, Censured, and Obstructed in its Performance
before His MAJESTY, April 1. 1666.
Vindicated by the Author MATT. LOCK, Composer in Ordinary to His Majesty.
HE is a slender Observer of humane action, who finds not Pride generally
accompanied with Ignorance and Malice, what habit soever it wares. In my case
Zeal was its Vizor, and In^^vation the Crime. The fact, Changing the Cu^^ome o^
the Church, by varying that which was ever Sung in one Tune; and occasioning
Confusion in the Service by its ill Performance. As to the latter part of the
charge, I must confess I have been noon of the fortunatest that way; but
whethe^ upon Design or Ignorance of some of the Performers it so happened, I
shall neither Examine nor Judge (they are of Age to understand the value of
their own reputation, and whom they serve:) Nor is it my business to find Eyes,
Ears, or Honesty to any, or answer for other men's faults: but, that such
defects should take their rise from the difficulty or novelty of the
Composition, I utterly deny; the whole, being a kind of Counterpoint, and no
one change, from the beginning to the end, but what naturally flows from, and
returns to its proper Center, the Kay. And for the former, the contrary is so
notoriously manifest, that all relating to the Church know, that, that part of
the Liturgy assigned for Music, was never but variously Composed by all that
undertook it; Witness the Excellent Compositions of Mr. Tallis, Byrd, Gibbons
(and others, their and our Co-temporaries) on the Te Deum, Commandments,
Preces, Psalms, Magnificat, etc. in use to this day, both in His Majesty's
Chapel, and the Cathedralls in this Nation. And to speak rationally, should it
be otherwise, Art would be no more Art, Composers useless, and Science Pinioned
for destruction. If therefore, in imitation of them, I have according to Art,
and the nature of the words, contrived and varied this little Composition; and,
as to the true manner of speaking, conducted it in the mid way between the two
Extremes of Gravity and Levity; I hope I may without ostentation affirm my self
guiltless, and return the Crime from whence it came; AEsop's Maunger. And here
might I fairly take notice of a thing lately crawled into the world, under the
notion (...) Composition, which is the height of its performance is both out of
Time, out of Tune, and yet all to the same Tune, had I the itch of
retalliation; but since the Accuser has been pleased to pass a public censure
on the tender of my duty, I shall only at present take the fre^dom (though
'twas never intended for a public view) in this manner to expose it; that all
capable of judging, may see, there is neither Heresy, nor Schism, nor any thing
of difficulty as to performance, either in the matter or form of it. In fi^e,
this Vindication offers at no more, than denying those to be Judges in Science,
who are ignorant of its Principles.

The Responses to the Ten Commandments.
^

^

^

^

The NICENE CREED.
^I Believe in One God, The Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; and of
all things visible and invisible: begotten of his Father before all worlds:
Light of Light, very God of very God: being of one substance with the Father,
by whom all things were made: and was, crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate: he suffered, and was buried: and ascended into heaven, and sits on
the right hand of the Father: and he shall come again again with Glory to Judge
both the Quick and the (...) whose Kingdom shall have no end, shall have no
end. And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who
proc^^^eth from the Father and the Son; who with the Father and the Son
together is worshipped and glo -- ri -- fi'd: who spoke by the Prophets. And I
believe One Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge One Baptism for the
Remission of Sins: And I look for the Resurrection of the Dead and the Life of
the World to come, and the Life of the World, of:: to come. A -- men.

^The Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; and of all things visible and
invisible: And in One Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God; begotten
of his Father before all worlds: God of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God: begotten, not made; being of one substance with the Father, by whom all
things were made: Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down:: from
heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
man, was made man: and was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate: he
suffered, and was buried: and the third day he rose again, ac -- cording to the
Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of the
Father; and he shall come again shall come again with glory to Judge both the
quick and the (...) whose Kingdom shall have no end, no end. And I believe in
the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father,
from the Father and the Son; who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glo -- ri -- fi'd: who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe One
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge One Baptism for the Remission of
Sins: And I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to
come, and the Life of the World to come, and:: A -- men.

^The Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; and of all things visible and
invisible: And in One Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God; begotten
of his Father before all worlds; God of God, Light of Light, very God of very
God: begotten, not made; being of one substance with the Father, by whom all
things were made: Who for us men, and for our salvation, came down:: from
heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
man, made man: and was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate: he suffered,
and was buried: and the third day he rose again, ac -- cording to the
Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of the
Father: and he shall come again with Glory to Judge both the quick and the (...)
whose Kingdom shall have no end, shall have no end. And I believe in the Holy
Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proc^^^eth from the Father and the Son;
who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glo -- ri -- fi'd:
who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe One Catholic and Apostolic Church. I
acknowledge One Baptism for the Remission of Sins: And I look for the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come, and the Life of
the World to come, and:: A -- men.

^The Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; and of all things visible and
invisible: And in One Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God; God of
God, very God of very God: begotten, not made; being of one substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made: Who for us men, and for our salvation,
came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary,
and was made man: he suf -- fer -- ed, and was buried: and the third day he
rose again, ac -- cording to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and
sits on the right hand of the Father: whose Kingdom shall have no end, shall
have no end. And I believe One Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge
One Baptism for the Remission of Sins: And I look for the Resurrection of the
Dead, and the Life of the World to come, and the Life of the World, of the
World to come. A -- men.


