A LETTER from the most Ingenious Mr. LODOWICK
Rhode Island, Febr. 1. 1691, 2. Honored and Esteemed Mr. Mather,
HAving seen your Book, called, Quakerism Displayed, wherein you have been
pleased to mention my Name and my Challenge to the Quakers of this Island, I am
thereby emboldned, to trouble You at this time with some Lines; sending You
withal, Three, Books penned by G. Keith, with a Ma. nuscript of His, Written by
Him about Three years ago. By perusing His Way to the City of God, from p. 128.
to 133. You will see, what Christ he owned at that time, and from p. 62 to 65.
You will see what He then understood by the Seed, Light, and Grace within, and
in p. 50 51 18. what His Faith in Christ then was. But G. Keith) perhaps by
means of His Controversies with Mr. Hicks, (perceiving the many Absurdities
which follow from this New Fabric, (e.g. that the Heavenly Body or Divine
Intermediate Substance, if there was really such an one would be discerpible
into particles, which particles should be carried hither and thither by men, as
they step from place to place, and that there would have been so many Messia's
or Christ's within, consisting of a Spirit and Body, as there have been Saints
from the beginning; and that the portion of that Body in the Son of Mary,
increased in quantity, and that that Heavenly Substance, consisting of a Body
and Spirit, should be most properly the Father of Christ the Second Adam, if a
portion of him, supplied the Male-Seed in the Conception of Christ in Mary
etc.) built some years after, another Fabric, as You will find by His, The way
cast up, from p. 89. to 168. which he further defends in his Third Book. By the
Manuscript You may further understand the Dotages of this Notional Man, which
some obscure Passages in his late Books have reference unto. When I read Your
Book, I did wish, that You might have had the perusal of these Books of his,
ere You wrote Yours. For though You have notably discovered the Errors of the
Generality of the Quakers (whom I call F^xians) yet there is also a little
party dispersed to and fro, among the common Foxians, who, though they observe G.
Foxes Ordinances, and pass with the rest under the Designation of Quakers, are
nevertheless no true Foxians, but may, (for distinction sake) be called
Semiquakers or Semi-Foxians: but they are so few, that I believe, if they were
all gathered together, they might meet in one room, and make no considerable
appearance. They are most of them, the more learned sort of the people called
Quakers: the chief writers of these, are G. Keith, To. Barclay, (both
Scotchmen,) and because Mr. Faldo and Mr. Hicks knew not the distinction that
is to be made between the Foxians and Semi-foxians and their several Opinions,
G. Keith and W. Pen were in some things too hard for them, (for notwithstanding
what W. Pen had written before that time, as a Foxian touching the Three
Persons, Christ's Satisfaction, Remission of sins etc. He subtly without
confessing any change, acted the Semi-foxian in his controversies with Mr.
Faldo and Mr. Hicks.) The common Foxians conceive that that which condemns
every man within him, is a measure of the Essence of God, which they call
Christ, the Light, the Word, and the Eternal Spirit etc. And they conceive that
this Christ is also the Father, (because Christ is called Everlasting Father,)
and the Hely Ghost, (because he is a Spirit as God,) and they fancy, that as
this Inward Condemner does condemn for some evil (which they call, a
Manifesting, R^vealing and showing them what is evil,) so it does show them not
only Errors in Practice but also Errors in Judgment, and that, if they be
faithful to it (which they call believing in it) it will reveal unto them more
in time, and that there is no more required of any man, then God or Christ has
thus shown him within him etc. And herein consist their daily Divine
Illuminations, Inspirations, Revelations of knowledge: but their Experimental
knowledge of Christ's Birth, Death, R^surrection, etc. Consists in this, that
when a man is Converted, then they say, the Immortal Babe is born, Christ the
Seed and Lamb which was slain, comes to be Raised, and he ascends the Throne,
and comes to Judgment in Clouds of Heaven within, and Judges such a man for
his sins [whereby they only describe the various condition of man's
Conscience.] And hence they deny wholly, that ever Christ as Man shall come
down from Heaven to Raise and Judge the Dead. And they say, that that which is
a man's Troubler, Reprover and Condemner within him, will be also his
Comforter, Approver, Justifier and Savior, if he believes in it, and it will
redeem and save him from all sin, and from W^ath for sin, (esteeming the checks
of the Conscience to be God's Wrath) Herein they place their Salvation and
Redemption from sin, viz. some wilful sinning, and their sin^ess Perfection
consist in their abstinence from gross wilful sinning and the peace of
Conscience ensuing thereupon, they call the peace of God, and Justification in
the sight of God. And their Inherent Righteousness, they call the Righteousness
of Christ, which he has wrought within them, and they do never speak of the
Merit of the sufferings, Death and Resurrection, of Jesus at Jerusalem, but
they call his Righteousness a Rightousness of another at a distance, which can
do us no good; and they say, it is an inward blood that must cleanse our Souls
inwardly. And here also may be understood, what their Baptism of Repentance
with Fire and with the Spirit of Judgment, is, VIZ. When a man is inwardly
Judged for his sin, so as to repent of it. And unto this PROTON PSEUDOS or
fundamental Error, VIZ. That the Inward Condemner is Christ, the Light, and if
obeyed, will become a man's Justifier and Savior, they have suited all their
other Doctrines concerning Christ, saying, that the true Christ was never seen
with Mortal Eyes, heard with Carnal Ears, and that the Visible Body Born of
Mary, was but a Garment of the true Christ tabernacling in it; which body, some
of them say he has laid down, others cannot tell what is become of it; and they
say, to mind Christ in that bodily appearance and manifestation (as they call
it,) is to know Christ after the Flesh, and they call their Christ within
Christ in the Spirit, they say that Christ Born of Mary was Christ in the
Flesh, And beacuse they, read of Eating Christ^s Flesh, and of Drinking his
Blood, they have feigned also an Omnipresent and Invisible Body of Spiritual
Flesh and Blood, which they say the Saints in all Ages partook of within them;
and when they feel an inward Affectedness or sensible Refreshment of their
Boweis (which they call the ^if^,) then they say, they eat of Christ's Flesh, or
of the Bread of Life, and they drink of his Blood which is Life, and by which
they are cleansed. And herein consists their Lords Supper: and he that fully
understands what they mean by their Light and by their- Life, may understand
their whole Divinity. The Semi-foxians finding this Doctrine to be too Gross,
and that God is Indivisible and Immortal, and cannot be Crucisied Slain and
Raised from Death, will not say, that the Inward Condemner is a measure of the
uncreate Eternal Spirit, but they say, it is a create or rather Emanated Being,
Emanated from God in the beginning before all things, VIZ. A measure of the
Es^ence of the Heavenly Man, which they generally call the Light and Spirit of
Jesus Christ, and the purchase of his Death R. Barclay says in his Apology p.
87. that it is a Measure of the Heavenly Body of Christ, and that every
unrighteouss Action is Reproved by it. But G. Kieth on his Way cast up, will
have it to be the Neshamah of the Heavenly Man extended into us. (And
consequently their pretended inward Motions immediate Inspirations,
Illuminations, and Revelations are not Immediately from God, but mediately
either through the Body or Soul of a feigned Man: and by this is also their
inward Justification, Sanctification and Regeneration) This is their Divine
Ess^ntial Principle, which they so often speak of, and sometimes call the Seed,
Grace and Word of God, and R. B. says, that it is the Manifestation of the
Spirit spoken of 1. Cor. 12.7. the seed of the Kingdom, Math. 13.18, 19. the
Light that makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 5.13. the word of God To. 10.18.
the Talent Math. 25 15. the little Leaven, the Gospel preached in every
Creature, Col. 1 23.. and he is offended with them that call it a Natural
Conscience. He says, that if this Seed be reci^ved into the Heart to bring
forth i^^^ Effects, Christ comes to be formed of it, which the Scripture calls
the New Man, Christ within, the hope of Glory. In this Birth or Formation of
Christ within us, and working his works in us, and pouring his Blood into our
Souls, he places our formal Justification, which he explains to be all one with
Sanctification, viz. A making righteous inwardly: and though he grants that
Remission of sins was only purchased ^y virtue of Christ's Sacri fice without
us, yet he says, that they may come to partake or it, that are ignorant of the
History of Christ, for he asserts that by the operation of this Light and Seed,
some have been and may yet be saved, to whom the Gospel is not outwardly
Preached, nor the History of Christ outwardly known, because they have with all
other men, a day of Visitation, in which God offers to work this Salvation, by
the Measure of a saving, sufficient supernatural Right, given to every man,
which all are to believe in, as he would infer from Joh. 12 36. G. Keith writes
in hi Way to the City of God, to the same purpose. And you may see by G. Keiths
Books, how they have framed their Doctrine Concerning Christ, according to this
their Hypothesis, ^orrowing several of their Notions out of the Writings of
some Rabbis among the Eastern Jews, Translated into Latin, by a Learned Noble
Man in Germany [whose Children I Tutored some years agoe] But if the Rabbis-
Aensoph ^e according to the Semi-foxians, the Father, Word and Holy Ghost, (as
they say) and the Aensoph's having clothed himself with the M^nhood, called
Adam Cadmon, be, the Word's being made Flesh, then according to them, not only
the Word, but also the Father and Holy Ghost were made Flesh. This and many
other Absurdities follow from G. Keiths assertion, that the Word was made Flesh
in the beginning, and that this Fl^^h is the Rabbis Adam Cadmon. And these
Cabbalisti^al Semi-foxians seem to expect that their heavenly Adam Cadmon in
the Body, assumed of Mary, shall come from Heaven to Judgment, and that then
there shall be a Resurrection ^ut of the Graves; and G. K. does also believe,
that at his coming there will be the 1000 Years-Reign, which is more then I
ever heard any one called a Quaker affirm. And because G. Keith, as he told me
last Summer, favors the Twelve Revolutions or Transmigrations of our Souls,
whereof R. Jischack, a whimsical Jew in the Eastern Countries, (who pretended
to Revelations,) has written most largely, (which notion he perhaps learned of
some of the Turks in some of those parts, who greatly favor the Py^^agorean
Metempsychosis) therefore he is of late very fickle concerning the
Resurrection-body; for he told me last Summer, that this our Flesh which goes
into the grave shall not rise again, but there is an Invisible Bone dispersed
through the Body, called by the Cabbalists Luz, which is the Seed Sown, unto
which God shall give a Spiritual Body: and he said, that he asked some of the
Jews in these parts, what Luz signified, and they [because they understood
nothing of that Cabbala, and perhaps knowing that the word, Luz in the Portugal
and Spanish Tongue signifies Light] told him it mean Light and so G. Keith is
hugely pleased with the fancy of it, and thinks it suteth bravely with their
Light and Seed. And when I told him, that the Cabbalists said, that this
Invisible Bone is only a Small Bone in the back, he answered, that Wise men
would not tell all at once. I suppose also that he believes, that honest
Pagans, at some of their Revolutions receive the knowledge of Jesus of
Nazareth, (and according to his late absurd Notion) are then perfectly
Justified and Saved [as if Justification admitted of Magis and Minus,] I asked
him last Summer, how any such Gentile could be actually justified and saved
from wrath, before he be pardoned, and how he could be pardoned of the least
imperfection of the very best of his moral virtues, without Faith in Jesus of
Nazareth, and he gave me no direct Answer Certainly G. Keith has no reason to
quote not only Protestants but also the Fathers, because he holds not the same
Christ, Grace and Justifying Faith with them. You will likewise find, SIR, that
G. Keith believes not only the Preexistence of Two degrees of the Soul of
Christ, but also the preexistence of our Souls, of which he makes of late more
degrees then one, thus contradicting what he formerly writ concerning our
Nephesh in his Way cast up: And indeed the GALGAL or Revolution of Soul;
presupposes their Preexistence. These Cabalistical Semi-Quakers labor as much
as is possible, to use the Expressions of G. Fox and his followers, whence many
of the common Foxians do not so much as suspect that they differ from them; and
in their Writing, they use deceitfully and impudently the Words We and Us,
without any specifical Distinction, as though they did write the Sense and
Judgment of the whole People called Quakers, when they do not; and when they
answer the Books writ by Anti-Quakers, they will either put another Meaning, or
some favorable Construction on the gross Tenants of Fox and his Followers,
without ingenuously bearing witness against those Errors, or if they be too
gross, they will either seek some Evasion, or render their Opposites gross
Liars and A^users of the honest People called Quakers, because themselves do
not maintain these things, though they know in their Consciences, that their
Pagan Brethren (as George Keith lately called them) hold those gross Tenants,
upon whom they were also most truly and justly charged by their Opponents. And
therefore as I suppose George Keith is writing an Answer to your Book, so I
believe, he will use many Evasions, and take advantage where he can: and he
will either put some other Meaning upon George Foxes words which you have
quoted (and which he dares not well deny) for his Brethrens sake, who esteem
George Fox the greatest Oracle and Prophet that ever was among them; or perhaps
he will say, that you have quoted no page, and therefore he will wave them. I
was glad to see the Antidote which you and your Honored Colleagues in Boston,
have set forth against George Keith, and I can sincerely say, that God made it
very profitable and serviceable to me, in many respects: and it is to be
admired, what Baseness and Malice George Keith did not scruple to use against
you, and how unreasonably he perverted the Assembly's Words and Meaning. Having
exceeded my intended Brevity, I shall conclude, desiring God to bless your
Labor and Service in the Gospel of his Dear Son: And Rest with my Respects to
you,

Sir, Your Servant in the Faith of Christ, Christianus Lodowick.


