Com' Concil' tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat' London' Die Veneris Septimo die
Junij Anno Dom' 1700 Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertij Angl' etc. Duodecimo.
Coram Ricardo Levett Mil', Major' Civitat' praed', Johannne Moore Mil', Thoma
Stamp Mil', Thoma Lane Mil', Johanne Houblon Mil', Edvardo Clark Mil',
Humphrido Edwin Mil', ac ejusd Civitat' Aldermannis, Salathiel Lovel Mil',
Servien' ad legem ac Recordat' dict' Civitat', Johanne Parsons Mil', Wil' Gore
Mil', Jacobo Houblon Mil', and Thoma Rawlinson Mil', ac ejusd' Civit.
Aldermannis and Carolo Duncombe Mil', Aldro ac un' Vic' Dictae Civitat', nec
non majori part Communiar' in codem Communi Concil' tunc and ibidem assemblat'.
IT is Ordered, That the Act of Common Council made in the Mayoralty of Sir
Robert Ducy Knight and Baronet, relating to the Choice, Election and
Confirmation of Sheriffs for this City and County of Middlesex: As also another
Act in the time of the Mayoralty of Sir William Ashhurst Knight, which Repeals
Two Clauses in Two Acts of Common Council made in the several Mayoralties of
the said Sir Robert Ducy, and Sir William Pritchard Knight, touching such
Choice, Election and Confirmation, be Printed together, and that each Deputy
and Common Council-man of the several Wards of this City have one of the said
Books when Printed

Goodfellow.



Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat LONDON, vicesimo die Julii,
Annoque Regni Dom nostri CAROLI nunc Regis Angliae, etc. Septimo, Coram Roberto
Ducy, Mil' and Baronet Majore Civitat' London, Thoma Middleton, Mil' and
Aldermanno Civitat' London, Nicholao Rainton, Radalpho Freeman, Thoma Moulston,
Rowlando Haylin, Roberto Parkhurst, Johan' Poole, Chr. Cletherow, Ricard Penn,
Mauritio Abbot, Mil' and Alderman', Henrico Garway, Rowlando Backhouse
Aldermannis; Willielmo Action Mil', and Baronetto, ac Aldermanno, Humphrido
Smith and Edmundo Wright, ejusdem Civitatis Aldermannis; Anthony Abdy and
Roberto Cambel, ejusdem Civitat' Vicecom', ac major' part Communiar' de
Communi Concilio ejusdem Civitat' assemblat', ubi tune and ibidem Enactitat'
fuit, prout sequitur.
WHereas an Act of Council made the Fifth Day of May in the Thirty fourth Year
of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, of England, etc. in
the time of the Mayoralty of Sir William Webb, Knight. deceased; one Act was made
and ordained, for, touching and concerning the Choice, Election and
Confirmation of the Sheriffs of this City, and the County of Middlesex. And
whereas also diverse other Acts of Common Council have been made touching the
same, Be it therefore Enacted by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of
this City, That the said Act made the said Fifth Day of May in the Four and
thirtieth Year aforesaid, and all other the said Acts made touching or
concerning the Choice, Election and Confirmation of the Sheriffs of this City
and County of Middlesex, shall be void and of none effect, for that the same
Laws have not taken so good Effect as might be wished, by reason that the
Penalties and Forfeitures therein contained, have been over-mild, and thereby
His Majesty's Service have been in Danger of Prejudice, and the good Citizens
of this City, by reason of often Refusal of the said Office of Shrievalty have
been much troubled and disquieted; For better Reformation whereof, Be it now
therefore Enacttd, Ordained and Established by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen and
Commons in this Common Council Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That from henceforth for ever the Day as well for Confirmation and Allowance of
such Persons as hereafter shall be Chosen and Elected by the Lord Mayor of this
City for the time being, to be Sheriffs of the said City and County of
Middlesex; as also for the Choice and Election of such other Persons as by the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons shall be Chosen to be Sheriffs of the said
City and County of Middlesex, shall be yearly holden on the Four and twentieth
Day of June; And if it shall happen by the Death or Refusal of any of the said
Person or Persons so to be Chosen or Elected, as aforesaid, or by the Death of
any Shreive of this City, Departing in the time of his Shrievalty, or upon any
other Occasion whatsoever, there shall be just Cause to make a New Election;
then the same shall from time to time be at such Day and Time, as by the Court
of Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, shall be Ordered and Appointed;
And that no Freeman of the said City, so to be Chosen or Elected, as is
aforesaid, shall be Discharged or Exempted from the Execution of the said
Office of Shrievalty by Supposition or Excuse of Defect, or Insufficiency of
Wealth, except he will voluntarily take his Corporal Oath before the Lord Mayor
and greater part of the Aldermen, in open Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
for the time being, That he then is not of the Value of Ten Thousand Pounds in
Lands. Goods and sperate Debts, and do likewise bring with him Six other
Citizens, Freemen of the same City, of good Credit and Reputation, such as the
Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, shall allow, who shall
likewise voluntarily testify upon their corporal Oaths, That in their
Consciences they believe, that the said Person so to be chosen or elected
Sheriff, has Deposed and Sworn truly concerning his Value, as is aforesaid:
And it is likewise Ordained and Enacted by the same Authority, That if any
Person, being a Freeman of this City shall be Chosen or Elected Sheriff of the
same City and County of Middlesex, and Publication thereof by open Proclamation
being made in the Guildhall in the place where the Court of Hustings is usually
holden in the Presence of the Lord Mayor and Six Aldermen for the time being
(at the least) or in the Absence of the said Lord Mayor, then in the Presence
of Eight Aldermen of the said City for the time being (at the least). And being
called to come forth and give his Consent to take the said Office of Shrievalty
upon him, shall not personally appear before the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen for the time being, in the Inner Chamber of the Guild Hall aforesaid,
at the next Court there to be holden (unless he have such reasonable Excuse as
the Lord Mayor and greater part of the Aldermen for the time being, shall in
open Court allow) and then and there become bounden to the Chamberlain of the
same City, for the time being, and his Successors by his Deed Obligatory, in
the Sum of One thousand Pounds, with Condition. That if he shall personally
appear in the Public Assembly in the Guild Hall of the same City on the Vigil
of St. Michael the Archangel then next following at the Time in that behalf
accustomed, and then and there take upon him the Office and Charge of
Shrievalty of the said City and County, That then the said Obligation shall be
void; Or if such Person so to be chosen or elected, shall, before the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen openly declare his Refusal to take upon him the
said Office, Then every such Person which shall make such Default in
Appearance, by which shall not become bounden, or which shall declare his
Refusal, as aforesaid, shall Forfeit the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds of Lawful
Money of England to the Mayor and Commonalty of the same City, to be Employed
to the Uses hereafter declared and expressed, unless he shall be duly
discharged of the said Office of Shrievalty, for Want or Defect of Ability in
Wealth, upon Oath taken, as is aforesaid. Provided nevertheless, and Be it
Enacted, Ordained and Established by the Authority aforesaid, (any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding) That if the Person so to be chosen or
elected, and making Default in appearing, or denying to become Bounden, or that
shall declare his Refusal, as aforesaid, shall be an Alderman of this City at
the time of his Choice or Election, then every such Alderman so to be chosen or
elected, shall Forfeit the Sum of Six hundred Marks, of Lawful Money of
England, to the Mayor and Commonalty of the same City, to be employed to the
Uses hereafter in this Act Declared and Expressed. All which Forfeitures or
Penalties shall be recovered by Action, or Bill of Debt Original, to be
commenced and prosecuted in any the Courts of Record of the King's Majesty, or
His Heirs and Successors, within the said City; And that the same Person or
Persons so Offending, or Refusing, after such Forfeiture, shall nevertheless
remain Eligible yearly afterward to be Sheriff of the said City and County, as
if he or they had never been before Chosen or Elected to the said Office.
Provided also, and it is likewise Enacted and Declared, touching the Uses and
Employment of the said Forfeitures, That if any such Default or Forfeiture
shall be made, as aforesaid, by any Person that shall first in any Year be
Chosen or Elected by the Lord Mayor for the time being, to be Shrieve of the
City of London, and County of Middlesex, That then One hundred Pounds, parcel
of such Forfeitures, shall be given and bestowed upon such Person as shall
first in the same Year accept to take upon him the said Office of Shrievalty:
And if it shall happen after such Acceptance of the said Office, any other
Forfeiture by Default or Refusal shall be made in the same Year by any person
that shall be Chosen or Elected by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons, for
the time being, to be Sheriff of the said City and County of Middlesex, That
then One hundred Pounds parcel of such Forfeiture shall be given and bestowed
upon such other Person as shall first after such Forfeiture in the same Year
accept and take upon him the said Office of Shrievalty, being thereunto Elected
and Chosen by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the same City; And that
all the Residue of the same Forfeitures, and all other Forfeitures and
Penalties for Refusal, or making Default to appear, denying to become Bound, or
declaring Refusal to take the said Office of Shrievalty, as is aforesaid, shall
be wholly and entirely Used and Employed to the only Use and Behalf of the
Mayor, and Commonalty and Citizens of the said City; any Act, Law, or Ordinance
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Freeman of this City, which shall incur any
Penalty or Forfeiture before declared, by Force of this Act, shall not within
Three Months next after such Forfeiture incurred, well and truly pay unto the
Chamberlain of the said City, for the time being, all such Penalties and
Forfeitures to such Uses as in this Act is appointed and declared, That then
every such Person failing of such Payment, shall, over and above the said
Penalties and Forfeitures before declared, Forfeit and Lose the Sum of One
hundred Pounds more to the Use of the said Mayor and Commonalty, to be
Recovered in Form abovesaid. And to the intent that no Alderman of this City
shall, in respect of Posteriority of Choice or Election to the said Office of
Shrievalty, be inferior in Antiency or Pre-eminence to any Commoner, and for
other good Considerations: It is therefore Enacted, That the Lord Mayor of the
said City for the time being, shall not at any time hereafter choose or elect
any Commoner of this City to be Sheriff of this City of London, and of the
County of Middlesex, so long as there shall then be an Alderman of this City
Eligible to the said Office; Any former Law, Custom, Usage, or other Matter
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And to the intent that the Court of
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City for the time being, shall not be burdened
or charged with any Unkindness, nor pestered with Importunate Suits. if they
shall refuse to relieve such Persons as shall make Default, or deny to become
Bound, or refuse to Accept of the said Office of Shrievalty, as is aforesaid.
And for other good Confiderations, it is likewise Declared and Enacted, That
the Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City for the time being have not,
nor shall have Power nor Authority in any case, without the Assent of the
Commoners in public Common Council of this City first had and obtained, to
Dispense with, Remit or Abate any of the said Forfeitures, or any part thereof.
which at any time hereafter shall happen or grow Due by Force of this Act; nor
to give Respite of Payment thereof, or of any part thereof, above the Term of
One Year at the most; nor to give any Restraint or Delay of Suit to be
commenced and prosecuted for Recovery thereof.

Goodfellow.

Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat' LONDON, die Veneris decimo
quinto die Junij 1694. Annoque Regni Dom' Willielmi and Dom' Mariae nunc Regis
and Reginae, Angl', etc. Sexto, Coram Will' Ashhurst Mil' Major' dictae
Civitatis, Roberto Clayton Mil'. Patienc' Ward Mil', Will' Pritchard Mil',
Roberto Jeffreys Mil', Thoma Lane Mil', Edvardo Clark Mil', Francisco Child
Mil', Richardo Levett Mil', Thoma Cook Mil' Alderman', and Thoma Abney Mil',
and VVill' Hedges Mil' Vic' and Alderman' dict' Civitat', nec non major' part
Communiar' dictae Civitat' in eodem Communi Concilio tunc and ibidem assemblat'.
WHereas by a Clause in an Act of Common Council made the Twentieth Day of
July, in the Seventh Year of the Reign of King CHARLES the First, in the
Majoralty of Sir Robert Ducy, It was amongst other things Enacted in the Words
following, That the Lord Mayor of this City, for the time being, shall not at
any time hereafter choose or elect any Commoner of this City to be Sheriff of
the City of London, and of the County of Middlesex, so long as there shall then
be an Alderman of the City Eligible to the said Office.

Which said Clause, in respect of Accidents or Circumstances, may not at all
times be convenient to be practiced.

And whereas by another Clause in an Act of Common Council, made the Sixth Day
of June, in the Thirty fifth Year of King Charles the Second, in the Mayoralty
of Sir William Pritchard, Knight; It was amongst other things Enacted in the
Words following, That the Person who shall be Nominated and Elected according
to ancient Usage by the Lord Mayor of this City, for the time being, to be one
of the Sheriffs of the City of London, and County of Middlesex, and such
Election shall be declared to the Commons of the said City assembled in Common
Hall upon the Twenty fourth day of June, shall there by the said Commons be
confirmed and allowed to be one of the Sheriffs of the said City and County
accordingly: And that upon proposing the said Person to be confirmed to the
said Common Hall, in case any Hands shall be holden up in token of
Confirmation, the said Person shall be taken to be confirmed and allowed, and
then another Person shall be chosen by majority of Hands to be the other of the
said Sheriffs, and to join with him that shall be so confirmed.

Which said Clause being not only repugnant to Reason, but contrary to the
Rules and Methods of Elections:

Be it therefore Enacted by the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said several Clauses
before-recited, and either of them, and every Article and Thing contained in
them, or either of them, shall be, and are hereby Repealed, Annulled and made
Void.

And whereas by several Acts of Common Council, the Election of Sheriffs,
Chamberlain, Bridgmasters and Auditors of the Chamberlain and
Bridghouse-Accounts, and Aleconners, are appointed on Midsummer-day yearly,
except the Sheriff or Sheriffs, Chamberlain, or other of the said Officers, for
the time being, shall die, or for just Cause be removed: And whereas in some
years (as in this present year) Midsummer-day happens to fall on the Lords
Day, commonly called Sunday, which ought to be kept holy, and is a necessary
and required part of the Service of God, and enjoined by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm;

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared, That from henceforth, whenever
Midsummer-day shall happen to be on the Lords Day, commonly called Sunday, That
the Election of the Sheriffs, Chamberlain, Bridgmasters, Auditors of the
Chamberlain and Bridghouse-Accounts, and Aleconners shall be on the Day next
following, any Act or Acts, or any other Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1700.


