AN ACT OF Common Council, For the better Regulation of HACKNEY-COACHES.

coat of arms of the City of London

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to this Honorable City, 1683.

Pritchard Mayor.
Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guildhall Civitatis LOND', Die Martis Decimo
Tertio die Martii, Anno Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angl', etc. Tricesimo
Quinto. Annoque Dom. 1682.
IT is Ordered by this Court, That the Act for Regulating the Hackney-Coachmen,
this Day passed, shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

Wagstaffe.

coat of arms of the City of London
Commune Concil' tent' in Camera Guildhall Civitatis LOND', Die Martis Decimo
tertio die Martii, Anno Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi, Dei gratia Angl',
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', etc. Tricesimo quinto,
Annoque Dom' 1682. Coram Willielmo Pritchard Mil', Major' Civ' Lond', Willielmo
Turner Mil', Jacobo Edwards Mil', Johanne Moore Mil', Jacobo Smith Mil',
Roberto Geffery Mil', Johanne Peake Mil', Thoma Beckford Mil', Johanne Chapman
Mil', Simone Lewis Mil', Jonathano Raymond' Mil', Richardo How Mil', Petro
Daniel Armig' Ald'ris, and Dudleo North Mil' Alder', ac un' Vicecom' dicte
Civitatis; Necnon Majore part Communiar' dicte Civitatis, in Communi Concilio
tunc and ibidem assemblat'.
WHEREAS by the Ancient Charters, Customs, Franchises and Liberties of this
City, the Lord MAYOR and Aldermen of the same City, with the Assent of the
Commonalty thereof, are to make Bylaws and Orders, for the preventing and
hindering of all Things which may from time to time happen, arise, or grow
within the same City, tending to the Hurt or Prejudice of the Citizens and
Inhabitants thereof, or of the People resorting thereunto, or of the Trade of
the same City.

And whereas, EDWARD (sometime King of England, of Famous Memory) the Third of
that Name, by His Charter made and granted to this City in the Fifteenth Year
of his Reign (confirmed also by Parliament) amongst other things granted, That
if any the Customs in this City before that Time obtained and used, were in any
part hard or defective, or any thing within the same City arising (where Remedy
before that time was not Ordained) should need Amendment, The Mayor and
Aldermen of this City and their Successors, with the Assent of the Commonalty
of the same City, might put and ordain thereunto fit Remedies, as often as it
should seem Expedient unto them, So that such Ordinances should be profitable
to the King, for the profit of the Citizens and other People repairing to this
City, and agreeable to Reason.

And whereas the Number of Hackney-Coaches, Driving, Standing, and Waiting
within this City, are now of late time so greatly Increased, and become so
many, that the Streets and Common Passages thereof are (by the Driving and
Standing of such Hackney-Coaches) so filled and pestered, That the Citizens and
Inhabitants of this City, and the People repairing thereunto, are greatly
hindered in their Affairs, and the Passages of Carts and other Carriages,
necessary for the conveying of Goods greatly obstructed, and the Trade of this
City thereby much prejudiced, and the Charges of the Repairs of the Streets of
this City much increased, And great Damages, Mischiefs, and Inconveniences are
daily occasioned thereby, and likely to be Increased to the Citizens and
Inhabitants of this City, and other Persons resorting thereunto. For prevention
therefore of all Inconveniences and Mischiefs which for the future may arise
and grow to this City by such great Numbers of Hackney-Coaches, and to the end,
That Hackney-Coaches to be used and employed within this City and the Liberties
thereof, may be reduced to a Convenient Number; and that the Persons Keeping
and Driving such Hackney-Coaches for Hire, within this City and the Liberties
thereof, may be under some good Regulation and Government, agreeable to what
has been already provided concerning Carrs, Carts, and Carr-Men.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in Common Council
Assembled; by Force of the Customs, Franchises, and Liberties aforesaid, and
Charter beforementioned, confirmed by Parliament, as aforesaid, and by
Authority thereof; That from and after the First Day of MAY next coming, the
Number of Hackney-Coaches to be used and employed within this City and the
Liberties thereof, shall not exceed Four Hundred.

And to the end the Number of them may be ascertained, and not exceed Four
Hundred, as aforesaid, Be it further Enacted and Ordained, That no Person or
Persons, after the said First Day of MAY next coming, other than such Persons
as shall be Licenced according to this Act; (Except Stage-Coaches to and from
their Inns, and Coaches which shall take up a Fare out of the City, to be
carried to any Place within or beyond this City or the Liberties thereof,
whilst they shall be without Covin or Delay driving to such Place or Places,
within or beyond this City or the Liberties thereof only;) shall by Himself or
his Servants, Drive for Hire any Hackney-Coach, or Stand therewith to be Hired
within this City of London, or the Liberties thereof. And, that if any Person
or Persons not so Licenced, (except as is before Excepted) shall presume by
Himself, or his Servants, to Drive for Hire any Coach within this City or the
Liberties thereof, as aforesaid; or to Stand with any Unlicenced Coach in order
to be Hired, within the said City and Liberties thereof, That then the Person
or Persons so Offending, shall Forfeit for every Time wherein he or they shall
Offend in the Premises, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to be Levied by Distress
of the Coach and Horses, so to be Driven or Standing contrary to the true
intent and meaning of this Act, or of One of them; or to be recovered by Action
of Debt, to be brought and prosecuted in the Name of the Chamberlain of this
City, now and for the Time being, in any His MAJESTY'S Courts of Record within
this City, where Actions of Debt may be brought.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in
granting such Licenses (as aforesaid) regard in the First place be had to such
Person and Persons as were last Licenced, by virtue of a Late Act of
Parliament, made in the Fourteenth Year of His now MAJESTY'S Reign, for
Regulating and Licencing of Hackney-Coaches, that shall desire Licenses in
pursuance of this Act; and to the Widow and Widows of every of them that now
have Coaches and Horses, or whose Livelihood is depending thereon.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That upon the Death, Forfeiture, or
Surrender of any of the Person and Persons first to be Licenced, as aforesaid,
and their respective Widows, nor at any time thereafter, New Licenses for the
keeping Hackney-Coaches within this City and the Liberties thereof, as
aforesaid, shall not be granted to any Person or Persons that uses any other
Trade or Occupation, or that shall vend Beer or Ale by Retail; nor to any One,
to keep more than Two Hackney-Coaches, for the ends and purposes aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That all and every the Person and
Persons that shall be Licenced, as aforesaid, shall observe and conform Him and
Themselves to the Rules and Provisions herein after set down, That is to say,
That every Coachman Licenced shall have a Mark of Distinction upon his Coach
by Figure, or otherwise, as the Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen shall
think fit; To the end They may be known, in case they shall Misbehave
themselves: And also to distinguish them from Coach-Men Vnlicenced; and that
none shall put the same Mark or Distinction upon his Coach, that is appointed
for any other Coach; nor shall for Hire, Drive or Use any Coach (Except as
aforesaid) that is not so Marked or Distinguished.

And further, That no Hackney-Coachman so to be Licenced, as aforesaid, shall
take for his Hire above the Rates following; That is to say, Ten Shillings for
one Day, reckoning Twelve Hours to the Day; and by the Hour not above Eighteen
Pence for the First Hour, and Twelve Pence for every Hour after. And from the
Inns of Court, or thereabouts, within this City, to any part of St. James's or
City of Westminster, (Except beyond Tuttle-Street) above Twelve Pence; and the
same Prices from the same Places to the said Inns of Court, or Places
thereabouts within this City: And from any of the Inns of Court, or Places
thereabouts within this City, to the Royal Exchange, or Places of the like
Distance, Twelve Pence; and so from the said Places to the said Inns of Court,
as aforesaid; and the like Rates from and to any Place at the like Distance
with the Places beforementioned, upon pain that every Coachman refusing to go
for the said Rates, or exacting more for his Hire than the several Rates herein
before Appointed, or Offending in any of the particulars aforementioned, shall
Forfeit and pay for every such Offense the Sum of Ten Shillings of good English
Money, to be levied by Distress, or Action of Debt, as aforesaid. And, that the
Persons so to be Licenced, and Every of them, shall conform Him and Themselves
to such other Rules and Provisions for their good Government, as shall from
time to time be Set down by this Court.

And be it further Enacted, That no Person shall be Licenced, by Force of this
Act, to Drive any Hackney-Coach, that shall be under the Age of One and Twenty
years; or that is not of Sober and Honest Conversation, and decently
Apparelled. And Further, That none of the said Persons to be Licenced by virtue
of this Act, shall take any Apprentice, to employ him in the Driving any
Hackney-Coaches within this City, or the Liberties thereof. And Further, That
their Hackney-Coaches shall stand to Take up Passengers in no other Places, or
in greater Numbers, than are herein after Expressed; That is to say,

From the Bars without Aldgate to the Gate, Twelve Coaches. Near the Pump
within Aldgate, Three.
In Fenchurch-Street.
From the said Pump to Mark-Lane End, Three. From Mark-Lane End to Philpot-Lane
End, Three. Near the Bulwark-Gate at the Tower, Two.
In Tower-Street.
At Mincing-Lane End, Two. At Mark-Lane End, Two. At Seething-Lane End, One.
Near the Monument on Fish-Street Hill, Two.
In Gracechurch-Street.
From East-Cheap End to Lombard Street End, Two. By St. Peter's Church, Two.
In Leadenhall-Street.
From Billiter-Lane End to St. Mary Ax, Four. From St. Mary Ax to Leaden Hall
Corner, Four. In Bishopsgate-Street, within the Gate, Eight. From the Bars
without Bishopsgate to the Gate, Eight. In Broad-Street, Six.
In Aldersgate Street.
From Long-Lane End to Jewen-Street End, Six. From Jewen-Street End to
Aldersgate, Six.
In Redcross-Street.
From Golding-Lane to Jewen-Street End, Four. From Jewen-Street End to
Cripplegate Church, Two. In Smithfield, Twelve.
In Cheapside.
Near the Conduit, Four. From Foster-Lane End to Wood-Street End, Three. From
Wood-Street End to King Street End, Four. From King Street End to Bucklers-Bury
End, Two. At the West End of St. Paul's Church, Four; standing Close to the
Fence.
In Cornhill.
Near the Standard, Three. Near St. Michaels Church, Three. From Finch-Lane End
to Sweethings-Alley, Three. From Castle-Alley to the Lower End of Cornhill,
Five. Against the Stocks-Market, Two. In Great Lombard Street, Four. On
Dowgate-Hill near Skinners-Hall, Two. In Old Fish-Street, Two. In
Coleman-Street, Four. In Aldermanbury, Two. From Guildhall to Cheapside, Six.
In Great Wood-Street, Two. In Milk-Street, Two. In Newgate-Street, Two. From
Newgate to St. Sepulchers Church, Two. On Each side of Fleet-Ditch (void of the
Great Street) Two; being Eight in all. In the Old Bailey, Six.
In Fleet Street.
From Shooe-Lane End to Water-Lane End, Four. From Water-Lane End to
White-Fryers Stump, Six. From White-Fryers Stump to the West End of St.
Dunstans Church, Six. From the East End of St. Dunstans Church to Temple-Barr,
Six; standing on the North-side of the Street. In Chancery Lane above
Sergeants-Inne, Six.
In Holborn.
Near Staple-Inne Gate, Four. Near Castle-Yard Gate, Three. From Castle-Yard
Gate to Fetter-Lane End, Five. From Fetter-Lane End to Hatton-Garden End, Five.
From Hatton-Garden End to Holborn-Bridge, Three. Without Moore-Gate, Three.
And be it further Enacted, That in all and every the Places aforesaid, where
more than One Coach is allowed to Stand, the same Coaches, and Every of them,
shall stand Five Yards distant at least one before another.

And further, That if any of the said Hackney-Coaches shall Stand in order to
be Hired in any other Place than are herein beforementioned, or in greater
Numbers, or at less Distances than are herein before specified, That then the
Person and Persons Offending in any of the said Cases, shall Forfeit the Sum of
Ten Shillings of like Lawful English Money, to be Levied and Recovered by
Distress or Action of Debt, in manner beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted, That none of the said Coach-Men shall Use or Drive
Two Coaches at the same time with One Figure, on the Penalty of Forfeiting for
every such Offense the Sum of Five Pounds, to be Levied and Recovered in manner
aforesaid.

And be it also further Enacted, That once in every Year a View shall be made
by Order of this Court, of the Fitness of the Persons that shall be Licenced by
Virtue of this Act, their Servants, Horses and Coaches, for the Service to
which they are Licenced. After which View, as aforesaid, Once in every Year the
Licenses of such of the said Persons as shall then be alive, or their Widows,
whose Coach, Servants and Horses, shall upon such View be found fit for that
Service; and that shall have reasonably Complied with the Rules and Directions
of this Act shall be Renewed.

And be it further Enacted, That none of the said Persons to be Licenced by
Virtue of this Act, shall at any time hereafter Stand, or Ply for Hire, against
any part of the Royal Exchange, nor stand in any Street or Common Passage
before the Door or Shop of any Citizen or Inhabitant of this City, to his
Annoyance or Hindrance; but in the Middle of the Streets and Passages only,
Except between St. Dunstans Church and Temple-Barr, as aforesaid (and at Five
Yards Distance, as aforesaid) and so as the Coaches and Carts may pass Free on
each Side of the said Street. Nor shall Feed his or their Horses with Hay in
any Street or Common Passage (Except such Quantities only as the Coach-Men
shall hold and deliver with his and their Hands to his and their Horses:) Nor
shall refuse to give Way to any Gentlemans-Coach, or other Coach in such Street
or Passage, where Need shall require; on Pain that Every Person Offending in
any of the said Cases, shall Forfeit and Pay the Sum of Ten Shillings of good
English Money for Every such Offense, to be Levied and Recovered in manner
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That to the end the said Coach-Men may be the more
Effectually kept to their Standings, and other the Rules and Orders of this
Act, That Andrew Tomlyn, and such other Person and Persons as this Court shall,
for and during so long Time as this Court shall from Time to Time Limit, shall
take Care that this Act, and every Thing therein contained, to the utmost of
His and Their Power, be duly put in Execution.

And in case He or They shall find any of the Coach-Men to be Licenced in
manner aforesaid, or any others Offending in any of the Particulars herein
beforementioned, That then He or They do Distrain the Coaches and Horses of
the Person and Persons so Offending, or One of them, for the Penalties and
Forfeitures Inflicted on Him or Them by this Act, for such Offense and Offenses
which such Coachman or Coach-Men shall so Commit in Contempt of this Act, or
bring the Name of the Offender or Offenders, or the Number or Mark of His or
Their Coaches, and the Place of his Abode, to the Chamberlain of this City, now
and for the Time being, to the end such Offender and Offenders may be proceeded
against according to Law.

And all Constables, and other His MAJESTY'S Officers within this City and the
Liberties thereof, are hereby Empowered and Required to be Aiding and Assisting
to the said Andrew Tomlyn, and such other Person and Persons as this Court
shall Direct, in all Things tending to the Execution of this Act, in preventing
the Mischiefs and Inconveniences intended to be Remedied thereby.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, (for prevention of all
Persons, other than such as are to be Licenced by Virtue hereof, to Drive and
Stand with Hackney-Coaches for Hire in the Streets of this City,) That the said
Four Hundred Persons shall be Licenced, and have a Certificate (Yearly to be
Renewed) from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, under the Seal of the
Office of Majoralty, and Signed by the Town Clerk of this City in manner
following, viz.

ORdered by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen of the
City of LONDON, That A. B. of, etc. for and during the space of One Year, to be
accounted from the First Day of May -- -- Be, and is hereby Licenced to keep a
Hackney-Coach within this City and the Liberties thereof, Pursuant to an Act of
Common Council, Made, Enacted and Passed, etc. He the said A. B. Conforming
himself to the Rules in the said Act of Common Council set down and prescribed;
And that the Number ((...)) be the Mark and Figure to be used by the said A. B.
upon such his Hackney-Coach. Witness, etc.

And Lastly, It is hereby further Declared, Ordained and Enacted, That all and
every the Sum and Sums of Money to be Forfeited by this Act, and to be Levied
and Recovered for the not due Observance of the same, shall be disposed of in
Manner following; (That is to say) One Moiety thereof (the Costs of the Suits
for Recovery of the same being first deducted and allowed) shall after the
Recovery and Receipt thereof, be paid and delivered to the Treasurer of
Christs-Hospital, to be employed for and toward the Relief of the Poor
Children, to be Brought up and Maintained in the said Hospital: And the other
Moiety to be paid to the Chamberlain of this City for the Time being, to be
disposed of to such Person and Persons as shall be Employed to see the due
Execution of this Act, to the end the Mischiefs thereby intended to be
remedied, may be fully prevented, and after to such other Uses as this Court
shall think fit and appoint.

Wagstaffe.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1683.


