
FOR as much as the gathering together of persons old and young, upon the
Exchange, and into the fields for sports and recreations, into
Victualling-houses, and Taverns upon the Lord's Day, and Fast-days; mispending
their time there, when they should be exercised publicly or privately in the
duties of Religion. And for as much as the setting open of shops, and selling
of Wine, Beer, Ale, Flesh, Fish, Fruit, and other victual upon those days, and
receiving and entertaining of persons upon those days to drink and tiple, tend
very much to the dishonor of God, the increase and spreading of profaneness,
the scandal of godly and religious men, and the government of this City. The
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor therefore does require all persons of what
Nation or quality soever, to forbear to walk or gather together upon the
Exchange, or into the fields, for sports and recreations; or into
Victualling-houses, or Taverns, or to set open any shop, or house, for vending
or putting to sale any Wine, Ale, Beer, or other victual or commodity
whatsoever, upon the said days, except in case of necessity: And all Parents
and Masters of families, to command their children and servants to forbear
accordingly: and all Constables and other Officers to search for, and apprehend
such persons as transgress in any of the aforesaid particulars, and to bring
them before His Lordship, or some other Justices of the Peace, to the intent
that they may be proceeded against; according to the laws in those cases
provided.

Dated at London, the 14th. April, 1649.
Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1649.


