blazon or coat of arms of the City of London By the Mayor.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Mayor deeply weighing and resenting the many
Outrages and Disorders of late too too frequently committed in the Streets and
Public Passages of this City in the Night time, by rude and disorderly
Persons, Instances whereof are most notorious in a Murder lately done upon an
innocent Person, in the open Streets, and several other Outrages; which
mightily redounds to the Disreputation and Dishonor of His Majesty's Government
within this City, heretofore famous for its Discipline, and is a great
Violation of the Peace and Security of His Majesty's Subjects within the same:
And his Lordship further considering, That by the Laws and Constitutions of
this City, the Constables in every Ward with a certain competent number of
Watchmen (particularly set down and apportioned for each Ward by several Acts
of Common Council) are obliged and ought to keep Watch within their respective
Wards, for the preservation of the King's Peace, and prevention of all such
Irregularities and Disorders; for which end there was never greater occasion
for a strong and sufficient Watch to be duly kept every Night, in the several
Wards and Divisions within this City and Liberties. His Lordship therefore, by
and with the advice of the Aldermen his Brethren, does hereby think fit to
publish and declare, and in His Majesty's name, straightly to charge and
command, That the Constables, with the full number of Watchmen appointed to be
set in every Ward, do without fail begin their Watch every night, from
Michaelmas day to the first day of April, at Nine of the Clock and there
continue till Seven of the Clock in the Morning; and from the first day of
April to Michaelmas day to begin at Ten of the Clock at Night, and there
continue till Five in the Morning, according to an Act of Common Council in
that behalf made and provided; and to be very careful and diligent to prevent
and suppress all manner of Disorders, and to apprehend all rude and disorderly
Persons, or such as cannot render a good account of themselves; and every Night
at Ten of the Clock to visit and search all Taverns, Alehouses, and other
public houses of receipt, within their respective Wards or Divisions, and
such persons as they shall there find disguised with Drink or disorderly, or
that cannot give a good account of some lawful occasion of their being there,
presently to turn them out from the said houses, and secure them to be
proceeded against according to Law. And to the end that this may be duly and
constantly performed, His Lordship does straightly require the Deputies and
Common Council men of the several Wards within this City, to take care and see
to the execution hereof, and immediately to meet together and call before them
the several Constables within their respective Wards, and charge them,
according to their Duty and their Oaths, faithfully and diligently to observe
and perform the same. And that the said Deputies and Common Council men by
turns, be present at the first setting of the VVatch at night, and again at
their rising in the morning, and see that they be punctual at their hours, and
have their full number, and perform their duty in all points; wherein his
Lordship expects a hearty and ready compliance, as a matter of the greatest
concern to the honor, safety and welfare of this City.

Given at Guild Hall, this tenth day of March, 1673. and in the Six and
Twentieth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


