Tichborne arms Mayor. Tuesday the twenty sixth of May 1657.
WHereas the late Ordinances touching Hackney Coaches and Hackney Coachmen
within the City of London and Places adjacent, are annulled and made void by
authority of Parliament from and after the Twenty fourth day of June now next
ensuing: And it is by experience manifest that by the said Coaches standing and
pestring the Streets, the Common passages are hindered and made dangerous, and a
great disturbance and annoyance thence arises and manifold inconveniences are
occasioned to Inhabitants and Passengers: This Court therefore does hereby
annull and make void all grants or Lycences made or Granted at any time
heretofore by this Court, by virtue of the said Ordinances, to any Person or
Persons for the keeping or employing of any Hackney Coach or Coaches and Horses
and all rules and Orders touching or concerning the standing and Regulating of
the same; And does further Order that from and after the said Twenty fourth day
of June no Hackney Coachman whatsoever nor servant to any Hackney Coachman
shall stand or remain in any the Streets, Lanes or Passages of this City with
his or their Coach or Coaches and Horses so as to annoy or incumber the same,
Upon Pain to be strictly and severely prosecuted and punished according to
Law, And all Constables and other Officers and Ministers within this City and
Liberties whom it may concern are Required to be ayding and Assisting in their
several places, whereby such as shall wilfully offend in the premises may be
apprehended and brought (...) fore some Justice of the Peace of the same City
and thereupon may be proceeded against according to the demerits of the
offenders, And to the end that all persons Concerned may take notice hereof and
not think to excuse themselves by pretense of ignorance, Coppies of this Order
are to be dispersed and affixed in all convenient places of this City and
Liberties.

Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


