AN ACT For Preventing and Suppressing OF FIRES WITHIN THE City of London, AND
LIBERTIES thereof.

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. M.DC.LXXVI.

blazon or coat of arms of the City of London Commune Concilium tent' in Camera
Guilhald' Civitatis London die Veneris, decimo quinto die Novembris, Anno
Domini 1667. Annoque Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. decimo nono,
coram Willielmo Peak Milite, Majore Civitatis London, Thoma Aleyn Milite and
Baronetto, Aldermanno, Johanne Laurence, Thoma Bloudworth, Willielmo Bolton,
Willielmo Turner, Willielmo Hooker, Militibus Aldermannis, Francisco Asty
Armigero, Aldermanno, ac Dionysio Gauden and Thoma Davis Militibus,
Aldermannis. and Vicecomitibus ejusdem Civitat', nec non majore part
Communiariorum de Communi Concilio ejusdem Civitat' tunc and ibidem assemblat'.
WHereas the late fierce and outrageous FIRE which happened in this City
(continuing violently, to the great Astonishment of all Beholders, more than
the space of four Days and four Nights) burnt, destroyed and consumed the
greatest part of the Churches and Dwelling-houses, rendering very many of the
Inhabitants calamitous, and much impoverished by the great Losses they
sustained, and is by all justly resented as a most sad and dismal Judgment of
Heaven: For the Prevention, Avoiding and Suppressing (as much as Human Prudence
is capable of) the like deplorable (and still too too visible) Events, and
dreadful Danger of Fire for the future, within this City, and Liberties
thereof, Be it ordained, Enacted and Established by the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in this Common Council
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, in manner and form following; that
is to say,

I. That the City, and the Liberties thereof, shall be divided and appointed
into four equal Parts or Quarters; and the East Part or Quarter to contain
these Wards following, viz. Portsoken, Aldgate, Tower, Billingsgate, Bridge,
Langborn, and Lime-street; the West Part or Quarter to contain Farringdon
within, Farringdon without, Casile-Baynard, Cheapside, and Aldersgate; the
North Part or Quarter to contain Cornhil, Broadstreet, Colemanstreet,
Bassishaw, Bishopsgate, and Cripplegate; and the South Part or Quarter to
contain Queenhith, Bread-street, Vintry, Cordwainer, Dowgate, Walbrook, and
Candlewick-street.

II. Item, That every of the said Quarters shall be furnished and provided, at
or before the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God next ensuing, of Eight Hundred
Leathern Buckets, Fifty Ladders, viz. Ten Forty two Foot long, Ten Thirty Foot
long, Ten Twenty Foot long, Ten Sixteen Foot long, and Ten Twelve Foot long; as
also of so many Hand-Squirts of Brass as will furnish two for every Parish,
Four and twenty Pickax-Sledges, and Forty Shod Shovels.

III. Item, That every one of the Twelve Companies provide and keep in
readiness Thirty Buckets, One Engine, Six Pickax-Sledges, Three Ladders, and
Two Hand-Squirts of Brass.

IV. Item, That all the other inferior Companies provide and keep in readiness
Buckets and Engines proportionable to their Abilities, of which those least
able, to provide portable Engines to carry up Stairs into any Rooms or Tops of
Houses; the number of which Buckets and Engines to be from time to time
prescribed and allotted by the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermens Direction.

V. Item, That every Alderman who has passed the Office of Shrievalty, provide
Four and Twenty Buckets, and One Hand-Squirt of Brass; and all those who have
not been Sheriffs, Twelve Buckets and One Hand-Squirt of Brass, to be kept in
their respective Dwellings: and all other principal Citizens and Inhabitants,
and every other person being a Subsidyman, or of the degree of a Subsidy-man,
shall provide and keep in their Houses a certain number of Buckets, according
to their quality.

VI. Item, That the several Inhabitants and Furniture of each respective
Quarter shall remain and abide within their own Quarters, and not go out
farther; excepting only such serviceable persons of other Quarters fit to take
pains in that behalf, who may be called to yield their help as need shall
require; and none other Persons or Furniture, without special Order of the Lord
Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being.

VII. Item, It is farther Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in every of
the said Quarters or parts of this City, by the Advice of the Aldermen and
Common Council of each several Ward within that Quarter, there shall be chosen,
retained and appointed for each Ward one honest and sufficient person, dwelling
within the same, to be Bell-man there, who shall from henceforth every Night,
from the Feast of St. Michael, until the Annunciation of St. Mary, diligently
walk up and down within the same Ward, from Ten of the Clock in the Night, till
Five of the Clock next Morning. Their Wages or Salaries to be levied within
their respective Wards, according as the same shall be assessed by the
Common Council of the same Ward, or the greatest part of them.

VIII. Item, That every Householder upon any Cry of Fire, shall place a
sufficient man at his Door well armed, and hang out a Light at his Door, if in
the Nighttime; upon default whereof, every party offending, shall forfeit
Twenty shillings.

IX. Item, That every Householder shall, during the time of any Fire, have Water
in a Vessel ready at his Door to quench and suppress all farther increase of
the Fire.

X. Item, That in every of the said four Quarters or Parts of this City a noted
Bell be rung from Lady Day to Michaelmas at Ten of the Clock every Night, and
at five of the Clock every Morning; and from Michaelmas to Lady Day at Eight of
the Clock every Night, and Seven of the Clock every Morning; at which
respective Hours the Watch shall punctually sit and rise, who as soon as they
are met together, one out of every Watch shall be sent the Rounds into every
part of the Ward, and at his return another shall be sent out, and so
successively all Night long without intermission, for Prevention of Fire,
Robbing, or other Inconvenience.

XI. Item, That every Inhabitant prepare some secure place in their Dwellings
(not under or near any Staircase) to lay in their Sea-coal Ashes, Embers, or
any other sort of Fire-Ashes; and that the said Ashes be quenched with water
every Night before they go to Bed: and that all Constables make inquiry of the
Security of Hearths, Ovens, and Stoves, and places for laying Fire-Ashes in,
twice every year.

XII. Item, That Plugs be put into the Pipes in the most convenient places of
every Street, whereof all Inhabitants may take notice, that breaking of the
Pipes in disorderly manner may be avoided.

XIII. Item, That as many Wells as can be found may be provided in every
Street, with Pumps, placed conveniently for furnishing of Water, especially in
Frosty weather, when other Water may be scarce.

XIV. Item, That the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, as also the Deputies and
Common-Council-men of such Ward where any Fire shall happen, have speedy notice
thereof by several Messengers to be dispatched from the Constables upon the
first Discovery.

XV. Item, That at all such times the Lord Mayor be attended with all his
Officers, with the Marshalls and all their men, as also the City Workmen and
their Laborers, the Bridg-Master with the Bridg-house Officers and Workmen,
and their Laborers, who are all upon notice of any Fire forthwith to repair to
the Lord Mayor, and to observe such directions as shall be given them; the
Sheriffs also to be attended with all their Officers, upon pain to them of
forfeiting Three pounds in default of such their Attendance.

XVI. Item, That the several Companies of Carpenters, Bricklayers, Plaisterers,
Painters, Masons, Smiths, Plummers, and Paviers, do yearly for each Company
elect two Master-Workmen, four Journey-men, eight Apprentices, and sixteen
Laborers, to be ready upon all occasions of Fire to attend the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs for quenching the same.

XVII. Item, That all Workmen and Laborers belonging to any public
Waterworks within the City, the Seacoal-meters, Porters, Blackwel-hall
Porters, Leadenhall Porters, Ticket-Porters, and Package-Porters, do constantly
attend the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs in such Services; and that a List of all the
Names of the aforementioned persons, with the places of their Abode, be
brought yearly in a Table to the Lord Mayor elect upon the first day of
October, to be placed in the Hall of the said Lord Mayor to public view; and
that henceforth the admittances of all such persons may be upon the same
Condition.

XVIII. Item, That all persons, unless such as are employed or allowed by the
Lord Mayor or Sheriffs, Aldermen, Deputies, or Common-Council-men, do keep
(during the time of any Fire) within their own Dwellings, until they are
summoned to give their Aid; that so Disorder and Confusion in the Streets may
be prevented.

XIX. Item, That all the Constables and Watchmen of the Ward where any Fire
happens, assemble immediately at such place, and there attend on the Lord Mayor
and Sheriffs, and follow their Directions.

XX. Item, That all Brokers on the Exchange (according to their Obligation at
their Admittance) do attend, in order to take care for such Goods and
Housholdstuff as may be removed.

XXI. Item, That yearly there be chosen some able Citizen and skilful Engineer,
to attend the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs or any of them upon such Accident, who by
their Advice is to give his Assistance, and to blow up by their Directions such
Houses, whereby the increase of the Fire may be most probably prevented; and
that Laborers be appointed to attend such Engineer.

XXII. Item, That the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, Deputies,
Common-Council-men, Engineer, and all persons appointed and required by the
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs to be aiding in suppressing and extinguishing the Fire,
by blowing up, or pulling down Houses, shall be indempnified by this Court.

XXIII. Item, That all persons whose Houses shall be blown up, or otherwise
demolished, for the prevention of the increase of Fire, shall have such Damages
as the Common Council shall award; and that all persons laboring therein,
shall be awarded, as by Order of the Court of Aldermen shall be appointed; and
that a Rate be laid by the Common Council on the remaining Houses of the City
and Liberties for satisfying thereof.

XXIV. Item, That once a Quarter the Deputy and Common Council of every Ward
return Certificates to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, of the Numbers and
Condition of their Buckets, Engines, Ladders, and all other Necessaries of that
nature, and the Engineer to examine the same, that on all occasions they may be
found in readiness; and that the Certificates of Michaelmas Quarter be returned
as well to the Lord Mayor elect, as to the Lord Mayor.

XXV. Item, That such quantities of Powder as shall be thought fit by the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, shall be provided by the several Wards, and the
several Companies of this City respectively, and laid up in such convenient
places as the said Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen shall from time to time
direct and appoint; and that the principal Engineer make trial of all such
Powder, that being satisfied of the strength and goodness thereof, he may the
better use it accordingly.

XXVI. Item, That no person whatsoever he henceforth permitted at any time to
make, or cause to be made any sort of Fireworks, or to fire, or cause to be
fired any such Fireworks, within the City or Liberties thereof, except such
persons only as shall be thereunto appointed by His MAJESTY, or any lawful
Authority under him.

XXVII. Item, That no Gunpowder be kept within the Walls of the City (except,
as aforesaid) but in such secure places as shall be allowed and approved by the
Court of Aldermen.

XXVIII. Lastly, That no person lay Hemp, Flax, Wax, Gunpowder, Pitch, Tarr,
Brimstone, Rosin, or the like combustible Commodities, in any Cellar,
Warehouse, or other place on that side next the Street, which by the shaking of
Links, Torches, or casting in of other Fire at the Windows next the Street, may
be in danger of such Fire.

And it is farther Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and singular the Peins, Penalties and Forfeitures, which shall be forfeited or
incurred by virtue of this Act, shall be obtained, levied and recovered, either
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in the name of the Chamberlain
of the said City for the time being, in the KINGS MAJESTY's Court holden in the
Chamber of the Guild Hall of the said City, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the said City for the time being; it which no Esloign, Protection, or Wager
of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant: and the Chamberlain of
the said City for the time being, in all Suits to be prosecuted by virtue of
this Act against any Offender or Offenders, shall recover the ordinary Costs of
Suit, to be expended in or about the prosecution of them, or any of them: And
that all such Peins, Penalties and Forfeitures (the Charges of Suit for
Recovery thereof being first deducted) shall be divided into two equal Parts,
one Moiety whereof to be paid unto the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital (for the
time being) to be employed toward the Maintenance of the poor Children
harbored and kept in the said Hospital; and the other Moiety to him or them
that will sue for the same, any other Act or Ordinance to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

AVERY.

Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. M.DC.LXXVI.


