blazon of the City of London
Pack Mayor.
Tuesday the Second day of January, 1654.
ORdered, That such of the Rules and Bylaws made by this Court in pursuance of
the late Ordinance for Regulation of Hackney Coachmen, and approved by His
Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, as are of most concernment to be
presently and publicly known, be forthwith Printed, that all persons concerned
may take notice thereof, and act according to the same Rules, being now to be
put in strict execution without further warning.

TO the intent there may be no exaction, strife or debate about the hire of
Coaches for time to come; It is Ordained, That no person or persons of the
Fellowship of Hackney Coachmen shall require, take or have any greater rate or
prices then is hereafter set down and expressed; that is to say, for the hire
of a Coach, Caroach or Charret with four Horses, twenty shillings a day; and
for a Coach and two Horses, ten shillings a day; And that every Coach with four
Horses shall at the Rates aforesaid limited, travel upon the Roads to and from
London, from the twenty fifth day of March until the twentieth day of October,
thirty miles a day, within sixty miles compass of London every way (excepting
in Sussex Road, which being worst and hardest for iourneying, shall be
traveled so far only as is reasonable, or as shall be agreed or undertaken by
the Coachmen upon hire) And a Coach with two Horses, at the Rates before
limited for two Horses, for the same season, shall travel twenty miles a day;
And that from and after the twentieth day of October, until the twenty fifth of
March, a Coach with four Horses shall travel twenty five miles a day, and a
Coach with two Horses shall travel fifteen miles a day, within the like compass
of sixty miles from London (excepting upon the said Road of Sussex) But for the
time a Coach shall rest or lie still upon any Journey, the hire shall be, viz
for a Coach and four Horses but ten shillings a day, and for a Coach with two
horses but six shillings eight pence a day. And that none of the said Coachmen
unless he be hired by the day) shall require, take or have for carrying any
person or persons in his Coach, from any parts or places within the places and
limits aforesaid, to any other place or places within the same limits (namely,
six miles compass of the late Lines of Communication, and back again) above
twelve pence a mile forward and backward, that is to say, six pence a mile
forward, and six pence backward, if he be not put to above an hours waiting and
attendance for carrying back of such person or persons; and then to have twelve
pence an hour for every hours attendance, above the space of one hour. And from
the Old Exchange in Cornhill London. unto Westminster, or to any other place of
like distance of place or thereabouts, not above eighteen pence, but if the
persons carried exceed three persons, two shillings; and from the Old Exchange
unto Temple Bar, Lincolns Inn or Grayes Inn or to any other place of like
distance of place, or thereabouts, not above twelve pence; also from Guildhall
to Temple Bar or any part of Chancery Lane, Grays Inn. or other place of like
distance, or thereabouts, not above twelve pence; and from Temple Bar*
Lincolns Inn, or Grayes Inn to Westminster, or to any place of like distance,
or thereabouts, not above twelve pence; and from Westminster to White-Chappel,
or the like distance of place, or thereabouts, two shillings six pence; and
from Temple Bar to White-Chappel, or the like distance of place, or
thereabouts, eighteen pence; and from the Old Exchange to White Chapel, or the
like distance of place, twelve pence: and after the same proportion from place
to place within the limits and places aforesaid. And if any person or persons
admitted, or that shall be admitted to keep Coach and Horses as aforesaid, shall
deny to accept his pay according to the Rates aforesaid, or shall wilfully
refuse to be hired, with his Coach and Horses, at the rates aforesaid, and
shall excuse himself, or pretend that he is hired before, whereas in truth he
is not; or shall misbehave himself by uncivil carriage, or repreachful or
railing words, toward any person or persons who shall require or offer to hire
his Coach or Horses, and offer to pay unto him for the same after the Rates
aforesaid, in such case such person and persons shall for the first offense,
being proved before the said Overseers at their Meetings, who are hereby
empowered to examine such abuses, forfeit, and pay ten shillings; for the
second offense, being proved as aforesaid, twenty shillings and for the third
offense, being complained of to the Court of Aldermen of the said City, and the
thing there proved, shall by Order of the said Court be dismissed, and put
beside his keeping of Coach and Horses to work and hire out, within the limits
aforesaid.

For avoiding all annoyance, and pestering of the streets by the standing of
too many Coaches in the same: It is Ordained, That there shall not stand at the
Old Exchange, at one time, above ten Coaches, side at the one side of the
Conduit there, and five at the other side, thirty foot off and from the said
Conduit, near the Channel, and a good distance one from another, and the
Drivers not to stir off from his and their Coaches, and be careful not to
offend the Inhabitants and Passengers thereabouts; In like manner in G^ildhall
yard, not above two Coaches (unless they attend any persons that have hired the
same) In Paul's Churchyard not above eight Coaches at one time: In Smithfield
not above ten: In Al^ersgate-street not above eight From Fleet Conduit to
Dunstans Church not above ten from thence to Temple Bar not above eight; In
Chancerylane not above six; From the Savoy to the New Exchange or York-house,
not above ten; At Charing Cross not above six; At Whitehall not above eight; At
Westminster as occasion serves; From the West End of S. Clements Church to
Exeter-house not above twenty; In Holborn not above twenty; In Long-acre and
Covent Garden as occasion serves; In S. Martins lane not obove twelve; and in
Bishopsgate-street not above twelve Coaches at any one time, Upon pain that
every one offending therein by a wilful exceeding of the respective Numbers of
Coaches beforementioned, shall for every offense forfeit and pay Two shillings
six pence.

That none of the said Hackney Coachmen shall have his Coach, or any part of it
gilded, nor wear the Eschucheon of any person of Honor, or Gentleman
thereupon, Upon pain of Five pounds: But, as a Mark of distinction, shall have
the City Arms placed or painted on the Shield, upon the cross piece behind of
his said Coach.

That if any person or persons shall after the twenty fifth of December 1654,
presume to keep and let to hire any Coach and Horses, not being duly allowed by
the Court of Aldermen of London, or having been allowed, and for any cause
disabled and dismissed by the said Court, shall yet presume to keep, or let to
hire any Coach or Horses; In every such case every person so offending, upon
the proof as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay for the first offense twenty
shillings, for the second offense forty shillings, and for every offense
afterward the sum of four pounds, to be had and recovered as is hereafter
mentioned.

And it is Ordained, That every person admitted, or that shall be admitted to
keep Hackney Coaches and Horses as aforesaid, shall retain and keep no servant
but of honest and civil life and behavior, and shall for the miscarriages or
offenses of his or her servants, against any the Orders and Provisions
before-going, or that shall hereafter be made in this behalf, undergo and
suffer like pains and penalties, as if the same had been done and committed in
his or her own person, and the servant so offending shall make reparation to
his Master or Mistress, out of his wages by way of abatement or deduction; or
otherwise shall be committed to the House of Correction by the said Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, there to remain and be whipped, and held to hard labor, as,
according to the merit and nature of the offense, shall by the said Court be
adjudged fit and reasonable, and not enlarged, but by Warrant from the said
Court.

And further, It is Ordained, that all pains, penalties, forfeitures, and sums
of money, by virtue of any of these Ordinances to be forfeited, and not
otherwise levied, shall and may be levied by Distress, and sale of the Coach or
Coaches, and Horses, or other Goods and Chattels of the party or parties
offending and refusing, or neglecting to pay the same; deducting the said
forfeiture or sum of money, and reasonable charges of distraining, and
restoring the overplus to the owner thereof; or otherwise, such pains,
penalties, forfeitures and sums of money, shall and may be recovered by Action
of Debt, Bill or Plaint, to be commenced in any Court of Record: And after
recovery and levying thereof, and charges deducted, the one moiety thereof to
be to the use of the said Fellowship, and the other moiety thereof to the
Informer that shall prosecute the same: In which Suits the Prosecutor shall
recover ordinary Costs and Charges against the offender or offenders in that
behalf, if the Suit or Action pass for him; and the Defendant shall recover his
Costs against the Plaintiff, if the same go for the Defendant.

Lastly, It is Ordained, That if any person or persons shall hire, or make use
of the said Hackney Coachmen, or any of them, or of their Coaches and Horses,
for carrying of them from place to place, and shall refuse or neglect to pay,
and satisfy him and them their hire or freight as aforesaid, and according to
the same proportion, That such person or persons shall and may be carried
before any Justice of Peace near the place where such refusal or fact shall be
committed; and that such Justice of Peace shall cause the same to be paid
forthwith, with such damages as he shall think fit in his discretion for
detaining the same: and for not performance thereof, the said Justice of Peace
shall hereby have power to deal with such offender, as fully, amply and
largely, to all intents and purposes, as any Justice of Peace may do with any
Master, who refuses to pay his Servant his wages contracted for.

SADLER.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


