Levett blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
Jovis Decimo die Octobris, 1700. Annoque Regni Regis WILLIELMI Tertii Angliae,
etc. Duodecimo.
UPON Reading the Humble Petition of the Inhabitants and Shopkeepers in and
about Exchange-Alley in Cornhill, setting forth, That by the daily Resort and
Standing of Brokers and Stock-Jobbers in the same Alley, not only the Common
Passage to and from the Royal Exchange is greatly obstructed, but Encouragement
is given by the tumultuary Concourse of People attending the said Brokers, to
Pick-pockets, Shop-Lifters, and other Idle and Disorderly People to mix among
them (as appeared to this COURT upon Oath) to the great Damage and Detriment of
all Passengers going through the said Alley about their Lawful Occasions, as
well as of the Petitioners. To the intent therefore, that all Merchants, and
others his Majesty's Subjects may have full and free Passage to and from the
said Exchange, or other Places in and through the said Alley; And for
prevention of the Evil Consequences aforesaid, It is Ordered, That none of the
Exchange-Brokers do for the future agitate any Business between Merchant and
Merchant, or others in the open Alley, or stand or stay in the same, for
transacting or doing thereof, upon Pain, That all such who shall act contrary
to the Tenor or true Meaning hereof, be suspended from their Employment of
Brokers during the Pleasure of this COURT. And it is further Ordered, That this
ORDER be forthwith Posted up in and about the Royal Exchange and the said
Alley, to the intent the said Brokers may not pretend Ignorance or
Inadvertency, but duly conform themselves hereunto.

Ashhurst.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1700.


