
WHereas diverse rude and disordered Young Men, Apprentices and others, do now
of late presume and take to themselves a Liberty (beyond what has ever been in
former times) to throw about Squibs and Fireworks in the Streets and Public
Passages of this City, and especially in Places and at Times of greatest
Resort; whereby great and intolerable Mischiefs are continually done,
proceeding sometimes even to Murder itself, (as is too too evident by a late
sad Example) and very many Persons, especially Women and Children are terrified
and affrighted, not daring to adventure themselves in the Streets for fear of
such rude and barbarous Usage, which is no where else to be parallelled in the
whole World; and almost all Persons of Quality (upon whom the Trade of this
City does very much depend) being so frequently assaulted in their Coaches in
that rude manner, are driven and kept out from the City, to secure themselves
from those dangers. Which disordered Practices, although they have been
constantly disowned and prohibited by the Authority of this City, yet nothing
hitherto has been sufficient to prevent them, to the great Dishonor of the
Magistracy of this City, the great Prejudice and Hindrance of the Trade
thereof, and the Scandal of this once renowned City in all civilized parts of
the World. The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of this City does therefore think
it fitting, and necessary, and highly incumbent upon him to take all possible
care to obviate and prevent so rude and disordered a Practice, and he does
hereby straightly charge and command, that all Persons do for the future
altogether forbear to throw about any Squibs, Firebrarnds or Fireworks at any
time, or upon any occasion, in any the Streets or Public Passages of this
City: And that all Masters of Families within the same be very diligent and
careful, and use their utmost endeavors to keep in and restrain their Children
and Servants from doing the same: In default whereof his Lordship is resolved,
and he does hereby publish and declare, that he will certainly inflict the
utmost and severest Punishment, with all possible rigor, upon all such who
shall hereafter be found to transgress herein. And wherever any person shall be
so apprehended, besides their personal Punishment, their Parents or Masters for
neglecting the Government, and their Remisness to contribute their Endeavors
to the Weal and Public Benefit of this City in the restraint of such Rudeness
and Abuses, shall also have marks of his Lordships Displeasure inflicted on
them. Given this third day of November, 1674. and in the six and twentieth year
of His Majesty's Reign.

God save the King.
Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. 1674.


