Child blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
Jovis decimo quinto die Junij, 1699. Annoque Regni Regis WILLIELMI Tertij,
Angliae, etc. Undecimo.
WHEREAS by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, there ought to be but
One Weight and Measure used throughout this Kingdom, to be Marked according to
the Standard of his MAJESTY'S Exchequer.

And whereas, for the more effectual Observation thereof, several subsequent
Laws and Statutes have been made (and amongst others) It is provided by an Act
of Parliament made 11 Hen. 7. Cap. 4. That no Person or Persons shall Buy or
Sell by any Weight or Measure, except it be Marked, and Like and Equal with the
said Standard, upon Pain, That such Defective Weights shall be broken and
burnt, And the Offenders, for the First time, to Forfeit Six Shillings Eight
Pence, for the Second Offense, Thirtee^ Shillings and Four Pence, and the Third
Offense, the Penalty of Twenty Shillings, and to be set upon the Pillory for
the Ensample of others.

And by another Act of the 17 Car. 1. Cap. 19. It is further provided, That if
any one shall sell by any other Weight, Measure or Yard, than according to the
Standard of the Exchequer, and being thereof Convicted, shall Forfeit Five
Shillings.

And by another Act made in the Second Year of his present MAJESTY King
WILLIAM, and the late Queen MARY, it is Enacted, That if any Person or Persons
shall sell or utter by Retail, in or by any Glass-Bottle or Bottles, or in or
by any other Retail Measure, not made of Pewter, and sealed according to Law,
any kind of Wine, or other Liquor exposed to Sale for Wine, or shall sell the
same for a greater Price than by the aforementioned Act is Directed and
Appointed, and being thereof Convicted, shall Forfeit for every such Offense,
the Sum of Fifty Shillings.

The said Respective Penalties and Forfeitures to be Recovered in such Manner
and Form, as in and by the said Acts are Directed, and as may by the said
several Acts more at large appear.

Notwithstanding all which Laws and Provisions, the Deceits and Abuses designed
to be Redressed by the same, have ^aily Increased; And the Grand Jury of this
City having at the last Sessions of Peace holden for the same, ^^esented the
said Offenses to be very Prejudicial to His Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting in,
(...) Resor^^ng to this City, And that for want of Encouragement of
Prosecution, the said several Laws have been neglected.

Now this Court taking the same into their Consideration, and being truly
sensible of so great a Grievance in general, and more particularly of the
Hardships brought upon the Poor of this City and Liberties thereof, by such
Practices (especially in this present Scarcity and Dearness of Provisions and
all Sorts of Commodities) And being resolved (as much as in them lies) to
prevent such Abuses for the future, by causing the said several Laws to be
effectually put in Execution, Does this Day Agree and Order, That every Person
and Persons who shall be Instrumental in the Discovery and Prosecution of any
of the said Offenses, shall not only be Countenanced and Vindicated by this
Court, but shall also receive due and fitting Encouragement for their so doing.

And that no Person shall o^ may pretend Ignorance of the said Statutes, and
the Penalties Inflicted thereby, it is Ordered, that this ORDER be forthwith
Printed, Published and set up in all the Public Places of this City.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London, 1699.


