armsBy the Major.
THe Right Honorable the Lord Major having taken into his serious
Consideration the many dreadful Afflictions, which this City has of late years
suffered, by a raging Plague, a most unheard of devouring Fire, and otherwise:
And justly fearing that the same have been occasioned by the many heinous
crying Sins and Provocations to the Divine Majesty: And his Lordship also
considering the present dangers of greater mischiefs and misery which seem
still to threaten this City, if the execution of the Righteous Judgments of God
Almighty be not prevented by an universal timely Repentance and Reformation: He
has therefore thought it one duty of his Office, being entrusted to take all
possible care for the good Government, Peace, and Welfare of this City, First,
to pray and persuade all and every the Inhabitants thereof to reform in
themselves and Families all Sins and Enormities whereof they know themselves to
be guilty: And if neither the Fear of the Great God nor of his Impending
Judgments shall prevail upon them; He shall be obliged to let them know, that
as he is their Chief Magistrate, he ought not to bear the Sword in vain: And
therefore does resolve by Gods Grace to take the Assistance of his Brethren the
Aldermen, and to require the aid of all the Officers of this City in their
several places, to Punish and Suppress according to the Laws of the Land and
the good Customs of this City, those Scandalous and Provoking Sins which have
of late increased and abounded amongst Us, even without shame, to the dishonor
of Christianity and the Scandal of the Government of this City, heretofore so
famous over the World, for its Piety, Sobriety, and good Order.

To the end therefore that the Laws may become a Terror unto Evil doers, and
that such, in whose hearts the fear of God, and the love of Virtue shall not
prevail, (being forewarned) may amend their Lives for fear of punishment; His
Lordship has thought fit to remember them of several Penalties provided by Law
against notorious Offenders: As also all Constables and Public Officers (who
are to put the said Laws in Execution) of their Duty therein; known by the
parties confession or otherwise; or if it be not known, then to the Parishes
where they last dwelt, before the same punishment, by the space of one whole
year; or if that cannot be well known, then to the Parishes to which they last
passed without punishment. Also that every Inhabitant do apprehend such
Beggars, etc. as he shall know to resort to his house, to beg or receive alms,
and carry or cause them to be carried to the next Constable, who is thereupon
to punish and pass away such Beggar as aforesaid, upon the severest penalties
to be inflicted upon every such Constable for their failure herein: And that
the Dwellings of all Constables may be known, and themselves more readily
found, they are forthwith to have their Staffs duly placed or fixed at their
Street-doors in open view of all Passengers; and themselves to remain
constannly at home, or leave some other fit and able persons to perform their
Office in their absence. And his Lordship having thus reminded the said
Constables of their Duty in this particular, he does also declare that he
expects all ready Conformity to be yielded hereunto; in default whereof the
Penalties appointed by Law shall certainly be inflicted upon them: And to this
end the Marshals of this City, and their men, and the Beadles of the several
Wards are required to take notice of and present to hie the Names of all such
Constables whom they shall find remiss and negligent of their Duty in this
service: But it is hoped that the said Constables upon this public Admonition,
will rather in conscience of their Duty, and for so great and public a
Benefit, readily acquit themselves in this matter as becomes honest and worthy
Citizens, than constrain the inflicting of Penalties upon them for neglect of
their Duty. And the said Marshals and Beadles are also to be very careful and
industrious to avoid the said Vagrants, and bring them to Punishment in manner
as aforesaid.

Dated at Guildhall, this Thirteenth day of October, 1676. and in the Eight and
Twentieth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


