Houblon blazon or coat of arms Mayor.
Wednesday, the 5th Day of August, 1696. at a COMMITTEE of Common Council, held
for the Public MARKETS of the City of LONDON.
WHEREAS this COMMITTEE has received Information, That the FARMERS of the
Public MARKETS have Exacted and Extorted greater Sums of Money from the
Market-People, than by the Laws of the City, or the Covenants of their Lease,
are allowed: and have Committed many other Irregularities, to their great
Oppression, and the Scandal of the Government of this City.

Now to the intent that the Rates allowed, as aforesaid, to be taken in the
Markets, may be ascertained and made Public to all Market-People, and the said
Farmers of the Markets may be prevented for the future from Demanding, Exacting
or Receiving more than is Allowed;

This COMMITTEE has thought sit (by Advice of the Right Honorable Sir JOHN
HOVBLON Knight. Lord Mayor) hereby to Declare, That by an Act of Common Council
made in Sir William Hooker's Mayor d^y. 17 Sept. Anno Domini 1674. (which the
Farmers are strictly obliged to observe) Every Person resorting to any the
Public MARKETS of this City, to Vend their Commodities, are to pay to such as
from time to time shall be appointed to Receive the Profits of all or any the
said MARKETS after the Rates following and no more: ( Viz) FOr every Stall or
Standing of Eight Foot long and Four Foot broad, for Sale of Flesh-meat or
Fish, Two Shillings six pence per Week. For every Stall or Standing of Six Foot
long, and Four Foot broad, Two shillings per Week. For every Stall or Standing
of Six or Eight Foot long and Four Foot broad, for other Commodities, Three
pence per Day. For every Horse-load of Provisions, not upon Stalls nor under
Public Shelter, Two pence per Day. For every Dosser of like Provision, One
penny per Day. For every Cart-load with not above Three Horses, Four pence per
Day. For every Cart-load with Four Horses, or above, Six pence per Day. For all
Fruit brought by Land or Water, and pitched in any of the Public Markets; for
each Prickcl or Basket, holding not above one Bushel, One Halfpenny per Day.
For each Basket, Dosser or Maund, holding above Two Bushel, One penny per Day;
To be paid by the People that bring or receive them. For every Standing of Six
Foot square, for the Gardiners, Twenty Shillings per Annum. For every Standing
for the Poorer sort of Country People, bringing Weeds and Physick-Herbs, of
Four Foot long and Two Foot broad, One penny per Day. For every Standing for
Fruit-Sellers and standing Herb-Women, not above Eight Foot long and Four Foot
broad, or Six Foot square, Twelve pence per Week. For every Standing for Bakers
and Gingerbread-Sellers, not above Four Foot long and Three Foot broad, Six
pence per Week.


And that the Collectors shall not Demand or Require, nor Receive or Take more
than according to the aforesaid Rates, without the free Consent of the said
Market-People, for some extraordinary Convenience or Accommodation; Unless in
Leaden Hall Market, where other and larger Rates have been Anciently paid for
Stalls and Standings therein.

And that no Collector shall Receive more than one Farthing for every Draught,
or Four pence per Week, for Weighing all such Provisions as are usually bought
or sold by Weight.

And this COMMITTEE does further Declare, That the Farmers of the said Markets
have Covenanted in their Lease, that in case they or any of them shall at any
time (during the Term thereby demised) Exact or Take any greater Rates or
Duties than are limited and appointed by the aforesaid Act of Common Council,
they or some of them shall pay to the City, for every time they shall so Exact
or Take, the Penalty of Ten Pounds.

Wherefore if the said Farmers, or their Assigns, shall Require and Receive
more than according to the aforesaid Rates, or Disturb the Market-People, who
have paid or tendered the said Legal Rates, in the quiet Selling or Exposing to
Sale, according to Law, their Commodities; It is Recommended to the Parties
grieved, to apply themselves to the Lord Mayor, or some other Justice of Peace
of this City, for Redress; And to give Notice thereof to this COMMITTEE, that
they may be proceeded against according to Law, and the Covenants and
Conditions of their Lease.

Nich: Wilmot, Comptroler.

Printed by SAMUEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1696.


