coat of arms of the City of London
Com' Concil' tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat' LONDON, die Veneris Vicesimo
primo die Junii, Anno Regni Domini WILLIELMI Tertii, nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
Septimo: Coram Thoma Lane Mil', Major' dictae Civitat'; Thoma Stamp, Mil' and
Alderman'; Salathiel Lovell, Mil', Servien' ad Legem ac Recordat' Civitat'
praedict'; Edwardo Clarke, Mil'; Richardo Levit, Mil'; and Thoma Abney, Mil',
Alderman'; Necnon major' part Communiar' dictae Civitat' in eodem Com' Concil'
tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
An ACT of Common Council for Settling the Methods of Calling Adjourning and
Dissolving the Common-Halls, upon the several Elections of the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Chamberlain, and other Officers usually there Chosen.
WHERE AS by reason of some Disputes concerning the Right and Power of Calling
and Adjourning of Common-Halls, for Election of Mayor, Sheriffs, Chamberlain,
and other Officers and Persons at such Halls usually Chosen, several Disorders
have arisen amongst the Citizens of this City, to the great Disquiet thereof.

Now for the preventing the like Mischiefs for the future, and that a certain
and undoubted Method may be observed therein for the time to come, Be it
declared by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in
Common Council Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That the Right of
Assembling Common-Halls, for the Election of the Lord MAYOR, SHERIFFS, and
other Public Officers of this City, and the Power to dissolve the same, after
such Elections made and finished, and not otherwise, is, and of Right ought to
be in the Lord Mayor of this City for the time being.

And it is Enacted and Ordained for the future, That if after any Common Hall
is assembled, for any of the Elections, as aforesaid, a Poll and Scrutiny, or
either of them shall be lawfully demanded, or any other Difficulty shall arise,
which may require the Adjournment of the said Hall, That then the Right of
granting and taking the Poll and Scrutiny, or either of them, and Adjourning
the said Hall from time to time, till such Poll and Scrutiny are concluded, and
the several Elections finished, shall be in the Sheriffs of the said City for
the time being, and no other; Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

But if it shall at any time happen, That any Dispute or Difference shall arise
at such Elections between the Sheriffs for the time being, touching any Matter
relating to Adjournments, Polls or Scrutinies, that may impead or hinder the
completing and finishing thereof within the Times hereafter for that purpose
limited and appointed; That then and in such Case, all such Differences between
them the said Sheriffs shall be determined by the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor for the time being; and such Orders and Directions as his Lordship shall
therein make, shall be observed by the said Sheriffs accordingly; And in
default of an immediate Compliance with such Orders and Directions, That then
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Lord Mayor for the time being,
to proceed in granting and taking the Poll and Scrutiny, or either of them; and
in Adjourning the said Hall from time to time till such Poll or Scrutiny are
concluded, and the several Elections finished; in like manner as the said
Sheriffs should or might have done, in case no such Difference had happened.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That where any Poll or
Scrutiny, or either of them, for determining the Elections of the Officers and
Persons aforesaid shall be granted, that the Sheriffs for the time being shall
finish such Poll within Three days next and immediately ensuing the First
meeting and assembling of the Common Hall; And that the said Sheriffs shall and
are hereby required to finish the Scrutiny, and to make Retorn of such Officers
and Persons as shall be so Chosen within Seven days next and immediately
ensuing the finishing of such Poll: And in case of Difference between the said
Sheriffs, as aforesaid, That then the Lord Mayor for the time being, shall and
is hereby required to finish such Poll within Three days next and immediately
ensuing such Difference, and to finish the Scrutiny, and to make Retorn of such
Officers and Persons as shall be so Chosen, within Seven days next and
immediately ensuing the finishing of such Poll, in like manner as the Sheriffs
should have done, in case no such Difference, as aforesaid, had happened.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That no person or persons that
shall be hereafter duly Elected and Chosen Sheriff or Sheriffs for the City of
London and County of Middlesex, by the Livery-Men of this City, in Common Hall
assembled, shall be discharged from Serving the said Office, after the 30th day
of August in any year, without the Consent and Approbation of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled, first had and obtained; Any
Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas by a Clause in an ACT of Common Council made the 6th day of June,
1683, it was amongst other things Enacted, That an Act made the 21th day of
June, 1643, Repealing Two former Acts of Common Council, whereby the Court of
Aldermen were to Nominate Two Persons to the Common Hall for their Election of
a Chamberlain, and Four for their Election of the Bridge-Masters, and the
Commoners to Ghoose out of them and no others, should be Abrogated and
Repealed: Now this COURT taking the said several Acts into their Consideration,
do hereby Enact and Ordain, And be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of
the same, That the said Clause of Repeal in the said Act, made the 6th day of
June, 1683, and every thing therein contained, relating to or concerning such
Repeals, be from henceforth Abrogated and Repealed; and the said Clause is
hereby Abrogated and Repealed accordingly: And the said Act made the 21th day
of June, 1643, (so far as concerns the Repeal of the said former Acts of
Common Council) is hereby Revived, and Declared to be in force and virtue. And
the said Acts of Common Council, Directing and Enacting such Nomination, as
aforesaid, are hereby declared to be and stand Repealed and Annulled to all
intents and purposes whatsoever.

And it is hereby further Declared, Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That for the future the Nomination of all and every Person and
Persons for Chamberlain and Bridge-Masters, and also the Election and Choice of
them, shall be made by the Livery of the several Companies of this City
(lawfully Entitled to have such Livery, according to the Laws and Customs of
this City) in Common Hall assembled, and not otherwise; Any Law or Usage to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Goodfellow.

Printed by Samuel Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City of London. 1695.


