coat of arms of the City of London
By the Mayor.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHEREAS diverse good Laws have formerly been made, and are still in force
against several wicked and disorderly Practices, which through the omission of
the Magistrate and Officers concerned to put the same in Execution, are openly
and notoriously violated and broken within this City, to the great Offense of
Almighty God, Dishonor of the Christian Religion, and Scandal and Reproach of
the Citizens and Inhabitants of this City, and not without a just Imputation
upon the Government thereof. And whereas it is Incumbent upon me to Correct,
Suppress, and Prevent (as much as in me lies) all kinds of Enormities and
Disorders within this City, and to Invite and Engage all my Brethren the
Aldermen to concur and join with me in that Performance; Wherein having
communicated to them my Intentions at a Court of Aldermen, they have readily
and heartily promised and undertaken in their Stations to further and promote
the same.

Wherefore, by Advice of my said Brethren the Aldermen, These are to desire,
and in His Majesty's Name to charge you from time to time to exert your Care
and your Authority (in all Parts of this City, as you shall have Opportunity,
and especially within your Ward) for the Punishment and Extirpation, as much as
is possible, of all Lewd, Enormous, and Disorderly Practices; Some Instances of
which kind, being most notorious and scandalous, I have thought fit more
particularly to recommend to your Care (not to lessen it in reference to other
Enormities, but to engage you more immediately to the Prosecution of such as
follow, namely) The Profanation of the Lord's Day by Peoples Exercise of their
ordinary Callings on that Day, and Tippling or using other vain Employment, and
neglecting the Worship and Service of God. The Sin of Drunkenness. And profane
Cursing and Swearing.
Which being very heinous, and yet grown very common, require the more vigorous
Endeavor of all Persons in Authority to suppress them.

And then Vagabonds and Beggars (which though of less Consequence than any of
the former, yet) exceedingly pestering and anoying the Streets and Public
Places within this City, and being given me strictly in Charge by my Lord Chief
Baron when I took my Oath at the Exchequer, I recommend likewise particularly
to your Care the clearing of the Streets from that living Nuisance.

In all which Cases, in regard sufficient Provision has been made by Acts of
Parliament, I have caused such Acts as provide against the said Enormities to
be Abbreviated and added hereunto, for your better knowledge of the Laws in
that behalf, and the better Execution thereof.

And you are required frequently to Charge and Admonish all Constables and
other Officers within your Ward, That they omit not to do their parts
diligently and carefully for putting the said Laws respectively in Execution
against all Offenders thereof: And on the Lord's Days particularly that they be
careful to search for all Persons that shall continue Tippling in Taverns
Alehouses, or Coffee-houses, and both them, and the Masters of the said
Houses, and all other Offenders against any of the said Laws, that they cause
them to undergo the Penalties thereby respectively inflicted.

And you are also desired to call all the Constables, and other Officers of
your Ward, frequently to Account, and Inform your self how they shall have
performed their Duties in all the aforesaid Particulars; and such of them as
you shall at any time find remiss or negligent therein, That you cause the
Forfeitures imposed by the said Laws in that behalf to be daily levied upon
them accordingly; or otherwise that they be bound over to the Sessions of the
Peace, there to answer the same. Hereof fail not as you tender the Honor and
Service of Almighty God, and the Public Weal of this City.

Given this Eighth Day of November 1687. and in the Third Year of his Majesty's
Reign. Wagstaffe.

A BREVIATE OF THE ACTS of PARLIAMENT.
The Lord's Day.
STat. 1 Jac. cap. 22. (continued 3 Car. 1. cap. 4. and 17 Car. 1. cap. 4.) No
Shoemaker shall show (for Sale) any Shoes, Boots, Slippers, etc. on the Sunday,
on pain of forfeiting Three shillings four pence for every pair made, sold, or
put to sale, and the value of them besides. The Offender to be bound over to
answer the same at the Sessions of Peace.

Stat. 1 Car. 1. cap. 1. Reciting, That the holy keeping the Lord's Day is a
principal part of the true Service of God, Enacts That there shall be no
Meetings or Concourse of People on that Day out of their own Parishes for any
Sports or Pastimes whatsoever; Nor any Bear-beating, Enterludes, or other
unlawful Exercises and Pastimes used by any within their own Parishes. The
Offender to forfeit Three shillings four pence to the Poor of the Parish where
the said Offense is committed. A Justice of Peace upon view, or the Parties
confession, or proof upon Oath, shall grant a Warrant to the Constables or
Churchwardens to levy the said Penalty by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods. In default of Distress, he is to sit Three hours in the Stocks. The
Offender must be questioned within a Month.

3 Car. 1. cap. 1. No Carrier with Horses or Wagons, nor Carman with Carts,
nor Drover with Cattle, shall travel on the Lord's Day on forfeiture of Twenty
shillings. No Butcher by himself, or other, to kill or sell Victual, on
forfeiture of Six shillings eight pence; being done in view of a Justice of
Peace, or proved by two Witnesses upon Oath, or the Parties confession; The
said Penalties to be levied by the Constable or Churchwarden by Warrant from
the said Justice, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering the
Overplus, and to go to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense is committed,
Except what the said Justice shall give (not exceeding a third part) for a
Reward to the Informer or Prosecutor. The Offender must be questioned within
Six Months.

Both those Acts continued per Stat. 17 Car. 1. cap. 4.

29 Car. 2. Entitled for Observation of the Lord's Day. All Persons on that
Day to apply themselves to the Observation thereof, by Exercising themselves
thereon in the Duties of Piety and true Religion publicly and privately. And
that no Tradesman or other, Exercise worldly Labor, or Work of their ordinary
Callings (Works of Necessity and Charity excepted) Offenders (being of the Age
of Fourieen) to forfeit Five shillings.

None publicly to cry or show Wares, Fruit, etc. on pain to forfeit the Goods.

No Drover, Horsecourser, Waggoner, Butcher, Higler, or their Servants, to
travel or come to their Inn, on pain to forfeit Twenty shillings.

Boats not to be used on that Day unless on extraordinary Occasions to be
allowed by a Justice of the Peace, on forfeiture of Five shillings. Upon
conviction by view of a Justice of Peace, or confession, or a Witnesses Oath,
the Justice shall give a Warrant to the Constable or Churchwardens where the
Offense is committed, to seize and sell the Goods cried or put to sale, and
levy the other Forfeitures by Distress. In default of Distress, or the
Offenders Ability to pay, to set them in the Stocks for Two hours. A third of
the Forfeitures the Justice may give to the Informer, and the Residue given to
the Poor of the Parish where the Offense is committed.

Dressing and selling Meat in Inns, Victualing Houses, etc. for such as cannot
otherwise be provided, and crying of Milk before Nine in the Morning and after
Four, Excepted. Prosecution must be within Ten days after the Offense.

If any Traveling on the Lord's Day be robbed, the Hundred not liable; yet
nevertheless shall make fresh Suit upon Huy and Cry.

No Writ, Process, Order, Warrant, etc. except for Breach of the Peach, shall be
served on that Day.

Tippling.
1 Jac. 9. IF any Innkeeper, Victualer, or Alehouse-keeper permit any Person
dwelling in the same City or Town, to continue drinking or Tippling in his
House, (unless invited by a Traveller, and accompanying him only during his
necessary abode there, and except laboring and handicrafts-men upon the usual
working days for an hour at dinner time, and except Laborers, who for
following their Work in any Town, shall sojourn or victual there, and except
for necessary occasions to be allowed by Two Justices of the Peace) he shall
for every Offense forfeit Ten shillings for the Poor of the Parish; the same
being seen by a Justice of the Peace, or proved before him by Two Witnesses.
The said Penalty to be levied by the Constable or Churchwardens of the Parish
where the Offense is committed, by Distress, to be apprized and sold, if the
Penalty be not paid within Six days, and the Surplus returned to the owner. For
want of sufficient Distress, the Justice may commit the Offender to the Common
Goal, to remain till the Penalty paid.

Constables and Churchwardens neglecting to levy the Penalties, or to certify
to a Justice within Twenty days if no Distress, shall forfeit Forty shillings
for the Poor of the Parish, to be levied by Distress by Warrant from a Justice
of Peace, the same, if payment be not made in Six days, to be apprized and sold
as before.

Drunkenness.
4 Jac. cap. 5. EVery Person that shall be drunk, and thereof lawfully
convicted, shall forfeit Five shillings, to be paid within one Week after his
Conviction to the Churchwardens of the Parish where the Offense shall be
committed, to the use of the Poor. Upon refusal or neglect then to pay it, to
be levied upon his Goods by Warrant from the Court, Judge, or Justices before
whom the Conviction shall be. If he be not able to pay, then to be committed to
the Stocks for Six hours.

Constable or other Officer, to whom it shall be given in Charge by Precept of
the Mayor or Justices of the Peace within their Limits, neglecting to Correct
the Offender, or Levy the Penalty, to forfeit Ten shillings to the Poor of that
Parish, to be levied by Distress upon Warrant from such Mayor, or Justices, or
Court where the Conviction shall be.

Tippling.
IF any Person continue drinking or tippling in any Iun, Victualing-house or
Alehouse, in the same City or Town where he dwells, and the same being viewed
by a Justice of Peace, or proved as is directed by the aforesaid Statute of 1
Jac. (unless in Cases excepted in the said Act) he shall forfeit for every
Offense Three shillings four pence to the use of the Poor of the Parish where
the Offense is committed, to be levied by Distress in like manner as is before
appointed for being drunk. If the Offender, being lawfully convicted, be not
able to pay, any Justice of Peace, or the Court where the Conviction shall be,
may set the Offender in the Stocks for Four hours.

Drunkenness.
ANy Person once lawfully convicted of Drunkenness, and after that lawfully
convicted again of the like Oftence, shall be bound with Two Sureties in a
Recognizance, or Bond of Ten pounds, to be of the Good Behavior.

Persons to be presented, indicted, or convicted within Six Months after the
Offense, upon this Statute.

Stat. 21 Jac. cap. 7. The aforesaid Statutes of 1 and 4 Jac. made perpetual.
Where proof of Two Witnesses is required by the said Two Statutes, One shall be
sufficient. Voluntary Confession of the Party (before such Persons as by the
said Acts are to minister the Oath) shall suffice to convict him. After his
Confession, his Oath shall be proof against another Offender.

Tippling.
IF any person, wherever his dwelling is, shall be found upon view, or his own
confession, or proof of one Witness, to be tippling in any Inn, Alehouse or
Victualing-house, he shall incur the like Penalty, and to be levied and
disposed as in the said former A^t is expressed concerning such as there
inhabit. The Offenders confession (before such as by the former Statutes are to
minister the Oath) shall convict himself, and his Oath afterward shall be
proof against another.

Any Justice of Peace, upon his view, the Parties confession, or Oath of one
Witness, may convict any person of drunkenness, whereby he shall incur the
forfeiture of Five shillings, to be levied, or the Offender punished, as in the
former Statutes appointed. And for the second Offense he shall be bound to the
Good Behavior.

If an Alehouse-keeper be lawfully convict of an Offense against this or the
two former Statutes, he shall for Three pears after be disabled to keep such
Alehouse.

1 Car. 1. cap. 4. Every Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, and other Victualer
permitting any person, not inhabiting in the City where the Inn or
Victualing-house is, to tipple therein, contrary to the intent of the Statutes
of 1 Jac. 9. and 4 Jac. 5. he shall incur the Penalty appointed by the said
Statute of 1 Jac. for permitting such to tipple as dwell in the City.

Keepers of Caverns, and such as sell Wine in their Houses, and also keep Inns
or Victualing in their Houses, shall be taken to be within this and the said
two former Statutes.

Swearing.
21 Jac. cap. 20. IF any person shall profanely Swear or Curse either in the
hearing of a Justice of the Peace, or be convicted thereof before him by the
Oaths of Two Witnesses, or the parties confession, he shall for every time
offending forfeit and pay Twelve pence to the use of the Poor of the Parish
where the Offense is committed. The Constable, Churchwardens, or Overseers of
the Poor of that Parish, to levy the same by Warrant from such Justice of the
Peace by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering him the Overplus.
In default of Distress, the Offender (if above Twelve years old) shall by
Warrant from such Justice be set in the Stocks Three hours; if under Twelve, be
whipped by the Constable, Parent, or Mastec, by Warrant of such Justice in his
presence.

This continued 17 Car. 1. cap. 4.

Beggars.
39 Eliz. cap. 4. ALL Rogues, Vagabonds, or sturdy Beggars (which all idle
persons going about to beg ars by the said Statute declared to be) taken
begging, vagrant, wandering, or misordering themselves, shall upon their
Apprehension, by the appointment of a Justice of Peace, or Constable, of the
County or Parish where such person shall be taken, be stripped naked from the
middle upward, and be openly whipped tilt his or her Body be bloody; and shall
be forthwith sent from Parish to Parish the next straight way to the Parish
where he was born, if the same may be known by the parties confession, or
otherwise: And if the same be not known, then to the Parish where he or she
last dwelt, before the same Punishment, by the space of one whole year, there
to put him or her self to labor; Or not being known where he or she was born
or last dwelt, then to the Parish through which they last passed without
punishment. After which whipping the same person shall have a Testimonial under
the Hand and Seal of the Justice of Peace and Constable, testifying the time
and place of his or her punishment, and the place whether they are limited to
go, and by what time they are to pass thither: And if the said person, through
his or her default, do dot accomplish the order given in the said Testimonial,
then to be taken again and whipped, and so as often as there shall be such
default. The party so whipped, and not known where he or she was born or last
dwelt by the space of a year, shall by the Officer of the place where he or she
last passed through without punishment, be conveyed to the House of Correction,
there to be employed in work till he or she shall be placed in some Service,
and so to continue for a year, or (if not able of Body) till placed in some
Almes-house.

If the Constable do not his best endeavor for apprehending every such
Vagabond, Rogue, or sturdy Beggar, and cause them to be punished and conveyed
according to this Act, he shall forfeit Ten shillings.

If any person disturb or let the Execution hereof, he shall forfeit Five
pounds, and be bound to the Good Behavior.

The said Forfeitures to be employed for Maintenance of the House of
Correction, or Relief of the Poor where the Offense shall be committed, at the
discretion of the Justices of the Peace, and be levied by Warrant of Two
Justices by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods upon the parties
confession, or proof by Two Witnesses before Two Justices.

This not to extend to Children under Seven years, nor to Seafaring-men
suffering Shipwreck, having a Pass from a Justice of Peace near the place where
he landed, but that they may beg in their Passage.

1 Jac. cap. 7. All persons shall apprehend such Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars, as they shall see resort to their Houses to beg, and cause them to be
carried to the next Constable, on pain to forfeit Ten shillings, to be levied
and employed, and upon like proof and conviction as is appointed by the said
former Act.

The Constable not causing the said Rogues, Vegabonds, or sturdy Beggars to be
punished and conveyed (as above directed) shall forfeit Twenty shillings for
every default, to be levied and employed, as before.

Both these Statutes are continued 21 Jac. cap. 28. 3 Car. 1. cap. 4. and 17
Car. 1. cap. 4.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, Printer to the Honorable City. 1687.


