coat of arms of the City of London
Com' Concil' tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat' LONDON, die Veneris Decimo nono
die Octobr', Anno Regni Domini and Dominae Nostrorum, WILLIELMI and MARIAE,
nunc Regis and Reginae, Angliae, etc. Sexto: Coram Willielmo Ashhurst Mil',
Major' dictae Civitat'; Salathiel Lovell Mil', Servien' ad Legem ac Recordat'
ejusdem Civitat'; Humphrido Edwyn Mil', Richardo Levit Mil', and Willielmo
Hedges Mil' and Alderman'; Necnon Major' part Communiar' dictae Civitat' in
eodem Com' Concil' tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
An ACT of Common Council for Regulating the Company of PLAISTEERERS, London.
WHEREAS the Master and Wardens of the Guild or Fraternity of the Blessed MARY
of PLAISTERERS, London, are, and very anciently have been a Brotherhood or
Guild, and for confirmation and strengthening of Their Privileges have obtained
several ROYAL GRANTS, whereby, and by their Original Constitution, the said
Fraternity or Guild ought to be and consist of all Persons using the Trade of a
'PLAISTERER, within the City of LONDON and Liberties thereof.

Nevertheless many Persons, who use and exercise the Trade of a PLAISTERER,
have Obtained their Freedoms of other Companies by Patrimony, Redemption, and
otherwise, to the great Prejudice and Hindrance of the said Company of
PLAISTERERS: By reason whereof many and great Frauds and Deceits have been
used, practiced and imposed upon the Citizens of this City, and other Their
Majesty's good Subjects, for want of due Government of the Artificers
exercising the said Trade, and for lack of frequent and due Inspection and
Search of and in the Plaisterers Work, which is wrought and done by them who
are not Members of the said Fraternity or Guild, and so not subject to the good
Government of the said Company, and to the good and wholesome Laws and Ordinances
thereof; and thereby also the said Company of Plaisterers is of late years much
lessened, decayed and diminished, and in a short time will become Incapable of
supporting themselves, and preserving the Just and Honest use and exercise of
the said Trade.

For Remedy and Reformation whereof, and to the intent the aforesaid Mischiefs
may be prevented in time to come, and to the end the said Company may hereafter
have the better and more easy and powerful View, Search and Oversight of all
Matters material, and Things pertaining and used in the said Trade, and to the
Faithful, Honest and Just Workmanship thereof, and for the more effectual
punishing all Frauds, Deceits, Unskillful Workmanship; and other Offenses in the
said Art and Trade done and committed:

Be it Enacted, Established and Ordained by the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, the Aldermen his Brethren, and Commons in this Common Council Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth all and every person or
persons, hereafter Using or Exercising the said Trade of a PLAISTERER, within
the said City and Liberties thereof, who has or shall have Right or Privilege
to be made Free of this City by Patrimony, Service, Redemption, or otherwise,
by virtue of his Father's Freedom in any other Company, whereof his Father was,
is or shall be Free, or by Service with any Freeman of any other Company, shall
(at the next Court of Assistants of the said Company of PLAISTERERS, after
Notice thereof to him given, by the Clerk or Beadle of the said Company, by
Order of the Master and Wardens of the said Company for the Time being) accept
and take upon himself the Freedom, and be made a Freeman of the said Company
of Plaisterers, in like manner and form as he could or might have been in any
other Company whereof his Father or Master was so Free, as aforesaid; Any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, using or exercising, or which shall use or exercise the Trade of a
PLAISTERER, within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, who has already
served an Apprenticeship, or shall hereafter serve an Apprenticeship in the
said Trade, and not yet made Free of this City; or who shall procure his
Freedom by Redemption, Service or Patrimony of any other Company, than of the
said Company of PLAISTERERS, and shall exercise the said Trade within the said
City of London or the Liberties thereof, not being Free of the said Company of
Plaisterers; Then all and every such Person and Persons so doing and offending
in all, either, or any the said Cases, shall forfeit and pay for every such
Offense, the Sum of Ten Pounds of Lawful Money of England, to be Recovered by
Action of Debt, Bill or Plaint; to be Commenced and Prosecuted in the Name of
the Chamberlain of the said City of London, for the time being, in Their
Majesty's Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen, to be holden in the Chamber of the
Guild Hall of the said City of LONDON; And that the Chamberlain of the said
City for the Time being, in all such Suits to be Prosecuted by virtue of this
present Act against any such Offenders, shall Recover his ordinary Costs of
Suit, to be Expended in and about the Prosecuting the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Moiety of all
such Forfeitures, to be recovered by Virtue of this present ACT (the Costs of
Suit for recovery of the same being first deducted and allowed) after recovery
and receipt thereof, shall be from time to time paid to the Chamberlain of the
said City, to the use of the Mayor, Comminalty and Citizens of the said City of
London; and the other Moiety to the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the said
Company of Plaisterers for the time being, for the Use of the Poor of the said
Company.

And that in case the Chamberlain for the Time being, shall be Nonsuited; or
any Verdict or Judgment be given for the Defendant or Defendants, in any such
Action to be brought by virtue of this ACT, That then the Costs of such
Nonsuit, Verdict or Judgment, shall be paid and born by the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of the Company of PLAISTERERS for the Time being; and the said
Chamberlain to be fully indempnified and saved harmless, by the said Master,
Wardens and Assistants, of and from the same: Any Law, Custom or Usage to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons, Using or Exercising the said Trade of a PLAISTERER within this City or
the Liberties thereof, shall be from henceforth Admitted by the Chamberlain of
this City for the time being, into the Freedom or Liberties thereof, in any
other Company, than the said Company of PLAISTERERS; Any Law or Custom of this
City to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Goodfellow.

Printed by SAMUEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. 1694.


