A Full and True Account of a Bloody and Dismal Fight Betwixt the English
Protestants, AND THE French and Irish Papists: BEING AN Impartial Relation, OF
A Great VICTORY Obtained By Duke Scomberg's Forces, Over a Party of King
James's Army IN IRELAND, Since the Joyful News of the Kings coming into this
Nation.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

PArt of our Forces lying near to Charlemont, under the Command of Lieutenant
Colonel Frogmorton receiving Information of a Considerable Number of Cattle,
amounting to about Two Thousand Cows, and about double the Number of Sheep and
Garoons, we resolved to send out a Party of six Hundred Horse, and eight
Hundred Foot, which on the Second of this Instant, we accordingly did, amongst
which Party I had the Honor to Command; but the Enemy by some means having
discovered our designse, nt out a Party (as nigh as we can guess) of Eighr
Hundred Horse, and seven Hundred Foot, under the Command of Colonel Macharty,
to prevent us Executing of our Design. We Marched on till we came within three
Miles of the Pastures where the Cattle lay, not knowing that the Enemy was
sensible of our Intention, we now being so nigh, thought it convenient to
reduce our Men into as good Order as possible, to receive any accidential
opposition that might happen. We had not Marched in this careful posture above
a Mile further, but by our Scouts, discovered that the Enemy was Ambuscaded in
a Wood opposite to a Bogg, through which Pass we were Obliged to March: But
having a pre-knowledg of it, we began to consult which was the most proper and
secure way to Accost them; at last by the Resolution of Lieutenant Colonel
Frogmorton, 'twas eonluded, we should draw up our Forces to the Wood-side,
which was of a considerable large Entrance, and after one Volley break in upon
them: To proceed to which, Orders was given through all our Party. The Irish
all this while lay very silent, till at last we proceeded and gave them a very
warm Salutation: In Answer to which, they at first made a very vigorous
Repulse, which was hotly disputed on both sides for about an hour; till at last
some part of the Irish began to fly, which gave fresh Courage to our English
Party, who maintained their Onset with such Vigor, that the Cowardly Natures
of the Irish could but for a short time endure it; that at last they betook
themselves to a Bogg which lay behind the Wood; where we could not with any
safety Pursue them, so that a considerable part made their Escape that way,
that in an hour and an halfs time they were thoroughly Defeated, with the loss
on their Side of about Three Hundred Slain, besides a Hundred and Sixty Four
taken Prisoners. The loss on our side was notabove Twenty Five Killed, and
Fourteen Wounded; which did not so Disable us, but we resolved to Execnte our
Design, and if possible secure the Cattle: In order to which, we made a
Detachment of Horse out of our Party, consisting of Two Hundred, and sent them
with our Prisoners and Wounded Men back to Clomish, whilst we Marched forward
to seiz the Cattle which lay about a Mile further, which we did, and brought
back about Fifteen Hundred Cows, with an Answerable Number of Sheep and
Garoons. With this Success we ended that present Action, the Account of which I
knew you would Embrace with great satisfaction.

The thoughts of his Majesty's coming over amongst us, greatly Disheartens the
Irish Army, insomuch, that since the News is spread amongst them, they Desert
King James daily in great numbers, to his great Disincouragement.

SIR,

Having Finished my Account of what I think the most remarkable and Worthy of
your View, I will not Tire you with any Prolix Uncertainties, but assure you,
if I meet with any thingthat may deserve your Trouble of Perusing, you shall
not fail of a faithful Relation from,

Your Obliged Friend, J. L.

London, Printed for Richard Pardoe, near the May Pole in the Strand.


