blazon of the City of London
By the Mayor.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, minding and intending, by Gods help and
the concurrent Endeavors of his Brethren the Aldermen, to discover, punish,
and suppress to the uttermost of his power, as the proper Work and most
incumbent Duty of his Office, those manifold Corruptions, Abuses, and
Disorders, which have broke in and of late times more exceedingly increased
upon us, to the Dishonor of Religion, and Scandal of the Government of this
City; has thought it not unnecessary to make some public mention of such as
are most obvious and notorious, with the Penalties and Punishments attending;
thereby to admonish and forewarn, not only the Citizens and Inhabitants in
general to reform and avoid those and the like Evils and Enormities in their
private Capacity and Conversation, but more particularly such who are in Office
and under greater Obligation to assist in Execution of the Laws Established
against the said Offenses: Of which sort are

Profane Cursing and Swearing. First, Profane CURSING and SWEARING, for which
the Law has appointed a Penalty of Twelve pence, to the use of the Poor, to be
paid and levied for every Offense; or (where no Distress can be had) to sit
three hours in the Stocks.

Profaning the Lords Day. PROFANATION of the LORDS DAY by Sports and Tippling in
Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, and Coffee-houses, during Divine Service; the
Statutes inflicting on all Persons who shall meet to sport, tipple, or use any
unlawful Exercises on that day, Three shillings four pence for every Offense;
and where no distress can be had, to sit three hours in the Stocks; and Ten
shillings on every Vintner, Innkeeper, or Alehouse-keeper, that shall suffer
any such Drinking or Tippling in his House.

Bawdy-Houses. Maintaining Houses suspected of Common BAWDRY, for which by Law
the Offenders are to find Sureties for the Good Behavior; and every Constable
upon Information of Men or Women of evil report, resorting to such suspected
Houses, may take and carry the Parties before a Justice of Peace to find
Sureties for the Good Behavior.

Gaming-Houses. Keeping of Common GAMING-Houses, which every Justice of the
Peace may enter, and arrest and imprison the Housekeepers, till they find
Sureties no longer to keep such unlawful Gaming.

Drunkenness. Idle and loose People. The odious Sin of DRUNKENNESS; the
Punishment by Law being, for the first Offense Five shillings, or six hours
sitting in the Stocks; and for the second Offense to find Sureties for the Good
Behavior, or for want of Sureties to be committed to the Gaol: And like Surety
for the Good Behavior is to be found by common Drunkards, Haunters of
Alehouses or Taverns, Common Gamesters, and suspected Persons, who live idly,
and yet fare well and are well apparelled, having no Estate whereon to live
(Except upon Examination they shall give good account of their Living.)

Tippling. Moreover no Person may sit or continue, or be suffered to sit or
continue Tippling or Drinking in any Tavern, Victualling-house, Alehouse,
Coffee-house, or other Tipling-house, (unless invited by a Traveller, during
his necessary Abode there, and Handicrafts-men, Laborers, and Workmen for one
hour at Dinner upon the Working-day, or sojourning or lodging there, or that
they be allowed by two Justices of the Peace) upon the Penalty of Ten shillings
for every Offense upon the Master of such House; and upon the Person that shall
continue drinking Three shillings Four pence. And by the ancient Custom of the
City none may remain to tipple or drink in any such House after Nine of the
Clock at Night.

And therefore all Constables and other Officers whom it does or may concern,
are required to take care for discovering and bringing to Punishment whosoever
shall offend in the Premises: And for that end they are to enter into any
suspected Houses beforementioned, and into any Tavern, Inn, Alehouse,
Victualling-house, Coffee-house, or other Tipling-house, or Gaming-house, to
search for such disorderly Persons, as shall be found mis-behaving themselves,
tippling, or otherwise doing contrary to the said Laws, and to levy the
Penalties and cause the Offenders to come before some of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace of this City, to be dealt withal according to Law.

And whereas the Streets and Common Passages, and all Places of Public Meeting
and Resort, are exceedingly pestered and annoyed by Vagrants and Beggars, and
that for suppressing and avoiding of that greatest living Nuisance, especial
Resolution is taken to put in execution against them the good Laws in force
with all Strictness and Severity: The said Constables therefore are charged and
required to apprehend all Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, that shall be
found begging, vagrant, wandering, or mis-ordering themselves within their
respective Parishes and Precincts; and such of them as shall appear to have
Dwellings or Abode within the City or Liberties to carry to Bridewel, there to
be received and dealt withal according to Law, and others to punish and pass
away from Parish to Parish the next straight way to the Parish where they were
born, if the same may be known by the Parties Confession or otherwise; or if it
be not known, then to the Parishes where they last dwelt, before the same
Punishment, by the space of one whole year; or if that cannot be well known,
then to the Parishes to which they last passed without Punishment; upon the
Penalty and Forfeiture of Ten shillings for every default. Also every
Inhabitant is to apprehend such Beggars, etc. as he shall know to resort to his
House to beg or receive Alms, and carry or cause them to be carried to the next
Constables; upon like Penalty or Forfeiture of Ten shillings for every Offense.
And such Constable is thereupon to punish and pass away such Beggar as
aforesaid, upon the Penalty of Twenty shillings for every default.

And that the Dwellings of all Constables may be known, and themselves more
readily found, they are forthwith (which of late has been neglected) to have
their Staffs duly placed or fixed at their Street-doors in open view of all
Passengers; and themselves to remain constantly at home, or leave some other
fit and able Persons to perform their Office in their Absence. And the several
Wards and Parishes are without delay to provide (where any are wanting) and to
repair, and from time to time sufficiently to maintain Cages, Stocks, Posts,
and other Instruments for correcting and punishing this sort of Offenders, as
the Law requires.

And moreover, the two Marshals of this City are commanded (according to the
ancient express Orders of their Place and Duty) to be on horseback, and their
Men, with the Beadles of the four Hospitals that shall be thereunto appointed,
on foot, sometimes with them, and sometimes without them, as occasion shall
require; and to ride and walk about, and compass all the Streets, Lanes,
Alleys, and Corners of the City and Liberties, every day, duly and diligently;
and so dispose and divide themselves, that once every day they or some of them
may survey every Quarter of the City: And that, as they pass through the
Streets, they apprehend all Vagrants and wandering Rogues and Beggars, Men,
Women and Children, and carry them either to Bridewel, or to the Constable of
the Place where they shall be apprehended, to be conveyed and passed as the
case shall require and is before directed. They are also to take notice of, and
present such Constables as they find remiss and negligent of their Duty in this
Service, to the end they may he prosecuted and punished according to Law. And
for their more Readiness herein, are to take Information from the Beadles of
the Wards of the Names and Dwelling-Places of every Constable within their
several Wards, and of each ones several Precinct, that so they may find them
easily upon all Occasions.

And the said Marshals are to keep an exact and true Note, in writing in a
Book, of every Vagrant, wandering Rogue, and Beggar, which shall be apprehended
by them, and delivered to any Constable, or carried by them immediately to
Bridewel, together with his Surname and Name of Baptism, and the Place of his
or her Birth, and if that cannot be found, the Place of his or her last
Dwelling, or if there be no such, then the Place where he or she last past
through without Correction.

Also the Porter of Bridewel is to keep a Book wherein he shall truly enter the
Surname, Name of Baptism, Place of Birth, and other the Premises of or
concerning every such Person which shall be delivered into the Custody of that
Hospital.

Likewise for the Health and Cleanliness of the City, all Inhabitants,
Householders, and others concerned, are warned and required to keep the Streets
before their Houses and Ground duly paved and swept, and the Soil to be taken
up and kept in Baskets, Tubs, or other Vessels, till the coming of the Raker,
upon pain of Three shillings Four pence; and not to throw or suffer any Ashes,
Dirt, or other Filth to be cast out into the Streets before their own Ground or
Houses, upon pain of Five shillings; nor before their Neighbors, or any Church
or Churchyard, or other public Place or Building, or into any Common Sink,
Vault, Watercourse, or Sewer, upon pain of Twenty shillings; (being the
respective Penalties for every Offense in those several Cases provided by a
late Act of Parliament) And the Scavengers to see the said Streets accordingly
swept and cleansed, or the Offenders prosecuted and punished, and the Soil,
Dirt, and Rubbish daily taken up and carried away by the Rakers, as by the said
Act and several other Acts, Orders, and late Precepts in that behalf has been
enjoined and directed.

Moreover, for the Common Safety and Peace of the City, and Convenience of all
whose Affairs may occasion them to travel or walk abroad at seasonable hours in
the dark of the Evenings, all Inhabitants are required duly to hang and keep
out their Candle Light to the accustomed hour; and the Constables to set and
continue their Watches at such times, and of such number of able Men, and in
all other respects, as by Acts of Common Council in this behalf is directed and
appointed.

And forasmuch as the Franchises and Liberties of this City are of late years
much invaded and violated by Forreiners, Strangers, Aliens, and others taking
upon them the Employment of Brokers upon the Royal Exchange, London; His
Lordship does Order with the Advice aforesaid; That no Person or Persons
whatsoever shall at any time hereafter use the Feat or Exercise of a Broker, or
by any means deal or intermeddle as a Broker, between Merchant and Merchant, or
other Buyer or Seller within the said City and Liberties for Fee or other
Profit, unless he be first duly admitted, and sworn to deal truly betwixt the
Buyer and the Seller, and bound by Recognizance, according to a late Act of
Common Council in that behalf, and upon the Penalties therein contained.

And his Lordship does declare, That he will not only deem it a good and
acceptable Service in any, who, from good and honest Intentions, shall bring
Complaint or Information of any the beforementioned or other like Offenses
against His Majesty's Peace and the quiet Estate and Government of this City;
but will give all just Encouragement and Rewards also (where the Law directs)
to such honest and well-meaning Persons as shall employ themselves to this
purpose for the Public Welfare.

And to the end that no Constable or other Officers or Ministers of Justice,
may be any ways discouraged in their lawful, diligent, and vigorous Prosecution
of the premises; It is provided, That if they or any of them shall be resisted
in the just and lawful Execution of their Charge and Duty, or in any wise
affronted or abused, they shall be encouraged, maintained, and vindicated by
the Justice, Order, and Authority of the Court of Aldermen, and the Offenders
prosecuted and punished according to Law.

Dated at the Guild Hall, London, the 7th of November, 1671 in the Three and
twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the
Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc,
Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, at his
House in Aldersgatestreet. MDCLXXI.


