coat of arms of the City of London
Com' Concil' tent' in Camera Guihald' Civitat' LONDON, die Veneris Decimo nono
die Octobr', Anno Regni Domini and Dominae Nostrorum, WILLIELMI and MARIAE,
nunc Regis and Reginae, Angliae, etc. Sexto: Coram Willielmo Ashhurst Mil',
Major' dictae Civitat'; Salathiel Lovell Mil', Servien' ad Legem ac Recordat'
dictae Civitat'; Humphrido Edwyn Mil', Richardo Levit Mil', and Willielmo
Hedges Mil' and Alderman'; Necnon Major' part Communiar' dictae Civitat' in
eodem Com' Concil' tunc and ibidem Assemblat'.
An ACT of Common Council for Regulating the Company of JOYNERS and CEILERS,
London.
WHEREAS the Company of JOYNERS and CEILERS, is, and has been an Ancient
Brotherhood, and long since Incorporated, and Their CHARTER Enrolled amongst
others of the like Nature in this City: But of late years is much lessened and
decayed, by reason that diverse Unskillful in the said Arts do daily Practice and
Use the same, not being subject or liable to any Government, Correction or
Control; and for that such as are Free of other Companies, and thereby
Obtaining the Freedom of the City, do Use and Practice the Trades of JOYNERS,
CARVERS and CEILERS, and other Employments pertaining thereunto, and are not
under any Regulation or Restriction either as to the Number of their
Apprentices, Seasons of Timber, or Goodness of Work; whereby much Deceitful
Work is daily made and exposed to Sale, within this City and Liberties thereof,
to the great Injury, Fraud and Deceit of Unskilful Buyers, as well within this
City and the Liberties thereof, as without.

For Remedy and Reformation whereof, and to the intent all Freemen of this City
and Liberties thereof, using the Trades and Arts aforesaid, or any of them, may
from Time to come be obliged to be Free of the said Company of JOYNERS and
CEILERS, and thereby become subject to the good Laws and Ordinances of the
same, and be brought under their Search, View and Regulation, whereby all
Frauds, Defaults, Unskillful Workmanship, and other Offenses in the said Trades,
Arts and Mysteries, may be discovered, corrected and punished:

Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained and Established by the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in this present Common Council Assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth all and every person or
persons, hereafter Using or Exercising the said Trades, Arts or Mysteries of
JOYNERY, CARVING and CEILING, or any of them, or other Employments pertaining
thereunto, within the said City and Liberties thereof, who has or shall have
Right or Privilege to be made Free by Patrimony or otherwise, by virtue of his
Father's Freedom in any other Company, whereof his Father was, is or shall be
Free, or by Service with any Freeman of any other Company, shall (at the next
Court of Assistants of the said Company of JOYNERS and CEILERS, after Notice
thereof to him given, by the Clerk or Beadle of the said Company, by Order of
the Master and Wardens of the said Company for the Time being accept and take
upon himself the Freedom, and be made a Freeman of the said Company of Joyners
and Ceilers, in like manner and form as he might or could have been in such
Company whereof his Father or Master was so Free as aforesaid; Any Law, Custom
or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that for the Future no Person or Persons, who shall use or exercise the
said Trades, Mysteries or Occupations of JOINING, CARVING, or CEILING, within
this City or the Liberties thereof, shall be made Free of the City by
Redemption in any other Company, save only of the said Company of Joyners and
Ceilers.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Person or Persons, using or excercising, or which shall use or exercise the
Trades, Arts or Mysteries of a JOYNER, CARVER and CEILER, or any of them,
within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, who has already served his
Apprenticeship, or shall hereafter serve his Apprenticeship in the said Trade,
Arts and Mysteries, or any of them, and is not yet made Free of this City; or
who shall procure his Freedom by Redemption, Service or Patrimony of any other
Company, than of the said Company of Joyners and Ceilers, and shall exercise
the said Trades, Arts or Mysteries, or any of them, not being Free of the said
Company; That then all and every such Person and Persons so doing and
offending, shall forfeit and pay for every such Offense, the Sum of Ten Pounds
of Lawful Money of England, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill or Plaint,
to be Commenced and Prosecuted in the Name of the Chamberlain of the said City
of London, for the time being, in Their Majesty's Court of Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, to be holden in the Chamber of Guild Hall of the said City of London;
And that the Chamberlain of the said City for the Time being, in all Suits to
be prosecuted by virtue of this present Act against any Offender, shall Recover
his ordinary Costs of Suit to be Expended in and about the Prosecution of the
same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Moiety of all
such Forfeitures to be recovered by Virtue of this present Act (the Costs of
Suits for recovery of the same being first deducted and allowed, after recovery
and receipt thereof, shall be from time to time paid into the Chamber of the
said City, to the use of the Mayor, Comminalty and Citizens of the said City of
London; and the other Moiety to the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the said
Company of Joyners and Ceilers for the time being, for the use of the Poor of
the said Company.

And that in case the said Chamberlain for the time being, shall be Nonsuited;
or a Verdict or Judgment shall be given against the said Chamberlain in any
such Action to be brought by virtue of this ACT, That then the Costs of such
Nonsuit, Verdict or Judgment, shall be paid and born by the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of the Company of Joyners and Ceilers for the time being; and the
said Chamberlain to be fully indempnified and saved harmless, by the said
Master. Wardens and Assistants, of and from the same: Any Law, Usage or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons, Using or Exercising the said Trades, Arts or Mysteries of JOYNERS,
CARVERS and CEILERS, or any of them, shall from henceforth be Admitted by the
Chamberlain of this City for the time being, into the Freedom or Liberties of
this City in any other Company, than the said Company of Joyners and Ceilers;
Any Law of Custom of this City to the contrary notwithstanding.

Goodfellow.

Printed by S^MUEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON* 16^4.


