Tichborne blazon or coat of arms Mayor
Tuesday the ninth day of June 1657.
WHereas against diverse Laws, Orders and provisions, great numbers of Men and
Women and their Children and Servants do daily on the week days, all the day
long, sit in the High Street of Cheap, with multitudes of Baskets, Tubbs and
other vessels of Fruit, Roots, Herbs, Plants, Flowers and other Garden
Commodities to sell and utter, and do thereby so fill, pester and streighten
the said Street, that not only the Inhabitants are much hindered and damnified
in their trades and estates, but they and all people travailing and passing
through the same street, exposed to manifold hazards and dangers, and many
hurts and mischiefs have happened, besides the further annoyance thence arising
from the unwholesome smells and stenches of the parings and refuse of Roots,
Plants and other filth continually left and lying scattered and corrupting, in
that principal Street and passage of the City: Now this Court having well
advised of reforming the said evils and abuses, does therefore think fit and
Order, that from and after the sixth day of August next coming, no Person or
persons whatsoever shall stand or be permitted to stand or abide, at any time,
with any goods or commodities (excepting Bread) to sell or put to sale in that
part of the said street of Cheap or Cheape-side lying between Bread-street
end and Paul's Churchyard (the same having never been appointed a Market place
for any commodities whatsoever) Nor shall stand or be permitted to stand or
abide with Carts, horses, or otherwise in any other place, or part of the said
Street of Cheap or Cheapside, on any day or time of the week with any Fruit
Roots, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, or Garden Commodities (excepting Peascods) to
sell or put the same to sale, but that every one, who shall be found doing
contrary, shall be taken, and for his offense be indicted and punished
according to Law. And that no annoyance may ensue by the permitting of
Peas-cods to be still sold as formerly in the said street, the shells are to be
constantly sweept up and coveyed away, that they may not by remaining and
corrupting, produce any noisome or offensive smells: And that there be not
wanting a known and convenient place whither all may resort for buying and
selling the said commodities: It is further ordered by this Court, that the
Country people and Gardiners shall have place or may stand with their said
Fruit, Roots, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, and other Garden commodities excepting
Peas-cods, in all parts of the void place on the Northside of Paul's within the
Channells, and in no wife beyond or without the said Channells, And may so sit
and abide with their Commodities as they may or ought to do in other public
Markets of this City. Provided that none shall bring any Carts or horses within
the place aforesaid, nor any to sit or have with them there at one time above
such number of Tubs or Baskets, and of such bigness as from time to time shall
be limited and appointed by the Lord Mayor of this City for the time being: And
for the better execution of this Order, the Sergeant and Yeoman of the
Channel, and the Beadles of the Wards respectively where the said Street, or
any the places aforesaid are situate or being, and all others whom it shall
concern, are charged and commanded by this Court to be intent and diligent in
and about the clearing of the Street of Cheap in manner before expressed, and
from the commodities aforesaid, and settling the Country people and Gardiners,
(who sell the same) in the place aforesaid, and to take upon them this service,
and perform the same effectually at their utmost perils.

Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


