
To all Constables, Beadles, and other his Majesty's Officers and loving
Subjects within the City of London, and every of them.
THese shall be in his Majesty's Name, straightly to charge and command you and
every of you to apprehend and take all such person and persons, as at any time
hereafter shall deface or pull down any Proclamation fixed upon any post or
wall, and them forthwith to commit to close prison, and to certify me thereof.
Not failing hereof at your perils.

God save the KING.
LONDON.
YE shall swear, that ye shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King
well and lawfully after your power. And ye shall arrest all them that make
contention, riot debate or affray in breaking of the said peace, and lead them
to the house or Counter of one of the Sheriffs. And if ye be withstood by
strength of misdoers, ye shall rear on them an outcry, and pursue them from
street to street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be arrested: and ye shall
search at all times when ye be required by the Scavengers or Bedles, the common
noyance of your Ward. And the Bedle and Raker ye shall help to rear and gather
their salary and quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them required, And if any
thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of the City, such defaults
as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to the Mayor and Ministers
of the City and if ye be let by any person or persons, that ye may not duly
do your office, ye shall certify the Mayor and Council of the City, of the name
or names of him or them that so let you. Ye shall also swear, that during the
time that ye shall stand in the office, and occupy the room of a Constable, ye
shall once at the least every month certify and show to one of the Clerks of
the Mayors Court, and in the same Court, as well the names as surnames of all
Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased within the month, in the parish
wherein ye be inhabited, as also the names and surnames of all the children of
the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans of this City, and you shall enquire
of all and every the offenses done contrary to the statutes made, 1 Jacobi, 4
Jacobi, 21 Jacobi, to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in Innes and
Alehouses, and for repressing of drunkenness, and due presentiments thereof
make according to the said statutes. And thus ye shall do as God you help.

God save the KING.

