
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHEREAS diverse good Laws have been Made, and are still in Force, for the
Suppressing and Punishment of Vagrants, Vagabonds, and other idle Persons, the
not executing whereof is the Reason that Vagrants and Beggars do so much Swarm
in the Streets and Places of common Resort within this CITY, To the great
Annoyance and Disturbance of the Citizens and Inhabitants thereof, and all
others resorting thereunto, and the great Scandal of the Government in
tolerating so great a Mischief: To the end therefore the said Laws may be
better put in Execution for the Future, and the Streets, Common Passages,
Church-Doors, and all other Places of Public Resort be cleared from that
Living Nuisance; These are in His MAJESTY'S Name straightly to Charge and
Require you, That you forthwith call before you all the Constables within your
Ward, and give them your Selves strict Command, as by the Laws in that behalf
they are required, to be very careful, diligent and active to observe and
apprehend all Vagrants and Beggars, that shall at any time be found Begging in
their respective Parishes and Precincts, and such of them as shall have
Dwellings or Abode within the City, or the Liberties thereof, that They carry
to BRIDEWELL, there to be received and dealt withal according to Law; And all
others that (as the Law in that behalf directs) they punish and pass away from
Parish to Parish, the next strait Way to the Parish where they were Born, if
the same may be known by the Parties Confession, or otherwise; and if that be
not known, then to the Parish where they last Dwelt, by the space of one whole
Year before the same Punishment; and if that cannot be well known, then to the
Parishes through which they last past without Punishment. And if through the
Remissness or Negligence of the Constable of any Precinct to put the said Laws
in Execution, any Vagrant shall at any time be found Begging in any Precinct
within your Ward, you are desired to cause the Constable of the said Precinct
to be Bound over to the Sessions, there to Answer the same; the Law having
provided, That every Constable shall in such case Forfeit Ten Shillings for
every Default: And you are earnestly desired to Press (what in you lies) all
the said Constables to a due and careful observance of their Duty in this
particular; And also that you will make it your Care, That where any Constable
shall at any time fail herein, He may certainly suffer the Penalty of the Law
for every Default. Hereof fail not, as you tender the Honor of the Government,
and the public Weal of this City.

Given this 15th Day of March, 1686/7. Wagstaffe.

Printed by SAMVEL ROTCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


