A CONTINUATION AND VINDICATION OF THE DEFENSE OF Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation: IN ANSWER To Mr. Baxter, Mr. Lob, etc.

Containing A further Explication and Defense of the Doctrine of Catholic
Communion.

A Confutation of the groundless Charge of Cassandrianism.

The Terms of Catholic Communion, and the Doctrine of Fundamentals explained.

Together with a brief Examination of Mr. Humphrey's Materials for Union.

By the Author of the Defense.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Pauls-Churchyard. MDCLXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
I Have already writ a Book so much bigger, than I at first designed it, that I
shall not trouble my Readers with a long Preface. I have carefully examined,
and I think, have fully answered, all that I could think material in my
Adversaries Objections. I can honestly say this for my self, that I have
overlooked nothing, because I thought it difficult to return a satisfactory
Answer to it, though, I confess, I have slighted some trifling Objections, as
unworthy of an Answer. Had I been merrily disposed, I could have given my
Readers great Diversion, by exposing the folly of Mr. Lob, a very bold, but a
very ignorant Writer. But I thought it a little thing to insult and triumph
over so mean an Adversary, and an unpardonable affront to the judgment of
Mankind, to attempt to prove, that the Church of England did not begin the War
against the King; that the Dissenters, by their unreasonable Opposition to the
Church of England, give great advantage to the Papists to accomplish their
designs: That the Papists are hearty Enemies to the Order of Bishops in the
Church of England, and would gladly destroy the Protestant Episcopacy: That
Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory was not inclined to Popery, nor designed to
reduce the Church of England to a nearer Conformity to the Church of Rome. I
did presume, that all Mr. Lob's Wit or Sophistry, could never persuade the
English World to believe otherwise, and therefore thought it to no purpose to
spend Ink and Paper, and some precious hours in so needless a Work. As for Mr.
Baxter (notwithstanding the grave and severe Reprimand, which Mr. Humphrey
gives the Dean for it) I am mightily inclined to pity him; he has disputed
himself out of all sense, and all good manners, and I think there is the least
Reason to answer his Books, of any man's I know, for I believe very few People
understand what he would have himself, or what there is in them to be answered;
what his Name and Authority may do, I cannot tell, but I fancy, his mere
Writings will never make any Proselyte one way or other. However I have
considered, whatever I could judge worth answering, and have been at more
trouble to find out what his Objection was, than to find an Answer to it.

He has been pleased to give me a Name, though I did not think fit to publish
it my self, and whether he guess right or wrong, he shall never know from me.
And yet, as I remember, the Country Conformist blames me for publishing Mr.
Lob's and Mr. Humphrey's Names, because they had not owned them themselves,
though Mr. Baxter had done it for them. But it was not enough to publish my
Name, unless he could give a History of my Life too, which, I thank God, has
been at least to outward appearance, so innocent, that if he knew me, I fear
not his most malicious and spiteful Comments. I shall only tell him, that Dr.
Sherlock, whom I know very well, presents his service to him, and assures him,
that he can tell a more pleasant story of his Adventures at Acton, and the
History of the Letter, than he has done, but is not willing to set up the Trade
of writing Intelligences, nor concerning the World, in all the Privacies of
Conversation. Only he wonders, what Temptation Mr. Baxter had, either to Print
his own Letter, which had been sufficiently answered long since, Defense of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ
or to Print his Letter, which contained so little Ceremony or Complement to
him; it being the first time, that he remembers, Mr. Baxter guilty of Printing
any private Lerter, which did not grossly flatter him. In short, that Doctor
assures him, that if he have a mind to revive that old Controversy, which his
other Adversaries have been pleased to forget, he is contented to enter the
Lists once more.

I shall only further acquaint my Readers, that I have taken all the care I
can, that they shall not wholly lose their time, if they please to peruse this
Vindication; for I have sought all Occasions of useful Discourse, and have
found many. And would but my Adversaries read this Discourse with as great
freedom and impartiality, as I used in writing it, possibly we might in time
see an end of these Controversies, in a happy Union of Protestants, in the
Communion of the Church of England.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. COncerning Catholic Unity, p. 1 The misrepresentation Mr. Baxter and
Mr. Lob have made of that Doctrine, ibid. The occasion of that Discourse of
Church Unity and Communion, p. 3 A brief account of the Doctrine of the
Defense, concerning one Catholic Church, p. 12 Whether the Catholic Church be
in order of Nature antecedent to particular Churches, and Mr. Lob's Cavils
answered, p. 14

Chap. 2. Concerning Catholic Communion, p. 30 Mr. Baxter's Objections
answered, p. 32 Mr. Baxter's Notion of a Catholic Church, and how it is
formed, p. 41 The Authority of Archbishop Bramhall, Mr. Hooker, and Dr. Field,
alleged against me by Mr. Lob, and their judgment in these points considered,
and reconciled with the Doctrine of the Defense, p. 53 In what sense
Schismatics, Heretics, Idolaters, may be owned members of the visible Church
of Christ, p. 61 An Historical account of the state of the Controversy, about
the re-baptization of Heretics, as far as it concerns the Doctrine of
Catholic Communion, p. 72

Chap. 3. Concerning the necessity of Catholic Communion. Wherein is proved at
large, that the Communion of the Church is ordinarily necessary to a state of
Salvation, p. 87

Chap. 4. Concerning the Unity of Church Power, p. 120 The Insinuation of a
Cassandrian design, for Union with the Church of Rome, p. 121 The Doctrine of
the Defense, considered with reference to the Unity of Church Power, whereon
the Charge of Cassandrianism is founded, p. 122 What the Opinion of Cassander
was about Church Power and Government, p. 130 Those who renounce the Authority
of the Pope, can be no Papists, though they assert the Authority of General
Councils, p. 132 The judgment of the Councils of Constance and Basil, in this
point, p. 133 The judgment of Petrus de Marca, Archbishop of Paris, concerning
the Liberties of the Gallican Churches, p. 137 Mr. Lob's Accusation answered,
that I make the universal Church the first Seat of Government, or a Political
Organized Body, in which there is one Supreme and Sovereign Power over the
whole, p. 142 Whether I make the Church of England accountable to Foreign
Bishops, p. 150 Whether I subject the Church of England to a General Council,
p. 160 Whether to assert the Authority of General Councils, subverts the King's
Supremacy, and incurs a Praemunire, p. 168 Mr. Lob's honesty in charging me with
owning the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, p. 172 The Contradictions Mr.
Baxter charge me with, considered, p. 175 The Reason of Mr. B.'s Zeal for a
constitutive Regent Head of the Church, p. 178 The distinction of a National
Church, considered as a Church, and as incorporated into the State, vindicated
from Mr. Humphrey's Objections, p. 188 Concerning the constitutive Regent Head
of the Church of England, and whether a National Church be a Political Body and
Society, p. 200 Mr. Humphrey's Argument to prove a Constitutive Regent Head of
the Church of England, examined, p. 209 The difference between Aristocracy, and
the Government of the Church by Bishops, without a Regent Head, p. 216 A
Vindication of the Dean's Argument, against the necessity of a constitutive
Regent Head of a National Church. p. 219

Chap. 5. Concerning that one Communion, which is essential to the Catholic
Church, and the practicableness of it, p. 226 In what sense Catholic Communion
requires the Agreement and Concord of the Bishops of the Catholic Church among
themselves, and with each other, p. 227 The several ways of maintaining
Catholic Communion used in the ancient Church, vindicated from Mr. B.'s
Objections, p. 232 What place there can be for Catholic Communion, in this
broken and divided state of the Church, p. 239 That there are Schisms in the
Church, is no Argument against the necessity of Catholic Communion, p. 240
Catholic Communion not impracticable in its own Nature, p. 240 Communion
necessary to be maintained between all sound and orthodox Churches, p. 243 Not
many positive Acts of Communion, necessary to maintain Catholic Communion
between foreign Churches, p. 245 The Terms of Catholic Communion very
practicable, p. 247 A Discourse of Fundamental Doctrines, p. 248 What a
Fundamental Doctrine is: Salvation by Christ, the general fundamental of
Christianity, p. 256 The Doctrine of the holy Trinity, a Fundamental of
Christian Faith, p. 259 The denial of Christ's Divinity makes a Fundamental
change in the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, p. 261 School subtilties about
the Trinity, not fundamental Doctrines, nor the dispute about the Filioque p.
273 The Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation, etc. fundamental, p. 274 What is
Fundamental in the Doctrine of Salvation it self, p. 281 Mr. Mede's Notion of
Fundamentals, p. 300 Whether an influence upon a good Life be the proper Ratio
or Notion of a Fundamental Doctrine, p. 305 Whether a Church, which professes
to believe all Fundamentals, but yet entertains such corrupt Doctrines, as in
their immediate and necessary Consequences overthrow Foundations, may be said
to err fundamentally, p. 316 And in what cases we may communicate with such a
Church, p. 319 How far it is lawful to communicate with Churches not governed
by Bishops, nor by Presbyters ordained by Bishops, p. 329 A great difference
between the case of our Dissenters, and some foreign Protestant Churches upon
this account, p. 331 Their Case more largely considered, p. 337 Concerning
Church Discipline and Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, considered as Terms
of Catholic Communion, p. 371

Chap. 6. An examination of Mr. Lob's suggestions, to prove the Dissenters,
according to my own Principles, to be no Schismatics, and a further inquiry,
who is the Divider, p. 382 Whether Dissenters separate from the Catholic
Church, p. 383 Whether Separation from the Church of England infer a Separation
from the Catholic Church, p. 387 Whether nothing can be a Term of Communion,
but what is a necessary part of true Religion, p. 394 Whether the Church of
England makes indifferent things necessary to Salvation, p. 404 Whether the
Church of England unjustly excommunicates Dissenters, and may be charged with
Schism upon that account, p. 413 The Answer, which was given in the Defense to
Mr. Lob's Argument, whereby he proves the Church to be the Divider, vindicated
from his Exceptions, p. 420

Chap. 7. Mr. Humphrey's Materials for Union examined, p. 442 His Materials for
Union destroy the present Constitution of the Church of England, which is a
very modest proposal in Dissenters, to pull down the Church for Union, p. 443
He sets up no National Church in the room of it, p. 447 His Project will cure
no Schism, and therefore can make no Union, p. 456 Nor is it a likely way so
much as to preserve the external Peace and Union of the Nation, p. 459

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. read Tendency, p. 18. l. 15. for Doctor r. Docetae or Docitae.
p. 31. l. 20. for is a desperate, r. is of a desperate. p. 45. l. 4. r. spick.
p. 52. l. 20. r. invisibly. p. 71. l. 6. for or thought r. are thought. p. 73.
Marg. for ex. 52. r. ep. 52. p. 77. Marg. for ingenuit. r. ingemuit. p. 79.
Marg. A Citation out of St. Austin divided in the middle, must be read
together. p. 89. l. ^2. for promising r. premising. p. 106. l. 22. for of, r.
or. p. 123. l. 2. dele also. p. 139. Marg. for litera, r. litura. i^ l. 9. for
Cevernment, r. Government. p. 141. l. 24. for that^ r. yet. p. 194. l. 4. for
present r. prudent. p. 226. l. 7. r. are. l. 22. r. it. p. 235. l. 20. for
uses, r. cases. p. 243. l. 28. dele two. p. 254. l. 20. for observe, r.
obscure. p. 273. l. 11. r. Personality. p. 347. Marg. for Ecclesia authoritas,
r. constituit ecclesiae auctoritas. p. 356. l. 16. r. Delegation. p. 358. l.
11. r. (...). p. 381. l. 29. for there, r. these. p. 392. l. 12. r. the
Catholic Church. p. 393. l. 18. r. with it. p. 421. l. 9. dele what. p. 464.
l. 29. r. help it.

A VINDICATION OF THE DEFENSE OF Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of
Separation.
CHAP. I. Concerning Catholic Unity.
IN my Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, I have
asserted (and proved, for any thing I see yet objected to the contrary) that
Christ has but one Church on Earth, and that the Unity of this Church consists
in one Catholic Communion: Mr. B. Mr. Lob, and Mr. Humphrey, instead of giving
a fair Answer to this, have endeavored to affix such a sense on my words, as I
never thought of, nay, as is directly contrary to the avowed Doctrine of that
Book; and when they have turned every thing into nonsense and confusion by
their own senseless Comments, they set up a great Cry of Cassandrianism and
Contradictions.

For my part, when I read those Representations these Men had made of my
Notions, I wondered to find my self such a stranger to my self. I was perfectly
ignorant of the whole business and Intrigue, and began to examine, whether I
had expressed any thing so unwarily, as to lead them into such Mistakes; but
upon inquiry, I found, it was nothing but the last weak Efforts of a dying
Cause, like the works and doublings of a Hare, when she is near run down, to
lose the Scent. For this is the constant Artifice of these men, when they are
no longer able to defend their Cause, to start aside, and by one Art or other,
to loose their first Question in some new Dispute. Thus Mr. B. tells us for a
Conclusion, I intend, God willing, hereafter to let the Matters of mere
Conformity comparatively alone, and farther to examine this fundamental
Difference, seeing it is evident, that now Satan's design is to call the French
Popery by the name of the Protestant Religion, Answer to Dr. Sherlock. p. 230.
and the Protestant Religion of the true Church of England by the name of
Nonconformity and Schism, and to deceive the simple by a noise against the
refusers of Episcopacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies; but that noise shall no more
divert me from opposing the Foundations of Popery. And I mightily commend the
prudence of Mr. Baxter's Resolution; for it is an easier matter to pull down a
man of Clouts of his own setting up, then to uphold such a decayed and ruinous
Cause

But I am resolved not to lose the Cause thus, and therefore shall beat a
little backward, till we find it again, and shall 1. mind my Readers of the
occasion of that Discourse of Church-Unity and Communion. 2. Give a brief
Account of the Doctrine of the defense in those Points, and consider their
Cavils and Exceptions against it, and those perverse senses they put upon my
words, to form them into a Cassandrian design.

. 1. I shall mind my Readers of the occasion of that Discourse concerning
Church-Unity and Communion, whereby they may the better judge of the Nature and
Tendancy of it. Now there were two things I apparently designed in it. 1. To
show how vain all those projects were of uniting Churches without curing their
Separation, such as Mr. Humphrey's is, of making all separate Churches parts of
the National Church, by virtue of an Act of Parliament, under the King, as the
Accidental Head of such an Accidental Church: For if the Church must be but
one, and the Unity of this one Church consists in one Communion, it is
impossible in the nature of the thing, for all the power in the World, to make
so many separate Churches one Church. The supreme Power may grant equal
Liberties and Privileges in the Commonwealth to all these separate Churches,
but it can no more make them one, than it can make Contradictions to be true,
the sin and evil of Separation still remains, the removal of which is the only
thing that makes Union so desirable; and if an Act of Parliament could do this,
I confess the Proposal would be considerable. If the evil and sinfulness of
Separation consisted only in disobedience to humane Laws, I should think it a
barbarous thing to make any Laws, which shall ensnare men in so great a guilt:
And it is impossible in such an Age as this, which is distracted with so many
different and contrary Persuasions, to make any Laws about Religion, which will
meet with an universal compliance. But if the evil of Separation consists in
dividing the unity of the Church, which no Laws can cure, but those which cure
Separation, Mr. Humphrey's uniting Law can give no ease and security to the
Souls and Consciences of men, whatever it may do to their Liberties and
Estates: And I take the Souls of men to be of greater concernement, than their
Bodies and Estates, and therefore should challenge the principal regard from
conscientious men in their Projects of Union.

2. Another design of that Discourse of Church-Unity and Communion, was to give
us the most plain and easy Notion of Schism and Separation, which Mr. B. and
some other late Writers have industriously endeavored to confound, that no
body might know what it is. Now if there be but one Catholic Church all the
World over, then every Separation is a Schism on one side or other; for where
there are two separate Churches, one, if not both, must be schismatical,
because there is but one Church: And if the Unity of this Church consists in
one Communion, which exacts a joint discharge of all the Duties of a
Church-relation, in hearing, and praying, and receiving the Lord's Supper, etc.
together, then to forsake the Church, and meet in private Conventicles, in
distinct and opposite Communions for Religious Worship, is Separation; and when
it is causeless, is a Schism, as I particularly proved in the defense from St.
Cyprian, Defense. p. 24^.
and St. Augustine; this was the ancient Notion of Schism. But if there be more
than one Church and one Communion; if the Catholic Church consist of all the
separate Churches all the World over, Answer. to Dr. Sherlock. p. 132.
as Mr. Baxter asserts, I would gladly know what Schism and Separation is,
which has so ill a Character in Scripture, and which the ancient Fathers so
vehemently declaim against, as one of the greatest Impieties, such a wickedness
as Martyrdom it self cannot expiate.

For if there be not one Church, but a great many Churches of distinct and
separate Communions, those Christians, who forsake one Church, and form
themselves into a new Church society, cannot be said to divide the Church, but
to multiply it, they become a distinct Church by themselves; and if they retain
all the Essentials of Christian Faith and Worship, are as good and sound a part
of the Catholic Church, as that particular Church is, from which they
separate: For when there is no obligation upon Christians to live in one
Communion, what should hinder them, if they please, from dividing into many?

If there be more Churches and Communions than one, he who forsakes one Church,
and joins in Communion with another, cannot be said to go, or to be out of the
Church, but only to remove from one Church to another; and yet this was the
ancient Character of a Schismatic, that he was Extra Ecclesiam foris, one who
is out of the Church without doors, Cypr. de imitate.
and is said, de ecclesia recedere, to go out of the Church. But according to
this Notion, it is impossible for a man to go out of the Church, unless he
forsake the Communion of all the Churches in the World: Nay, if Church-unity
does not consis tin one Communion, he may do that too, as Mr. B. says the
Seekers do, and yet while they believe in Christ, continue members of the
Catholic Church.

Take away the Notion of one Communion, and there are but two things, that I
can think of, whereon to found the charge of Schism and Separation: Either, 1.
on a private Contract and Covenant between the Pastor and Members of a
particular Church; or, 2. on the Authority of the Magistrate, who enjoins us to
communicate with such a Church. But now I observe first, that the Notion of
Schism was antecedent to both these: The ancient Church knew no other
Church Covenant but Baptism, which obliges us to Catholic Communion, and had
no Christian Magistrates for three hundred years to enforce or enjoin any
Communion: And yet the Church never had a greater sense of the evil of Schism
in any Age, and therefore did believe Schism to be a very evil thing, without
any regard to private Contracts or humane Authority.

2. To break our Promise and Covenant is a great evil, but it is not in its own
nature Schism, unless there be something else to make it so, besides breach of
promise. To disobey our Governors in lawful things is a very great evil, but it
is not in it self the evil of Schism, but of disobedience to lawful Authority:
These do greatly aggravate the sin of Schism, when men are guilty of it, but it
cannot make that to be Schism which is not; and yet there is no such sin, and
can be no such sin as Schism, if there be not one Church; but men may divide
into as many distinct and separate Churches, as they please; for if any man
should say, that Separation is sinful, when there is no just cause or reason
for Separation, this supposes that there are necessary reasons against
Separation, when there are no just reasons for it; and I would gladly hear,
what those reasons are against Separation, when you have destroyed the Notion
of one Catholic Communion. But I have discoursed at large the use of this
Notion of Catholic Communion, in the Disputes of Schism and Separation, in the
defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, chapter 5. p. 231.
and thither I refer my Reader.

Now I shall hence briefly observe two things, with reference to my present
design. 1. That the whole force of my reasoning aginst Separation in the
defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, depends on the Doctrine of one Catholic
Communion; and therefore I was not at all concerned to assert one visible
unifying Church Power under Christ, Answer to Dr. Sherlock. p. 181.
over all the Catholic Church, as Mr. B. calls it. I no where throughout my
Book oppose Separation, upon the Principles of an universal unifying
Church Power, but only on the Principles of Catholic Communion; and therefore
neither having any where asserted any such thing, nor having any reason to do
so in the service of the Cause I undertook, especially having asserted the
quite contrary, (as in due time will appear) the Reader may easily perceive how
injuriously my Adversaries have distorted my words, to give some color and
pretense to their Calumnies.

2. I observe farther, That supposing there had some dubious passages about an
universal Church Power slipped from my Pen, the confuting such a fancy as that,
is by no means a confutation of the Defense. If the doctrine of one Catholic
Communion hold good, as it will certainly do, whatever becomes of Catholic
Church Power, it confounds all their little Excuses and Apologies for
Separation, and they are as very Schismatics, as ever the Novatians or
Donatists were. Here the Controversy began about the sinfulness of Separation;
very angry they were, and gave a great many hard words to that excellent
Person, who warned them of the danger and evil of it; many Books have been
written about it, and now they are charged as high as ever, and are ferreted
out of their Retreats, and see the very foundations of their Cause rooted up;
all on a sudden they grow tame and gentle, and patiently hear themselves proved
Schismatics, without saying a word for themselves, being more concerned, it
seems, to oppose a French Popery (which sometimes, by what figure I know not,
they call a Cassandrian design) than to vindicate their own dear selves from
the charge of Schism. Some possibly may think them very mortified and
self-denying men; others will be tempted to suspect some other Cause: But Mr.
B. is resolved that noise shall not divert him from opposing the foundations of
Popery; the plain meaning of which is this, He finds it troublesome to write in
a Cause, where he is likely to find some pert young Doctors to answer him, and
therefore is resolved for the future to dispute by himself, where he is secure
of the victory, unless Richard and Baxter should happen to quarrel; he having
now Printed a Book in Quarto of 230 pages, as a Preparatory to a fuller
Treatise; I suppose he means a fourth Folio, he telling us that he has writ
three already.

. 2. I come now to give a plain and brief account of the Doctrine of the
Defense concerning one Catholic Church, and one Catholic Communion, which my
Adversaries have so industriously misrepresented, that it is necessary to set
it in a new Light.

In the third Chapter I proved at large, Defense chapter 3. p. 137. etc.
that Christ has but one Church, which is his Body and Spouse, which we call
the Catholic Church; and I do not find any of my Adversaries hardy enough to
deny the name of one Catholic Church, though it will appear in due time, that
they deny the thing.

That the Church is but one, I proved from the express Testimony of Scripture,
and the ancient Fathers, and by this unanswerable Argument, Ib. p. 151. etc.
that the Christian Church is not a new Church, but the old Jewish-Church,
reformed and spiritualized by the Laws and Institutions of Christ; Christianity
being nothing else but mystical Judaism. The believing Jews continue still
united to their own Root, and the believing Gentiles are grafted on the Jewish
Root, and become one Church with them, as St. Paul discourses. Romans 11.17, 18,
24. The middle Wall of Partition was broken down, and the Gentiles received
into the Church of God, which was no longer to be confined within the bounds of
Jury, nor to the carnal Seed and Posterity of Abraham, but to spread it self
over all the World; and therefore since the Christian Church is not a new
Church, but built upon the old foundations of the Jewish Church, enlarged and
Christianized, it must continue as much one, as ever the Jewish Church was.

I observed also from St. Cyprian (whose words I had cited at large) that the
Catholic Church, Ib. p. 144.
though it consist of all particular Churches, which are contained in it, yet
is not a mere arbitrary Combination and Confederacy of particular Churches, but
is the root and fountain of Unity, and in order of nature antecedent to
particular Churches, as the Sun is before its Beams, and the Root before its
Branches, and the Fountain before the Rivers that flow from it; that particular
Churches are made by the increase and propagation of the Catholic Church, not
the Catholic Church by the propagation of particular Churches.

Here Mr. Lob gives us the first taste of his great understanding and skill in
Controversy, and what a formidable Adversary he is like to prove. He says, I
assert, Reply to the Defense. p. 10.
that the universal Church is in order of nature antecedent to particular
Churches (he should have said Catholic, for that was my word; but then he had
lost his Metaphysical subtilty about Universals, of which more presently) well,
what hurt is there in that assertion? why first, the Allusions I use for the
illustration of this, of the Sun being before its Beams, and the Root before
its Branches, and a Fountain before its Rivers, are not ad rem (that is, not to
the purpose, nor to the Matter in hand; for I know not what force English
Readers may imagine to be concealed in, ad rem, unless I translate it) but he
knew very well, that these are not my Allusions (as he calls them) but St.
Cyprians', whose Authority is much more considerable. But suppose they had been
my own (as I see no Reason to be ashamed of them) what is their fault? why, I
should have given some instance of some one Universal, that was in order of
nature antecedent to its Particulars. Now suppose I think, that the Sun and
Root, and Fountain, are such Universals, with respect to their Beams, Branches,
and Rivers; or suppose there were never an adaequate Example in nature of this,
besides the Catholic Church, what were this, ad rem, if it appears, that the
Catholic Church be such an Universal?

Yes, if that could be proved indeed, it were somewhat to the purpose; but
that, says Mr. Lob, is impossible, it being in the sense of most, evident, that
Universale is unum in multis, that is, Ibid.
in many particulars, which Universal has no real Existence but in
particulars, but abstracted from all particulars ^ it is only an Ens Rationis,
having its being in the Eutopian Commonwealth; whence we distinguish between
the consideration of Universal, as Formal and as Fundamental. Fundamental and
it is, Quid singular; but formally, and so it is abstracted from all singulars,
the particulars being the foundation of the Universal, the root from which the
Universal does proceed. Now if it be the particulars that are the foundation of
the Universal, how can the Universal be the foundation of the particulars? No
way in the World, Sir, Quod erat demonstrandum. This is a very Learned and
Scholastic Period, and therefore deserves a just regard: And 1. I thank our
Author for letting me know, where to find those pretty things called Ens
rationis, which, it seems, have their Being in the Eutopian Commonwealth,
though all Authors are not agreed in this matter; for some think it as probable
that they have their Being in the Cassandrian design, but that makes no great
difference; for Learned Geographers say, that is the next County to Eutopia:
But yet it is a material discovery Mr. Lob has made, for by this means, we may
know where to find the Catholic Church. For, 2. the Catholic Church being an
Universal, is no better than an Ens rationis, a mere Metaphysical Notion, and
therefore must have its Being also in the Eutopian Commonwealth; I wish Mr.
Lob does not at last prove the Creed, where we find the Catholic Church, to be
a mere Eutopian Commonwealth, for giving entertainment to such an Ens
Rationis. Well, but Universals have a real existence in particulars! right, but
not as Universals, but as Particulars; humane nature has a real existence in
Peter, James and John, because they are all men; but humane nature considered
as Universal, is in neither of them, unless you will make as many Universal
humane natures, as there are men in the World; thus there are a great many
particular Churches actually existent, but the Catholic Church considered as
Catholic and Universal is a mere figment and notion, no where existing but in
Eutopia. And if this be all Mr. Lob means by his Universal Church, that it is a
mere Logical notion, I readily grant, that he has not only proved, that
Particular Churches are before the Universal Church, but that the Universal
Church has no actual Being at all, nor can ever have any, and therefore it is a
vain thing to dispute, which of them exists first, when one of them does not
exist at all any where but in Eutopia. But all this is nothing to me, who never
troubled my head about the existence of an Ens Rationis in a Fayry Land, but
assert such an Universal Church, as has an actual being and existence, which
always is or may be visible in the World, an Universal Church, which is the
object of Sense, not the creature of fancy and imagination.

This I take to be the general sense of all Christians, of what Communion
soever they are, if they understand any thing of these matters, that the
Universal Church is a real thing which does actually exist; not as Logical
Notions do, but as a Church and Society of Christians: For the Universal Church
is the Body and the Spouse of Christ, and it is a new fangled Heresy to assert
the Body and the Spouse of Christ, to be an Ens Rationis; as the Do^^ formerly
asserted his Natural Body, to be only an empty Apparition.

Hitherto particular Churches have been acknowledged to be Members of the
Universal Church, but no man in his Wits ever dreamed before, that a thing
which actually exists could be a Member of that, which has no real existence,
that the Church of England, suppose, or the Church of France, should be Members
of an imaginary Universal Church, which has no Being any where but in Eutopia:
And therefore to help out our Author here, who has so miserably lost himself in
Logic and Metaphysics; I observe, that the Catholic Church, is such an
Universal as a whole is, with respect to its parts, not as a Species is, with
respect to the Individuals contained under it; or to speak more plain, as our
natural Body is with respect to its particular Members, not as humane Nature
is, with respect to particular men.

And therefore the most common Reason assigned, both by Ancient and Modern
Divines, why the Church is called Catholic and Universal, is, not because it
is an universal Notion, Necessario consequitur, unam duntaxat esse Ecclesiam,
quam propterea Catholicam nuncupamus, quod sit Vniversalis, and diffundatur per
omnes mundi parts, and ad omnia se tempora extendat, nullis vel locis inclusa
vel temporibus. Helv. conf. cap. 17.
made by a mental Abstraction from particulars, but because it diffuses it self
all the World over, and propagates it self into all parts, without Division or
Multiplication into new distinct Churches, but continuing one and the same
Church from the Beginning, fills the World with Christians, living in this one
Communion and Society.

Having thus redeemed the universal Church from its invisible and imaginary
State in the Eutopian Commonwealth, and brought it back into the World again,
let us now consider how the Church becomes Catholic and Universal, and which
is first in order of Nature, the Catholic Church or particular Churches.

Mr. Lob asks me, Where this universal Church should be, when Antecedent to any
particular Church? Reply, p. 10.
Truly I suppose it must be, where he has placed it, after there are particular
Churches, viz. in Eutopia. But did I ever assert that there was a Catholic
Church, before there was any one particular Church; that is, before there was
any Church at all? Do I not assert, that the universal Church in the first
beginnings of Christianity, was not so large as many particular Congregations
are now? Defense, p. 140.
And therefore that the Catholic Church did subsist in a particular
Congregation. That though in the beginnings of Christianity, the true Church of
Christ was consined to one small Congregation, yet it was the Catholic Church,
etc. p. 148.
If Mr. Lob does not understand this, I will endeavor to help him in it, if
his Conscience be not more incurable than his Understanding. For when I
asserted, that the Catholic Church is in order of Nature antecedent to
particular Churches; I expressly declared, That I did not consider the Catholic
Church, as actually spread over all the World, but as the Root and Fountain of
Unity, As St. Cyprian did: For in this Sense of the word Catholic and
Universal, as it signifies, the Christian Church diffused and propagated in all
parts of the World, it is absurd and senseless to affirm, That the Church was
Planted in all the World, before it was Planted in any one Country; but I
placed the Catholicism of the Christian Church, not merely in its actual
Extent, but in its intrinsic Nature; its Extent varies in several Ages,
according to the Progress or Decrease of Christianity in the World, but the
Nature of the Church is always the same, be its Extent more or less.

Catholic, indeed is a Name, which we do not find given to the Church in
Scripture, nor in the most ancient Creeds; but we find in Scripture, that
Christ has but one Church, and the very Nature and Constitution of this Church
is such, That it was not to be confined to any one Country, as the Jewish
Church was, Defense, p. 147.
but to diffuse and propagate it self all the World over; and upon this
Account, as I proved in the Defense, it is called the Catholic Church, because
though it be spread all the World over, it is but one Church still. That very
Church, which the Apostles first planted in Jerusalem, and by degrees enlarged
into all parts of the World. The difference between the Church at its first
Planting, when the beginnings of it were but small, and when it overspread so
great a part of the World, is like the difference between a Child new Born, and
when he is come to his full Growth and Stature, he is the same Person still but
increased in all parts, without dividing one Member from another, or
multiplying it self into more Bodies; or like a Grain of Mustard Seed, which
from small beginnings grows into a large Tree. The Catholic or universal
Church is that one Church, which is the one Body of Christ, which was the same
Church, when in the beginnings of Christianity, it was confined to a single
Congregation at Jerusalem, and when it had spread it self over all the World.

I would desire to know, whether Christ had ever more than one Church, and one
Body? If he had not, Whether that one Church might not always be properly
called the Catholic Church? If it might not, Then if Christ have a Catholic
Church now, and formerly had no Catholic Church, he has a Church now which he
had not at first; and therefore has either changed the Church, which he once
had, or has two Churches; one which is not the Catholic Church, and another
which is the Catholic Church.

The Christian Church indeed has spread it self into many parts of the World,
where it was not at the first planting of the Gospel, and therefore is more
Catholic and Universal, with respect to its extent, than it was at first; but
the Church, which is now spread all the World over, is but that one Church
still which began at Jerusalem; and therefore the Church at Jerusalem, while
but one single Congregation, was the Catholic Church in its Root, and
Fountain, and principle of Unity, which was all that St. Cyprian, and I from
him, affirmed of this Matter. And if particular Churches now may be Catholic
Churches, as maintaining Catholic unity, which was the familiar Language of
the primitive Fathers, much more might the first Christian Church be very
properly called the Catholic Church, as being the Principle and Fountain of
Catholic unity.

But of all things I hate to dispute about Words, and therefore if Mr. Lob will
but grant the thing I contend for, let the Words shift for themselves; and that
is this, That the Church first planted by the Apostles in Jerusalem, is that
one Church, which was afterward spread over all the World; that when the
Apostles planted Churches in other Cities, Countries, and Provinces, they did
not erect new distinct Independent Churches, but only enlarged that one Church
of Christ, and added new Members to it. Let the Church of Christ be
acknowledged to be but one, which propagated it self in the Unity of the same
Body all the World over, and I have no farther Controversy about this Matter.

This is the only thing I was concerned for, to prove that there is but one
Church all the World over; and for this Reason, I asserted, That the Catholic
Church considered as the root and fountain of Unity, was in order of Nature
antecedent to particular Churches: The Catholic Church may subsist in one
particular Church, otherwise the belief of the Catholic Church can be no
necessary Article of our Creed, for the first Christian Church, was the
particular Church of Jerusalem, and if that were not in some sense the
Catholic Church, there was a Christian Church, when there was no Catholic
Church, and may be so again; if we should suppose all the World excepting one
particular Church, to apostatize from the Faith of Christ, which yet is
generally acknowledged possible to be.

But if particular Churches were in order of Nature antecedent to the Catholic
Church, then they must be true and complete Churches, without any regard to
Catholic unity, and then it is impossible ever after to find or make one
Catholic Church. The Notion and Essence of the Catholic Church, as far as
concerns this Controversy, consists in such a Catholic unity, as makes all
the Christians, and Christian Churches in the World one Body and Church, and
Members of each other. Now could we suppose that there were two or three or
more particular Churches before the Catholic Church, as suppose the Churches
of England, France, and Spain, then we must acknowledge, that a Church may be a
true complete Church, without any regard to Catholic unity, and then Catholic
unity is not necessary to the Notion and Being of a Church, and then there can
be no necessity of one Catholic Church. If it is possible, that there should
be two Christian Churches, which are not of the same Communion, nor Members of
each other, then why not a hundred, a thousand, etc. And then there can be no
one Catholic Church of Christ's Institution, whatever there may be by humane
Combinations and Confederacies.

The Sum of all is this, Christ in the Institution of his Church, designed but
one Church all the World over, which we call the Catholic Church. This
Catholic Church must of necessity have a beginning somewhere, as, De facto, it
had at Jerusalem; wherever this beginning is, there is the Root and Fountain
of Catholic unity, because all other Christians, and Churches, which
afterward embrace the Christian Faith, are added to this Church, and received
into the Unity of this one Body; and it is impossible, that any man should be a
Christian, or any Society of men a Christian Church, who are not received into
the Unity of this Church, not considered as such a particular Church, but as
the beginning of the Catholic Church; and thus all particular Churches are
united to one another, and by virtue of this Catholic union, are one Catholic
Church. He who carefully considers this, will see what Reason I had to assert,
that the Catholic Church was in order of Nature antecedent to particular
Churches; for a Church, which is one by Institution, must begin in one, and
enlarge it self by receiving others into the Unity of the same Body, which for
the convenience of Worship and Discipline, may form themselves into distinct,
but not separate Church-Societies.

This is an intelligible Account, how all the Churches in the World come to be
but one Church, as proceeding from one principle of Unity, from one Root and
Stock, and by the necessary Laws of their Constitution incorporated into one
Body, and closely united to each others; but those who make particular Churches
to be entire and complete Churches by themselves, in order of Nature and time
too, antecedent to the Catholic Church, must either make the Catholic Church
an imaginary Being, a mere Ens Rationis, as Mr. Lob does, or else no better
then an arbitrary Combination, which may last as long as they please, and be
dissolved again, when they please, and yet the particular Churches remain very
entire and perfect Churches without it. It is certain, that the Catholic
Church cannot be one Church and one Body, if any particular Churches by their
essential Constitution are entire complete Churches, and not integral parts of
the Catholic Church, which they cannot be without such a necessary Union as I
have now described.

And to conclude this Argument, I shall refer Mr. Lob for better Instruction in
this Matter to Mr. Baxter, who, in Answer to this Question, Whether a single
Church, or the Catholic Church be first? Answer to Dr. Sherlock, p. 202.
Resolves it thus. Christ was first himself, and then, Christians as Christians
were United to him, and were the Catholic Church in Fieri, or an Embrio: And
then the Pastor's Office, was made as the Organical Office to make the rest, --
And when the particular Churches are formed, they are thereby parts of the
Universal, and as such are, Simul et Semel, such Churches and such parts. Now
though Mr. B. and I are not like to agree very well in our Notions of the
Catholic Church, (a particular Account of which I shall give hereafter) yet
here are several things for the Instruction of Mr. Lob, and to vindicate my
Notion from such ridiculous Absurdity, as he charges it with. For, 1. Mr. B.
acknowledges an universal Church, In fieri or Embrio, before any particular
organized Church, before the Apostolical Office it self, which is more than I
say, who only make the first Church, The Root and Fountain of Catholic unity.
2. He asserts, That when particular Churches are founded, they are thereby
parts of the universal Church; and therefore the universal Church must be in
order of Nature before particular Churches, which is very consistent with their
being, Simul and semel, in order of time. And that he does not look upon the
universal Church, to be a mere, Ens Rationis, in an Eutopian Commonwealth, but
a real existent thing appears from hence, that in the next Paragraph, he owns,
Particular Churches to be integral parts of the Catholic Church.

CHAP. II. Concerning Catholic Communion.
HAving thus vindicated my Notion of Catholic unity, the next thing in order
(for I shall confine my self to the Method I observed in the Defense, that my
Readers may the better know, what the present Controversy is, which my
Adversaries have endeavored to conceal, as well as misrepresent) concerns
Catholic Communion.

I asserted and proved at large, Defense, p. 169.
Chapter 4. That the Unity of the Catholic Church, consists in one Communion. I
explained what this one Communion is, produced variety of Proofs for it, from
the Authority of Scripture, and Ancient Fathers; and none of my Adversaries yet
have had the confidence to attempt any Answer to it, either by showing that my
Arguments are not cogent, my Authorities from Scripture, or Fathers impertinent
or false: Mr. Lob thinks it sufficient to start some difficult Cases, and to
confront me with the Authority of some late Writers of the Church of England,
who, as he, who understands neither one nor the other, imagines, contradict what
I say; which, if it were so indeed, is neither a sufficient Answer to me, who
prefer the Authority of the Scripture, and Ancient Fathers, before any Modern
Doctors, of what Note soever; nor a sufficient justification of himself and his
party, who are condemned by these very men, whose Authority they oppose against
me, though they do not value it themselves.

An Argument, Ad hominem, can never establish a Cause, though in some cases it
may silence an Adversary; and it is an evident sign of great prevarication,
when men fence only with such Authorities, as they themselves do not think
valid, as it is a desperate Cause, when they can neither confute the Reasons
which are alleged, nor oppose Reason to Reason; but Mr. Lob shall have a fair
hearing presently.

Mr. Baxter seems not to have read this Chapter, which is the main seat of the
Controversy, but skips to the 8th. Chapter, where this Doctrine of one
Communion is applied to the Catholic Church, and this is the Reason, why he
does not understand, what I mean by one Communion, but imagines, that I have a
Grammar or Dictionary by my self, and will excommunicate them, and make them
Schismatics, for speaking as all mankind do. Good man, he is a little mistaken
in this Matter, as usually he is, and as every man must be, who confutes Books
before he reads or understands them, and replies before he knows what to answer.

However, Answer to Dr. Sherlock, c. 6. p. 208.
let us hear what terrible Objections he has against this plain Proposition,
that the Unity of the Catholic Church consists in one Communion. I shall
transcribe his Reasons, and then give a plain and easy Answer to them.

1. He says, This is contrary to the common course of Nature, in which the
Union of all compounded beings makes them what they are, and goes before
their Operations and Effects. The Union of the Soul and Body goes before
Sensation, Imagination, Intellection, or Volition.

2. It is contrary to all Artificial beings in a Clock, a Watch, a Coach, etc.
The Union of their parts is their relative Form, and goes before the Exercise,
and Use, and the Effects.

3. It is contrary to all Political Beings and Societies: The Union of King and
Subjects is the constitutive Form of the Kingdom, and goes before the
Administration or Regiment, by Legislation and Judgment, and the Allegiance
and Subjection before Obedience. Thus the Union of Husband and Wife, Master and
Servants, Captain and Soldiers, Schoolmaster and Scholars, as the Constitution
of the Relation, go before their Communion in the Exercise.

4. If Union and Communion be all one, then a man is new made a Christian at
every Act of Communion; for Union is the Constitution, and makes us Christians;
but the Consequence is not true.

5. If Union and Communion be all one, then Baptism does no more make us
Christians, and unite us to Christ and his Church, than after-Communion in
Prayer and Sacraments do; but this is singular and false.

What pity is it, that so many good Arguments should be lost, for want of some
Thing and some Body to oppose? for all these Arguments proceed upon this
Mistake, That by Communion, I mean only some transient Acts of Christian
Communion, such as Praying, and Hearing, and Receiving the Lord's Supper
together; that the Christian Church is united by such Acts as these; whereas
these Acts of Christian Communion necessarily suppose Christian Union, and
therefore can neither be the efficient nor formal Cause of it: A man must first
be united to the Church, and one Church to another, before they can communicate
together in such Acts of Worship, or have any Right to do so.

But then I wonder, what he thought I meant by one Communion; for if by
Communion, I meant only a transient Act of Communion, by one Communion, I could
mean but one such transient Act. And here he might have found out greater
Absurdities than before, and have triumphed over this senseless Notion
unmercifully; for what a ridiculous conceit is it, to place Christian Unity in
some one transient Act? But possibly Mr. B. might see this Absurdity, and be
merciful to it, for the sake of his darling Notion of Occasional Communion,
which is just such a transient Act, and yet, as he thinks, sufficient to Church
Unity, and to justify any man from the Guilt of Schism and Separation. But
then I cannot but wonder, that he should so industriously prove, that the Unity
of the Church cannot consist in such transient Acts of Communion; for if this
be true, (as certainly it is) he may be a Schismatic from the Church of
England, notwithstanding he sometimes holds Occasional Communion with her.

But had Mr. B. carefully read and considered but the six first Lines of the
4th. Chap. of the Defense, where I explain, what I mean by one Communion, he
might have spared all his Arguments, from natural, artificial, and political
Unions. My words are these; Defense p. 164.
The 2d. thing to be considered is, That the Unity of the Christian Church
consists in one Communion; Catholic Unity signifies Catholic Communion, and
one Communion signifies one Christian Society, of which all Christians are
Members. From which it is plain, That I did not place this one Communion in any
transient Acts, but in a fixed and permanent State. And that this is not a new,
uncouth way of speaking, but very agreeable to the Language of Scripture and
Antiquity, I made appear in the same place, and concluded, This is sufficient
to let you understand, what the Ancients meant by Christian Communion, which in
a large notion, signifies the Christian Church or Society, which is called
Communion, from the Communication which all the Members of it had with each
other. So that when I say, the Unity of the Catholic Church consists in one
Communion, the plain and obvious sense of it is this, That all the Churches of
the World are but one Church or one Society, and have the same Right, and the
same Obligation on them, to communicate with each other, as opportunity serves,
in all those Duties, for the sake of which Christian Churches are instituted,
as the Members of a particular Church are. For all particular Churches are as
much Members of the universal Church, as particular Christians are Members of a
particular Church, and therefore are as much bound to communicate with each
other: One Communion signifies one Body and Society, in which all the Members
communicate with one another. As to explain this by a familiar Comparison:
Suppose the whole World were one Family, or one Kingdom, in which every
particular man, according to his Rank and Station, enjoys equal Privileges; in
this case the necessity of Affairs would require, that men should live in
distinct Houses, and distinct Countries, as now they do all the World over: But
yet if every man enjoyed the same Liberty and Privileges, wherever he went,
as he does now in his own House and Country, the whole World would be but one
great Family, or universal Kingdom. And whosoever should resolve to live by
himself, and not to receive any others into his Family, nor allow them the
liberty of his House, would be guilty of making a Schism in this great Family
of the World; and what Nation soever should deny the Rights and Privileges of
natural Subjects, to the Inhabitants of other Countries, would make a Schism,
and rent it self from this universal Kingdom.

Thus it is here: The Church of Christ is but one Body, one Church, one
Household and Family, one Kingdom; and therefore though the necessity of Affairs
requires, that Neighbor-christians combine themselves into particular Churches
and particular Congregations, as the World is divided into particular Families
and Kingdoms, yet every Christian by virtue of his Christianity, has the same
Right and Privilege, and the same Obligation to Communion, as occasion serves,
with all the Churches of the World, that he has with that particular Church
wherein he lives: Wherever he removes his Dwelling, whatever Church he goes
to, he is still in the same Family, the same Kingdom, and the same Church.

I can hardly be so charitable to Mr. B. as not to believe this to be a wilful
Mistake; for it is impossible for any man of common sense, who had ever read
what I discoursed so largely and particularly of Catholic Communion, to
mistake it for some transient Acts of Communion, when I so frequently explained
one Communion by one Body and Society: And all the Arguments whereby I prove
one Catholic Communion, prove only that all Christians and Christian Churches
are but one Body, and thereby obliged to all Duties and Offices, and Acts of
Christian Communion, which are consequent upon such a Relation. And this is a
sufficient Answer to his three first Arguments, from natural, artificial, and
political Unions.

But upon a stricter Examination of Mr. B's. Arguments, I find he is as much
blundered and confounded about the notion of Unity, as he is about Communion. I
asserted, that Catholic Unity consists in one Communion; the plain sense of
which is no more than this, That the Catholic Church is one, considered as one
Body and Society, wherein all Christians and Christian Churches have equal
Right and Obligation to Christian Communion. This Unity he turns into Union,
and understands it of our Union to Christ, not of the Unity or Oneness of the
Christian Church, and argues thus: 4. If Union and Communion be all one, then a
man is new made a Christian at every Act of Communion; for Union is the
Constitution, and makes us Christians. 5. If Union and Communion be all one,
then Baptism does no more make us Christians, and unite us to Christ and his
Church, than after-Communion in Prayers and Sacraments do. Where you see he
misconstrues both the terms; and it would be wonderful to any Logician, to hear
him conclude from these premises, Ergo, the Unity of the Catholic Church does
not consist in its being one Body and Society, and Communion of Christians. If
this be to write Controversies, we may e'ne as well lay Wagers, and cast Lots
for Major, Minor, and Conclusion; for any Propositions well shuffled, will
naturally fall into as good Syllogisms as these.

And yet Mr. B. had notice given him of this distinction between the Union of
the Church to Christ, and the Unity of all Churches in one Body and Society, in
the 8th.. Chap. of the Defense, where I consider, what Communion is essential
to the Catholic or universal Church; where the Reader may find these words,
which Mr. B. himself takes notice of: I have already proved the Catholic
Church to be one visible Body and Society, Answer to Dr. Sherlock. p. 208
and therefore need not now add any thing more to confute that opinion, that
the Catholic Church is invisible, which is asserted by Dr. Owen, and his
Independent Brethren. But Mr. B. and others, who acknowledge one visible
Catholic Church, consisting of all the particular Churches in the World, do
not much differ from Dr. O 's. invisible Church, while they make the Unity of
this Church to consist only in their Union to Christ, as Head of the Church,
not in the Union of Churches, as Members of the same Body: For I take it not to
be enough, that all Churches are united to Christ, unless they be all united in
one Body; for the whole Church cannot be the one Body of Christ, unless all
particular Churches are one Body. And therefore I would desire Mr. B. and his
Brethren to tell us, how the whole Catholic Church is united into one Body: I
assert, this is done by one Communion; if he can tell any better way, I would
gladly learn it, especially if he can tell me, how all Churches can be one Body
without one Communion. This sudden Humiliation, as Mr. B. calls it, in being
contented to learn of him, makes him condescend to undertake this task to teach
me, but very much suspects my capacity to learn, till I am better instructed by
some Grammarians, Metaphysical and Political Teachers, what the meaning of
Union and Communion is, Ib. p. 209.
what is the difference between Essentials, and Integrals, and Accidents, and
of Union and Communion in each of these, and how many sorts of Union and
Communion there are, that are pertinent to our Case, etc. I do not wonder,
there are so few persons who understand Mr. B. or are capable of learning from
him, since there are so many things to be understood beforehand, to prepare
them for his Instructions, as no man of sense can ever understand.

I ask Mr. B. one plain Question, How the whole Catholic Church is united into
one Body, so as to become one Church? In Answer to this, he sends me to
Grammarians and Metaphysicians, to learn how many sorts of Union there are;
though I care not how many sorts of Union there are, if he will tell me, what
the Unity of the Catholic Church is. But he says, 1. He cannot talk sense
about these things, without distinguishing about the unifying of the Society,
and the uniting a single Member to that Society. But I suppose in my Question,
particular Churches already formed, and particular Christians united to these
Churches, and only enquire, how all these Christians and all these Churches are
one Church. Other men, I believe, could talk sense, without these Distinctions,
which Mr. B. seems to be so fond of, only to prevent his Readers from
understanding sense. 2. He must distinguish also an essentiating Union, and an
integrating or accidental Union and Communion. I perceive we shall never come
to the Business: For I did not enquire, wherein the essence of the Church
consists, or what degrees of Communion are more or less necessary to its Being,
which I suppose he means by his essentiating, integrating, accidental Union and
Communion; but I suppose a thousand Churches, or as many more as you please,
with all the Essentials, Integrals, Accidentals of a Church, and enquire how
these thousand Churches become one Church. Possibly these Distinctions may be
the way of speaking sense, but I perceive they are not the way of speaking to
the purpose.

But let us now consider the Account Mr. B. gives us of this Matter: And 1. he
says, It is only essential to the Church, that there be an organized Body of
Pastors and People united to Christ the Head. Here I agree with Mr. B. if he
would add one Body; for that is the thing in Dispute, whether Christ have one
or a thousand Bodies; if but one, how all the Christians and Churches in the
World make up that one Body. 2. He adds, In this Definition, Christ only is the
supreme, constitutive, Summa Potestas, or regent part; the organized Body of
Pastors and People, but the Pars subdita, and the Union of Christ and that Body
makes it a Church. This is very well still: We acknowledge Christ to be the
supreme Governor of his Church, and that the Union of Pastors and People to
Christ makes them a Church; but the main Question still remains untouched, What
it is, which makes all the Christian Pastors and People in the World to be but
one Church.

Nor does his Similitude help him out, which is so admirable in its Philosophy
and Application, that I cannot let it pass. His words are these: As in the
Constitution of Man, 1. The rational Soul is the real Form, which is,
Principium Motus. 2. The organized Body is the constitutive Matter: That there
be Heart, Liver, Stomach, is but the Bodies Organization; that these parts be
duly placed and united, is Forma Corporis, non Hominis, and makes the Body but
Materia disposita. 3. The Union of Soul and Body is that Nexus, ( like the
Copula in a Proposition) which may be called the relative Form, or that which
makes the Soul become Forma in actu. Had this Philosophy been known in St.
Paul's days, I should not much have wondered, that he warns men against vain
Philosophy. I shall avoid disputing with Mr. B. as much as I can, and therefore
shall not quarrel with him for saving, that the Soul is Principium Motus, the
Beginning, or first Cause and Principle of Motion to the Body, though it may be
some Cartesians will not like it: Nor for affirming, that the Union of Soul and
Body, is but like the Copula in a Proposition, which is a speck and spang new
Notion; but shall only consider, how he applies this to the Church. Christ it
seems then is the Soul, and Christians the Body; though in Scripture he is
represented as the Head of the Body, and the divine Spirit as the Soul which
enlivens and animates it: And if Christ be not the Head of the Body, (which I
think the Soul was never accounted yet) the Church must be without a Head, or
have some other Head than Christ, which I suppose is the Reason, why he talks
so much of a constitutive Regent Head of the Church. But the organized Body is
the constitutive Matter of the man, though other Philosophers used to call the
Body a constitutive part; but to let that pass. Thus an organical Church is the
constitutive Matter; of what? Of Christ, or of his Church, or of some third
thing compounded of both? That there be Heart, Liver, Stomach, is but the
Bodies Organization; this is easily applied. Thus Apostles, Prophets, Pastors
and Teachers, and People, make an organical Church; but that these parts be
duly placed and united, is Forma Corporis, non Hominis, is the Form of the
Body, not of the Man; which what it means, I cannot tell, unless that a man
would be a man, though the several parts of his Body did not stand in their
right places, nor were united to one another; so they were all united to the
Soul. And thus the Catholic Church is one Body, by being united to Christ,
though the parts of it are not united to each other; and much such a Body it
is, as the natural Body would be, did the Legs and Arms grow out of the Head,
and every Member change places without any order, or divide from each other,
and hang together only by a Magical kind of Union with the Soul. Well, but this
Organization and due Position of the Parts, makes the Body, Materia disposita,
Matter fitly disposed; I suppose he means, for Union with the Soul: But is this
disposition of the Matter so necessary, that a Soul cannot unite with a Body
otherwise disposed, without forfeiting the external Form of a Man, his Senses,
or his Understanding? And consequently, that no reasonable Soul, which is not
under some force, would unite with such a Body. If this be his meaning, it sits
our present Case very well; for then the Church cannot be united to Christ in
one Body, without union with it self; and the Unity of the Catholic Church
cannot consist merely in the union of all particular Churches in and to Christ,
without any union among themselves. But how to apply the Copula in a
Proposition, either to the union of Soul or Body, or of Christ and his Church,
I cannot tell, and shall never be able to learn, till I meet with some new
Baxterian Logic, as well as Grammar and Metaphysics. But to proceed, as a
farther Explication of this Matter, he adds,

3. In this Union there is no Summa Potestas, or universal Governor,
(Monarchical or Aristocratical) but Christ. In this we agree also, as will
appear more hereafter.

And now or never to the Point: 4. The Body is sufficiently organized, if it
consists of local Churches, called single or particular, being Pastors and
Christian People, (having all the Essentials of Christianity.) But is our
Dispute then about the Organization, or about the Unity of the Body? The
Catholic Church has no other Organization, but that of particular Churches;
but there is something more required to make it one: No, says Mr. B. that which
makes this Body (that is, all the Christians and Christian Churches in the
World) to become a Church, (he should have said, one Church) is no union of the
Members among themselves: So that the Catholic Church may be one Body, without
the union of its Members among themselves, i. e. it may be one without Unity.
But why should not union of the Members among themselves be necessary to make a
Church one? Because, says Mr. B. that makes them only Materia disposita, i. e.
Matter disposed, prepared, fitted; but for what? To be one Church? I should
rather think, that the union of several Churches makes them one Church, and
does not only prepare and dispose them to be one, unless he can tell, how they
can be more one than by Unity. But however, are any other Churches, which have
no union among themselves, this Materia disposita, or Matter disposed and
fitted to make one Catholic Church? If they be, then there is no need of any
Union, so much as to dispose and prepare the Matter: If they be not, then I
still enquire, what that Union of Churches is, which is necessary to make them
fit matter for the Catholic Church? But this Mr. B. has not yet vouchsafed to
tell me; though possibly this may be one of those things, which I must learn
from some Grammarians or Metaphysicians, before I can be capable of his
Instructions.

But Mr. B. tells us, how the Church is one without any Union of the Members
among themselves, viz. by their common Union with Christ, and then all single
Persons and Churches are one Catholic Church, because united in and to him, as
all Lines are united in the Center. So that there is no necessity of any other
Union between several Churches to make them one Catholic Church, but that they
are all united to Christ the common Center; they are one Church, though as
distant and opposite to each other, as the two Poles, because they meet in the
same Center.

But 1. This is a pretty easy way of determining Controversies to outface all
the Authority of Scripture and Antiquity, by a dogmatical Assertion, without
offering the least Reason or shadow of Reason to confirm it: I had at large
proved the necessity of one Catholic Communion to make one Catholic Church,
and instead of answering these Proofs, he asserts the contrary upon his own
naked Authority, and that must pass for a Confutation.

And 2. He takes that for granted, which I can never grant him, that those
Churches which are divided from each other, by separate and opposite
Communions, may yet be all united to Christ; for Christ has but one Body, one
Spouse, one Flock, one Church, and if we be not Members of this one Church, (as
no Schismatics are) we are not united to Christ: and therefore it is a vain
thing to talk of uniting those in Christ, who are not united among themselves;
for Christ has not an hundred several Bodies, but one Body, and we must
continue in the Unity of this Body, if we will enjoy Union and Communion with
Christ.

3. When he places the Unity of the Catholic Church, in the Union of all
single Persons and Churches in and to Christ, he must either mean this of an
external and visible Union to Christ, by an external and visible profession of
Faith in him, or a real, internal, mystical Union.

1. If he mean the First, an external and visible Union to Christ, I observe,
that this can neither be made, nor be known, but by something, which is
external and visible. We cannot know, that any Society of men is the Church of
Christ, but by their external profession of Faith in him, and subjection to
him; nor can we know, that a hundred Societies are the same Church, but by some
common Profession and Practice; and if, by the Institution of our Savior, one
Communion be essential to the Notion of one Church, as I have abundantly proved
it is, then the visible Union of all Churches, in and to Christ, consists in
their visible Communion with each other.

2. If he mean a mystical internal Union, I have two things to say to him. 1.
This makes the Catholic Church invisible; for if the Unity of the Catholic
Church consists only in the Union of all Churches in Christ, and this Union be
a mystical invisible Union, then the Catholic Church it self must be invisible
too. 2. Though particular Christians may be thus mystically united to Christ,
yet no particular Churches are thus united to Christ much less all the
particular Churches in the World, unless you will say, that none belong to the
Church, but those Persons who are true and sincere Christians, which reduces
the Church to the invisible number of the Elect, and destroys not only the
Visibility, but in many cases the Organization of the Church on Earth, for I
fear the Pastors and Governors of the visible Church, are not always
invisibly united to Christ, and therefore according to this way of arguing, it
is not visible, whether Christ have an organical Church on Earth: which shows
how absurd it is, to place the Unity of the Catholic Church, in this invisible
Union of particular Churches to Christ.

I may add 3. That no men are thus visibly united to Christ, who are not
visible Members of the Catholic Church, and do not live in visible Communion
with it, when it may be had; for otherwise we destroy the necessity of a
visible Church, or of a visible Profession, and Practice of Christian
Communion, even in particular Churches: Which shows, that the Notion of
Catholic Unity, and a Catholic Church, does not consist in such an invisible
Union to Christ, for our invisible Union to Christ, necessarily supposes our
visible Communion with his Church; and since Christ has but one Church, it
requires our visible Communion with the Catholic Church; and this supposes
that there is a visible Catholic Church, of a distinct Consideration from the
invisible Church of the Elect, which therefore cannot be founded on an
invisible Union to Christ, but on something which is visible, such an external
Profession, and external Communion, as may be seen. The sum is this, No Church
can be the Church of Christ, but upon account of some Union to him, either
visible, or invisible, or both; but that which makes all the Churches of the
World, the one Church and Body of Christ, must be an Union amongst themselves,
which I have proved, consists in one Catholic Communion. What Mr. B. farther
adds, proceeding upon the same Mistake, needs no particular Answer; and what
deserves any farther Examination, will fall in under another Head.

But Mr. Lob (I confess) has pinched harder in this Cause, having alleged
some venerable Names in the Church of England against me, Archbishop Bramhall,
Mr. Hooker, Dr. Field, all very great men, to whose Memories I cannot but pay a
just Reverence and Respect: But yet if it should appear, that my Notion of
Catholic Communion should differ from theirs (as I think it does in some
Points from Archbishop Bramhal's) while I have the Authority of Scripture, and
the primitive Church, I think my self very safe, notwithstanding the dissent of
any modern Doctors, of what note soever. Only hence we may learn, with what
Judgment and Honesty Mr. Lob charges me with carrying on the Cassandrian
Design, when I differ from the Archbishop in those very Points, for which he
was (though very unjustly) charged with it.

But let us examine Particulars. I assert, that all Christians and Christian
Churches in the World are one Body, Society, or Church; and this is called
Catholic Communion, because it obliges them all to communicate in all the
external Offices and Duties of Religion and Church-Society, and Membership, as
occasion offers, especially Neighbor-christians are bound to live together in
external Communion with that Church in which they are; and that whoever
causelessly separates from any Church, which lives in Catholic Communion, is a
Schismatic from the Catholic Church.

Mr. Lob, to avoid this, Reply to the Defense, p. 14
alleges the Authority of Archbishop Bramhal, and triumphs over me after his
usual rate, for not having con'd my Lesson well, nor sufficiently digested my
Notions, which he supposes I learnt (though very imperfectly) from this great
Master: he tells me, This great Prelate uses several distinctions about
Communion, which would have been for my purpose and rectification: Though
whoever reads my Book, will find, that I was not ignorant of these
Distinctions, but did not think them to my purpose.

The Bishop says, Bramhal's Vindication of the Church of England. Tom. 2.
Disc. 2. P. 57.
The Communion of the Christian Catholic Church, is partly internal, partly
external: And do I any where deny this? The Question only is, whether internal
Communion will excuse men from the guilt of Schism, who separate from the
external Communion of the Church, when it may be had without sin? And this I
deny, and do not see, where the Bishop asserts the contrary.

But let us hear, what internal Communion is, which he says, consists
principally in these things. To believe the same entire substance of saving
necessary Truth revealed by the Apostles, and to be ready implicitly in the
Preparation of the mind, to embrace all other supernatural Verities, when they
shall be sufficiently proposed to them: to judge charitably of one another. And
do not I also expressly say, Defense, p. 171.
that the same Faith, and mutual Love and Charity, are the Bonds and Ligaments
of Christian Union? p. 172.
That the Unity of Faith must be acknowledged, as absolutely necessary to the
Unity of Christians, for Heretics are no Members of the Christian Church?

But we must exclude none from the Catholic Communion and hope of Salvation,
either Eastern, or Western, or Southern, or Northern Christians, which profess
the ancient Faith of the Apostles and primitive Fathers, established in the
first general Councils, and comprehended in the Apostolic, Nicene and
Athanasian Creeds: Here Mr. Lob makes a Query, Whether, seeing the Faith
contained in these Creeds, is professed by the Dissenters, this Gentleman does
not fall short in this respect of Catholic internal Communion, by excluding
the Dissenters from the Catholic Communion, and hope of Salvation. But our
Questionist should have considered, that to exclude from Catholic Communion,
is an ambiguous Phrase, and may signify two very different things. 1. Not to
receive those into our Communion, who are willing and desirous to communicate
with us; and thus no man, that I know of, but themselves, exclude Dissenters
from Catholic Communion, and thereby, from the ordinary means of Salvation,
which is to be had only in the Unity of the Church. Or 2. It may signify not
owning those for the Members of the Catholic Church, who divide themselves
from the external and visible Communion of it, while they profess the same
Catholic Faith. If the Bishop meant this, by excluding from Catholic
Communion, all that I shall say to it, is this, that he must condemn St.
Cyprian, Cornelius, and all the Italian and African Bishops in their days, and
St. Austin, Optatus, and the Catholic Church in their time, for excluding the
Novatians and Donatists from Catholic Communion, and the hope of Salvation,
not for any Error or Heresy in Faith, but for a Schismatical Separation from
the Catholic Church; and I am contented to be a Schismatic in so good
Company, as the Catholic Church in St. Cyprian's and St. Austin's days. But I
have proved at large in the Defense, P. 171, etc.
that the same Faith is not sufficient to make any men Catholic Christians,
who separate from the external Communion of the Catholic Church; but this our
Author did not think fit to meddle with.

Mr. Lob proceeds, Moreover as to external Communion, says Bramhal, there are
degrees of Exclusion, and did I ever deny this? Do I make all the Censures of
the Church equal? But it may be waved or withdrawn by particular Churches or
Persons, from their neighbor Churches and Christians in their Innovations and
Errors, most certain! If they be such Innovations and Errors, as make their
Communion sinful; but every Innovation, nor every Error, which does not corrupt
their Religious Worship, is no just cause for a Separation, or for waving or
withdrawing Communion. But of this more hereafter.

He adds from Bishop Bramhal, Nor is there so strict and perpetual adherence
required to a particular Church, as there is to the universal Church: But how I
am concerned in this, I cannot see; for by adherence to the universal Church,
the Bishop seems to mean, adhering to the Judgment or Decrees of the universal
Church assembled in a general Council, which he makes the supreme Authority of
the Church on Earth, and therefore prefers their Decrees before the Decrees or
Canons of any particular Church; and I agree with him so far, that the Judgment
of a general Council, if such a Council could be had, is to be preferred before
the Decrees of any particular Church, and ought not, without some necessary and
apparent Reasons, be slighted or disobeyed by particular Christians or
Churches; though I do not make a general Council, the constitutive regent Head
of the Catholic Church; but if by adherence Mr. Lob will understand Communion,
I do assert, that Communion with a particular Church, which is it self in
Catholic Communion, is as necessary as Communion with the Catholic Church,
and he that separates from any such Church, separates and divides himself from
the Catholic Church; and this I shall believe, till I see better Reason for
the contrary.

Let us now consider how he urges me with the Authority of Mr. Hooker and Dr.
Field. I assert that the Unity of the Catholic Church consists in one
Communion, and consequently that those Christians and Churches which do not
live in Catholic Communion, are no Members of the Catholic Church, but are
out of the Church, extra Ecclesiam foris, according to the Language of the
primitive Fathers. Whereas I acknowledge, he has proved by very plain
Testimonies from Mr. Hooker and Dr. Field, that they own all those for
Christians and Members of the visible Church, who profess the Faith of
Christians, and are baptized, though they be Schismatics, Heretics,
Idolaters, excommunicable or excommunicated Persons; and therefore either
Christ must have more Churches than one, which I deny, or the Unity of the
Catholic Church cannot consist in one Communion, as I assert; for
Schismatics, Heretics, Idolaters, are not in the same Communion, and yet are
all Members of the visible Church. I own his Citations out of Mr. Hooker and
Dr. Field, and therefore need not repeat them, and have represented the
Objection with greater Advantage and Perspicuity, than he has himself; for I
neither design to cheat my self, nor to impose upon my Readers, nor to
perpetuate Controversies, as my Adversaries do, by false Representations of
Things, or some shuffling and sophistical Arts to put by a Blow.

But all this appearing Difference is not real but verbal: Mr. Hooker and Dr.
Field believe Schismatics and Heretics to be as much out of the Church, as I
do; and I believe them to be as much in the Church, as they do.

When Mr. Hooker asserts, That all that profess the Faith of Christ, whatever
they be, whether Schismatics, Heretics, Idolaters, are Members of the visible
Church of Christ, he understands the visible Church in a large Notion, to
comprehend the whole Body of professed Christians. And therefore the Reason he
assigns for it is, because all Mankind are Christians or Infidels: Those who
believe in Christ, whatever their other Errors in Doctrine, or Miscarriages in
Life and Practice may be, are Christians in some sense notwithstanding, and
therefore visible Members of the Christian Church, as that comprehends all
Christians; but those who do not believe in Christ, are Infidels. Now I
acknowledge, as much as Mr. Hooker can do, that there is a difference between a
professed Christian, though a Schismatic, Heretic, Idolater, or excommunicated,
and an Infidel. Such Persons, who have been once incorporated into the Church
by Baptism, whatever they prove after, may be restored to the Church again,
without being rebaptized; but an Infidel cannot be admitted without Baptism,
which is a plain proof, that the first do in some sense belong to the Body of
Christ, and that the other do not. Baptized Christians, though Schismatics,
Heretics, Idolaters, shall at the last day be judged not as Infidels, but as
wicked and apostate Christians; when men are made the Members of Christ's Body
by Baptism, and an external profession of Christianity, they can never alter
this Character, but shall be finally judged, either condemned or rewarded as
Christians, and upon this account may still be said to belong to the Church of
Christ.

Dr. Field, whose Authority Mr. Lob alleges against me, has plainly reconciled
this appearing difference, as every ordinary Reader would have seen, had our
Author been so honest, as to have transcribed the whole Paragraph; and
therefore since he has only cited a part of it, Dr. Field, of the Church, 1. B.
Chapter 13
I will transcribe the whole: His words are these: This is the first sort of
them, that depart and go out from the Church of God, and Company of his People,
( viz, Schismatics) whose departure yet is not such, but that notwithstanding
their Schism, they are and remain parts of the Church of God; for whereas in
the Church of God, is found an entire profession of the saving Truth of God,
Order of holy Ministry, Sacraments by virtue thereof administered, and a blessed
Unity and Fellowship of the People of God, knit together in the bond of Peace,
under the command of lawful Pastors and Guides, set over them to direct them in
the ways of eternal Happiness: Schismatics notwithstanding their Separation,
remain still conjoined with the rest of God's People, in respect of the
Profession of the whole saving Truth of God, all outward acts of Religion and
Divine Worship, power of Order and holy Sacraments, which they by virtue
thereof administer, and so still are and remain parts of the Church of God: But
as their Communion and Conjunction with the rest of God's People, is in some
things only and not absolutely in all, wherein they have and ought to have
Fellowship, so are they not fully and absolutely of the Church, nor of that
more special number of them, that communicate entirely and absolutely in all
things necessary, in which sense they are rightly denied to be of the Church;
which I take to be their meaning, that say they are not of the Church.

So that Dr. Field expressly acknowledges, that Schismatics may be rightly
denied to be of the Church, though they continuing Christians by external
profession of Faith in Christ, may in a loose and large sense of the Word, be
said to belong to the Christian Church, as they retain something which belongs
to the Church still among them.

But to make this more plain and easy, I shall briefly distinguish between the
several Notions and Acceptations of a Church. For 1. the Church sometimes
signifies the number of the Elect, that is, all sincere Christians, who are
vitally united to Christ by a true and lively Faith, a divine Love and Charity,
and all other Christian Graces and Virtues, who are living and fruitful
Branches in this spiritual Vine. And this Church is commonly called the
mystical Body of Christ, by reason of that mysterious union which is between
Christ and good men, and the invisible Church, because we, who cannot know the
Hearts of men, cannot certainly know who belongs to this Church.

2. There is the visible Catholic Church, which consists of all those
Christians and Churches, who profess the true Faith of Christ, observe his Laws
and Institutions, and live in Communion and Fellowship with each other. This
Church is called visible, from its visible profession of the Christian Faith,
and external and visible Communion; and Catholic, because all such Churches
all the World over, are but one Communion. This is that Church which is the
visible Body and Spouse of Christ, to the Communion of which, all the ordinary
means of Salvation are annexed and confined. Now it is commonly and truly
observed, that there are some professed Christians, who are only in this
Church, others who are of it, and others who are out of it. Those who are in
the Church, but not true Members of it, are those professed Christians, who
live in the Communion of the Church, but yet are either secret Hypocrites, or
openly wicked, but not excommunicated; these are in the Church by external
Profession, as dead and withered Branches are in the Vine, till they be cut
off. All sincere good Christians are both in the Church and of it; they are in
the Church by an external and visible Profession, and an external Communion,
which is absolutely required of all Christians, when it may be had; and they
are of the Church, that is, true and lively Members of it, by a sincere Faith
and Obedience to Christ. None properly belong to the visible Church, but those
whom we call the invisible Church, that is, all sincere Christians; for the
visible and invisible are not two, but one Church. And the Reason of the
distinction between them is, because the Government of the Church being
committed to men, who cannot discern Hearts and Thoughts, and the necessity of
external Affairs, or the negligence of Church Governors, loosening the Reins
of Discipline, many bad men continue in the visible Communion of the Church,
either because they are not known, or because when known, they are not through
the Neglect of Church Officers, or cannot through the Iniquity of the Times, be
cast out. And therefore the visible Church in Scripture is called the Body, the
Spouse of Christ, the Wife of the Lamb, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a
peculiar People, pure, undefiled, holy; and by such like Characters of peculiar
Sanctity, with respect to what the Church is in its original Institution, and
what it actually is in its true and sincere Members, not regarding what some
visible Professors are, who are in the Church indeed, but are not of it, and
ought not to be in it. The not observing of which, has occasioned many Divines
to ascribe all such Titles and Characters, not to the visible, but to the
mystical and invisible Church, which in many Cases is the Reason of some
considerable Mistakes.

But then all Heretics, and Schismatics, and excommunicated Persons, are out
of this Church, till they either return, or be restored to the Communion of it.
For to be in the Church, is nothing else but to live in the Communion of it,
and to have a Right to actual Communion in some or all Christian Offices: And
therefore those, who either by their own Choice, or by the Censures of the
Church, are not in Communion, must be out of it. And nothing is more common in
all Church-Writers, both ancient and modern, than to meet with such Expressions
as these; of separating from the Church, going out of it, being out, and being
cast out of the Church; which is a very strange way of speaking, if Mr. Lob's
Notion be true, That all professed Christians, whatever they are, are Members
of the Catholic Church; for then it is impossible for a professed Christian,
either to go out, or to be cast out of the Catholic Church, as it is for a man
to go out of the World.

This is that one Catholic Church, and Catholic Communion, which I asserted
and proved in the Defense, from whence Heretics and Schismatics depart and go
out, and the Excommunicate are cast out.

But now the Difficulty is, Whither these Heretics and Schismatics go, when
they go out of the Church. They cannot go into the World of Infidels and
Unbelievers, for Heresy and Schism does not make men Infidels; and if they be
neither in the Church nor in the World, what third State shall we find for them?

The plain Resolution of which in short is this, That they are the Conventicles
of Heretics and Schismatics, which is a kind of middle State between the true
Catholic Church, and the World of Infidels.

They have not wholly renounced Christianity, and therefore in some sense
belong to the Christian Church, though they are not in it. There seems to be
the same difference between Heretics and Schismatics, and Catholic
Christians, as there is between Rebels and dutiful Subjects: They are both
natural Subjects to their Prince, as being born in his Territories, and under
the same Oaths of Allegiance; Rebels are not Aliens and Foreigners, but
Subjects still. Thus Heretics and Schismatics, though they have corrupted the
Christian Faith, and divided the Church, yet they have the Character of
Christian Baptism, and either retain the Christian Faith entire, or so much of
it as will denominate them Christians: They may have the Power of Orders,
Officers rightly constituted, Christian Sacraments, and all the Essentials of a
true Church, excepting Christian Peace and Unity, and Catholic Communion. This
was the Case of the Donatist Churches, which were in all things like the
Catholic Churches, excepting Catholic Communion.

Upon this score many learned men own corrupt Churches, which retain the
Essentials of the Christian Faith, though mixed and blended with many Errors,
and schismatical Churches, which retain the Purity of Faith and Worship, to be
true, though not every way sound and orthodox, nor Catholic Churches: Which I
hope will satisfy Mr. Lob, how the Church of Rome may be acknowledged to be a
true Church, and yet both corrupt and schismatical.

There is one Distinction, which is not so commonly observed, which will make
all this Dispute plain and easy: And that is, between the visible Church, and
the one true Catholic visible Church. The visible Church comprehends all
Societies of professed Christians whatsoever, Heretics, Schismatics,
Idolaters, or whatever they be; the one visible Catholic Church contains only
those Churches, which are sound in the Faith, and live in Catholic Communion;
these visible Churches are Christian Churches by outward Profession, but not
Parts or Members of the one Catholic Church, which is the Body and the Spouse
of Christ, as Optatus observes, that besides one Church, which is the Catholic
Church, the other Churches of Heretics, are thought to be Churches, but are
not; that is, they have the visible Appearance of Churches, and so are visible
Churches, as bad men are visible Christians by a visible profession; Praeter
unam quae est vera Catholica, caeterae apud Hereticos putantur esse, non sunt
Opt. l. 1.
but they are not such Churches, as Christ will own, Quae sit una Ecclesia,
quam Columbam and Sponsam suam Christus appellat. Id. l. 2.
as he adds in another place, that there is but one Church, which Christ calls
his Dove and Spouse. So that in this Sense men may be visible Christians, and
Members of the visible Church, and yet not Members of the one Catholic Church.

The not observing this, occasioned St. Cyprian's, and the African Fathers
mistake about the Rebaptization of those, who were Baptized by Heretics or
Schismatics, and upon this very Mistake, our Dissenters at this day dispute
the validity of Orders received in the Church of Rome, and Mr. B. so often
twits us with deriving our Succession from Rome, which if it were true, is no
Objection against us, unless he will wholly unchurch the Church of Rome, and
assert that, which Mr. Lob charges me with; that Heresy or Schism does destroy
all relation to the Church; for if they belong to the Church still, they may
retain the Power of Orders, and the Administration of Sacraments among them.

And therefore to confirm this Notion, it will not be amiss to give a plain and
short Account of the State of that ancient Controversy, about the
Rebaptization of Heretics, as it was managed by St. Cyprian and St. Austin, as
far as concerns our present Dispute.

Now, 1. Both St. Cyprian and St. Austin were agreed, that there is but one
Catholic Church, which is the Body, and the Spouse of Christ; this is so
acknowledged by all men, who are acquainted with their Writings, especially
their Tracts, De unitate Ecclesiae, That I shall not need to transcribe any
particular Sayings to that purpose.

2. They were agreed also, that there is no Salvation ordinarily to be had out
of the Communion of this one Catholic Church. Both of them do over and over
affirm this, Salus, inquit, extra Ecclesiam non est, quis negat? August. de
Baptismo contra Donat. l. 4. cap. 17,
and St. Austin asserts, that no Body in his days denied it.

But, 3. St. Cyprian would not allow that Heretics or Schismatics did in any
Sense belong to the Church; but denies them to be Christians, and consequently
that they had any Christian Sacraments among them. Quisquis ille est, aut
qualiscunque est, Christianus non est, quia in Christi Ecclesia non est, Cypr.
E^. 52. ad Anton.
He would not allow Novatianus to be a Christian, or to be in the Church of
Christ, and this was the Reason, why he so vehemently urged the necessity of
Baptizing those, who had been Baptized by Heretics or Schismatics, when they
returned to the Unity of the Catholic Church; because Schismatics had no
Church, and therefore no Baptism, it being impossible to separate the Church
and Baptism, according to the Judgment of the African Fathers in the Council of
Carthage.

St. Austin on the other hand considered, Mirum autem est, quomodo dicatur
separari a se and dividi omnino non posse Baptismum and Ecclesiam; si enim
Baptisma in Baptizato inseparabiliter manet, quomodo Baptizatus separari ab
Ecclesia potest, and Baptismus non potest. August. de Baptismo cont. Donat. l.
5. ca. 15. See St. Hierom. contra Luciferianos in Initio.
that those, who were Baptized in the Catholic Church, did not forfeit their
Baptism by turning Heretics or Schismatics, and forsaking the Communion of
the Church; for no man ever disputed, whether such Persons upon their
Repentance, might not be restored to the Communion of the Church without being
rebaptized, which proves that the Church did not think them Infidels, for
Infidels cannot be admitted into the Church without Baptism, and if such men
retain their Baptism, when they are out of the Church, then the Church and
Baptism may be separated, Ita posse extra Catholicam Communionem dari
Baptismum, quemadmodum and extra eam potest haberi -- Sic and illi, qui per
Sacrilegium Schismatis an Ecclesiae Communione discedunt, habent utique
Baptismum, quem, priusquam discederent, acceperunt: quod si foris baberi
potest, etiam dari cur non potest. Ibid. l. 1. cap. 1.
which overthrows the main Principle on which the African Bishops founded their
Doctrine and Practice of re-baptizing Heretics.

From hence he concludes, that if men may retain their Baptism out of the
Church, they may give Baptism out of the Church too; for the same Argument,
whereby they opposed the Administration of Baptism by Heretics, if it have any
force, must prove also that they forfeit their own; and from those Answers he
returns to many Difficulties, wherewith he was pressed; we may learn his Judgment
in our present Dispute, in what sense Heretics and Schismatics belong to the
Church: which will give some light also to St. Austin's whole Dispute with the
Donatists, which I hope will not be ungrateful to an inquisitive Reader.

As, 1. One great Difficulty is, How those, who are not in the Church can
administer those Sacraments, which belong particularly to the Church? How there
can be the same common Sacraments to those who are in the Church, and to those,
who are out of it? To which he answers, that though Schismatics do forsake the
Communion of the Church, yet they do not forsake the Church in every thing, In
quo enim nobiscum sentiunt, in eo etiam nobiscum sunt; in eo autem a nobis
recesserunt, in quo a nobis dissentiunt -- si ergo qui recessit abunitate aliud
aliquid agere voluerit, quam quod in unitate percepit, in eo recedit, and
disjungitur quod autem ita vult agere, ut in unitate agitur, ubi hoc accepit
and didicit, in eo manet atque conjungitur. August. de bapt. l. 1. cap. 1.
and as much as they retain of the Church, so much they belong to it; and
whatever they find of the Church among Schismatics, they are bound to approve
and allow, though done in a Schism; and therefore they dare not reject the
Baptism of Schismatics, when Persons so Baptized return to the Communion of
the Church: so that though St. Austin will not allow Schismatics to be in the
Catholic Church, whose Communion they have forsaken, yet they retaining
something, which belongs to the Church, Vt ergo utraque Sententia vera sit,
sicut vera est, and illa ubi ait, qui non est mecum adversum me est, and qui
mecum non colligit, spargit; and illa ubi ait, nolite prohibere, qui enim
contra vos non est, pro vobis est, quid restat inteligendum, nisi quia ille in
tanti nominis veneratione confirmandus fuit, ubi non erat contra Ecclesiam, sed
pro Ecclesia, and in illa tamen separatione bulpandus, ubi si colligeret
spargeret; and si forte veniret ad Ecclesiam, non illud quod babebat, ibi
acciperet, sed in quo aberraverat, emendaret. Ib. cap. 7.
the Christian Faith, and Christian Sacraments, they still have some relation
to the Church, and are not to be accounted Heathens, and Infidels, and to this
he applies that saying of our Savior, He that is not against us, is with us;
that is, he is so far with us, as he is not against us; and therefore is not to
be rejected in every thing he does, but only in those things, wherein he
departs from us: And therefore though Schismatics are not in the Church, as
having forsaken the Communion of it, yet so far as their Faith and Worship is
truly Christian, they must be acknowledged to belong to the visible Church, as
the visible professors of Christianity.

Thus St. Austin thinks the vessels of Honor, and the vessels of Dishonor,
(by which the Apostle means such Heretics or Separatists as Hymeneus and
Philetus 2 Timothy 2.) may be said to be in the same House, Dicit and Apostolus
Paulus de quibusdam qui circa veritatem aberraverant, and fidem quorundam
subvertebant quos cum evitandos esse diceret, in una tamen domo magna eos
fuisse significat sed tanquam vasa in contumeliam; credo quod nondum foris
exierant, aut si jam exierant, quomodo eos dicit in eadem magna domo cum vasis
honorabilibus, nisi forte propter ipsa Sacramenta. Ib. l. 3. cap. 19.
upon account of the same Sacraments.

2. Sometimes he seems to make Schismatics to belong to the Church, as other
wicked men do, who have not forsaken the visible Communion of it; for otherwise
I cannot understand his Answer to that great Objection against the Baptism of
Schismatics, that Schism is so great a Sacrilege and Impiety, and
Schismatics such Rebels against Christ, that we cannot think he will approve
their Baptism, that they are Carnal, and therefore cannot give the Spirit,
which is conferred in Baptism; Nunquid ergo ad eandem columbam pertinent omnes
avari, de quibus in eadem Catholica graviter idem Cyprianus ingenuit? nam ut
opinor, raptores non columbae, sed accipitrices dici possunt, quomodo ergo
Baptizabant, qui fundes insidiosis fraudibus capiebant, etc. Ib. l. 3. cap. 17.
to which he commonly answers, That the Case is much the same with reference to
Baptism administered by bad men in the Church; those who are Carnal, Covetous,
Unjust, etc. And therefore he makes Heretics and Schismatics to be only
Pseudo-Christiani, or false and counterfeit Christians, as all bad men are, and
bad men no more to belong to the Church, than Schismatics do: Those who are
Enemies to brotherly love, Hujus autem fraternae charitatis inimici, sive
aperte foris sint, sive intus esse videantur, Pseudo-Christiani sunt and
Antichristi -- cum intus videntur ab illa invisibili charitatis compage
Separati sunt. Ib. cap. 19.
whether they be without, as Schismatics are, or seem to be within, as those
who still live in visible Catholic Communion, they are all counterfeit
Christians, and Antichrists. And therefore he must allow Schismatics in some
sense to belong to the Church, as other bad men do; they have indeed made a
more visible and open Separation from the Church, Si nihil potest ratum and
firmum esse apud Deum, quod illi faciunt quos Dominus hosts and adversarios
suos esse dicit, cur firmus est Baptismus, quem tradunt homicidae? An hosts
and adversarios domini non dicimus homicidas? qui autem odit fratrem snum
homicida est. l. 5. cap. 21.
but yet have not renounced Christianity: And therefore he observes, that if
those, who are without, cannot have any thing that belongs to Christ, Hoc tamen
puto me non temere dicere, si foris nemo potest habere aliquid quod Christi
est, nec intus quisquam potest habere, aliquid quod Diaboli est, si enim hortus
ille clausus potuit habere spinas Diaboli, cur non and extra hortum potuit
manare fons Chrisli. Ib. l. 4. cap. 7.
neither can those, who are within, have any thing that belongs to the Devil;
for if this enclosed Garden may have the Thorns and Thistles of the Devil grow
in it, why may not the fountain of Christ flow without the Garden? in which he
alludes to the Rivers of Paradise, which did not only water the Garden, but
divided themselves into all the World, as he discourses elsewhere. Sicut ergo
intus quod Diaboli est (...)
So that the Case of bad men in the Church, and Schismatics out of it,
Arguendum est, sic foris quoa Christi est agnoscendum est. c. 9.
according to St. Austin, is much the same, only with this difference, Dixerit
aliquis, interiora Zizania facilius in frumentum converti: concedo ita esse. c.
10.
That he allows bad men in the Church to be in a more hopeful Condition to
become good, than Schismatics are: But if he will allow bad men to belong to
the Church, he must in some sense allow Schismatics to do so too, or else he
does not fairly conclude from the Validity of Sacraments administered by bad men
in the Church, to the Validity of Sacraments administered by Schismatics out of
the Church.

3. In Answer to that captious Question of the Donatists, whether Baptism
administered by them did regenerate, which they would make a Mark of the true
Church to beget Children to God by Baptism; he does acknowledge not only their
Baptism, but Baptismal Regeneration; but then says, Quasi vero ex hoc generet
unde separata est, and non ex hoc unde conjuncta est. Separata est enim a
vinculo charitatis and pacis, sed adjuncta est in uno Baptismate. Itaque una
est Ecclesia, quae sola Catholica nominatur, and quicquid suum habet in
communionibus diversorum a sua unitate Separatis, per hoc quod suum in eis
habet, ipsa utique generat, non illi neque enim Separatio ecrum generat, quod
secum de ista tenuerunt, quod si and hoc dimittant omnino non generant. l. 1.
cap. 10.
that Baptism has this Effect, as it belongs to the Church, not upon account of
its Administration by them: wherein they are separated from the Church, they
can do nothing, but as far as they continue united, as they did in the same
Baptism, so the Sacraments of the Church will have their Effect, though their
Efficacy is immediately lost in a Schism, of which more presently, which is a
plain acknowledgment, that Schismatics are not wholly separated from the
Church, as retaining something, which belongs to the Church. And this he
confirms by a mystical Interpretation of the Stories of Sarah and Hagar, and
Isaac and Ishmael; and says, that the Church bears Children not only by her
self, but by her Maids, conceived by the Divine Seed of the Sacraments, l. 1.
c. 10.
Ergo ipsa generat and per uterum suum and per uterum ancillarumex ejusdem
Sacramentis, tanquam ex viri sui semine; which how fanciful soever it may seem
to be, shows what St. Austin's Opinion was, that Schismatics themselves did in
some sense belong to the Church.

4. But then lest any man should think, that it is no great hurt to separate
from the Unity of the Church, if Schismatics may retain the Faith, and
Sacraments of the Church, St. Austin adds, That though Schismatics may have
the Sacraments of the Church, yet they are not available to Salvation in a
Schism. They have Baptism and give Baptism, Non recte foris habetur, and tamen
habetur, sic non recte foris datur, and tamen datur; sicut autem per unitatis
reconciliationem incipit utiliter haberi, quod extra Ecclesiam inutiliter
habebatur, sic per eandem reconciliationem incipit utile esse, quod extra illam
inutiliter datum est. Aug. de oapt. l. 1. cap. 1.
but without any profit or advantage; and therefore he exhorts the Donatists,
and in them all other Schismatics not to be puffed up with a Conceit of what
they have, but to consider what they want, and how many great and excellent
things profit nothing, when one thing is wanting, and that this one thing is
Charity, which principally consists in preserving Catholic Communion, without
which, whatever they have besides, cannot procure their Admission into Heaven.

And therefore when the Donatists pressed him with that Difficulty, since he
acknowledged Baptism as administered by them to be true Christian Baptism, Non
extolluntur ex his quae habent, quid tantum per ea quae sana sunt superbos
oculos ducunt. Et vulnus tuum dignentur humiliter intueri, nec solum quid
assit, sed etiam quid desit, attendunt videant quam multa, and quam magna nihil
possint, si unum quidem desuerit, and videant qaid siti sum unum. -- Charitatem
utique non habendo, etiam cum illis omnibus, quae nihil eis prosunt, ad
aeternam salutem pervenire non possunt. Ibid. cap. 9.
which ought not to be repeated, whether this Baptism did wash away sin? For if
it did, then they were the true Church, wherein alone Remission of sin is to be
had; if it did not, then it is not true Christian Baptism; and so those who
were Baptized by the Donatists, ought not to be received into the Catholic
Church without Baptism; St. Austin answers this two ways, either, 1. That
Baptism though administered by Donatists, being not their Baptism, but the
Baptism of Christ, Ib. cap. 11. 12.
and the Christian Church, had its effect in ipso temporis puncto, in the
instant of its Administration to wash away sins, but that the Guilt of these
sins did immediately return again, the Baptized Person continuing in his
Schism: or, 2. That the Schism of the Person Baptized did hinder the efficacy
of Baptism, as any other sin does, for the Grace of Baptism is given only to
Persons, who are qualified to receive it, and if any such Persons offer
themselves to Baptism, who live in any sin unrepented of, their sins are not
washed away in Baptism, though they receive it in the Communion of the Church:
But yet, when they repent of their sins, they are not to be rebaptized, but
then receive that Grace and Pardon by virtue of their former Baptism, which
their Hypocrisy and Impenitence hindered them of when they were baptized: Thus
it is with those, who are baptized in a Schism; their sins are not washed away
by Baptism, because their Schism suspends the Virtue and Efficacy of the
Sacrament, but when they return to the Communion of the Church, then their
Baptism proves a true Laver of Regeneration.

From hence we easily learn, what St. Austin's Judgment was in this
Controversy: For, 1st. Though he would not own, That Schismatics in a proper
sense had any Church, there being but one Catholic Church, to which the Name
of Church does properly belong, as Optatus also asserts, That the Churches of
Schismatics appear to be Churches, but are not, nor, 2ly. would he allow them
to be Members of the Catholic Church, whose Communion they have forsaken,
Illud quale esl, and ideo putetur baereticus non habere Raptismum, quia non
habet Ecclesiam? Aug. de bapt. l. 5. cap. 20.
and therefore says, they are out of the Church, and denies that Catholics and
Schismatics have the same Church, Ita ergo potest Haereticus and Catholicus
Baptisma unum babere, and unam Ecclesiam non babere. Ib. cap. 21.
though they have the same Sacraments. Non recle foris habitur, and tamen
habitur, sic non recle foris datur and tamen datur. Ib. l. 1. cap. 1.
Nay, 3ly. He denies, That Heretics have any Sacraments of their own, Magis
ergo quia pro Ecclesiae honor atque unitate pugnamus, non tribuamus
Haereticus, quicquid a^^a eos ejus agnoscimus. l. 4. cap. 2.
but have usurped the Sacraments of the Church, which are not rightly had, nor
rightly given out of the Communion of the Church; though they are not to be
repeated when they are once given, but to be completed by Reconciliation to
the Church. But, 4ly. Schismatics retaining the Christian Faith and Christian
Sacraments among them, though they are out of the Church, are not Heathens and
Infidels, but in some sense Christians; Itaque (...) (...) (...), sed gravius
^^^riant vulnere Schismatis. l. 1. cap. 8.
and therefore he acknowledges, that the Donatists do cure those whom they
Baptize of Infidelity and Idolatry, but wound them more grievously with Schism.
And therefore, 5ly. He owns them to be united to the Catholic Church, as far
as they retain any thing of the Catholic Church among them, such as the same
common Faith, and the same Sacraments; but yet, 6ly. That whatever they retain
of the Catholic Church, though they believe the same Articles of Faith,
observe the same Rules of Worship, have the same Sacraments rightly and duly
administered among them, excepting their Schism, yet nothing of all this will
avail them to Salvation, unless they return to the Communion of the Catholic
Church. So that though we should not agree what Name to call Schismatics by,
whether Christians at large, upon account of their Profession, without any
relation to the Church, whose Communion they have forsaken; or, whether we say
they are out of the Church, as having forsaken its Communion, or that in some
sense they belong to the Church, as retaining its Faith and Sacraments, or
whether we own them Members of the visible Church, as that may include the
whole Number of Christian Professors, as distinguished from the one Catholic
visible Church, which contains only Catholic Christians, who live in Christian
unity and Communion, the Difference is not great, while with St. Austin we own
but one Catholic Church, and Catholic Communion, wherein Salvation is to be
had. This is all I ever intended to prove, and I think no body need prove more
to deter any man from Schism, who loves his Soul.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Necessity of Catholic Communion.
HAving thus vindicated my Notion of Catholic Communion, from the Exceptions
of Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob, before I proceed any farther, it will be highly
expedient to discourse something briefly of the necessity of it; for I find Mr.
Lob mightily puzzled to conceive, that those who believe in Christ and repent of
their sins, and lead an holy Life in all Godliness and Honesty, as they suppose
many may do, who separate from the Church of England, and do not live in
Catholic Communion, according to my Notion of it, should for this Reason be
excluded from all the ordinary Means of Salvation. They look upon the Christian
Religion to be like a System of Philosophy, and if men be careful to believe
such Laws, without any regard to a Church State, or Churchunity and Communion,
their Condition is very safe, and they have a Right and Title to all the
Promises of the Gospel. Holiness of Life and a good Temper of Mind, is the only
thing Christ designed to promote by his Gospel; and if men be holy, however
they came by it, or whatever they are besides, it matters not. This is very
plausible, and a prevailing Notion in our days, which makes a great many
well-disposed men extremely indifferent, what Church they are of, so they be
but watchful over their Hearts and Lives in other Matters: For will any man
say, that a holy man shall not go to Heaven, when all the Promises of the
Gospel are made to such Persons? When Godliness has the Promise of the Life,
that now is, and of that which is to come? Where is the Man, who has so much
Courage, as to repeat the Case, which St. Austin puts; of a Man, Constiuamus
ergo aliquem castum, continentem, non avarum, non Idolis servientem,
hospitalitarem indigentibus ministrantem, non cujusquam inimicum, non
contentiosum, patiemem, quietum, (...) Em^lantem, nulli invidentem, sabrium,
fragalem, sed Haereticum. nulli utique dubium est, (...) solum quod haereticus
est, Regnun Dei non ^^ssedibit. August. de baptismo. l. 4. cap. 18.
Who is Chaste, Continent, void of Covetousness, no Idolater, Hospitable and
Bountisul to those in Want, Enemy to no Man, not Contentious, but Patient,
Quiet, without Emulation or Envy, Sober, Frugal, but a Heretic (which in St.
Austin's Language in that Place signifies a Schismatic) of such a Person he
says, That no man doubts, but for this very Cause, that he is a Schismatic, he
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. This it seems, was not St. Austin's
private Opinion, but the received Opinion of all Christians in his days; that
which no Body then doubted of: which makes it at least worthy of our most
serious and impartial Enquiry; and were men once thoroughly satisfied of the
danger of Schism, and the absolute necessity of Catholic Communion, a great
many wanton Scruples, which now divide and subdivide the Church, would vanish
of themselves; for they would be then afraid to venture their Souls in a
Schism. And therefore to make this as plain and evident as possible I can, I
shall proceed by these following Steps; only premising, That the whole design
of this Discourse is pure Charity to the Souls of men, not to triumph in their
Ruin and Misery; for God forbid, I should ever rejoice in the thoughts of any
Man's Damnation; for then I am sure, I should never go to Heaven my self.

1. I observe then in the first Place, That though holiness of Life is the
necessary Condition, yet it is not the meritorious Cause of our Salvation:
Without holiness we shall never see God. But that holiness carries any man to
Heaven, is in virtue of the meritorious Sacrifice and Intercession of Christ,
and therefore unless we have a Covenant Interest in this Sacrifice, nothing
else can secure us of our Reward.

2. That Catholic Charity, which is exercised in Catholic Communion, is a
principal Part of Evangelical Holiness, without which nothing else will be
accepted by God. Love and Charity is the great Gospel-Command, and the peculiar
Badge of the Christian Profession; and Christian Charity, as it is
distinguished from good Nature, and an obliging Temper and Conversation, which
is indeed a necessary moral Virtue, but not that which is peculiarly called
Christian Charity, does unite all Christians together in one Body; is such a
Kindness for one another, as answers to that Tenderness and Sympathy, which the
Members of the Natural Body have for each other: So that Christian-charity
necessarily preserves Christian-unity and Communion; and whoever rends and
divides the Church, is void of this Christian-charity.

This I have already proved at large in my Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet,
Defense, p. 183. etc.
both from Scripture and the Ancient Fathers; and it were easy to add numerous
Quotations more to this purpose. This is the principal thing St. Augustine
insists on: he frequently applies that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 13. where he shows
how unavailable all other Seize are without Charity, Aug. de baptismo. l.
1. cap. 9. l. 3. cap. 16. and alibi passim.
to signify such a Charity as preserves the Peace and Communion of the Church;
and does every where assert, that that man is void of Charity, who does not
love the Peace and Unity of the Church: if then Christian Charity be so
necessary a part of Christian Holiness, and consists in preserving the Peace
and Unity and Communion of the Christian Church, whatever other good Qualities
Schismatics may have, they want the chief branch of Holiness, without which no
man shall see God, and therefore though a holy man shall never miscarry, or
fall short of Heaven, yet a Schismatic with all his other good Qualities may.

3. Since the best men must be saved by Christ, and not by their own
Righteousness or Merits, we must expect to be saved by Christ only in such a
way, as he himself has appointed; It is all free Grace, and therefore we must
be contented to receive it in such a way, as he is pleased to give it. He is a
Debtor to no man, and therefore may well be allowed to make his own terms;
Heaven is a supernatural State of Happiness, which the best Man, setting aside
the consideration of his many Imperfections and Defects, cannot challenge as
the Reward of his best Services; and therefore God is under no other Obligation
to bestow Heaven on any man, but his own Promise made to us in Christ Jesus,
and therefore can be obliged no farther than his own Promise reaches: If any
hard and pityable Case happens, he has the sovereign Power in his own hand, and
can do, as he himself pleases, but we must expect no more from him, than he has
promised.

The not considering this, is apt to confound men's Notions concerning the
undertaking of our Savior, and our Redemption by him: It runs some men into
Socinianism, to deny the Satisfaction of Christ; and others, who cannot be so
subtle, as to distinguish themselves out of so plain and express an Article of
our Faith, and therefore do heartily and sincerely believe the Satisfaction of
our Savior, that he dyed as a true and proper Sacrifice to expiate our sins,
and purchase Eternal Life for us, yet have no clear Conceptions of the Reason
of this, which will not well comply with those other Notions they have of God,
and his natural Obligation, not to call it natural Necessity, to love and
reward good men.

I do as firmly believe God's Goodness to good men, and his Love to true
Holiness, wherever he sees it, as I do any Article of my Creed, but then I
consider, that Heaven is a supernatural Happiness, and not the natural Reward
of an earthly Creature, as man by Nature is: And therefore the best man,
considered as a Man, has no more reason to expect, That God as a Reward of his
Virtue, should translate him from Earth to Heaven, than that he should give him
wings to fly in the Air, and to visit the several Planets; all that can be
expected from God upon account of the Goodness or Justice of his Nature, is to
bestow such a Happiness on innocent or deserving Creatures, as their Natures
were made for, that is, an earthly Happiness on an earthly Creature, which was
all that was promised Adam in Paradise, an immortal, happy Life in this World.

So that if we consider the State of mankind, we shall find, that the whole
Work of our Redemption, is wholly owing to free Grace, that is, that which was
neither due to our Natures, nor what we could reasonably expect from God,
considered only as our Maker.

Man in Innocence was but an earthly Creature, 1 Cor. 15.
the first Adam was of the Earth and earthy; And an earthly Creature cannot
challenge as his natural Birthright, an heavenly and divine state of Life: For
Flesh and Blood, though innocent and pure, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. A
gross, earthly Body cannot ascend into Heaven, nor dwell in those pure Regions
of Light, and therefore such a Creature can no more challenge Heaven, as its
natural Portion and Inheritance, than it can, that God should change its
Nature, and refine an earthy into a spiritual Body.

If we consider man in his lapsed State, he has forfeited even an earthly
Immortality, and cannot now challenge an immortal Life in this World, much less
in the next; For what natural Reason can there be, when we suffer Death as the
Punishment of sin, for God, to raise our dead Bodies out of the Dust again into
an immortal Life. So that whatever may be the Reward of Virtue in this World,
an immortal Life after Death cannot be the natural Reward of it; for then it
could not be in the Evangelical Notion of it, the Gift of God, or the Purchase
of Christ.

And we may consider farther, that as man is now designed for a supernatural
state of Happiness in Heaven, so much advanced above the original state of
humane Nature, so there is required a divine Holiness and Virtue to fit and
qualify him for this supernatural Happiness. Upon this account our Savior so
earnestly presses the Necessity of the new Birth, that we must be born of Water
and of the Spirit, if we would enter into Heaven: For that which is born of the
Flesh, is Flesh, but that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit: Whereby our
Savior signifies to us, that we must attain to such a pitch of Goodness, as is
as much above the original Seize of an earthly and fleshly Nature, as
Heaven is above the Earth: For that saying of our Savior, That which is born
of the flesh, is flesh, is true in a state of Innocence; Innocent flesh is
flesh still, and therefore we must be born into a diviner State than innocent
flesh, if we would enter into Heaven; that is, we must attain to such a divine
and spiritual frame of Mind, as raises us above this World, and prepares us for
an Angelical state of Life: For there are different degrees of Virtue fitted to
the different states of a reasonable Nature: Unless we will say, that the
Virtue of a Man, and of an Angel is the same. That degree of Virtue which is
sufficient to teach a Man to use the good things of this World innocently and
happily, is not sufficient to raise a Man above the World, and to make him
contemn all bodily Pleasures and earthly Satisfactions.

The highest and noblest Seize of Christianity would be no Virtues in an
earthly state: Were we to live always happily in this World; were this the best
and most perfect state we could expect, it would be no Virtue, but a great
instance of Folly to despise the good things of this Life, and to live above
them: For in such a State, the delights and satisfactions of Flesh and Sense
would be an essential part of our Happiness, and whatever is so, cannot and
ought not to be despised: It always becomes a reasonable Creature to govern all
his appetites and desires by the Laws of Reason, and to mortify and subdue his
inordinate Affections, as that signifies to correct the Extravagancies of them;
but yet in an earthly state he may indulge himself to the full in all lawful
Enjoyments, and is not bound to lay restraints upon himself, nor to endeavor
to stifle and suppress his sensual Inclinations, nor to deny them their proper
and natural satisfactions: That is, he who is to live always in this World, and
has no bigger or diviner Happiness to expect, is not bound to die to this
World, while he lives in it. So that all those Evangelical duties of
Self-denial and Mortification, and Contempt of this World, and heavenly
Mindedness, can be no Virtues nor Duties in any earthly state, much less a life
of Faith, and hope of unseen things, when we have no unseen things promised to
us, as the Object of our Faith and Hope, but have our Portion at present, and
expect only a circular and endless Repetition of the same Enjoyments. The Laws
of Virtue must be proportioned to the State and Condition of Mankind, and must
alter and vary with it; that which becomes an earthly Creature, who is to live
always in this World, and in this Body, which as far as we know, was the
Original state of Mankind, does not become one, who must put off this Body,
and lives in this World, not as his home, and place of rest, but as a
probation-state, for a better and more spiritual Life. That Virtue, which
teaches us how to live happily in this World, and that which must prepare us
for the Happiness of the next, must differ as much as Earth and Heaven, as
Flesh and Spirit: And this I take to be the true difference between Moral
Virtue, and Evangelical Graces; the first is proportioned to the state of a
reasonable Creature, inhabiting an earthly Body, without any expectations of a
more Divine and Spiritual Life, the second includes a Respect to the other
World, and that Angelical Happiness, which Christ has promised to his sincere
Disciples.

The Religion then of our Savior, being as much above Nature, as that Glory
and Happiness is, which is revealed and promised in the Gospel, it is necessary
we should have some more divine Principle to raise us into this divine Life,
than mere Nature is; for Nature can never act above it self; and that the
Gospel tells us, is the holy Spirit of God, whereby we are Renewed and
Sanctified, and have the divine Nature formed in us; and this being above
Nature, no considering man will say, that the Gift of the Holy Spirit is owing
to our Natures, or that God is under any natural Obligation, as our Maker, to
bestow it on us.

The Result of which is this, that the Gift of the Holy Spirit, whereby we are
born again, and prepared and qualified for a divine and immortal state of Life,
being an act of pure Grace, and wholly owing to the Mediation of Christ, God
may dispense it upon what terms, and in what manner he pleases, and we must
expect it only in that way, which God has appointed for the bestowing of it.

I need not insist now on the Pardon of our sins, which all Mankind own to be
an Act of Grace, which we can upon no account challenge without a Promise, nor
upon any other Terms and Conditions, nor in any other way, than what is
promised.

So that the whole Work of our Redemption is an Act of pure Grace, which we
cannot challenge from the natural Goodness of God, nor from his natural
Relation to us, as we are his Creatures, and therefore must thankfully accept
of it, in what way God pleases to give it, and not quarrel with him, if he do
not give it to those, who will not have it in his way.

4. And therefore I observe in the next Place, That all the Blessings of the
Gospel are promised to us in a Church State. This is so fully, Discourse of our
Union, etc. to Christ. Chap. 4. sect. 1. 142 Defense, and Continuat. c. 5. p.
399.
and hitherto so unanswerably proved by Dr. Sherlock in his Discourse of our
Union and Communion with Jesus Christ, and in his Defense and Continuation of
that Discourse in answer to Mr. Ferguson, that would men be at the Pains to
turn to those Books, there need be nothing said to it here; however that this
Treatise may not be wholly defective in so material a Point, I shall speak
something briefly to it, and refer those, who have a mind to see this Matter
more fully debated to the aforesaid Discourses.

1 Then, That Christ did intend to erect a Church in the World, and to unite
all his Disciples into one Religious Society, is so universally acknowledged,
that it is a needless trouble to prove that which no body denies; no man denies
that Christ has a Church, and that he intended to have one, only the seekers
know not where to find it, now methinks, if Christ have instituted a Church,
wherein he requires all his Disciples to communicate as Members of the same
Body, it goes a great way toward proving, that the ordinary Means of Salvation
are to be had only in the Communion of this Church; for to what purpose is this
Church instituted, if not for a common Body and Society of those, who shall be
saved by Christ? No Society can be founded or maintained but by such
Privileges and Immunities, as make it desirable to enter into it, and continue
in it; without this all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Cities, and Families would
disband, for nothing can tie men together, who are naturally giddy, and fond of
Innovations, but some sensible Advantages, which they cannot otherwise enjoy.
And therefore the Church being a spiritual Society, and the great end of its
Institution, the Salvation of sinners, it is not reasonable to think, that
Christ would institute a Church, without obliging Christians to preserve the
Peace and Unity of it, at the Peril of their Souls, if they do not.

2. And therefore I farther observe, That the Gospel Covenant is the Charter,
whereon the Church is founded. The Blood of Christ is the Blood of the
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace being purchased and sealed by the Blood of
Christ; and therefore let us consider, whether this Covenant be made with
particular men, considered as single and scattered Individuals; or as
incorporated into a Church. Now in general we are told, that Christ is the
Savior of the Body, and that he has redeemed his Church with his own Blood,
which confines the Effects and Application of his Grace, and Merit, and
Satisfaction to his own Body, which is the Church. But besides this we may
consider, That the Jewish Church was Typical of the Christian Church, nay
indeed, that it is the same Church still, only enlarged and Chrystianized; for
the Christian Church is built upon the foundations, not only of the Apostles,
but Prophets; and Jews and Gentiles are united into one Church, by breaking
down the middle wall of partition, and engrafting the Gentiles upon the same
Root and Stock with them, as I discoursed at large in the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet.

Now we know the Mosaic Covenant was made with the Children of Israel, as a
Nation, whom God had chosen for himself of the Seed and Posterity of Abraham:
Natural Jews had no Title to this Covenant, till they were circumcised and
incorporated into the Body of Israel, considered as in Covenant with God, of
which Circumcision was the Sign and Seal; and no strangers were admitted to
these privileges of the Covenant, till they were engrafted into the Body of
Israel by Circumcision, and became one People with them: So that the Mosaic
Covenant, which was but the Christian Covenant in Types and Figures, was
confined to a particular Nation, or Body of men, and to all those, who were
incorporated into the same Body with them; now it is plain, that the Christian
Church is incorporated into the Body of Israel; and therefore the Apostles call
the Christians, the true Israel of God, and all the Names of Israel are given
to the Christian Church. A chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9.
an holy Nation, a peculiar People: So that the Christian Church is a Nation,
and People peculiar to God, and chosen by him out of the rest of the World, as
the Jews formerly were, that is, united to God and to each other in the same
Covenant, and therefore as the Mosaical Covenant was confined to the Body of
Israel, that no Strangers or Aliens had any right to it, so is the Gospel
Covenant confined to the Communion of the Christian Church: And therefore
Christ is said to give himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to
purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. (...) or (...), 2
Tit. 14.
as it is in St. Peter, which is one of the Names of Israel, as they were a
Nation, a peculiar Body and Society of men, separated from the rest of the
World.

3. To confirm this, we may consider, that it is not enough that Christ has
died for us, and purchased the Pardon of our sins, and the Gift of the holy
Spirit, unless this Pardon and Grace be applied to us in such ways, as he has
appointed. For it will not suffice, that we make Christ our own, by a fanciful
Application of his Merits to our selves, which would quickly overturn the
Church, and make the Institutions of our Savior very useless things, as we see
this conceit has in a great measure done already, but we must receive Christ
and all his Blessings, as he is pleased to bestow them.

Now that the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are by the
Institution of our Savior, the ordinary Conveyances and Ministries of Grace,
has been the universal Belief of the Christian Church in all Ages; in Baptism
we receive the Remission of our sins, and the Gift of the holy Spirit; and
therefore we are said, to be baptized for the Remission of sins, and to be born
of Water and of the Spirit, and we are said to be saved by the washing of
Regeneration, 3 Titus 5.
and the renewal of the holy Ghost.

In the Lord's Supper Christ gives himself to us as the Bread of Life, See Dr.
Sherlock's practical Discourse of religious Assemblies. part 2.
which is the daily Food and Nourishment of our Souls, of which the Manna in
the Wilderness was but a Type; The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, (that Blood which was shed for the remission
of Sins) and the Bread which we break is the Communion of the Body of Christ: 1
Cor. 10.16.
That is, in this holy Sacrament all the Merits of Christ's Death and
Sufferings are made over to worthy Communicants. Here we receive the fresh
Supplies of the holy Spirit, Chapter 12 13.
and therefore are said to drink into one Spirit; but I need not insist on the
proof of that, which no body denies, who has any Reverence for our Saviors
Institutions, and does not think them mere empty Shadows, and insignificant
Ceremonies.

If then our Savior has appointed these holy Sacraments as the Means and
Conveyances of Grace, and these Sacraments are ineffectual to those, who do not
live in the Unity and Communion of the Christian Church, then we cannot
ordinarily expect the Application of Christ's Merits to us, or the Virtue of
his Death and Passion, out of Catholic Communion.

And yet this was as generally acknowledged by the ancient Fathers, as the
other, as I have already shown: St. Cyprian would not acknowledge, that
Schismatics had any Sacraments, no more, than that they had any Church; St.
Austin acknowledged that they had Sacraments, but inutiliter; their Schism made
the Sacraments ineffectual to attain the end for which they were instituted;
and indeed the very Nature of the Sacraments will easily satisfy us, that it
must be so.

Baptism is the Sacrament of Pardon and Forgiveness, of our Regeneration and
new Birth by the holy Spirit; but it is the Sacrament also of our initiation
and incorporation into the Christian Church: And upon this very account our
sins are forgiven in Baptism; and the holy Spirit is bestowed on us, because it
makes us the Members of Christ's Body, that is, of his Church, to whom the
Forgiveness of sins, and the Gift of the holy Spirit is promised; and therefore
those who are baptized in a Schism, and are no sooner made the Members of
Christ's Church, but do immediately divide and separate themselves from its
Communion, if they do receive remission of their Sins, and the Gift of the
Spirit in the instant wherein they are baptized, as St. Austin supposes they
may, yet do immediately forfeit it again by their Schism: For the same
Sacrament must have its entire effect, or none at all; Incorporation into the
Christian Church, and forgiveness of sins, are inseparably united in Baptism,
as God's and man's part is in the same Covenant: Incorporation into the
Christian Church, which is signified, represented, and completed in Baptism,
is our part of the Covenant, our choice and resolution, and actual undertaking
of Christianity, which is done by a Profession of our Faith in Christ, and
subjection to him, and by uniting our selves to the Society and Fellowship of
his Church, by such a sacred Right, as he has appointed for that purpose:
Forgiveness of sin, and the Gift of the holy Spirit, is God's part of the
Covenant, who has promised to forgive the Sins, and renew and sanctify those
with his Spirit, who thus solemnly devote themselves to the Faith and Obedience
of a crucified Jesus, and therefore these two can never be separated, unless
God will perform his Part of the Covenant, whether we perform ours or not.

Thus the holy Supper of our Lord does as plainly represent the Unity of the
Christian Church, and the Communion of all Christians with each other, as it
does their Union to Christ, and participation of the Merits of his Death and
Sufferings: For the Apostle tells us, there is but one Bread, as there is but
one Body; For we being many, 1 Cor. 10.17.
are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread: And
upon this account it is called the Communion of the Body of Christ, and
therefore the Body of Christ cannot be received in a Schism; for where there is
a Schism, it is no longer one Bread and Body, nor the Communion of Christ's
Body, when it is divided into different and opposite Communions. That which is
the common Bread of all Christians, must be received in Unity and one
Communion; for it loses its Nature, Virtue, and Efficacy, in a Schism. Thus the
Paschal Lamb, which was a Type of Christ's Death and Passion, and of the
Christian Feast of the Lord's Supper, as it was to be eaten by the whole Body
of Israel, so every particular Lamb was to be eaten in one House, and nothing
to be carried out of it.

The like may be said of all the other Means of Grace, which cannot avail any
man, who does not live in the Peace and Communion of the Church: Our Prayers
are effectual only in the Merits of Christ's Sacrifice and Intercession, and if
such men have no interest in the Sacrifice of Christ, as they cannot have, if
they have no Title to the Supper of our Lord, which is the Christian Feast upon
the Sacrifice of the Cross, and applies the Merits and Virtue of it to us, then
their Prayers cannot be prevalent neither; and if our Savior would not allow
any man to offer any Sacrifice to God, who had a private quarrel with his
Brother, till he had reconciled himself to him, how unlikely is it, that God
will hear the Prayers of those men, who are at variance with the Church of God,
and divide the Communion of it.

As for hearing and reading, Paul may Plant, and Apollos may Water, but it is
God, that gives the Increase, and if God deny his Grace and Spirit to such
external Ministries, they can avail nothing, and yet we have already heard, how
little reason such men have to expect it. St. Paul tells us, that Christ gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the Work of the Ministry, 4
Ephesians. 11, 12.
but the end of all is, For the edifying of the body of Christ: So that all
Ministerial Gifts are for the edification of Christ's Body, which supposes,
that their efficacy and influence is confined to the Communion of the Church,
and does not reach the Conventicles of Schismatics. And he adds, But speaking
the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is Christ the
Head, from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplyeth, v. 15, 16.
according to the effectual working in the Measure of every Part, makes
increase of the Body, to the edifying of it self in Love. So that the Increase
and Edification of Christians is in the Unity of the Church, and consists in
the increase of brotherly Love and Christian Charity, Virtues which cannot be
learned in a Schism, nor preserved in it, a bitter zeal, and envenomed
Passions, and uncharitable Censures and Surmises, and evil speaking, and an
insolent contempt of all, who are not of their Party and Faction, being the
most usual fruits of a Schismatical Reformation.

All the Metaphors whereby the conveyance of Grace from Christ to his Church is
represented in Scripture, do plainly signify that this is done in Unity, such
as the influences which the Body receives from the Head, or the Branches from
the Vine, which do not reach those Members which are separated from the Body,
nor those Branches, which are broken off from the Vine.

The result of what I have said, is this, If Holiness be not the meritorious
Cause, but only the condition of our Salvation, and therefore cannot save us,
separated from the Merits of Christ; if Catholic Unity, that is, Christian
Charity, be one main essential part of Evangelical Holiness, without which
nothing else will be accepted by God; if the Work of our Redemption from first
to last, be an Act of free Grace, which we cannot challenge from God, as due to
our Natures, nor as a necessary Effect of his own Goodness, considered as our
Maker; and therefore is as entirely at God's choice, in what way, and upon what
conditions he will dispense it, as it was, whether he would do any such thing
at all; if we must expect to receive the Blessings of the Gospel only in such
ways, as God has appointed, and if Christ has confined all the Grace of the
Gospel to a Church State; this is sufficient to satisfy any unprejudiced man,
how necessary Catholick-unity and Communion is, without which we cannot upon
any good grounds hope for the pardon of our Sins, the influences of God's
Grace, or eternal Life.

4. But there are some men, who will never be satisfied by the most clear and
demonstrative Proofs, that a thing is so, unless they can see the Reason why it
should be so; a way which of late has mightily prevailed, and has in a great
measure thrust all revealed and instituted Religion out of the World. We cannot
always give the natural Reasons of things, not because there are none, but
because they lie too deep for us to discover them, and if we cannot fathom
Nature, which is more exposed to our view and observation, how unreasonable is
it to think to fathom the unsearchable Counsels of God, in such Matters as
wholly depend upon his Sovereign Will, and have no apparent Cause, but his own
good pleasure: Matters of Revelation can be discovered only by Revelation, and
in such Acts of sovereign Grace, it is abundantly sufficient, if God tell us
what he will do for us, and in what way he will do it, without assigning the
Reason, why he does so.

But yet to satisfy these men, as much as may be, let them but assign a
Reason, why Christ would have a Church, and why he would have but one Church,
and I will give them a manifest and necessary Reason, why Salvation should be
confined to the Communion of this Church, and that is, because it is impossible
to preserve the Unity, Discipline, or Government of the Church without it.

The Christian Church considered as a Church, is not armed with any secular
coercive Power, and if it have no spiritual Power neither, how shall it
maintain and preserve it self against all the oppositions of Men and Devils?
and yet it can have no spiritual Power, if men may as well be saved out of the
Church, as in it: For who then will regard the Unity of the Church, value its
Censures, or reverence its Authority and Government? Spiritual Power is
exercised upon the Souls and Consciences of men, and respects the Happiness of
the other World, as temporal Power Governs the outward man, and respects this
present Life; now all the Power Christ has given to his Church, is that, which
we call the Power of the Keys, to take in, or to shut out of the Church, which
is no Power at all, if the Communion of the Church be so indifferent a thing,
that men may be as safe out of the Church as in it. All the Censures of the
Christian Church, which are purely Spiritual, only respect Church Communion,
and therefore their Authority too depends upon the necessity of this Communion:
Some were cast out of the Church, others received into the Number of Penitents,
of which Albaspinaeus reckons four degrees in the Primitive Church, which were
the different Degrees of their Separation from Christian Communion; now how
easily may a man, who believes no necessity of Catholic Communion, despise all
this Authority, and all these Censures, and there can be no necessity of it, if
our Souls be not greatly endangered by the want of it.

And yet our Savior calls this Power of receiving in, and shutting out of the
Church, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: I will give unto thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, 16 Mat. 19
and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Now how can
the Keys of the Church to let in, or to shut out, be called the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a necessary Relation between the Communion
of the Church on Earth (which is also called the Kingdom of God) and the
Kingdom of Heaven, that those who are in the Communion of the Church, and have
a Right to be in it, have a Title also to the Kingdom of Heaven, and that those
who are out of the Church, either by their own Choice, or by a just Censure,
have no Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, and shall never enter into it. That the
Church on Earth, and the Church in Heaven is but one Communion, and that no men
are transplanted into the Church in Heaven, but from the Communion of the
Church on Earth; upon which account the Peace of the Church, which was given to
dying Persons under Censures, was called the Viaticum, or a kind of Pass into
the other World: And when our Savior so expressly asserts, whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven, if by binding and loosing we will
understand putting out, or receiving into the Church, it makes the Communion of
the Church absolutely necessary to Salvation.

And I farther observe, that what in St. Matthew is called the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and binding and loosing, is in St. John called retaining or
remitting sins, Whosoever sins ye remit, Joh. 20.23
they are remitted, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained: And
therefore if we expound this remitting and retaining sins, by binding and
loosing in the exercise of the Keys, as in all reason we must; then to remit
sins, is to restore men to the Peace and Communion of the Church, and to retain
them, is to cast men out of the Church, or to keep them under Church Censures;
which is a plain demonstration, that sins are forgiven only in the Communion of
the Church.

So that whatever other Reasons our Lord might have, in confining Salvation
ordinarily to the Communion of the Church, among which the Promoting of
Catholic Love and Charity among his Disciples and Followers is none of the
least, which as I observed before, cannot be maintained and preserved in a
Schism; yet here is one manifest Reason for it, that the Authority, and
Discipline, and Government of the Church, without which the Church cannot well
subsist, does wholly depend on it.

If Christ have instituted a Church, and invested it with such Authority and
Power, as is necessary to preserve it self, and to promote the great ends of
Church-Society, and the Church, as a spiritual Society can have no other Power,
and has no other given it by Christ, but what results from the necessity of
Catholic Communion, we need not wonder, that the pardon of Sin, and the
assistances of the divine Grace, and everlasting Life, should be confined to
the Communion of the Church, because the Church cannot Preserve it self, nor
Govern its own Members, can neither Instruct, Reprove, nor Censure with any
Authority and Effect, without this, which by the way shows us, how effectually
those men, who separate from the Church, upon a pretense of purer Worship and a
purer Discipline, overthrow and contradict their own pretenses, and tear up the
very foundations of all Church Authority; for if separation from the Church be
so slight and indifferent a Matter, there can be no Authority in the Church;
for any man who is uneasy, or humersom, or ungovernable in the Communion of
the Church, may leave it if he pleases, and join himself to some other
Communion, or set up a new Communion of his own, without any danger; and in
this Case nothing can keep People together, but some great Art and Cunning in
their Guides, or some secular Advantages, or arbitrary Covenants, and I think
the Independents have great reason on their side to found a particular Church,
on a particular Church Covenant, if there be no necessity of Catholic
Communion, as I have now described it; for if there be no essential and
inherent Authority in the Church, there can be no other than what depends upon
private Contracts.

Now may we not as well wonder, why humane Laws inflict such severe Punishments
upon Rebels, whatever other good qualities they may have, as that Christ should
so severely punish Schismatics, who may upon other Accounts pass in the World
for very good men; the Reason of both is the same, Government in Church and
State is of such mighty Consequence, to the temporal and spiritual Happiness of
Mankind, and Rebellion and Schism so destructive to all Government, that those
men deserve the severest Punishments, who disturb the Peace and Establishment
of Church or State; and Schism is so much worse than Rebellion, as the
happiness of the Souls of men, is of much greater Concernment, than their
temporal Ease and Felicity.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Unity of Church Power
ANd now I am come to the main seat of the Controversy, between me and Mr.
Lob, Mr. Humphrey, and Mr. Baxter, not to mention the Country-Conformist, who
is such an insignificant Appendage and Hanger-on, as a silly fly is to a
Wheel, though possibly he may have no more wit, than to fancy that he has
raised all this dust and stir.

They charge me with advancing a Cassandrian design, and promoting an Union
with the Church of Rome, rather than with Protestant Dissenters. And to
insinuate the belief of this into his Readers, Mr. Lob endeavors to prove,
that Archbishop Laud had this design in his head; but what is this to me? I am
no Archbishop yet, and greatly suspect, I never shall be; if he can prove that
the Archbishop died like a Papist, or a Phanatick, with a lie in his mouth; or
that he attempted any reconciliation with the Church of Rome, which is not
consistent with the Principles, or Practices of the Primitive Church, I think
he was very much to blame for it, and am very glad he did not perfect his
Design; but could a Reconciliation be obtained upon the principles of Primitive
and Catholic Christianity, accursed be the man, who would hinder this Union,
which I would be glad to effect, not only with shedding my Blood once, but if
it were possible a thousand times, with all the Scorn and Obloquies of the most
virulent Phanaticks into the Bargain.

But whatever Mr. Lob may fancy, I look upon this, as a very hopeless and
impractible design, and never had such a vain Conceit in my head, while I was a
(...) ^^^iting the late Defense, and had any one Whispered such an accusation
in my Ear, without at the same time, showing the folly and weakness of the
Charge, I should have been more puzzled, to have found out the Rise and
Occasion of it, than to have answered all the Cavils against the Church of
England, which I have ever yet seen.

But though I knew nothing of a Cassandrian Design, yet my Adversaries have
found me out, and if we will believe Mr. Lob, I am got at least as far as
France, in my Journey to Rome, surely there is some Conjuring in the Case, for
I don't know, that ever I went a step beyond Canterbury. But this is a Cause,
which will not bear an Ignoramus, and therefore I must defend my self as well
as I can; and in order to that, I shall 1. briefly represent the Doctrine of
the Defense, with respect to the Unity of Church Power and Government, whereon
this Charge of Cassandrianism is founded, 2. Consider what the Doctrine of
Cassander was in this matter, 3. Examine the Arts my Adversaries have used to
pervert the Sense of my words, to turn them into Nonsense and Ridicule, and to
draw me headlong into the Popish Plot.

1. As for the first, in order to prove that the Unity of the Catholic Church
consists in one Communion, I asserted, that all the Bishops of the Church, are
but one (...), invested with the same Power and Authority to Govern the Church,
that as St. Cyprian tells us, Defense of the unreas.of Separation. p. 208.
There is but one Episcopacy, part of which every Bishop holds with full
Authority and Power: That all these Bishops are but one body, who are bound to
live in Communion with each other, and to govern their respective Churches,
where need requires, and where it can be had, by mutual advice and consent, and
therefore that no Bishops are absolutely independent, but are obliged to
preserve the Unity of the Episcopacy, or Episcopal College, as Optatus calls
it, whereon the Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church depends; for it is
impossible the Catholic Church should be one Body or Society, or one
Communion, if it be divided into as many independent Churches, as there are
absolute and independent Bishops; for those Churches must be independent, which
have an independent Power and Government, as all those must have, which have
independent Governors or Bishops, and independent Churches can never make one
Body, and one Catholic Communion, because they are not Members of each other;
and thus the Unity of the Catholic Church must be destroyed, unless we assert
one Episcopacy, as well as one Church, one Evangelical Priesthood, as well as
one Altar, all the World over.

But to make this as plain as possibly I can, that every one may understand it,
who will; I shall reduce the whole state of this Controversy, under some few
heads.

1. There is but one Episcopacy, because all the Bishops of the Catholic
Church have originally the same Authority and Power in Church Affairs; no one
has the whole, but each of them has a part and equal share, and therefore they
are called the Episcopal College, and a copious Body of Bishops, as all the
Churches in the World are one Catholic Church, not because they ever do, or
ought to meet together for Advice and Counsel, and Acts of Government from all
parts of the World; no more than the Catholic Church does for Acts of Worship;
but because they are, and ought to be in Communion with each other, they have
all the same Power and Authority, which must be exercised in one Communion.

2. Though all Bishops have a Relation to the whole Church, every Bishop being
a Bishop of the Catholic Church, yet the Rules of Order and good Government,
and the Edification of the Church, require, that the Exercise of this Power be
in ordinary Cases limited and confined to a certain Part, which we call a
particular Church, for as no particular Bishop can Instruct and Govern the
Catholic Church, no more than he can be in all parts of the World at the same
time, so every Bishop will be capable of exercising his Office to the best
Advantage, when his Care is confined to a certain Place, and particular Church;
and every particular Church, is likely to receive the greatest Benefit from the
Care and Inspection of a fixed Pastor and Bishop.

3. That the same Rules of Order and Government, require, that every Bishop
have the chief Power of Government in his own Diocese, for if every Bishop had
Authority as often as he pleased, to intermeddle in another Bishops Diocese,
and order the Affairs of his Church, it must needs cause great Confusion and
Distraction in all Churches, and make the People very uncertain, whom they are
to obey, and therefore it has been the constant Practice of the Apostles, and
all succeeding Ages, to set Bishops and Pastors over particular Churches, and
to confine their Care and Inspection to them.

4. But yet the Power of every Bishop in his own Diocese, is not so Absolute
and Independent, but that he is bound to preserve the Unity of the Episcopacy,
and to live in Communion with his Colleagues, and Fellow-Bishops; for this is
the Foundation of Catholic Communion, without which, there can be no Catholic
Church; and therefore he, who causelessly breaks this Unity, can be no Catholic
Bishop; and this is the Foundation of all those greater Combinations of
Churches, and that Authority, which is regularly exercised over particular
Bishops by their Colleagues.

For, 5. To preserve the Peace and Unity of the Episcopacy, it is necessary,
that every Bishop do not only observe the same Rule of Faith, but especially in
matter of Weight and Consequence, the same Customs and Usages, and the same
Laws of Discipline and Government; and therefore it is highly expedient and
necessary, when any difficult Case happens, for which they have no standing
Rule, to advise and consult with each other, not as with superior Governors,
who are to determine them, and give Laws to them, but as with Friends, and
Colleagues, of the same Body and Communion. And this makes it highly reasonable
for neighbor Bishops, at as great a distance, as the thing is practicable with
Ease and Convenience, as the Bishops of the same Province, or the same Nation,
to live together in a strict Association and Confederacy; to meet in Synods,
and Provincial or National Councils, to order all the Affairs of their several
Churches by mutual Advice, and to oblige themselves to the same Rules of
Discipline and Worship; this has been the Practice of the Church from the very
beginning, and seems to be the true Original of Archi-Episcopal, and
Metropolitical Churches, which were so early, that it is most probable, they
had their beginning in the Apostles days; for though all Bishops have
originally equal Right and Power in Church Affairs, yet there may be a Primacy
of Order granted to some Bishops, and their Chairs, by a general Consent, and
under the Regulation of Ecclesiastical Canons, for the preservation of
Catholic Unity and Communion, without any Antichristian Encroachments or
Usurpations on the Episcopal Authority.

For, 6. This Combination of Churches and Bishops does not, and ought not to
introduce a direct Superiority of one Bishop or Church over another, or of such
Synods and Councils over particular Bishops: Every Bishop is the proper
Governor of his own Diocese still, and cannot be regularly imposed on against
his Consent; the whole Authority of any Bishop or Council over other Bishops is
founded on the Laws of Catholic Communion, which is the great end it serves,
and therefore they have no proper Authority, but only in such Matters, as
concern the Unity of the Episcopacy, or the Peace and Communion of the
Catholic Church. If a Bishop be convicted of Heresy or Schism, or some great
Wickedness and Impiety, they may depose him, and forbid his People to
communicate with him, and ordain another in his stead, because he subverts the
Unity of the Faith, or divides the Unity of the Church, or is himself unfit for
Christian Communion; But if a Bishop differ from his Colleagues; assembled in
Synods, or Provincial Councils, or one National or Provincial Council differ
from another, in Matters of Prudence, and Rules of Discipline, without either
corrupting the Faith, or dividing the Church, if we believe St. Cyprian, in his
Preface to the Council of Carthage, they ought not to deny him Communion upon
such accounts, nor to offer any force to him in such Matters. Thus St. Cyprian,
and the African Father differed from Stephen Bishop of Rome, and his
Colleagues, about the re-baptization of Heretics, but yet would not divide the
Church, nor the Unity of the Episcopacy upon that Score, for any Bishop to
dissent from his Colleagues, and obstinately adhere to his own private
Opinions, without very great and necessary Reasons for doing so, is great
frowardness and Insolence, which may be condemned and censured; but while he
preserves the Unity of Faith, and Catholic Communion, whatever Church or
Council should deny Communion to him, would be guilty of the Schism; which
plainly shows, that there can be no constitutive Regent Head on Earth of a
National, much less of the Catholic Church; since every Bishop is the supreme
Governor of his own Church, and though he may, and ought to take the Advice of
neighbor Bishops or Councils, yet he is not under their Authority, any farther
than the Purity of the Faith, or the Unity of the Church is concerned; nor yet
is so absolute and independent, but that he is bound to live in Communion with
his Colleagues, and as much as is possible, govern his Church by mutual Advice
and Consent, and if he divide the Church by Heresy or Schism, he may be
deposed, and cast out of Christian Communion.

These things I have discoursed at large upon several occasions in the Defense,
and proved them from primitive Practice, and have now reduced them into this
plain Method, that if it be possible to prevent it, it may not be in the Power
of my Adversaries a second time, to form a Popish or Cassandrian Plot, out of
such Anti- Cassandrian Principles.

2. It is time now to consider, what Cassander taught about this Matter. George
Cassander was a very learned and moderate Papist, who in Obedience to the
Command of the Emperors, Ferdinand and Maximilian, writ his Consultation,
wherein he gives his judgment of every Article of the Augustan Confession,
which was drawn up by Melancthon, and dedicated to Charles the fifth. The
seventh Article concerns the Church, and there we must seek for his Judgment in
this matter; and yet there I can find nothing to Mr. Lob's purpose, who has
named Cassander indeed, but not cited any one passage out of him.

Cassander expressly asserts, Quod autem ad unitatem hujus externae ecclesiae
requirunt obedientiam, unius summi Rectoris, qui Petro in regenda Christi
ecclesia, and ejus ovibus pascendis successerit, non est a consensu priscae
quoque ecclesiae alienum. Cass. Cons. ad act. 7. de Pontifice Romano. Constat
etiam olim, quatenus extat memoria ecclesiae, praecipuam semper authoritatem in
universa Christi ecclesia Hpiscopo Romano ut Petri successori, and ejus
cathedram obtinenti, delatam fuisse -- Id. Ib.
That to the Unity of the Catholic Church is required obedience to one supreme
Governor, who succeeds Peter in the Government of Christ's Church, and in the
Office of feeding his Sheep, and that this is agreeable to the sense of the
Ancient Church. And that it is evident from all the Records of the Church, That
the chief Authority in the Universal Church of Christ has always been yielded
to the Bishop of Rome, as Peter's Successor, who sits in his Chair, For the
Proof of which he refers us to the Testimonies of Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Optatus, and others,

It is very true, as Mr. Lob observes, that there have been some, who have
advanced the Authority of a General Council above the Pope of Rome, and that
this is a prevailing Opinion among the French Papists, and thence concludes,
That such as assert, Reply. p. 31.
that a General Council is the Political Head, or Regent part of the Universal
Church, are in the Number of French Papists; which is an Argument of his great
Skill in Controversy.

For suppose there be any such men, who assert a General Council, to be the
Political Head or Regent Part of the Universal Church, but renounce all the
pretended Authority of the Pope of Rome, and all Communion with him; are these
men Papists or not? If they be, then it seems, that those who renounce the
Pope, may be Papists still, and then let Mr. Lob and his Friends look to
themselves, who are in as fair a way of being Papists, as any men I know,
notwithstanding their renouncing the Pope of Rome, and General Councils; if
they be not Papists, then they are not French Papists, unless French Papists be
no Papists.

But Mr. Lob, if he had been at all acquainted with these Matters, would easily
have perceived, that all who plead for the supreme Authority of General
Councils, do not therein renounce the Authority of the Pope of Rome, and
therefore are Papists still, call them French or Cassandrian Papists, or what
you please; and that those, who renounce the Authority, and all dependence on
the Pope, can be no Papists, how zealous soever they are for the Authority of
General Councils.

It were easy to discourse largely upon this Argument, but a few plain Proofs
are as good as a thousand. Mr. Lob instances in the Councils of Constance and
Basil, but if he had ever seen more than the Names of those Councils, he would
have found, how little they served his purpose. I grant they do decree, that a
General Council is above the Pope, in determining Matters of Faith, in
composing Schisms, and in reforming the Church in its Head and Members; but
still they attribute such a sovereign Authority to the Bishop of Rome, as no
Power on Earth can equal, or match, but only a General Council. This is so
evident and notorious, that whoever casually opens these Councils, can hardly
miss of something to this purpose, and therefore I shall only produce two or
three plain and undeniable Proofs of it, and refer my Readers, who desire
farther satisfaction, to the Councils themselves.

When Amedeus the Duke of Savoy, who called himself Felix the 5th, was elected
Pope by the Council of Basil, they call his Office, summus Apostolatus, the
chief Apostleship, or the supreme Bishopric, Declarans eidem Electo tanquam
unico vero and indubitato ecclesiae Romanae Pastori, ab omnibus Christi
sidelibus de necessitate salutis obediendum fore, and debere obediri, ac eisdem
Christi sidelibus quacunque etiamsi Imperiali, Cardinalatus, Patriarchali,
Regali, Pontificali, Abbatiali, seu alia quavis ecclesiaslica vel mundana
prefulgiant dignitate, Council. Basil. sess. 40.
and declare to all Christian People that they must obey him, as the only, the
true, the undoubted Pastor of the Roman Church, under the necessity of
Salvation, and that, whatever their Rank and Quality be, Emperors, Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Kings, Bishops, Abbots, or whatever other Ecclesiastical or Civil
Honor or Power they enjoy.

They acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to have the executive Ecclesiastical Power
in his hands, Romanus Pontifex decretorum bujufmodi Executer and Conservator
precipuus. Ib. sess. 42. summi pontificatus apicem.
and call the Popedom, the Top of Ecclesiastical Power, and Nicholas the 5th.
who after all this stir, Libenter secundum nostrae and Apostolicae authoritatis
plenitudinem -- Bulla Nicolai Papae 5. in Conc. Bas.
was owned Pope by this Council, in his Bull of Confirmation of the Council of
Basil, attributes to himself a fullness and plenitude of Power.

But to put this out of doubt, the Council it self has adjusted this Dispute
about the Authority of the Pope, and a General Council; for after some debate
about this Matter, it concludes, Who now can doubt of the Power of Councils,
Quis jam de potestate Corciliorum super omnes alias potestates ambigere
poterit, tot irrefragabilibus testimoniis comprobata? ex his manifest constat
anctoritates, quas de summi porestate Pontificis allegastis, non probare quo
minus ipse Pontifex mandetis universalis ecclesiae and Concilii generalis
obedire teneatur; sed id duntaxat probant, quod omnes singulares homines, and
particulares ecclesiae ipsi Pontifici obedire debent, nisi in his, quae huic
sacrae synodo, and cuilibet alteri legitime congregatae, praejudicium generent.
council. Basil. responsio synodalis de auctor. Council. General.
being Superior to all other Powers, which has been proved by such irrefragable
Testimonies? from whence it manifestly appears, that those Authorities which
have been alleged for the Power of the Supreme Bishop, do not prove, that the
Pope himself is not bound to obey the Decrees of the Universal Church, or
General Council; but they prove only this, that all particular men, and
particular Churches, are bound to obey the Pope, unless in such Matters as are
prejudicial to this Holy Synod, or any other, which is lawfully assembled.

This is sufficient to inform Mr. Lob, that men may assert the Authority of
General Councils, and yet if they reject the Authority of the Bishop of Rome,
they are not Papists, nor true Catholics in the sense of the Councils of
Constance and Basil; both which ascribe the sovereign Authority to the Pope in
the vacancies of Councils, and command all men under pain of Damnation, even
Emperors, Patriarchs, Princes, Prelates, to obey him in all things, which are
not derogatory to the Decrees or Authority of general Councils.

But it may be, the French Church has proceeded farther in retrenching the
Authority of the Pope, than the Council of Constance or Basil did, and
therefore since Mr. Lob talks so much of French Papists, I shall briefly show
his skill in this also.

I presume Petrus de Marca the Learned Archbishop of Paris, who writ in
Defense of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, is a good competent Witness in
this Matter, and yet in his Book, de Concordia sacerdotii and Imperii, which
met with so many Censures at Rome, and so difficultly passed the Test, and kept
him so long out of his Bishopric, he asserts the Authority of the Pope, much
higher than cither of those Councils; and to shorten my Work, I shall only set
down some Propositions, which he himself collected out of his Book, in answer
to the Roman Censure.

1. 1 Supremam in rebus ecclesiasticis authoritatem per Gallias exer^aisse
Komanum pontificem, judiciis ad relationes and appellationes redditis ab eo
tempore quo fides Christiana in Galliis floruit, ad hanc usque aetatem.
That the Bishop of Rome has always exercised the chief Power in Ecclesiastical
Affairs in the Gallican Churches, ever since Christianity flourished there.

2. 2. Papam jure divino esse universalis ecclesiae caput, atque adeo
Gallicanae, quae illius est membrum.
That the Pope is the Head of the Universal Church by divine Right, and
therefore of the Gallican Church, which is a Member of the Universal Church.

3. 3 Generalia decreta a Romany Pontificibus in Gallias, aeque ac in reliquas
provincias missa, quae magno applausu ab Imperatoribus Romany, deinde a
Francorum, regibus post constitutum regnum, usque ad hanc aetatem suscepta sunt.
That the general Decretals of the Roman Bishops, have been sent into France,
as well as into other Provinces; and received with great Applause by the Roman
Emperors, and the French Kings, from the first foundation of that Kingdom, till
this present Age.

4. 4. Nullum esle crimen cujus ratione Papa deponi possit, excepta haereseos
puolica professae causa, quod verum esse testimoniis veterum docetur, and
praeterea hanc esse. antiquam ecclesiae Gallicanae definitionem demonstratur.
That no Crime is a sufficient Reason for deposing the Pope, except the public
Profession of Heresy; and that this is true, he proves by the Testimonies of
the Ancients, and besides shows, that it has been of old the Judgment and
Definition of the Gallican Church.

5. 5. Papam solvere posse and dispensare valide and licite a canonibus
conciliorum Generalium, etiam sine causa, dummodo haec dispensatio non tendat
ad labefactandum ecclesiae statum.
That the Pope can effectually and lawfully dispense with the Canons of general
Councils, even without any Cause, so long as such a Dispensation does not
weaken the State of the Church.

6. 6. Libertates ecclesiae Gallicanae consistere in usu and praxi Canonum
atque decretalium, tam veterum quam recentiorum, easque non pendere a sola
praxi antiquorum Canonum. Vbi ostendit ur necessitate cogente Pontifices variis
temporibus pro bono publico ecclesiae, ad novas leges condendas progressos.
That the Liberties of the Gallican Church, consists in the Use and Practice of
Canons and Decretals, both Ancient and Modern, and is not confined only to the
Practice of Ancient Canons; where he shows, that at several times, in case of
necessity, Popes have proceeded to make new Laws for the public Good of the
Church.

7. 7. Papam praeter eum primatum, quo universae ecclesiae praeest, solum esse
and immediatum occidentis and Galliarum Patriarcham, Regibus vero non competere
jus aliquod Episcopatum vel metropolim instituendi, multo minus Patriarchatum.
Lit^ra Censurae Romanae in prolegom. ad librum de Concordia sacerd. and Imp.
That the Pope, besides his primacy over the Universal Church, is the only and
immediate Patriarch of the Western and Gallican Churches, and that Kings have
no Right or Power to erect any New Bishopric, Metropolitical Seat, much less a
Patriarchate.

This is a brief Scheme of French Popery, as it respects the Government of the
Church, if we believe this great Archbishop, Men may assert the Authority of a
General Council, without being Papists; but no man can be a Papist, who does
not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be the supreme Head, and universal Pastor
of the Christian Church, whom all Princes, Prelates, and People are bound to
obey; in Communion with whom consists the Unity of the Catholic Church, and to
separate from whom is a Schism: All Papists must own the Bishop of Rome for
their universal Pastor, though they are not agreed whether his Power be
absolute, or under the Control of a general Council.

3. Having thus prepared the way, it will be no hard Matter to vindicate the
doctrine of the Defense, about the Unity of Church Power, from those ridiculous
and senseless Imputations of Cassandrianism and French Popery. This Charge is
managed so knavishly by Mr. Lob, who has put in words of his own to make out
the Charge, when my words would not do it; and with such blind fury by Mr.
Baxter; with so much confusion, and yet with so much Triumph by both, that
there needs no other Art to expose and shame them, than to set my Notions in a
true light once more, and to vindicate them from the artificial
mis-representations of ignorance, or a Scholastic Buffoonery.

The Sum of their Charge amounts to this; that I place the supreme governing
Power of the Church in a general Council, and that the Unity of the Church
consists in the Subjection of all particular Christians and Churches to a
general Council; and yet they are forced to acknowledge, that I disown a
Constitutive Regent Head of a National, or of the Universal Church: And here
they cry out of Contradictions, and exercise their guessing faculty, what
should be the meaning of it; and yet hold to the Conclusion in spite of
Nonsense and Contradiction, that I set up one sovereign Power over the
Universal Church.

As for Contradictions, I will consider them anon, but the first thing to be
done is to examine, what occasion I have given them to think, that I place the
supreme unifying Power (as Mr. B. calls it) of the Church in a general Council.

Mr. Lob lays it down, as his fundamental Charge against me, Reply. p. 27.31.
that I make the Universal Church the first Seat of Government, Or, as he
learnedly speaks, the (...) of Church Government, that it is a Political
organized Body, in which there is a pars imperans and subdita, The Bishops in
their College being the Governors, Or, pars Imperans, and all others of the
universal Church, the subdite part, which others would have called Subjects,
and that in the very next words he adds. It may be our Author, to gratify the
Dean, will deny the universal Church to be a Political organized Body, as
indeed he does: So that it seems I deny, what he says, I assert, which either
proves, that I did not understand my self, or that Mr. Lob does not, or will
not understand me; and which of these is most likely, comes now to be tried.

Only we must first observe, what he means by the universal Church, being the
first Seat of Government, that it is a Political organized Body, in which there
is one supreme and sovereign Power over the Whole: As a Kingdom is one
Pollitical organized Body, because it is under one supreme Government, and all
the Power of inferior Officers is derived from the King, as the supreme
governing Head, or as the Papists make the Catholic Church one Political
organized Body, and the Pope, or a General Council the Constitutive Regent Head
of it.

Now then let us hear, how he proves this Charge against me, that I make the
universal Church the first Seat of Government, and such a Political organized
Body, as he here talks of: And to this purpose he alleadges several things,
which shall be particularly, but briefly considered.

1. Reply, p. 27.
He alleadges, that I assert, That all Church Officers belong to the universal
Church, and have one original Right, to govern the whole universal Church:
These are none of my words, nor do they represent my sense: Every one who reads
this Proposition, as Mr. Lob has expressed it, would imagine, that I made every
Bishop as sovereign a Monarch of the Church, as the Pope of Rome is; whereas
all that I say in that passage, he cites out of the Defense, is no more but
this. (1. That the Apostles had a Relation to the whole Church, and as he
observes, I assert in another place, That every Bishop, Ib. p. 11.
Presbyter, or Deacon by his Ordination, is made a Minister of the Catholic
Church: That every Bishop and Presbyter receives into the Catholic Church by
Baptism, and shuts out of the Catholic Church by Excommunication, which they
could not do, if they were not Ministers of the Catholic Church; but does this
make every Bishop an universal Monarch, that he is a Bishop of the universal
Church? Orwill^ Mr. Lob deny, that Bishops or Presbyters have a Relation to the
universal Church? If they be Ministers of the Church, and there be but one
Church, they must be Ministers of the Catholic Church; for particular
Churches, are not Churches, but considered as Members of the Catholic Church;
and therefore the primary Relation of all Catholic Christians, and Catholic
Bishops, is to the Catholic Church. This proves indeed, that the whole
Catholic Church is but one Body, and one Communion; but it does not prove,
that there is but one supreme Regent Head of the Catholic Church.

2. That the ordinary Power of a particular Bishop, or the Exercise of the
Episcopal Office is confined to a certain place, or particular Church, which
certainly does not make them the ordinary Governors of the whole universal
Church.

3. I assert, That though the Exercise of their Episcopal Power is ordinarily
confined to a particular Church, yet they continue their Relation to the whole
Church; that is, in their Government of their particular Churches, they act as
Bishops and Ministers of the universal Church; for they are Bishops of
particular Churches, not considered merely as particular, but as Members of the
universal Church. And if Mr. Lob meant no more but this, by making the
universal Church the first Seat of Government, that all the Power in the Church
primarily respects the universal Church, though as it is distributed into
different hands, the Exercise of it is confined to particular Places and
Churches, I readily own the Charge, and may do so safely without making the
Church, such an organized Political Body, as has one Constitutive Regent Head
over the Whole.

4. I assert farther, That Bishops being Ministers of the Catholic Church,
when Necessity, that is, when the preservation of the Catholic Faith, or
Catholic Communion, require it, may with one consent oppose the Heresy or
Schisms of neighbor Bishops; depose those, who are incorrigible; and Ordain
others in their stead; and as far as it is possible take care, that no part of
the Church of Christ suffer any injury by the Heresy or evil Practices of any
of their Colleagues. And if Mr. Lob will hence infer, that every Bishop has an
original Right to govern the whole universal Church, he must have a Logic by
himself, or some great flaw in his Understanding or Conscience. Every Bishop is
a Bishop of the universal Church, and therefore as far as the Rules of good
Order and Government, Catholic Peace and Communion, and the possibility of
things will permit, he may exercise his Episcopal Office in any part of the
Christian Church, but this does not give him an original Right to govern the
whole Church.

2. Mr. Lob observes, Ib. p. 11.
that I say, The Catholic Church is united and coupled by the Cement of
Bishops, who stick close together, for which I produce Cyprian; and therefore I
hope, there is no Popery in this, unless St. Cyprian also, were a Cassandrian
or French Papist. For may not Bishops stick close together in one Communion,
unless there be a supreme Constitutive Regent Head of the Church? Or, can the
Church be one, unless the Bishops, who are the supreme Ecclesiastical Governors
of their several Churches, be one also?

3. But I assert, that the Unity and Peace of the Episcopacy is maintained by
their governing their Churches by mutual Consent; Therefore not by one
Constitutive Regent Head. But he says, I mention, Collegium Episcopale, or
Episcopal College, So indeed I observed Optatus, called the whole Body of
Bishops, and upon the same account, St. Cyprian and St. Austin calls them
Colleagues. But this Episcopal College, he says, He takes to be a Council of
Bishops, But that is his mistake, and a very silly one it is; and he might as
well conclude, that when the Fathers speak of the Unity of the Episcopacy, they
mean their Union in a general Council. In St. Cyprian's time there never had
been a general Council, excepting the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem; and
yet, when he writ to Foreign Bishops, with whom he was never joined in
Council, nor ever like to be, he calls them his Colleagues, or those of the
same College with him; which signifies no more, but that they were of the same
Power and Authority in the Church, and united in the same Communion.

And yet Mr. Lob takes hold of this Phrase of the Episcopal College, to make
me expressly assert the supreme Authority of general Councils. p. 12.
That every part of the universal Church, is under the government of the
universal Bishops assembled in their College, or in Council. Which Sentence he
very honestly puts into a different Character, that it may be taken for mine,
and makes it a distinct head of accusation, when I never writ nor thought any
such thing; but this is the dealing we must expect from those men, whose
Understandings and Consciences are formed only to serve a party.

Well, but these Bishops have an original Right and Power in relation to the
whole Church, this has been considered already, only he adds an untoward (i.
e.) which is such another honest Exposition, as turning an Episcopal College
into a Council. For, (i. e.) says Mr. Lob, The Foreign Bishops, as those of
Alexandria and Rome, etc. have an original Power and Right in relation to the
whole Church, a Right and Power in relation to England. Now this is very true
in the sense in which I assert it: The Bishop of Rome and Alexandria have such
a relation to the Church of England, and so have all the Bishops in the World,
that if they live in the same Communion with us, and should come over into
England; with the leave of English Bishops, they might exercise their Episcopal
Office in any Church in England; as Polycarp consecrated in the Church of
Anicetus at Rome: A Catholic Bishop does not lose his Character by going out
of his own Church, but is a Bishop in what part of the World soever he be; and
therefore may exercise his Episcopal Office, as far as is consistent with the
Rules of Order and Christian Communion, and with the Rights and Jurisdiction of
other Bishops.

Nay, were there nothing else to alter the Case, but only the local distance
between Rome, and England, and Alexandria; the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria
might admonish and censure the English Bshops, in case they fell into Heresy
or Schism, and deny them Communion in case of obstinacy or incorrigibleness;
and so may the English Bishops admonish those of Rome, and Alexandria, and
inflict the like Censures on them: The Unity of the Episcopacy consists in one
Communion, and all the Authority of the Church results from the necessary
Obligations to Christian Communion; and all Churches must judge for themselves
by the Rules of Catholic Communion, what Churches to hold Communion with; and
though we must expect, while Bishops are men, and subject to the Weaknesses,
Passions, Mistakes of humane Nature, they may be guilty of great miscarriages,
and deny Communion to each other upon insufficient Reasons; yet there is no
help for this, that I know of, but either the Mediation and Interposition of
other Churches, or an Appeal to the last Judgment: That obligation all Churches
are under, as far as in them lies, to preserve the Purity of the Faith, and the
Unity of the Church, obliges them to reject the Communion of those, who violate
either; but it withal obliges them, as they will answer it at the Tribunal of
Christ, the great Bishop of his Church, not to make any unnecessary breaches,
or lightly and wantonly refuse each others Communion.

But by the Original Right and Power of the Bishop of Rome, or Alexandria, or
other Foreign Bishops in relation to the Church of England, he seems to mean a
Right of Appeals and proper Jurisdiction, as he plainly does in what he adds a
little after, concerning the Independency of the Church of England, on any
Foreign Power: For because I assert the Bishops are not wholly independent, he
concludes, That the Church of England is not independent, Reply, p. 12. p. 28.
but accountable to Foreign Bishops, if at any time they abuse their Power.
And some Pages after confutes this, by saying, That, it is notorious, that the
Church of England estalished by Law, is a particular National Church,
independent on any Foreign Power whatsoever. Such is the Constitution of our
Church, that what Bishop soever is found an abuser of his Power, he is not
accountable to any College of Bishops, but such us are convened by his
Majesty's Authority, and that what apprehensions soever he may have of his
being grieved through any undue procedure, he cannot make any appeal to any
Foreign Power from the King. And therefore he thinks, I incur a Praemunire, by
setting up a Foreign Jurisdiction over the Church of England.

Now this is so wild and absurd a Conclusion, from any thing I have said, that
none but Mr. Lob, or some few of his size could have hit on it; there is but one
Episcopacy in the Christian Church, of which every Bishop has an equal Share
and Portion, and therefore is a Bishop of the Catholic Church, and though the
Exercise of his Episcopal Office and Authority, is regularly and ordinarily
confined to a particular Church, yet his original Right and Power in relation
to the whole Church does still remain, i. e. He is a Bishop in all parts of the
World, and may exeroise his Episcopal Authority wherever he be, as far as is
consistent with the Rules of Order and Catholic Communion; and when necessity
requires, is obliged to take care, as far as possibly he can, that the Church
of Christ suffer no injury by the Heresy or evil Practices of any of his
Colleagues; ergo, the Church of England is subject to the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome, or Alexandria. But I believe few men can discern, how such a
Consequence results from such Premises, and what follows, is of the same stamp.

All Bishops have originally equal Authority in the Church of Christ, but yet
are not so independent, but that they are bound by the Laws of Christ to
preserve the Peace and Unity of the Episcopacy, and to live in Communion with
their Fellow Bishops, and in case of Heresy, Schism, or notorious Impiety, may
be censured and deposed by their Colleagues, and others ordained in their
stead, Ergo, The Church of England is subject to the Bishop of Rome, or
Alexandria, or other Foreign Bishops.

I have abundantly proved in the Defense, that St. Cyprian owns these
Premises, but denies the Conclusion, and therefore either he, or Mr. Lob, are
out in their Logic, when St. Cyprian had Excommunicated two of his Presbyters,
Felicissimus and Fortunatus, and they fled to Rome to Cornelius to make their
Complaints to him; St. Cyprian writes a Letter to Cornelius, wherein he informs
him of the whole Matter, and has this remarkable passage in it: That it was by
a general Consent agreed among them, Nam cum statutum sit omnibus nobis, and
aequum sit pariter ac justum, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est
crimen admissum, and singulis pastoribus portio gregis sit ascripta, quam regat
unusquisque and gubernet rationem sui actus Domino redditurus, oportet utique
eos, quibus praesumus, non circumcursare, nec Episcoporum concordiam
cohaerentem sua subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere, sed agere illic
causam suam, ubi and accusatores habere, and testes sui criminis possint. Cypr.
ep. 55. ad Cornelium.
and is in it self equal and just, that every ones Cause should be heard there,
where the Crime is committed; since every Pastor has a Portion of the Flock
committed to him, which he is to Rule and Govern, so as he is to give an
Account of it to his Lord, and therefore those, who are under our Government,
ought not to run about from one Bishop to another, nor by their subtle and
fallacious insinuations engage those Bishops, who are at Unity among
themselves, in contests and quarrels, but should there plead their Cause, where
they may have both Accusers and Witnesses of their Crime. Thus St. Cyprian
rejects the Appeal of Basilides and Martialis, two Spanish Bishops, to Stephen
Bishop of Rome, when they had been justly deposed by their Colleagues, Cypr.
ep. 68.
and Felix and Sabinus ordained Bishops in their stead.

Thus when Marcion for his lewdness had been Excommunicated by his own Father,
(...). Epiph. haer. 42.
Bishop of Sinope, he fled to Rome, but was denied Communion there, and they
gave this reason for it, We cannot do this without the leave of thy venerable
Father, for there is but one Faith, and one Consent, and we cannot go contrary
to thy Father, our good Colleague and fellow Labourer.

From these instances it appears, that the Unity of the Episcopacy, or
Episcopal College, does not give Authority to every Bishop, to intermedle with
the Affairs of another Bishop's Diocese, but only in case of absolute
necessity, for here are two things to be distinctly considered, which qualify
each other, and set bounds to the Ecclesiastical Government. 1. That there is
but one Episcopacy, in which every Bishop has an equal share; Christ has
committed the Care of his whole Church to the Bishops of it, who are to
maintain Unity and Communion among themselves, and as far as it is practicable,
and as occasion requires, govern the Church with mutual Advice and Counsel, and
one Consent, as if they were but one Bishop. And, 2. That every Bishop has a
Portion of the Flock assigned to his particular Care, over which in ordinary
Cases, he has the sole and supreme Authority; for though the Church of Christ
be but one Flock, yet it is not committed in common to the Care of all Bishops,
but is divided into several Folds with particular Pastors set over them, to
instruct and govern, and take Care of them; and as every Bishop and Pastor is
more peculiarly concerned, than any other, to render an account of that part of
the Flock committed to his Charge, so it is fit, he should have the greatest
Authority and Power over them; all Bishops have an equal Power and Authority in
the Church, but the ordinary exercise of this is confined to their own
Churches, in which each of them is supreme.

Now the first of these, the Unity of the Episcopacy, is the foundation of
those larger Combinations and Confederacies of neighbor Churches, which make
Archiepiscopalor National Churches, for since there is but one Episcopacy, it
is highly reasonable and necessary, that as far as it is practicable (as it is
in the Churches of the same Province or Nation) they should all act, and govern
their respective Churches, as one Bishop, with one consent; which is the most
effectual way to secure the Peace and Unity of the Episcopal College, and to
promote the Edification and good Government of the Church.

Nay, this Unity of the Episcopacy is the Foundation of that Authority, which
neighbor Bishops have over their Colleagues in case of Heresy and Schism, or
any notorious Wickedness, for they being Bishops of the universal Church, have
an original Right and Power to take care, that no part of the Church, which is
within their reach and inspection, suffer by the Heresy or evil Practices of
their Colleagues.

But the second Consideration, that every Bishop has the chief Power in his own
Church, prescribes the Bounds and Limits of this Ecclesiastical Authority; as,
1. Every Bishop having the chief Power in his own Diocese, though he is bound
by the Laws of Catholic Communion, and in order to preserve the Peace and
Unity of the Episcopacy, to consent with his Colleagues in all wholesome
Constitutions, and Rules of Discipline and Government; yet he cannot be imposed
on against his own Consent by any Bishop or Council of Bishops, nor can justly
be deposed upon such Accounts, while he neither corrupts the Faith, nor
Schismatically divides the Church.

2. Nor can any Bishop or Bishops rescind any Censures justly passed by another
Bishop against any in his own Church, or receive Appeals about such Matters,
without his Consent; for the Unity of the Episcopacy requires all Bishops to
leave each other to the free Exercise of their Power and Authority in their own
Churches, as we see the Church of Rome acknowledged in the Case of Marcion's
Appeal from his Fathers Sentence: For it is an usurpation on the Authority of
Bishops, not to suffer them to govern their own Flock, while nothing is done to
the injury of the Faith, and the Churches Peace; and nothing is more likely to
make infinite divisions and quarrels between Bishops, than for one Bishop to
undo, what another has done, or to judge over again that Cause, which has been
already judged and determined, where it ought to be judged; as St. Cyprian
tells Cornelius in the Case of Felicissimus and Fortunatus, as I observed
above: I grant this is generally practiced in Archiepiscopal and National
Churches, and in many Cases there is great use and reason for it; but then this
is not without the Consent of other Bishops; those Appeals are allowed and
confirmed by Provincial and National Synods, to which every Bishop gives his
Consent, but I am now considering what the original Right of Bishops is, not
how far they may part with this Power for a more general good.

3. As every Bishop has the chief Authority in his own Diocese, so much more
has a larger Combination of Bishops into a National Church, the supreme Power
within it self, from whence lies no Appeal to any Foreign Church, without its
own Consent.

The Unity of the Episcopacy requires the Union of neighbor Bishops for one
Government; but because all the Bishops in the World, though they are of the
same Communion, yet cannot be united into one Government, it is necessary to
stop somewhere, and that which in all reason must determine the bounds of such
a Church, must be a convenient distance of place, or one Nation, and one Civil
Government, such Churches being more easily confederated into one Body, than
those of different Nations. Now if every Bishop be the supreme Governor of his
own Church, much more has a National Church the supreme Power of governing it
self.

A National Church is bound to maintain Catholic Communion with Neighbor
Churches, and if it fall into Heresy or Schism, Neighbor Churches may and
ought to admonish and censure them; and if they continue obstinate to withdraw
Communion from them; but while a National Church preserves the Unity of the
Faith, and Catholic Communion, no other Church can intermeddle in its
Government, nor ought to receive any Appeals from its Judgment; for no Bishops
or Churches have any Authority over each other, but only in order to Catholic
Communion.

These things I have discoursed more largely on purpose, if it be possible to
prevent the mistakes of these men, who are so unwilling to see or to
acknowledge the Truth; and I hope I may safely conclude from the whole, that
there is no danger, that the Bishop of Rome or Alexandria should challenge any
jurisdiction over the Church of England, by virtue of the original Right and
Power of the Catholic Bishops in relation to the whole Church of Christ.

But however Mr. Lob is resolved to make something of it at last, and if he
cannot prove, that I subject the Church of England to any Foreign Bishop, yet
it is plain, that I subject it to a general Council; for he says, I assert,
that if any Bishops abuse their Power, they are accountable to a general
Council, that is, unto a Foreign Power, whereby he does his utmost, to tear up
the Church of England by the Roots, Reply, p. 29.
to subvert his Majesty's Supremacy, as if all the Laws of the Land concerning
it, had not been of any force, all this by Dr. Stillingfleet's Defender. Good
man! What a happy Reformation is here! How is he now concerned for the Church
of England, his Majesty's Supremacy, the Sacredness of Civil Laws in Religious
Matters, and the Reputation of Dr. Stillingfleet; which suffers by such a
Defender!

But where do I say, That if any Bishops abuse their Power, they are
accountable to a general Council? Truly no where, but he transcribes a long
Paragraph out of the Defense, against the absolute independency of Bishops,
wherein there is this Expression, And it is very wild to imagine, that any of
these Persons, who abuse their Power, should not be accountable to the rest for
it. i.e. to the College of Bishops; which last words are not mine, but his own
Comment, though Printed in a different Character, as if they were mine; and
this College of Bishops he transforms presently into a general Council, and
thus I subject the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom I first equal to other
Bishops (as I do indeed with respect to original Right and Power, wherein all
Bishops are equal, not with respect to Church-constitutions) to some Court
above any in this Realm, to a general Council, a College of Bishops, and now I
am in danger again of a Praemunire.

But this has been already sufficiently explained, in what sense I deny the
Independency of Bishops, and how far this is from subjecting them to any
Foreign Jurisdiction, whether of Foreign Prelates, or a general Council,
though I cannot well understand, how a general Council, of which they
themselves are part, can be properly called a Foreign Court, or Foreign
Jurisdiction; unless the Treaty at Nimengen were a Foreign Jurisdiction to all
those Princes and States, who sent their Plenipotentiaries thither to act for
them.

However to satisfy Mr. Lob, I shall 1. freely declare my thoughts about a
general Council. 2. Consider the folly of that suggestion, that to assert the
Authority of a general Council, subverts the Kings supremacy, and incurs a
Praemunire.

1. As for a general Council, my thoughts are these, which I humbly submit to
my Superiors. 1. That there never was, nor ever can be in a strict sense, a
general and ecumenical Council of the whole Church, unless the Council of the
Apostles at Jerusalem, was such; which yet was not general, unless all the
Apostles were there, which I suppose will not be easily proved; for it is not
likely there ever should be a Convention on of Bishops from all parts of the
Christian World, nor if it were possible, that there should be some few Bishops
dispatched from all Christian Churches all the World over, can I see any reason,
why this should be called a general Council, when it may be, there are ten
times as many Bishops, who did not come to the Council, as those who did; and
why should the less. Number of Bishops assembled in Council, judge for all the
rest, who so far exceed them in Numbers, and it may be are not inferior to them
in Piety and Wisdom: Especially considering that every Bishop has the supreme
Government of his own Church, Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse
Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem
collegas suos adigit, quando habeat omnis episcopus pro licentia libertatis and
potestatis suae arbitrium proprium -- Cypr. praef. ad Council. Carthag.
and his Liberty and Power to choose for himself, as St. Cyprian tells us; and
must not be compelled to obedience by any of his Colleagues, which overthrows
the proper Jurisdiction of general Councils, which can have no direct Authority
over any Bishops, who refuse to consent, unless it be in such Matters as
concern the purity of Faith and Manners, or Catholic Unity; in other Matters
if St. Cyprians principle be true, the major Number of Votes in Council cannot
make a firm Decree, much less can the Votes of three or four hundred Bishops
give Laws to all the Bishops in the Christian Church, which is a plain
Demonstration, that a general Council cannot be the supreme Constitutive Regent
Head of the Catholic Church.

2. Since every Bishop from the Unity of Episcopacy, and his obligations to
Catholic Communion is bound, as far as he can, to govern his particular Church
by the mutual Counsel and Consent of his Colleagues, we must acknowledge, that
both Provincial and General Councils are of very great use, though they have no
proper jurisdiction; and whatever Bishop should wilfully refuse to observe the
Decrees and Canons of such Councils, without manifest necessity for not doing
it, would be guilty of such pride and obstinacy, as would fall very little
short of the Guilt of Schism, when there is a just Reason for it; we may say
with St. Austin, Non consertimus huic concilio, salvo jure unitatis. Aug. de
haptismo l. 7. c. 25.
we do not consent to this Council, but yet keep the Peace and Unity of the
Church entire, and will not heighten every dissent into a Schism; but where
there is no such reason, it is no better than Schismatical pride and
peevishness for any Bishop to pursue his own humor, in opposition to the
Decrees and Constitutions of his Colleagues; for the very Consent and Agreement
of Bishops among themselves is so great a good to the Church of God, that That
alone is sufficient to determine a good man, when there are not very weighty
reasons against it.

St. Cyprian, I am sure, thought it a Matter of mighty Consequence to manage
all the great Affairs of the Church by mutual Advice, Et dilectio communis and
ratio exposcit, fratres charislimi, nihil conscientiae vestrae subtrahere de
his quae apud nos geruntur, ut sit nobis circa utilitatem ecclesiasticae
administrationis commune consilium. Cyp. ep. 29.
in his Letter to the Presbyters and Deacons at Rome, written after the Death
of Fabian, during the vacancy of that See, he tells them, that both mutual Love
and Charity, and the reason of the thing required, that he should conceal
nothing from them of the Affairs of his Church; that so they might advise and
consult with each other, concerning the most useful Rules of Ecclesiastical
Administrations. And therefore he tells us, that he put off the Consideration
of the State of the Lapsed, and would not innovate any thing in the ancient
Rules of Discipline, till God should be pleased to restore Peace to the Church,
Cypr. ep. 40.
that they might meet together for common Advice. And the Roman Presbyters in
answer to another Letter of St. Cyprians, approve of this resolution, and add a
very weighty Reason for it, that it is impossible that Decree should be firm,
and obtain a general Compliance, which is not made by the Consent of many: ep.
31.
And therefore I observed in the Defense, that though they had no such thing as
a general Council, before the times of Constantine, yet they had frequent
Provincial Councils, and sent their Synodical Letters to Foreign Churches,
with an account of their Transactions and Decrees, that they might either
approve them in their Councils, or give them an account of their Dissent, and
the Reasons of it.

Mr. Baxter asks me, whether they sent these Letters all the World over; Came
quo nobis totus orois commercio formatarum in una Communionis societate
concordat Opt. lib. 2.
and I answer, I believe they did not, because I suspect it is not to be done;
no more than a general Council can be convened from all parts of the World; but
yet it is evident, this Communication by Letters was so general, that St.
Cyprian and Optatus found the Consent of the whole Church upon it: However half
the World, or all the known famous Churches were sufficient for Advice and
Counsel, though not for supreme uncontrollable Government, which I never
asserted; to advise with all the known Churches, which were within the reach of
such Communication, is sufficient to satisfy us, how necessary they thought
it, to use the most effectual Means they could to preserve Catholic Communion;
and that they believed mutual Advice and Counsel a very proper means for that
end, and the Duty of all true Catholic Bishops.

This way St. Austin calls an Epistolare Colloquium, Aug. de baptismo. l. 3.
cap. 2.
a Conference by Letters, which he thinks is not to be compared with the
Plenarium Concilium, as he very properly calls a general Council, a full or
plenary Council, which is made up of wise and learned Prelates from distant
parts of the World. For when the Bishops of so many several Churches, who may
be well presumed to know the Judgment and Practice of their own Churches, meet
together without any private or factious Designs, freely to debate and consult
for the public good of the Church, the Authority of such a Council must needs
be venerable, and it must be some very great reason, that will justify a
dissent from it.

Such Councils indeed are not infallible, Article 21.
as our Church asserts, because they consist of fallible men, who may be, and
have been deceived; and therefore in Matters necessary to Salvation, we must
believe them no farther, than they agree with the holy Scriptures; though a
modest man will not oppose his private judgment to the Decrees of a general
Council, unless the Authority of the Scripture be very expressly against it; but
in Rules of Discipline and Government their Authority is greater still, because
the Canons of general Councils are a great Medium, and excellent Instrument of
Catholic Communion, the promoting of which is the principal end and the
greatest use of general Councils; and therefore though they do not command by
any direct Authority, and superior Jurisdiction, yet they strongly oblige in
order to serve the ends of Catholic Communion.

2. But now, suppose a man should assert the Authority of a general Council,
how does this subvert the Kings Supremacy, or incur a Praemunire? For let the
Authority of a general Council be what it will, it is wholly Spiritual, as the
whole Government of the Church is, considered merely as a Church or Spiritual
Society; but the Supremacy of the King is an external and civil Jurisdiction in
all Causes, and over all Persons Ecclesiastical, within his Dominions; and Mr.
Lob might as well say, that every man, who sets up any spiritual Authority in
the Church, subverts the Supremacy of the King; and thus the King's Supremacy
makes him a Bishop and a Priest too, a Scandal which Mr. Lob's Predecessors
raised in Queen Elizabeth's days, to dissuade People from the Oath of Supremacy,
which it seems they were not then so fond of, and which the Queen confutes in
her Injunctions, and tells her Subjects, that she neither does, nor ever will,
challenge any other Authority, but only this, under God to have the Sovereignty
and Rule over all manner of Persons, born within these her Realms, Dominions,
and Countries, of what Estate, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they
be, so as no other Foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over
them.

When Bishop Jewel writ his Apology and Defense to Scipio, a Patrician of
Venice, who complained of the English Nation for not sending their Legates to
the Council of Trent, he never thought of this reason against it, that it was
contrary to the King's Supremacy, which is owned and confirmed by the Laws of
this Land; and we may observe that the Statutes of Provisors, and several Laws
to preserve the Liberties of the Realm from the Usurpations of the Pope of
Rome, or any other Foreign Potentate, were made and confirmed in several Kings
Reigns, long before Henry the 8th, a particular Account of which the Reader may
find in Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, part 1. Book 2. p. 107. etc.
upon which the Clergy were convicted in a Praemunire by King Henry the 8th. and
therefore Archbishop Bramhall truly observes, Bramhall's vindication of the
Church of England.
That the Supremacy was not a new Authority usurped by that King, but the
ancient Right of the Imperial Crown of England; and yet in those days it was
not deemed a Subversion of the Supremacy, to acknowledge the Authority of
general Councils. For after the Statutes of Provisors, we find the English
Bishops in the Councils of Constance and Basil, which asserted the Authority of
general Councils as high, as ever any men did.

For indeed, since Princes have embraced the Christian Faith, no Bishops,
excepting the Pope of Rome, have pretended to call a general Council, but by
the Will and Authority of the Prince, nor can the Decrees and Canons of any
Council be received in any Kingdom, or obtain the Authority of Laws, but by the
Consent of the Prince, which therefore certainly can be no encroachment upon
his Supremacy: While the King has the supreme executive Power in all Causes,
and over all Persons in his own Hands, the spiritual Power and Authority of the
Church is no invasion of his Rights.

This is sufficient at present, in answer to Mr. Lob's insinuation, that to
assert the Authority of general Councils, subverts the Kings Supremacy,
subjects the Church of England to a Foreign Court and Jurisdiction, and
thereby incurs the Penalty of a Praemunire; whereby we see, that he understands
the Law as little, as he does the Gospel, only shows his good Will to poor
Cassandrians, and as much as he declames against penal Laws against Dissenters,
would be glad to see the Church of England once more under the Execution of a
Praemunire.

4. Mr. Lob has not done with me yet, but to make me a perfect Cassandrian,
whether I will or not, he adds as my sense, Reply p. 12.
That this Council of Foreign Bishops, unto which they (i.e. the Bishops of
the Church of England) are accountable, must look on the Bishop of Rome, as
their Primate; the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome being acknowledged, it seems,
by our Author himself, as well as by Bramhall. The Primacy (he says) out of
Cyprian, being given to Peter, that it might appear, that the Church of Christ
was one, and the Chair, that is, the Apostolical Office and Power is one. Thus
Cyprian, on whom lay all the Care of the Churches, dispatches Letters to Rome,
from whence they were sent through all the Catholic Churches; all this is to
be found from p. 208. to the end of the Chapter.

This is a terrible Charge indeed, and home to the Purpose, and Mr. Lob is a
terrible Adversary in these days, if he can but Swear, as well as he can Write;
for all this is Forgery and Villainy, as any man may satisfy himself, who will
be at the Pains to peruse that part of the Defense, he directs to; where I am
so far from asserting the Primacy of St. Peter over all Bishops, that I do
expressly vindicate that passage of St. Cyprian, which the Flatterers of the
Pope allege for this Primacy, from signifying any such thing; and for the
Satisfaction of all indifferent Readers, what Credit is to be given to Mr. Lob,
I will transcribe the whole Passage, though it be somewhat long, as a
sufficient Confutation of this Calumny, and it is this.

And in his ( Cyprian's) Book of the Unity of the Church, the first Argument he
uses to prove the Unity of the Church, is the Unity of the Apostolical Office
(and what that means, I have already sufficiently explained) and assigns this
as the reason, why our Savior, in a particular Manner, committed the Keys to
Peter (when he gave the same Power to all the rest of the Apostles, which he
did to Peter) viz. to manifest the Unity of the Apostolical Office and Power,
that there is but one Chair, and one original of Unity, which begins in one;
for the rest of the Apostles were the same, that Peter was, had an equal share
in the Honor and Power of the Apostolical Office; but the beginning is from
Unity, and the Primacy is given to Peter, that it might appear, that the Church
of Christ is one, and the Chair one, i.e. the Apostolical Office and Power;
they are all Pastors, but there is but one Flock, which is fed by all the
Apostles with a joint Consent.

This is the plain Scope and Design of this Passage of St. Cyprian (which has
been so often abused, especially by the Romanists) that our Savior in naming
Peter only, in giving the Apostolical Power, did signify, that the Apostolical
Office, though exercised by several Persons, is but one Office and Power, which
is not so properly divided among the Apostles, as administered by a joint
Consent; and therefore giving this Power to one Apostle, included the bestowing
this Power on the whole Apostolical College.

And therefore, when St. Cyprian says, that Christ built his Church upon Peter,
he does not, and cannot mean, the Person of Peter, or any thing peculiar to
him, but that Apostolical Office and Power, which was given to the College of
the Apostles in the Name of Peter, as the Church is said to be built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And when he says, that Christ gave the
Primacy to Peter, and yet at the same time affirms, that the other Apostles
were equal sharers with him in Honor and Power, and were all that, which Peter
was, it can signify no more, nor no less, than that Christ named Peter first,
or rather in stead of all the Apostles, thereby to instruct them, that though
they were many, yet their Office and Power was but one, which they must
exercise as one man with one Consent.

This I suppose is sufficient to satisfy any man, how far I am from ascribing
to Peter a Primacy over all the Apostles, much less to the Pope over all
Bishops, as Peter's Successor.

And this is all I can find, that either Mr. Lob or Mr. B. urges to prove me
engaged in a Cassandrian design; but now for the Contradictions I am charged
with. Mr. Baxter says, Answer to Dr. Sherlock. p. 202.
Dr. Sherlock ( if he be Dr. Stillingfleets Defender) which I think, is not
very material to this Controversy, whether he be, or not, says and unsaith,
and would verify Contradictions. He must write us a new Dictionary, to tell
us, in what Sense he takes common words, before he can be understood. He
defends Dr. Stillingfleet's denial of any political, constitutive, supreme
Power, and yet maintains that the whole Church has one Regent part, which
all must obey, that will be Members. This I confess, is a Contradiction, for if
the whole Church has one Regent Part, it must have a constitutive Regent Head.
This he says, I affirm, but he could not tell where, and therefore never
pretends to cite my words for it. But (as he goes on) he will not grant, that
every Political body must have a constitutive Regent Head; and yet he does but
say (if we deny this) as if he could not, or durst not tell, what he grants, or
denies; yet he grants that ( every Political body consists of a Pars Imperans
and Subdita) and that Church Governors united and governing by Consent are the
Pars Imperans, and Christian People the Pars Subdita) but says he (all this is
true without a constitutive Regent Head) can you tell how his asserted, and his
denied Propositions differ? 1. It is not a Regent part he denies. 2. It is
not, that this Regent part is one to the whole Body, the Church. For if it were
that, he would not so zealously contradict and condemn us, that say the same
thing as he. And here Mr. B. himself has unridled this whole Mystery of
Contradictions, though he was not willing to understand it, because then he had
had nothing to object. I deny, that there is one constitutive Regent Head,
either of a National, or the Universal Church, but yet affirm, that there is a
Government in the Church, and consequently, that there is a governing and a
governed Part, that the Bishops are the Governors of the Church, and the
Christian People, those who are governed; now I thought Mr. B. without a new
Dictionary (unless it be a Dictionary to teach common sense, which indeed would
be the best Cure in the World for Fanaticism) might have understood, that when
I denied, that there is any one constitutive Regent Head of the Church, and at
the same time asserted, that the Bishops are the Regent and governing part of
the Church, I could not mean, that the Bishops were the Governors of the
Church, as united into one Common Regent Head over the whole Church, but they
were Governors of the Catholic Church, as every Bishop governed his own share
and portion of it, as committed to his Charge.

This was the State of the Controversy between Mr. B. and the Dr. Mr. Baxter
will not allow a National Church, to be one political Body and Society, unless
it have one constitutive Regent Head, for he says, many Churches associated for
mutual Help and Concord, The second true Defense in answer to Dr. Still. p. 112.
are but in a loose sense called a Church, not in a political Sense, but
equivocally so called; and that the Ecclesiastical Government of the particular
Churches severally, makes it no Church, but an association of many Churches.

But the Reader will be the better able to judge of this Dispute, if I briefly
explain the true Reason of all this zeal for one constitutive Regent Head of
the Church, which I perceive very few People understand; for indeed it is a
Mystery but lately discovered by Mr. Baxter, and earnestly espoused by Mr.
Humphry, to justify all the Schisms and Separations in the World, and to make
all the distinct and separate Communions in a Nation, one National Church, and
all the separate Churches in the World, one Catholic Church.

For, 1. they assert, that a particular Congregation associated for local
presential Communion under a fixed Pastor, is the only Church of Divine
institution, which I have at large confuted in the 5 and 6 Chapters of the
Defense, and none of my Adversaries have been so hardy yet, as to attempt the
least Reply.

2. That all these single Churches all the World over become one Catholic
Church, not by any Union among themselves, but by being all united in Christ,
who is the supreme Regent constitutive Head of the Catholic Church; there is
no need they should be all united to one another, to make one Catholic Church,
so they be all united to Christ, the Head of the Church. Of which I have
discoursed above in the second Chapter of this Vindication.

3. It hence follows, that it is impossible to make one National Church upon
pure Ecclesiastical Principles; for every one of these single Churches with
their particular Pastors over them, are original Churches of Divine
Institution, and no one Church or Pastor, has a superior Power and Jurisdiction
over the rest; and therefore though particular Churches may voluntarily
associate with each other for mutual Help and Concord, yet this cannot make
them one Political organized Body or Church, but only a Church in a loose
equivocal sense; for it is contrary to all the Maxims of Polity, that That
should be called one Political Body, which has not one Political constitutive
Regent Head, that is, one superior Power over the whole Body, either
Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical; and since Christ has given no
one Pastor or Bishop a superior Authority to govern the rest, which would make
the Church a Monarchy, nor united all Pastors into one governing Head, which
should govern the whole Church, and their own Members by a major Vote, which is
an Aristocracy, nor erected a mixed Tribunal of Pastors and People, which is a
Democracy, it is evident, that the several Churches and Pastors in a Nation,
are not by divine Institution united under any one Ecclesiastical governing
Head, and therefore cannot be one Political National Church; which makes it a
fond thing to cry out of Schism and Separation, from the National Church of
England, when there is, and can be no such thing, in a proper Ecclesiastical
sense.

4. And therefore the only Notion of a National Church, is all the Churches of
a Nation united under the King, as the accidental Head of the Church, who is
the supreme Head, and Governor of the Church in his Dominions. And thus the
National Church of England has no other Foundation, but the Laws of the Land,
and the Supremacy of the King; it is the Creature of the supreme Power, which
made it, and may unmake it again, when it pleases.

5. And therefore the most effectual way of uniting all Dissenters, is not to
enjoin Conformity to any one Constitution, but to give a legal Establishment to
the different Sects and Parties among us, at least to all those, which are
tolerable, which shall be under the Government of the King's Ministers, whether
Lay or Clergy, in Ecclesiastical affairs, and thus all the Dissenters, which
are now among us, as much as they dissent from the present Constitution of the
Church of England, and from each other, shall immediately become the Members of
this accidental National Church of England, under the King as an accidental
Head; and thus the Schism, which we so much complain of, is effectually cured,
according to Mr. Humphry's Materials for Union, which shall be particularly
examined in their due place.

This is the plain account of this whole Intrigue, and that the impartial
Reader may the better judge, where the Dispute lies between me and my
Adversaries, I shall as plainly represent in one view a Scheme of my
Principles, upon which I oppose this.

As 1. That Christ has but one Church, which we call the Catholic Church, and
is antecedent in order of Nature before particular Congregational Churches,
which are Churches not considered as independent Congregations, but as Members
of the Catholic Church, which I proved at large in the 3d. Chapter of the
Defense, and the 1st. Chap. of this Vindication.

2. That all the Churches in the World are one Catholic Church, as united in
one Catholic Communion; as I have proved in the 4th. Chapter of the Defense,
and the 2d. Chapter of this Vindication.

3. That the Church is a Society under Government, has a governing and a
governed Part; that the Bishops are the Governors of the Church, and Christian
People, those who are governed.

4. That all Bishops are originally of equal Power, and that every Bishop is
supreme in his own Diocese.

5. That yet all Bishops and Churches are bound to live in Catholic Communion
with each other, that is, as Members of the same great Body, the Catholic
Church, and every Bishop, as far as possibly he can, must govern his particular
Church and Diocese, by the mutual Advice and Consent of neighbor Bishops.

6. That this is the Foundation of those greater Combinations of Churches,
considered as Churches, or pure Ecclesiastical Societies, into Archiepiscopal,
Metropolitical, or National Churches, which signifies no more than the
voluntary Combination of such Bishops and Churches into a stricter Association,
for the better Preservation of one Communion, by mutual Advice and Counsel,
Concord and Agreement, in Worship, Discipline, and Government.

7. That for the preservation of Peace and Order in this united Body or
Confederation of neighbor Churches, one or more Bishops may by a general
Consent be entrusted with a superior Power of calling Synods, receiving
Appeals, and exercising some peculiar Acts of Discipline, under the Regulation
of Ecclesiastical Canons; which is the Power now ascribed to Archbishops and
Metropolitans.

8. That yet there cannot be one constitutive Ecclesiastical Regent Head in a
National, much less in the Universal Church; not Monarchical, because no one
Bishop has an original Right to govern the rest in any Nation, and therefore
whatever Power may be granted him by Consent, yet it is not essential to the
Being or Unity of the Church, which is one, not by being united under one
superior governing Power, but by living in one Communion; not Aristocratical,
because every Bishop being supreme in his own Diocese, and accountable to
Christ for his Government, cannot and ought not so wholly to divest himself of
this Power, as to be in all Oases necessarily determined and overruled by the
Major Vote, contrary to his own Judgment and Conscience; he is always bound to
live in Christian Communion with his Colleagues, while they do not violate the
Terms of Catholic Communion; and as far as possibly he can, he must comply
with their Decrees to preserve Peace and Order; but if they should decree any
thing, which he judges prejudicial to his Church, he is bound not to comply
with them; because the chief Care of his Church is committed to him, and he
cannot so entirely give away the Government of it to others. From whence it
appears, that all the Bishops in a Nation, much less all the Bishops in the
World, cannot unite into such a College, as shall by a supreme Authority,
govern all Bishops and Churches by a Major Vote, which is the Form of
Aristocratical Government: And for the same Reason a National Church considered
as a Church, cannot be under the government of a Democratical Head, for if the
College of Bishops have not this Power, much less has a mixed College of
Bishops and People.

Let any impartial Reader now judge, wherein I contradict my self in this
Scheme of Church Government: I acknowledge the Church to be a governed Society,
to have a pars Imperans and Subdita; for every Bishop is the Governor of his
own Church, and thus the whole Church is governed by parts. I deny, that there
is any one constitutive Regent Head of a National or Universal Church; because
every Bishop is the supreme Governor of his Church, and cannot so absolutely
part with his original Right to any Bishop, or College of Bishops, as to
oblige himself to govern his Church by their Order and Direction, though
contrary to his own Judgment and Conscience; but yet the Episcopacy is one,
because all Bishops have the same Power, and are bound to live in the same
Communion, and to govern their several Churches by mutual Advice and Consent;
and in order to this, may unite themselves in stricter Associations and
Confederacies, under such Rules of Government, as do not encroach upon the
unalienable Rights and Power of the Episcopacy: And this is sufficient to make
them one Church, for if the Catholic Church be one by one Catholic Communion,
why may not the National Church be one, by one Communion? And those guilty of
Schism, who separate without just Cause from such a National Union of Churches,
though it were not backed by any Civil Authority or humane Laws?

And now I doubt not, but every intelligent Reader, will think it needless to
give a particular Answer to the cavilling Objections of Mr. Baxter and Mr.
Humphrey, but I must beg his patience (for the sake of others, who are very
unwilling to understand these Matters) while I particularly apply, what I have
now discoursed, in Answer to them; being ashamed, that I am forced to prevent
such wilful or ignorant Mistakes, by so frequent a Repetition of the same
things; but I consider, it is better to do this effectually once, than to be
obliged to write, as often as these men can spit Books.

The original Dispute was concerning the constitutive Regent Head of the Church
of England; in Answer to which Question, who is the constitutive Regent Head of
the Church of England, I 1. distinguished between a National Church, considered
as a Church, and as incorporated into the State, and 2. reinforced the Deans
Answer to this Question; and though I know not any one thing, that need be
added to what I have already Discoursed in the 7th. Chapter of the Defense, yet
this being the Chief, and almost only Place my Adversaries have thought fit to
fix on, to show their great Abilities, I shall briefly review this Dispute in
the same Method, which I before observed, that I may not confound my Readers
with altering the state of the Question.

I distinguish between a National Church, Defense, p. 558.
considered as a Church, and as a Church incorporated with the State; this Mr.
H. says, is no good distinction, because the Church is National only under the
last Consideration, i. e. as incorporated with the State. Reply, p. 130.
The Church of Christ considered in its self, is either Universal or
Particular, but it must be considered as incorporated in the State, to make it
National. Now this is said without any Reason, and therefore might be as well
denied, without assigning any Reason for such a Denial; but to satisfy Mr. H.
in this Point, I answer.

That the Church, considered as a Church, is not necessarily considered, either
as Universal or Particular. The essential Notion of a Christian Church, is a
Body or Society of men confederated in the Faith, and for the Worship of Christ
under such Church Officers, as he has appointed: That this Church is
Universal, is founded on the Laws of Catholic Communion, which unites all
particular Societies of Christians into one Body; that it is divided into
particular Churches, is owing to the Necessity of things, for since all
Christians in remote and distant places of the World, cannot all worship God
together, nor live under the Care and Government of one Bishop, this makes it
necessary, that the Episcopal Office and Power be divided into many hands, and
the Multitude of Christians divided into many particular Churches, under their
proper Pastors, but in the same Communion.

Now if Catholic Communion makes all the Churches in the World, one universal
Catholic Church, and a particular Communion, makes a particular Church, why
does not a National Church Communion make one National Church? A Church is a
Church, considered as a Religious Body and Society of Christians, as I have now
described it, but it is Universal, National, or Particular, from the different
degrees and kinds of Communion, and therefore Churches joined in National
Communion are properly called a National Church, though there were no Christian
Prince to head it.

And that a National Church is of a distinct Consideration, as it is a Church,
and as incorporated with the State, I proved in the Defense from this Topic,
that de facto, p. 558.
there have been, and may be still, National Churches, when the Prince and
great numbers of the People are not Christians. For Patriarchal and
Metropolitan combinations of Churches, are of the same Nature with what we call
National Churches, and such there were in the times of Paganism under Heathen
and persecuting Emperors. To which Mr. H. Answers, A Patriarchal Church, and a
Metropolitan Church, is not a Church National. A Patriarchate may contain in it
the Churches of many Nations; A Metropolitan but half the Christians of one,
and so the one is too bigg, and the other too little to be a National Church,
and a Diocesan much less: But what is this to the Purpose? Can Mr. H. prove,
that a Patriarchate must of necessity be always larger, and a Metropolitan
Church always less than a Nation? Might not a National Synod before the
Conversion of Princes to the Christian Faith have set up a Patriarch, or
Metropolitan over themselves? and may not the Kings of England, France, and
Spain, do so still, if they please? And yet I did not say, that a Patriarchal
or Metropolitan Church, was a National Church, but of the same Nature with a
National Church, that is, they were a voluntary Combination of Churches,
founded on the Laws of Catholic Communion, antecedent to any civil
Conjunction, by the Laws and Authority of Princes; and I would fain know any
Reason, why all the Christian Churches in a Nation may not thus unite, and why
Churches thus united, may not be called a National Church, though they were not
Confirmed and Established by humane Laws; though the Prince, and great part of
his Subjects, were Infidels, Heretics or Schismatics.

But Mr. H. observes, that I say, Reply, p. 131.
I cannot tell, why it is accidental to the Church of Christ to be National,
any more than to be Universal, or Patriarchal and Metropolitical, any more than
Universal, and Answers, But when I tell him, that the Body of Christ (which is
his Church) may subsist, though there were never a Patriarch, or Metropolitan
in the Earth; I hope, he can see (if he will) how the Consederation of the
Church, as Patriarchal or Metropolitical, and so National, must be accidental
to it. I am very willing to see any thing, I can; but I can see nothing here,
but his Mistake. That the Church cannot subsist without a Patriarch or
Metropolitan, I never said yet, nor does he produce any place, where I have
said it, for what he says, are not my words, but his own Comment. All that I
say is this, that the Association and Confederacy of neighbor Churches is
founded on the Law of Catholic Communion, and that Catholic Communion cannot
be maintained without it; that such Combinations of Churches in several Nations
and Provinces there were, long before there were any Christian Princes, and may
be so still, though there were no Christian Kings in the World, and therefore
that a Church may be National, without being incorporated into the State.

It is true, since the first Records of Church History, these greater
Combinations of Churches, have by mutual Consent had a Patriarch, Primate, or
Metropolitan set over them, and therefore we cannot speak of these Churches in
the Ancient Language, without calling them Patriarchal or Metropolitical
Churches; but my Argument does not proceed upon the Union of Churches under a
Patriarch or Metropolitan, but upon their Association for Advice and Council,
and Discipline, for the preservation of Catholic Communion.

There may be such Associations without a Patriarch or Metropolitan; but the
universal Church has always thought it most convenient to have one; and Mr. H.
is greatly mistaken to think, that every thing, which is not essential to a
Church, is accidental. There are a great many prudential Constitutions in
Societies, which are of great use to the wellbeing of a Society, though not of
absolute necessity to its being; and he would be thought a very mean
Politician, who should call the Results of the best Reason and Consideration,
and most mature advice for the public Good, accidental Constitutions.

The Union of neighbor Churches for Worship, Discipline and Government, is not
accidental to the Church, but the necessary Result of Catholic Communion,
which is a binding Law to all Churches, and hereon I found a National Church;
The Superiority and Jurisdiction of Patriarchs or Metropolitans, is not
essential to the Church, but a present Ecclesiastical Constitution, which ought
not to be called Accidental, unless when they are the Results of Chance, or the
Effects of Folly, Ignorance, and Rashness, like Mr. H's accidental National
Church, patcht up of forty separate Communions, united in an accidental Head;
but this man, I perceive, is an Epicurean Divine, who makes the Church, as that
Philosopher did the World, by a fortuitous jumble of Atoms.

But at last, Mr. H. grants me all that I ask, with reference to National
Churches; for to prove, That the Union of all the Christian Churches in a
Nation into one Body and Society, is no more an accidental Consideration of the
Church, than the universal Church it self is, Defense, p. 561.
I observed, That our Savior gave Command to his Apostles to go teach all
Nations, and to plant Churches in them, and therefore this was the Intention of
our Savior, that there should be Churches in all Nations, as well as in all
the World; and if all the Churches in the World must make but one Church, then
certainly much more must all the Churches in a Nation be but one; which are in
a nearer Capacity of Communion with each other, than the Churches of all the
World are, and whereby Catholic Unity and Communion may be more easily
preserved, than if all the Churches in a Nation were single and independent;
there being a more easy correspondence between Nations, than between every
Town and City in distant Nations. To this Mr. H. replies. Reply, p. 131.
And as for Christ's Command of planting Churches in the whole World, and so in
Nations, and Cities and Towns, requiring Unity and Communion every where among
Christians (i. e. the Unity and Communion of one Body, for that is my meaning)
it may warrant the Combinations of Patriarchal, Metropolitical, National,
Diocesan, and Parochial Churches to this end ( i. e. to maintain one Catholic
Communion) if he please, provided only, that these Forms be held only
accidental Forms, according to humane prudence, and not the Essential Form of
the Church of Christ, according to divine Institution. But we are not a talking
of Church-forms, but of Church Communion. The Patriarchal or Metropolitical
Church-form is an Ecclesiastical Constitution, though not therefore accidental,
as I observed before; but Catholic Communion is a divine Institution, and
therefore the Combinations of Churches for Catholic Communion is divine also,
See the Defense, p. 258.
though the particular Forms of such Combinations may be regulated and
determined by Ecclesiastical Prudence, which differs somewhat from what we call
mere humane Prudence, because it is not the Result of mere natural Reason, but
founded on, and accommodated to a divine Institution.

Now if Mr. H. will, as we see at last he does, own such Combinations of
Churches into one Body for Catholic Communion, according to our Saviors, that
is, a divine Institution, then we find a National Church antecedent to any
humane Laws, and of a distinct Consideration from a Church incorporated into
the State. But after all, I wonder what Church-form Mr. H. will own to be of
divine Institution, since he says, that Patriarchal, Metropolitical, National,
Diocesan, and Parochial Churches, must be held only accidental forms according
to humane prudence, there is no form left, that I know of, but an independent
Church-form, to be of divine Institution; and if Mr. H. will own this, farewell
to Catholic Communion, for Independency in the very Nature of it, is a Schism,
as I have proved in the Defense.

There is one thing more Mr. H. says, which, because it is very pleasant, I
reserved to the last. Reply, p. 130.
Mr. H. proves a National Church, to be an accidental Consideration of a
Church, because, that to the being of a National Church it is necessary, that
all the People of the Nation should be Christians, and that the King should be
so also, both which are very accidental things, and therefore a National Church
is an accidental Church, now I proved in the Defense, that neither of these was
necessary to make a Church National; and all the Answer he gives to it, is
this; When we speak of a National Church, our own is always to be understood,
about which the Dispute is and our Church is a National Political Church, no
otherwise but upon this account (that is, that the People and the Prince are
Christians) and the Supposition hereof is necessary to it. And a little after
he tells us, By a National Church we commonly understand (I apprehend) a
Political Church, wherein all the particular Christians and Churches in a
Nation, and those only, are combined under the Government, through the supreme
Magistrate, to Church-purposes. This is such a loose description of a National
Church, as may serve almost any purpose; But the whole force of his Reasoning
is this, that the National Church of England (and so other National Churches
under Christian Princes) is incorporated into the State, ergo, it is a National
Church, only as it is incorporated into the State, and the Supposition of this
is necessary to make it a National Church; the last Result of which, is no more
but this, Bellarmine thou lie. I had asserted and proved, that a National
Church may be considered as a Church, and as incorporated into the State, in
Answer to this; Mr. H. says, that the Church of England is a National Church,
only as it is incorporated into the State, which is the thing he ought to have
proved, but he thought it more convenient only to affirm it; how easy is it to
answer Books, if bold denyals, or bold and naked Assertions may pass for an
answer?

Or does Mr. H. indeed think, that because the Church of England is confirmed
and established by Civil Laws, and Sanctions, and humane Authority, therefore
it can be considered as a Church upon no other account? May not the same thing
be considered under different Respects and Relations? Or does he think with Mr.
Hobb's, that Christianity it self can be a Law to us, only considered as the
Law of the Land, because it is now made the Law of the Land? And if Christian
Religion as the Law and Institution of Christ, be of a distinct Consideration
from its being the Law of the Land, so must the Christian Church be too, the
Institution of which is a great part of the Christian Religion, the Sacraments
and Promises, the Remission of sins, and eternal Life being confined to the
Communion of the Church; and the Laws of Princes can as well make a new
Christian Religion, as a new Christian Church; and therefore a National Church
must be distinctly considered as a Church, and as incorporated into the State,
for no Civil Authority can make that to be a Church, which is not a Church, nor
that to be one National Church, which is not one National Communion, one
Communion being necessary to make any Church one, whether it be the Universal,
National, or particular Church. But of this more hereafter.

Having thus vindicated a National Church, and proved it to be a Church, before
and after its incorporation into the State, the next inquiry is, whether a
National Church be a Political Body or Society, now this Dispute will quickly
be at an end, if we do but recover the true State of the Controversy: Mr. B.
asked, what is the constitutive Regent Head of the Church of England? the Dean
denied, that there is any such Head of the Church of England considered as a
Church, though the King be the supreme Head and Governor of the Church, as it
is incorporated into the State: Mr. B. replies, that the Church must have such
a constitutive Regent Head, because every political Society must have one
constitutive Regent Head, or else it is not one Polity: to this I answered in
the Defense of the Dean, that if the Church cannot be a Political Society
without one constitutive Regent Head, then the Church is not a Political
Society, for it neither have nor can have any such constitutive Regent Head on
earth over the whole. That the Church is one, not by one superior Power over
the whole, an informing, specifying, unifying, supreme Power, as Mr. B. calls
it, but by one Communion.

Now Mr. B. in his Answer to me, p. 184.
instead of proving that the Church is such a Political Society, as has one
constitutive Regent Head, he produces his Definition of Politica, and observes,
that Polity is either a Civil or Ecclesiastical Commonwealth. That Hooker and
many others entitle their Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, and Spalatensis 's
learned Volumns are de Republica Ecclesiastica. But what is this to the
purpose? Does Hooker set up one constitutive Regent Head over the Church? Do
any of them prove, that Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity is the same thing? Do
not the Civil and Ecclesiastical Commonwealth differ as much, as the Church
and the State? And therefore he must still prove, that as one supreme Regent
Head is necessary to the Unity of a State or Kingdom, so it is to the Unity of
the Church; which will be a fair Advance toward Popery. And yet I find nothing
like a Proof of this, but a down right Affirmation without any Proof, That the
Regent part, is the Informing part; if it have not one Regent part, it is not
one Society, as Political: If it have none, it is no Polity; if it have many,
it is many. This I grant is true of such Societies, as are one by one supreme
unifying Power; but it is not true of such a Society, as is one, not by one
supreme Power over the Whole, but by one Communion: And such a Society the
Church is, as I largely proved in the Defense, and therefore the Church must be
excepted from Mr. B's Rules and Definitions of Polity.

In another place Mr. B. suspects, Ib. p. 203.
that the Reason of my Opposition to a constitutive Regent Head, is, that I do
not understand the Terms, and therefore he takes pains to instruct me, what a
Regent Head signifies, and what Constitutive signifies. But he has as ill luck
at guessing, as he has at reasoning: For the quite contrary is true; I did
understand the Terms, but did not like the Thing, and therefore opposed it.

But do I not know, That Head is commonly taken for Synonimal with summa
potestas, or the supreme Power? Yes I do, and deny that there is such a visible
Regent Head over a National Church, considered as a Church.

Or do I not know, That a constitutive Cause, in the common Sense of Logicians,
signifies the essentiating Cause, as distinct from the efficient and final.
Yes, I know this too well: A Political Society either has Matter and Form, or
not. If yea, what is the Form, if not the Regent part in relation to the Body?
Its species is the specifying Form, quae dat esse and nomen, and in existence
it is the unifying or individuating Form. But if it have no Form, it is
nothing, and has no name. This is a formidable man at Metaphysics and Logic,
and I do not wonder, he was so often too hard for St. Matthew Hales, (as he
himself tells us, in his late additional remarks on the Life of that excellent
Person, whose Name and Memory is Martyred by such Historians) for I think, few
men of understanding can deal with him.

But the plain English of all these hard words, and Metaphysical subtilty, is
no more but this. That in every Society there is something, which makes it such
a kind of Society, which in allusion to Natural beings, he calls the Form of
it. That a Political Body being a Society under one supreme Government, the
supreme Power must be the Form of it, and therefore the National Church being a
Political Society, considered as a Church, must have a supreme constitutive
Regent Head, as the Form of it. The result of which reasoning is this, that if
the Church be such a Political Society, as has a supreme Regent Head on Earth
(which I always denied) then it must have a supreme Regent Head. Which if Mr.
B. calls Disputing and Proving, I suppose no body else will: But this will be
better understood, by considering Mr. B's Reasons, to prove this supreme Regent
Power to be the constitutive Form of the Church; which follow in the same
place, and are these.

1. If the summa Potestas of the Church be not the constitutive Form, then the
Church is not a Society univocally so called, as all other Political Societies
are, but is Equivocally called a Polity. i. e. then the Church is not a
Political Society, with one constitutive Regent Head, which I readily grant,
and see no inconvenience in it. Though Mr. B. cunningly supposes in his
Argument, what he knows I denied him; that there is such a summa Potestas, or
supreme Regent Power over the whole Church, and then indeed it were absurd to
deny a constitutive Regent Head.

2. Then a Bishop is no constitutive part of a Diocesan Church, nor a
Metropolitan of a Metropolitan Church, nor a Patriarch of a Patriarchal Church,
nor any summa Potestas of any Church: or else the Catholic, and these are not
univocally called Churches. The Force of which reasoning is this; that if there
be not a supreme Regent Head over the whole Church, there cannot be such a
superior Governor over any part of the Church. A Bishop cannot govern his own
Church, unless one Bishop, or College of Bishops be a supreme constitutive
Regent Head over the whole Church: For as for Metropolitans and Patriarchs, I
never owned their original Right to such a Superiority, but ascribe it to
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which are very justifiable, and of great use to
the Preservation of Catholic Communion: And I do not see, what inconvenience
there is in granting, that a particular, and the Catholic Church, are not
univocally called Churches, that is, are not in the same sense called a Church,
any more than in saying, that a Part, and the Whole, are not in the same sense
called the Body of a man, for the Whole contains all the Parts, and a Part is
only a Part of the Whole: All the particular Churches in the World, are
univocally called Churches, as being under the Government of their respective
Pastors, in obedience to the Laws and Institutions of our Savior, the only
universal Bishop of his Church, but the Catholic Church is called a Church,
from the Union of all particular Churches, not only to Christ, the supreme
Regent Head of the Church, but to each other in one Catholic Communion.

3. If the summa Potestas, be not a constitutive part of the Church Catholic,
it is no essential Part; unless by this summa Potestas over the whole Church,
he means Christ (which alters the state of the Question, of which more
presently) it is so far from being an essential part of the Church Catholic,
that it is no part at all; there being no such supreme Power over the whole
Church: But, if so, the Church must be defined without it; and why do they not
give us such a Definition, and tell us, what is the constitutive Form of it, if
this be not? None so blind, as those who will not see. How often have I told
him, what it is, which makes the Catholic Church one Catholic Church, which
is the constitutive Form he enquires after, viz. not one Superior Power over
the whole Church, but one Communion?

4. And then he that denies this summa Potestas, and separateth from it,
denies or separateth from nothing essential to the Church; very right! Why
then do they make obedience essential to a Member? Obedience to what? To one
supreme Regent Head over the Church. Who are they that make such obedience
necessary to a Member? Or may not every Christian be bound to obey his
spiritual Guides, and Pastors, unless there be one supreme Regent Head over the
Catholic Church? Now whatever Lawyers, and men acquainted with the common
Terms of Law and Politics, to whom Mr. B. appeals, may think of such Disputes,
as these; I am confident be they what they will, if they be men of sense, they
will pity the drudgery of answering such trifling Cavils. Though I am glad to
hear Mr. B. own it as a thing beyond Dispute, that a King is the constitutive
Head, that is, the supreme Regent Head of his Kingdom, without whose supreme
Government it is not a Kingdom.

Mr. B. proceeds. But says this Doctor, Its original constitution differs from
secular Forms of Government, by that ancient Church-canon of our Saviors own
decreeing, it shall not be so among you, which I alleged to prove, that the
Church could not be a Political Society in Mr. B's notion of it, with a supreme
constitutive Regent Power over the whole: To which Mr. B. answers, There is
some hope in this Citation. It seems he thinks, that by these words Christ
forbad any constitutive Supreme under him in his Church. Yes verily I do think
so. Why then does the man so fiercely dispute for it, against it he means
surely, for that I have professedly done, but never disputed for it yet. If
there be none, we are agreed: In good time; why then does he and Mr. H. so
rudely scorn and deride the Dean, as one who has betrayed the Church, by
denying the necessity of a constitutive Regent Head? I may be a young Doctor,
as he pleasantly adds, but I perceive he grows so old, that forgets what he is
for or against.

But he is unwilling this should be my meaning, because this spoils his Notion
of a Political body; and therefore spitefully insinuates what he says he will
not impute to me, that I speak of a Polity that has the Power of the Sword;
and yet immediately after this Complement he pawns his own understanding for
it, that I must mean so. I will therefore rather conclude, that if he know what
he says, I am incapable of knowing, rather than impute this to him; or else
that he takes it to be no Policy, that has not the Power of the Sword: Let the
controversy rest there then, and we will leave it to wiser men to judge
between us.

But Mr. B. and Mr. H. do not agree about that Citation, It shall not be so
among you. Mr. B. thinks it a hopeful Citation, and is agreed with me about it.
Mr. H. says, none but such a forward one, would have alleged it to this
purpose, let them now agree this Matter between themselves.

For now I shall leave Mr. B. a while to hear what Mr. H. says to the main
Dispute. He undertook in Answer to the Dean, to produce an Argument for the
Proof of a constitutive Regent Head of the Church, which Mr. B. was so subtle,
as to prove only by a Definition. His Argument was this. There is a Government
in the Church of England. -- Where there is a Government, H's answer to Doctor
Still. p. 12.
there must be a Political Society; every Political Body consists of a Pars
Regens and subdita, -- If the Church of England then be a Political Church, it
must have a Regent part, and this constitutive Regent part must be assigned. To
this I answered, Defense, p. 565.
by acknowledging that there is a Government in the Church considered as a
Church; and if all Government made a Political Society, then a National Church
may be owned to be a Political Society; for Government by consent without
superiority, is Government: That Church Governors united and governing by
consent, are the pars Imperans; Christian People in obedience to the Laws of
our Savior, submitting to such Government, are the pars Subdita, and all this
is true without a constitutive Regent Head. The plain meaning of which is this.
That there is a Government in the Church, as every Bishop is the Governor of
his own Church, which is but one Government, because all Bishops are bound by
the Laws of our Savior to govern their particular Churches by mutual Advice
and Counsel, and one Consent, as far as is necessary to the ends of Catholic
Communion; and this may be done without any direct superior Power of one
Church, or Bishop, or College of Bishops over all the Churches and Bishops of
the Christian World, which is what Mr. B. calls a constitutive Regent Head over
the whole Church.

Here Mr. H. disputes with great Triumph, and wonders, I should applaud the
Dean for denying the necessity of a constitutive Regent Head of a National
Church (considered as a Church, for that is the state of the Question, which he
is willing to conceal) when I my self have asserted such a Head, viz. Reply, p.
131.
a College of Bishops, governing by consent: But his mistake in this matter,
has been already sufficiently exposed in Answer to Mr. Lob, and he has added
nothing new to deserve a new Consideration.

He says, p. 132.
I understand the term Political, to be commensurate with Civil, but I say, I
never did understand it so, and deny the Church to be a Political Society, only
in Mr. B's notion of Political, who asserts, that every Political body must
have one supreme Regent Head over the Whole; which the Church has not, which is
one, by one Communion, not by one supreme Power.

He says, I have found out a Head for the Church, which is Aristocratical, and
yet thinks the Church cannot be Political, unless it have some Head, that is
Personal, or as if a Head Collective, were not one Head, as well as one that is
Monarchical. Yes, no doubt but it is; but I neither know such a Collective, nor
Monarchical Head.

But do I not assert, p. 133.
That a National Church is a Political Society? Yes, I do assert, that if
Government (as distinguished from one constitutive Regent Head) makes a
Political Society, then the Church, (which is a governed Society) is a
Political Society, for Government by consent without Superiority (i. e. without
one supreme Regent Head) is Government. But if I grant a Government by consent,
understanding by it the Episcopal College, or Cyprians one Episcopacy, as the
governing Part, and the People by the Law of Christ subdite to it, then I have
found out a constitutive Head, and an Ecclesiastical constitutive Head by
Christ's institution: For an united College of Bishops for Government (gratia
Regiminis) is a formal Ecclesiastical Head. I need give no new Answer to this,
having already sufficiently explained, what is meant by St. Cyprian's one
Episcopacy, and the College of Bishops, which is far enough from being such an
Ecclesiastical constitutive Regent Head of the Church.

But to return to Mr. Baxter; Answer to Dr. Sherl. p. 205.
he makes great sport with that Proposition, that Government by consent without
superiority over the pars Subdita, or over the People, who must be subject to
this Government, it is governing sine jure regendi. But then I hope we break
not the 5th. Commandment by disobeying them. But this I suppose, was only to
show his skill in Drollery, and in turning plain sense into nonsense, I wish
at last he would give us as plain a Proof that he understood sense. It were
well indeed for him, that Bishops had no Authority to govern; for then, as he
well observes, they might be Schismatics without sin.

But Mr. B. did not think this answer would satisfy any man, though he knew
the spite of it would greatly entertain a true Fanatic Zeal: And therefore he
adds. But I rather think the Doctor meant without superiority over one another.
Ans. And verily does the Church of England think, that an Aristocracy is no
constitutive Head, or summa Potestas, or form of Policy? Had the Senators at
Rome Power over one another, as such? Or has the Venetian Senate, Or the
Polonian Parliament men? Does this novelty and singularity deserve no word of
Proof, but ipse dixit? See how all Politics are damned with the
non-Conformists, for making Aristocracy a Species of Policy. But I pray you,
use them not all for it as hardly, as you use us. But really thus much of the
World is governed.

Mr. B. I see, (as Mr. H. says) is a man, who understands Politics, and I dare
not pretend to so much skill in the Roman, Venetian, or Polonian government,
but this I think, I can safely say, as little as I know of them, that the
College of Bishops is neither one nor the other, nor any kind of Aristocracy; for
when I speak of a Government without superiority (that is, without a supreme
constitutive Regent Head, which was the Subject of the Dispute) it is as wild
to imagine, that I mean an Aristocracy, which is such a Regent Head, as that,
by without superiority, I mean, governing without superiority over the pars
Subdita. But we must leave Mr. B. to his own way; who thinks he has answered
his Adversary sufficiently, when by a perverse Comment, he has made him speak
or write nonsense; which must be acknowledged the best way of confuting Books,
when he cannot confute the true and genuine sense of them.

But as to the thing; when I say there is a Government in the Church without
superiority, or without a constitutive Regent Head, the plain meaning is this.
That every Bishop is the chief Governor of his own Church, and thus the whole
Church is a governed Society, as every particular Church is under the
Government of its own Pastor; no Bishops, either single or united, having any
direct Authority or Superiority over each other. Now though in Aristocracy,
every individual Patrician and Senator have equal Power, yet the Government is
not in any of these distinct, but in the whole Senate, whether that signify
the Majority of Voices, or the unanimous Vote of every Member of it, and this
makes it properly a Regent Head. But to help Mr. B. to understand this; if
Pride and Interest will give him leave, I shall particularly consider the
difference between Aristocracy, and the Government of the Church by Bishops,
without a Regent Head.

Every Bishop is the supreme Governor of his own Church, but no Senator, merely
as a Senator, has any immediate Right, much less the supreme Right of
Government in any distinct part of the Nation. For the Government of the Whole
is in the Senate, who appoint subordinate Governors, either some of their own
Members, or others; in dependence on themselves, who act not by their own, but
by the Authority of the Senate.

Every Bishop may govern his own Church by his own prudence, has his Arbitrium
proprium, as St. Cyprian speaks; may regulate public Worship, and prescribe
Rules of Discipline for his own Church, without depending on the Authority of
any other Bishop, or Councils of Bishops, nor is accountable to any, while he
preserves the Purity of Faith and Worship, the Unity of the Church, and
Catholic Communion, but no single Senator in an Aristocracy has any Power of
making Laws himself, but only in conjunction with others.

The Combinations of Churches, and the Synods and Councils of Bishops are not
for direct acts of Government and Superiority over each other, but for the
preservation of Catholic Communion, which is most effectually done by mutual
Advice and Counsel, which I think differs a little from the Sovereign Power of
an Aristocracy.

When Neighbor Bishops thus unite into one Body, and agree upon some common
rules of Worship or Discipline, they govern indeed every one their particular
Churches by common Advice and Consent, but still by their own Episcopal
Authority: They do not receive any Authority from the Synod to govern their
Churches, but only agree among themselves upon some common rules of Government,
and therefore the Synod is not a Regent Head, because it gives no new
Authority; which is quite contrary in an Aristocracy, which is the Fountain of
all Power for the Government of such a Nation: Which shows, how well skilled
Mr. H. is in Politics, who thinks, Reply, p. 134.
that if the Bishops rule by a Superiority over the People, that makes it an
Aristocratical Government.

And this may satisfy Mr. B. what I mean by a Government by Consent without
Superiority, or a Regent Head: Which he turns also into Ridicule: It is not a
constitutive Supremacy, but a Supremacy by consent: No Sir, it is no Supremacy
at all; but every Bishop governs his own Diocese by his own Authority, but with
the Advice and Consent of a Synod, or Council, or Neighbor Bishops: A consent
I say, not as to the Power of governing, but as to the Rules of Government. And
therefore I am not concerned to Dispute with him, how far Consent is necessary
to all Government: I shall only observe, how Mr. H. mistakes both the Dean and
me, in what we speak about Consent: The Doctor (he says) holds that Consent is
sufficient to the making a National Church, understanding by Consent, a Consent
to be of it: The Deans Defender holds the Church to be a Government by Consent,
meaning by it the Consent of the Bishops; these are two contrary things, the
one making the Church not Political, and the other makes it an Aristocracy: But
indeed it is neither so, nor so, but Mr. H. understands neither, as appears
from what I have already Discoursed: There is no other Consent required to
become a Member of the National Church, then there is to be a Member of the
Catholic Church, that is, a Consent to be a Christian; for every Christian is
bound to live in Catholic Communion, as a Member of the one body of Christ:
And if Catholic Communion makes all the Churches in the World one Catholic
Church, it makes all the Churches in a Nation one National Church: But that
stricter Combination of Churches in the same Nation under a Patriarch, or
Metropolitan, or National Synods is a National Church Government by consent, as
I have already explained it, which is highly useful to preserve Peace and
Communion between neighbour-Churches, whose neighborhood requires a more close
and intimate Union, than there can be between Churches of different Nations,
under different Princes, and at a greater distance.

There is but one thing more remains to be considered, and so I will put an end
to this Chapter, and squabling Dispute. And that is to vindicate the Deans
Argument against the necessity of Mr. B's. constitutive Regent Head of the
National Church, which in short was this. If every Church must have a
constitutive Regent Part as essential to it, then it unavoidably follows, that
there must be a Catholic visible Head to the Catholic visible Church, and so
Mr. B's constitutive Regent part of a Church has done the Pope a wonderful
kindness, and made a very plausible Plea for his universal Pastorship. Mr. B.
indeed says, that the universal Church is headed by Christ himself, but as the
Dean adds, this does not remove the difficulty; for the Question is about that
visible Church, whereof the particular Churches are parts; and they being
visible parts, do require a visible constitutive Regent Head, as essential to
them; therefore the whole visible Church must have likewise a visible
constitutive Regent part, i. e. a visible Head of the Church.

What Mr. B. and Mr. H. answered to the Deans Argument, I considered and
answered in the Defense, and Mr. B. thought fit to let this Dispute fall; but
Mr. H. who has not discretion enough to know when he is answered, was resolved
to try one trick more with it, and see what Logic will do: And he says, he has
discovered four Terms in the Deans Argument, Reply, p. 135.
and if so, I promise you, it is a very material discovery, and the Argument
must be false and fallacious, nay, it seems, I have done worse than the Dean,
and have put in a 5th. Term, this is foul play I confess, but let us hear, how
it is. I will tell them both plainly (says Mr. H. who is indeed a very plain
Writer) the Doctor may be ashamed to put in a fourth Term into his Argument,
and this man truly takes the shame on him by bringing in a fifth also. p. 137.
That which Mr. Baxter said, was this. That every proper Political Church must
have a constitutive Head, and the Doctor both leaves out the words proper
Political, and brings in the term Visible; Therefore the Catholic Church (says
he) must have a constitutive visible Head. The Interposer now to take off the
shame from the Doctor, has taken the right Course (I say) for he comes and
does worse, and that is, puts in a fifth term into the Argument; if every
Church (when he should say, every proper Political Church only, if he speaks to
Mr. Baxter) must have a visible subordinate constitutive Head, then must the
Catholic Church have such a one; but that not having such a one, a National
Church, as well as the Catholic, may be without a constitutive Head. I was in
a horrible fright, when I heard four and five terms, and began to blush at it;
but if this be all the Business, I shall be able to bear this shame very well.

As for the Deans leaving out the terms proper Political, I gave a reasonable
account of that in the Defense, which Mr. H. takes no notice of: For Mr. B.
defines a proper Political Church to be a Church, which has one constitutive
Regent Head, and therefore the Dean denies, that a National Church is a proper
Political Church, considered as a Church, in Mr. B's sense of the Words, and
this certainly was reason enough to leave it out, and yet to gratify Mr. H. we
will take it in, if he will but allow the Catholic Church to be as proper
Political a Church, as the National Church is; and then the Argument runs thus.
If a National Church, as a proper Political Church, must have a National
constitutive Regent Head, as essential to it; then the Catholic Church as a
proper Political Church, must have a Catholic visible Regent Head essential to
it. And thus I think it comes much to one, and let Mr. B. and Mr. H. take their
choice.

But what shall we do with the Deans fourth term the visible Head, time was,
when Mr. B. and Mr. H. thought this no inconvenience at all, nor any
surreptitious fourth term crept into the Argument, but learnedly disputed, that
Christ is the visible Head of the Catholic Church; and therefore the Catholic
Church has a visible Head, as well as the National Church. But let us briefly
consider, whether visible be a fourth Term, or only added as a necessary
Explication of Mr. B's Proposition, if he mean any thing by it: For I think
Logicians distinguish between a fourth Term, and an additional explication of
the Terms.

Mr. B. disputes, that every proper Political Church, and therefore a National
Church must have a constitutive Regent Head: Does he mean by this constitutive
Regent Head, a visible Head on Earth, or an invisible Head in Heaven? If he
means Christ as an invisible Head in Heaven, then there is no Dispute between
us; for we will readily grant, that Christ is the Head of the National, as well
as of the Catholic Church: If he means a visible Head on Earth, then Visible
is no fourth Term, but only an explication of what Mr. B. means by a
constitutive Regent Head: And then the Argument holds good from a National, to
the Catholic Church. That if a National Church, as a proper Political Church,
must have a visible Constitutive Regent Head on Earth essential to it; then the
Catholic Church, as a proper Political Church, must have a visible
constitutive Regent Head on Earth essential to it; or Mr. B's Argument is not
true, that every proper Political Church must have a visible Regent Head on
Earth essential to it.

Thus, I think, the Dean is once more defended, but I must speak one good word
for my self too, as Charity obliges me. Mr. H. says, I bring in a fifth Term,
subordinate visible Head. But this is only a farther explication of Mr. B's
Terms to prevent their cavilling evasions. Mr. B. says, every proper Political
Church must have a constitutive Regent Head; does he mean this of Christ, as
the supreme Head of his Church; or of men, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical
Persons, as a subordinate Head under Christ? if the first, there is no dispute
between us; for Christ is the Head of every part of his Church: If the second,
a subordinate Head, then subordinate is neither a fourth nor a fifth Term, but
included in a constitutive Regent Head; and I think I need not spend time to
prove, that Mr. H's instance of adding Monarchical, to a visible subordinate
constitutive Regent Head, is not a parallel case; because Monarchical would be
properly a fourth Term, as not being necessarily involved in a constitutive
Regent Head, as Visible and Subordinate are; for a constitutive Regent Head may
be either Monarchical or Collective, but signifies neither determinately,
unless it be expressed.

I shall only observe, how Mr. B. and Mr. H. are apparently guilty of this
fallacy themselves, of introducing a fourth and a fifth Term in answer to the
Deans Argument. If a National Church, as a proper Political Church, must have a
constitutive Regent Head, then the Catholic Church as a proper Political
Church must have a constitutive Regent Head: Yes, says Mr. B. and Mr. H. so it
has; for Christ is the constitutive Regent Head of the Catholic Church. Where
we plainly see, that in the Antecedent, by a constitutive Regent Head, they
understand a Visible, Subordinate, and Mr. H. says, an accidental Head of the
Church; and in the Consequent, a supreme invisible Head of the Church, which is
as fallacious a way of answering, as it is of arguing. And now I leave the
Reader to judge, where the shame, which Mr. H. so much talks of, must at last
rest. But Ignorance and Insensibility (...) as great a security to some men
against shame, as Impudence is to others.

CHAP. V. Concerning that one Communion, which is essential to the Catholic
Church, and the practicableness of it.
IN the eighth Chapter of the Defense, I briefly stated, what the Communion is,
which is essential to the Catholic or Universal Church; and what place there
can be for this Catholic Communion, in this broken and divided state of the
Church, which we see at this day. Mr. B. in his Answer, Chap. 6. attempts to
say something to it, but it is such a something, as needs no farther answer;
for it all proceeds upon his own blundering or wilful mistakes about the nature
of Christian Communion, and a supreme Regent Head of the Catholic Church: And
both these I have discoursed so fully already, that I cannot excuse my self to
my Reader, should I repeat over the same things again; and therefore I shall
only briefly consider some few new Objections he has started, which though they
are very trifling, yet may disturb an injudicious Reader.

I asserted, That Catholic Communion strictly so called, Defense p. 595.
consists, 1. In the agreement and Concord of the Bishops of the Catholic
Church among themselves, and with each other. Here Mr. Baxter (1) plays the
Critic: He knows not, he says, how Agreement and Concord differ; nor among
themselves, and with each other: Nor it may be, Answer. p. 212.
is there any material difference between them; but is this such an
unpardonable fault, to use Synonomous words, especially when a man has to deal
with such cavillers? It is a good sign Mr. B. has no great matter to say, when
he condescends to play at so low a game.

1. But he adds, does this man dream, that no Bishops are Christians and
Catholics, that have any disagreement? That is no two in the World. I hope
many Bishops agree better than Mr. B. thinks they do; who agreeing with no body
himself, judges of others by his own wrangling humor: But yet I believe
Bishops may disagree about many things, and yet preserve the Concord and Unity
of the Episcopacy in one Catholic Communion: St. Cyprian, I am sure, thought
this very possible, when he allows of such differences without breaking
Communion; and that in so high a point, as the rebaptization of Heretics.

2. But is Communion of Bishops only necessary to Church-unity? Why not of
Presbyters also? Communion of Presbyters with their Bishop, is essential to the
Unity of a particular Church, as I had discoursed in the 6th. Chapter of the
Defense; but the Union of one Church with another, principally consists in the
Agreement and Concord of Bishops, who are the chief Governors of their
Churches: And those Presbyters, who live in Communion with their Bishop, are
supposed to live in Communion with those, who are in Communion with him: Or if
any Presbyter should dissent, this makes no schism between the Churches, only
makes him himself a Schismatic.

3. But, says Mr. B. Who doubts but there must be Communion? I am glad to hear
this is out of doubt; I assure him, I do not doubt of it. But the Question is,
whether it must be in or under an Aristocratical Sovereign? But whose Question
is this Sir? It is none of mine, for I always denied it, and made no question
about it: I suppose you would have said, this should have been the Question,
and then you had had something to say to it. It is a troublesome thing, I
confess, to meet with a perverse Disputant, who denies wrong, and chooses that
side of the Question, which we are not prepared to oppose.

Well, but I assert out of St. Cyprian, That no man can have the Authority or
Honor of a Bishop, who does not preserve the Peace and Unity of the
Episcopacy, that is, who does not live in Unity with his Fellow-Bishops. Here
Mr. B. suppresses the name of St. Cyprian, whose Authority is venerable in the
Christian Church, and leaves out the Peace and Unity of the Episcopacy, and is
resolved to confute this raw pitiful notion under the name of Sherlock, not of
St. Cyprian; and thus he assaults it.

Ans. But what Unity? No one that lives not in a Union in the essentials of
Christianity and Ministry? But Chrysostom and Theophilus Alex. and Epiphanius,
might all be Bishops, though they had much discord, and condemned one another.
And so might Cyril, and Memnon, and Johan. Antioch, and Theodoret, and the
Orthodox, and the Novatians, and the Eastern and Western Bishops since; and the
Old and the New sort of English Bishops, if they differ not tota Specie.

I wondered this tota Specie did not come in before: For these Quarrels and
Contentions of Diocesan Bishops is one principal Argument, whereby Mr. B.
proves, that they differ tota Specie, from the true Apostolical, i. e.
Parochial Bishops; and we have got some ground by this, that he owns, they may
be Bishops, notwithstanding they had much Discord, and condemned one another.

As for the Novatian Bishops, who were guilty of a formal Schism from the
Catholic Church, they may be called Bishops, as the Novatian People might be
called Christians, which I have already given a particular Account of from St.
Austin, but they were not Catholic Bishops, as the Novatians were not
Catholic Christians; though for ought I perceive Mr. B. thinks the Novatians
as good Bishops as the Orthodox.

As for the Case of St. Chrysostom, Theophilus Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius,
that was a personal Quarrel, and though this indeed destroyed that Unity, which
ought to have been maintained between these good men, who were all of them
Bishops, yet it did not destroy the Peace and Unity of the Episcopacy, which
was the only Unity of Bishops, I asserted necessary to Catholic Communion;
though Mr. B. was pleased to conceal that, to make his Argument appear more
plausible. The Unity of the Episcopacy consists in this, that all Bishops live
in the Communion of the same Church, as members of the same Body, and as near
as they can, govern their Churches by mutual Advice and Consent; This St.
Chrysostom, and Theophilus, and Epiphanius did in the height of their Quarrel:
They owned the same Church, and governed their respective Churches by the same
Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons, which preserved served the Unity of the
Episcopacy: But Theophilus had a personal Quarrel against St. Chrysostom, and
drew Epiphanius and some other Bishops to his side, and did at last prevail so
far, as to depose him, very undeservedly. This was a very great fault in these
good men, a very scandalous breach between these Bishops, but no Schism in the
Episcopacy: For they still acknowledged the same Order, the same Communion, and
the same Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline. But of this more anon.

I observed in the Defense, Defense, p. 596.
that there were several ways, whereby this Communion among Bishops was
expressed and maintained. As 1. By writing Letters to, and receiving Letters
from one another about Church Affairs; and I instanced in their sending the
names of any Bishops elected into vacant Sees, that they might know, who were
Catholic Bishops, and who not. To this Mr. B. answers. 1. So do the
Independents and Presbyterians; what do they do? Write Letters? No doubt of it!
And so did the Novatians, and the Donatists, and yet were Schismatics for all
that. And this was one reason, why the Catholic Bishops gave an account to
each other, who were their Colleagues, that so they might be aware of the
Letters of Schismatics. I hope, it is no argument, that Catholic Bishops
cannot express and maintain Catholic Communion by such Letters, because
Schismatics may in the same way maintain a Schismatical Confederacy. But says
Mr. B. do none this ( i. e. write Letters) but a Sovereign Senate? Yes,
particular Bishops did, as I instanced in St. Cyprian, who sent a Catalogue of
the names of Catholic Bishops to Cornelius. But 2. Is this the Communion that
unifyeth the Church? I hope it is a Church, and men are members of it, before
they write Letters. No doubt at all! But did I say, that the Communion of the
Church consisted in writing Letters, or that it was expressed and maintained by
it? Mr. B. is a very unhappy man at distinctions; he can never find a good
distinction, when there is want of it; and never wants distinctions, where
there is no difference.

2. The next way of maintaining Catholic Communion among Bishops, I observed,
was by advising together about the public affairs of the Church, and
Communicating Counsels with each other, and giving an account of the reasons of
their Actions, (that there might be no misunderstanding between them) these
last words, which I have included in a Parenthesis, Mr. Baxter has left out of
his Citation, because they did too plainly discover, how this mutual Advice and
Counsel did tend to maintain Catholic Unity. And answers, 1. This Independents
are ready to do: What then? Does it hence follow, that they are Catholic
Bishops? Schismatics may do many things, which true Catholic Christians do,
and be Schismatics still. 2. How does this differ from the former? Do you not
mean advising by Letters or Messengers? If not, is it general Councils you
mean, or what? I told my meaning very plain: Sometimes one particular Bishop
writ to another. Sometimes Neighbor Bishops met in Provincial Synods, and sent
their Synodical Letters to Foreign Churches. But this is writing Letters
still, and how does it differ from the former? Why Sir, only as a Letter
containing an account of the present state of the Church, what Bishops die, and
who are ordained in their stead, who are Catholics, and who are Schismatics,
does from a Letter of Advice and Counsel, etc. but how is it we must advise
with them of Armenia, Abassia, and the rest? When Mr. B. can prove, that I make
it necessary to do so, I will undertake to find out a way to do it; but this,
and what follows about Provincial Counsels, has been sufficiently considered
above.

3. Mr. B. proceeds, But how? Is it only public Affairs that the College
advises you about? The Man dreams, who talks of the advice of the College?
Who is it then that must dispose of the Church, State, and Souls of all us
Individuals? Every particular Bishop with the assistance of his Presbyters,
must take care of his own Church, and the Souls committed to him; and that he
may do this the better, in all difficult (...), especially such as concern the
whole Church, must take the best Advice of his Fellow-Bishops, that he can,
where is the absurdity of all this? Surely Mr. B. makes himself more ignorant
than he is, when he adds, It seems it is some body below the Senate, that is
meant, when we are told, that we must obey the universal Church. I thought
whither it would come at last. And well he might think whither it would come,
when he was resolved whither to carry it.

3. I observed another way of expressing and maintaining this Catholic
Communion, was by Letters of recommendation granted to Presbyters, or private
Christians (who had occasion to travel) from those Churches of which they were
members, to other Churches, whither they went, which were called Formed or
Communicatory Letters, the use of which I there explained. To which Mr. Baxter
answers. 1. Are not all these three Proofs the same, writing Letters of
Church Affairs, Consultation, and Communication? Yes, writing Letters is
writing Letters most certainly, but I imagine there may be some difference with
reference to the Subject about which men write: And that Letters of
recommendation differ something from Letters of advice. 2. Do any of us deny
his Conclusion, that this proves Communion among them? Why then does he not
own this Catholic Communion which I contend for, and which infallibly proves
him to be a Schismatic? No, but I should prove an Episcopal College, as one
Aristocratical supreme Regent Head. I thank him for nothing, I am not at
leisure to write such Books on purpose for him to confute them.

But, 3. He says, these communicatory Letters the Non-conformists are greatly
for; that no man may be admitted to Communion in any particular Church, without
either a Personal understanding, owning of his Baptismal Covenant, or a
Testimonial, that he has done it, and been received into Communion with some
Church, with whom we have such Communion as is due between several Churches.
Quidlibet ex Quolibet! How cleverly has Mr. B. turned these Communicatory
Letters into an examination by Lay Elders, or an Independent Church Covenant;
and the one Communion of the Catholic Church, into such a Communion as is due
between several Churches? I could wish as heartily as Mr. B. that greater care
were taken in the Discipline of the Church, though they who make the greatest
Complaints of the want of it, are the true cause of this defect. But what is
this to Communicatory Letters? Or what if Schismatics are for Communicatory
Letters among themselves, are they ever the less Schismatics for that? All
that I designed to prove by these Communicatory Letters, was this; that the
Ancient Church did believe, that every Christian as a Christian was a member of
the Catholic Church, and had a right to Christian-communion where he came;
which cannot be, unless all Christians are one Body, and all particular
Churches, members of one Catholic Church.

And here I had occasion to express my dissent from a very great man, whose
memory is as dear and venerable to me, as to most of his particular and
intimate Friends. I mean Dr. Barrow, and I think I express my dissent from him
with all that modesty, and just respect, which is due to his memory. I
acknowledged that he had abundantly confuted that notion of a Constitutive
Regent Head of the Catholic Church, but yet that he made Catholic Communion
too arbitrary a thing, like the Confederacies of Sovereign Princes. I should be
heartily glad to see my self confuted in this point, and to find that I was
mistaken in his judgment in this matter; if at least it may be called his
Judgment, and not rather his Inadvertency.

I will not dispute with Mr. B. about the judgment of this Reverend Person; for
I do not find, that he understands either of us: I am sure he urges such things
in his Defense, as that great man would be ashamed of; and I will not be so
injurious to his memory so much as to repeat them: I may have occasion to take
notice of what he says upon some other score, but Dr. Barrows name shall not be
concerned in it.

And now I come to the grand difficulty of all, which I did but just name in
the Defense: What place there can be for Catholic Communion in this broken and
divided state of the Church, which we see at this day: If there be no Catholic
Church without Catholic Communion, where shall we find the Catholic Church at
this day, when so very few Churches live in Communion with each other? This
makes some men suspect, that Catholic Communion is a pretty Romantic notion
of a Catholic Church, but so impracticable, that it is of no use to us now,
nor will put an end to any one Controversy or Schism in the Christian Church.
But this difficulty, when it is thoroughly examined, will vanish of it self. For

1. That there are Schisms in the Christian Church, is certainly no very good
Argument against the necessity of Catholic Communion; and yet this is the
whole force of the Objection: That if Catholic Communion be essential to the
Catholic Church, we must reduce the Catholic Church into a very narrow
compass, and un-Church most of the Christian Churches in the World, as not
maintaining this Catholic Communion: If this be so, I am heartily sorry for
it, as every good man will be for the Degeneracy and Apostasy of any part of
the Christian Church. But would Mr. Baxter have me frame some new Notions of
Catholick-unity and Schism, to justify the many Schisms and Separations of the
Christian World? Must we fit our Notions of Church-unity to the present divided
state of the Church, or endeavor to reduce a broken and divided Church to a
true Primitive state of Unity? Suppose I had proved, that Catholic Doctrine
instead of Catholic Communion, had been only essential to the being of the
Catholic Church, and such another Objector as Mr. B. should urge me with this
inconvenience, that then there are very few Churches, that are true Members of
the Catholic Church: Because in most Ages, and at this day, there are such
great breaches between several famous Churches about what they think the most
fundamental Articles of our Faith; must I therefore deny the necessity of
Catholic Doctrine to a Catholic Church, for fear of that inference, that then
there are many large and famous Churches, which are not true Catholic
Apostolic Churches? This is the way, I confess, never to be without a
Catholic Church; to make the Catholic Church to be what the present Churches
are, not what they ought to be: But it is the way also to make a new
Christianity in every Age.

And this is the more considerable, because many of the Schisms, which now are,
and have been in many Ages of the Church, are owing to different apprehensions
in matters of Faith, which either are, or have been thought to be Catholic
Doctrines: Such are the differences between the Greek and Latin Churches; the
Church of Rome, and the Reformed Churches; the Lutheran and Zuinglian Churches:
So that Mr. B. must either find out a Church without Catholic Doctrine, as
well as without Catholic Communion, or must reduce the Catholic Church almost
into as narrow a compass for want of Catholic Doctrine, as for want of
Catholic Communion: Unless he can prove, that these doctrinal Disputes are not
of that Moment, as to cause Schisms in the Church; and then he will mightily
enlarge Catholic Communion, and answer this formidable Objection himself.

II. No man can pretend, that Catholic Communion is in its own nature
impracticable, because it was de Facto, religiously observed in the Primitive
Church for several Ages. Thus it was in St. Cyprian's, thus it was in St.
Austin's time, who made Catholic Communion essential to the being of a
Catholic Church: And that cannot reasonably be thought an impracticable
Notion, which has been practiced in the Christian Church, and which is equally
necessary to be practiced in all Ages.

III. For what should hinder all good Christians from maintaining Communion
with all Christian Churches, which are sound and orthodox in Faith, and
Worship? If there be such Churches to be found in France, in Germany, in
Holland, etc. What should hinder any sober Christian, who travels into those
Countries and understands their Language, from joining with them in all acts of
Worship, as Members of the same Body of Christ? Those Churches, which are not
sound and Orthodox, are not the Objects of Christian Communion, and it is no
breach of Catholic Communion, not to communicate with them: And nothing can
reasonably hinder our Communion with those, that are. For where there are no
sinful terms of Communion imposed, we are bound to all Acts of Communion, as
opportunity serves.

So that those, who think it such an impossible thing to maintain Catholic
Communion among the Christian Churches of this Age, must necessarily suppose,
that there are very few Churches in the World at this time, which a sound and
orthodox Christian can communicate with; for nothing else can make Catholic
Communion impossible. And if this be true, it is a very sad consideration, and
deeply to be lamented of all Christians, but it is that, which I cannot help:
Catholic Communion is very feasible, when there are (...) Catholic Churches
to communicate with, but when there are none, it cannot be had; or if there be
but a few such, it must be maintained among those few, that are; and that is
true Catholic Communion, which includes all true Catholic Churches, be they
more or less.

But the thing at present to be considered, is this, whether he, who denies any
Church to be a true Catholic Church, which does not maintain Catholic
Communion, makes the Catholic Church any narrower than he does, who denies the
possibility of Catholic Communion, because there are very few Churches, which
a good Christian can safely communicate with. For I suppose, those are no true
Catholic Churches, which a Catholic Christian must not communicate with; and
Catholic Communion may be maintained among all other Churches, whose Communion
is not sinful and dangerous.

As for instance, Answer to Dr. Sherlack p. 189.
Mr. Baxter reckons up twelve Sects of Christians in the World, as Members of
the Catholic Church; his only doubt being concerning the Church of Rome: I ask
Mr. B. then, whether these Churches be so sound and orthodox, that a good
Christian may communicate with them? If they be, then here is a possibility of
maintaining Catholic Communion with all the Churches in the World, at least
excepting the Church of Rome: If they be not, how are they Catholic Churches?
Are those Catholic Churches, which are so corrupt and unsound, that a
Catholic Christian must not own their Communion? Catholic Communion may
certainly be maintained with those Churches, whose Communion is lawful; and I
think it as certain, that those Churches cannot be Members of the Catholic
Church, whose Communion is unlawful.

IIII. We may consider farther, that in this present state of things, there are
not many positive Acts of Communion necessary to preserve Catholic Communion
between Foreign Churches; and therefore Catholic Communion is not so
impracticable, as some may imagine. The Churches of distant Nations cannot
worship God together, nor easily meet for Advice and Counsel, but they may own
and receive each others Members, as occasion serves, which signifies their
Communion with each other. Nay, where there is no breach of Communion, no
declared disowning of each other, nor express denial of any Act of Communion
between distant Churches, those Churches may be said to be in Communion with
each other. There are some Christian Churches, which we know little or nothing
of, nor they of us; but while we break not Communion with any sound part of the
Christian Church, and profess Communion with all that are so, we may be truly
said to live in Catholic Communion with the whole Christian Church.

It is true, as I observed in the Defense, in the Primitive Church they
maintained Communion with distant Churches, by Formed and Communicatory
Letters; by giving notice to each other of the state of their several Churches,
and advising and consulting about Church Affairs; which was a prudent means of
maintaining a stricter Communion and fair Correspondence between them; and was
especially necessary at that time, when they lived under Pagan Emperors, and
the external Unity of the Church was upheld only by Ecclesiastical Authority:
But this was not absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion, and is in a great
measure impracticable now: The Empire being divided into the hands of several
Independent Christian Monarchs, who have the supreme Power in all
Ecclesiastical, as well as civil Causes, there can be no such actual
Correspondence between the Churches of several Nations, but by their consent
and leave: Sovereign Princes, not Subjects, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical
Persons, must treat with one another about the great Affairs of Church and
State, though with the advice of their Civil or Ecclesiastical Counselors: But
still those Churches are in Communion with each other, who own each other as
Members of the same Body, and deny no Act of Christian Communion to each other,
as opportunity serves. And whether this be so very difficult, much less
impossible, let any man judge.

V. To make this appear still more easy and practicable, we may consider, that
the Terms of Catholic Communion are not so straight and narrow, as some men
make them. This is the true reason of most of the Schisms in the Christian
Church, that some rash and inconsiderate People think, that every little
difference, and petty controversy is a sufficient reason to divide the Church
and set up distinct and separate Communions: and have espoused such narrow
Principles of Church Communion, that it is almost impossible any two Churches
should long hang together; much less that all the Churches in the world should
agree in such matters. This Argument deserves a more particular consideration,
as discovering the original of Church-divisions and the cure of them; and
therefore I shall briefly consider upon what terms Catholic Communion may be
maintained in the Christian Church.

Now the terms of Catholic Communion may be reduced to these four general
Heads; 1. Doctrine; 2. Government; 3. Discipline; 4. Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies.

I. As for what concerns the Doctrines of Christianity, I presume my
Adversaries will readily grant, that an agreement in Fundamentals is a
sufficient Foundation for Catholic Communion; and I will as readily grant,
that no Church which denies any Fundamental Article of our Religion, ought to
be owned for a Catholic Church, or received into Catholic Communion. To deny
Communion to any such person, or Church, is no schism, no more than it is to
cut off a rotten and gangreened Member from the Body. And if it should appear,
that many or most Christian Churches are overrun with such Heresies, as
destroy the foundations of Christianity, this must of necessity mightily
straighten Catholic Communion; not because Catholic Communion is in it self
an impracticable notion, but because there are but few Catholic Churches to
communicate with; for it is as necessary a duty not to communicate with
Churches, which renounce Catholic Doctrine, as it is to communicate with
those, which own it; we being under the same Obligations to maintain all
fundamental Doctrines of Faith, as to preserve the Peace and Communion of the
Christian Church: For indeed it is an ill way to preserve the Peace of the
Christian Church, by forfeiting our Christianity, as every fundamental Heresy
does; or to enlarge Christian Communion, by receiving those into our Communion,
who are no Catholic Christians.

And I suppose, none of my adversaries will require me to give such a Catalogue
of fundamental Doctrines, as are necessary to qualify any Church for Catholic
Communion: Both Papist and Protestants in their Disputes about Fundamentals,
have always waved this, and there is no reason any harder terms should be put
upon me; and thus I might end this Dispute honorably enough; for as far as
respects Doctrines, every man must acknowledge, that Catholic Communion, may be
as large as Catholic Doctrine, and that is as large, as it ought to be.

But yet for the greater satisfaction of my Readers, and of my self, I shall
discourse this matter more particularly; for I confess, I do not understand the
reason, why so many great men of our Church, as have writ against the Papists,
since the happy reformation of Religion among us, have been so tender in this
point; if we cannot tell, what are the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity,
how can we be assured, that we, or any other Church do not err fundamentally?
and how can we know, that the whole Church has not so erred, but only by that
general promise, that the whole Church should not fall into fundamental errors?
and if we can tell what Doctrines are fundamental, methinks it is not
impossible, if occasion were, to give a Catalogue of them.

I am far enough from being of that mind, That a Catalogue of Fundamentals is
impossible, because to some, more is fundamental, to others less, to others
nothing at all, because God requires more of them to whom he gives more, and
less of them, to whom he gives less. Which indeed does not only prove, that it
is impossible to assign a Catalogue of Fundamentals, but that there is nothing
in its own nature fundamental in Christianity, but only for every man to
believe, as much of it as he can.

Yet the Caution of so many great men in this Matter, makes me very sensible,
how nice a thing it is to talk of Fundamentals, and what unpardonable arrogance
it would be in any private man, to be peremptory and dogmatical in assigning a
Catalogue of them; and therefore I shall only pretend to make some Essay of
this nature, which the argument I am now engaged in, and the clamorous
Objections of some men extort from me; for if we cannot in some measure tell,
what are the terms of Catholic Communion, Catholic Communion must needs be a
very impracticable notion. And to prepare the way, I shall briefly observe some
few things to prevent some cavilling Objections, and Prejudices against the
following Discourse.

1. That by Fundamentals, I mean such Doctrines as are essential to
Christianity, and distinguish the Christian Religion from all other Religions:
Now if we will acknowledge, that Christian Religion is a fixed and certain thing,
we must acknowledge, that there are such Fundamentals, as are fixed and certain
too, and do not alter with men's different Apprehensions, Capacities, and
Opportunities of Instruction; and if it be possible to understand the true
difference between Christianity, and all other Religions, it is possible to
understand, what the Fundamentals of Christianity are.

2. The greatest difficulty, which is objected against a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, does equally lie against the belief of Christianity it self. The
difficulty is this, that the belief of all Fundamentals is necessary to
Salvation, and therefore whoever assigns a Catalogue of Fundamentals, damns all
those who are of a different Opinion, which therefore is a work fit only for a
daring and uncharitable man, or haereticating Councils, as Mr. Baxter calls
them.

Now in the same manner I may argue against the necessity of the Christian
Faith it self. Whoever asserts it necessary to Salvation to believe in Christ,
damns all Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, and all Infidels, which seems at least as
hard a thing, as to damn all Heretics, who bear no proportion at all to the
number of Infidels; and yet if the Christian Faith it self be necessary to
Salvation, it must be necessary to Salvation, to believe some Articles of the
Christian Faith; for we cannot believe Christianity, without believing such
Articles as contain the essentials of Christian Faith, which do not alter with
the Prejudices, Prepossessions, and Capacities of men, no more than
Christianity it self. And yet neither I, nor any man else, have any thing to do
to pass a final Sentence, either upon Infidels or Heretics, but they must
stand or fall to their own Master. There may be a standing rule of Faith and
Manners, whereby men shall be judged, but how far the sovereign and
uncovenanted Grace of God may dispense with this rule in equitable Cases, is
not my business to determine. But of this more hereafter.

3. I observe, there are some Doctrines, which, if they be true, must be
fundamental Truths, if they be false, must be fundamental Errors; because they
alter the very Foundations of Christianity, and make two very different
Religions of it, as I shall show in what follows. There are indeed a great many
erroneous Doctrines, which make great alterations in the Scheme of Religion, as
all the Antinomian Doctrines do, which yet I cannot call fundamental Errors,
because they make no essential difference in the Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ, which is the great Fundamental of Christianity, as you shall see more
presently; every erroneous Doctrine does not make a new Religion, though it may
in a great measure observe the Glory, or spoil the influence of it upon men's
minds.

4. I observe further, that there are some Doctrines, which are necessary to
Catholic Communion, because the denial of them makes an essential difference
in Christian Worship. Christian Communion is principally exercised in all the
Offices of Christian Worship, and those, who cannot Worship God together,
cannot maintain Christian Communion with each other. Thus the belief or denial
of the sacred Trinity, the incarnation of Christ, the satisfaction of his
death, etc. makes an essential alteration in most of the Acts of Christian
Worship: And we see to this day, the very Gloria Patri, is an effectual bar to
the Socinians, from joining in our Communion. Now that which I am principally
concerned for at present, is such an account of Fundamentals, as is necessary
to maintain Catholic Communion in the Christian World.

To state this matter then, as plainly and briefly as I can, I shall 1.
endeavor to fix the plain notion of fundamental Doctrines, and consequently,
of fundamental Errors. 2. I shall consider the Case of those men, who heartily
believe all the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and yet entertain such
corrupt Doctrines, as in their immediate and necessary Consequences overthrow
Foundations, and whether they may be said to err Fundamentally. 3. How far, and
in what Cases, we may Communicate with such men and Churches, as believe all
Fundamentals, but yet profess such other erroneous Doctrines, as seem to
overthrow Foundations. I think this is all, that is necessary in order to clear
this point of Catholic Communion, as it respects Doctrines.

1. To fix the plain notion of fundamental Doctrines; now a fundamental
Doctrine is such a Doctrine, as is in a strict sense of the essence of
Christianity: A fundamental Doctrine, without which the whole building and
superstructure must fall. The belief of which, is necessary to the very being
of Christianity, like the first principles in any Art or Science, which must be
acknowledged, or else there can be no such Science. Now St. Paul tells us, that
this Foundation is Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.
For other Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
That is, no man can lay any other Foundation for the Christian Religion; for
you destroy the Christian Religion, if you leave Christ out of it. And
therefore the Character the same Apostle gives of Apostates from Christianity,
is that they hold not the Head, 2 Col. 19.
that is Christ. And St. John makes this the sum of Christian Faith. These are
written, 22 Joh. 31.
that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through his Name. And the necessary qualification
of an Apostle, was to be a Witness of the Resurrection, 1 Act. 22.
as the last great Confirmation, which was given to our Saviors Authority; and
the sum of St. Paul's preaching at Athens, was Jesus and the Resurrection,
which the Philosophers of the Epicureans and Stoics mistake for strange Gods.
17 Act. 18.
And the Commission Christ gave his Apostles, 24 Luke 47.
was to preach Repentance and remission of Sins in his Name. So that Salvation
by Christ is the general fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel. Take away this,
and you destroy the essential Character of the Christian Religion, whereby it
is distinguished from all other Religions.

But then as for particular Doctrines and Articles of Faith, those are
Fundamental, which are either necessarily included in, or inseparably conjoined
with this general fundamental of Salvation by Christ. For we must not think it
enough to believe in general, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, without
a more explicit understanding of the meaning of that Proposition; who this
Jesus is, what it is to be the Christ and the Son of God, and how we are saved
by him; and this we must learn from the Revelations of the Gospel; the more
necessary connection there is between any particular Doctrine, and that great
fundamental of Salvation by Christ, the more necessary and fundamental it is;
which seems to me to be the truest and easiest Character, that can be given of
a fundamental Doctrine.

Thus far I think I am safe, but it may be thought a hazardous attempt to
launch out any farther, or particularly to define, what those particular
Doctrines of Christian Religion are, without which we cannot rightly believe
Salvation by Christ. Though I cannot see, but that this may be done safely
enough, if we use due caution in it: and I shall venture to offer something of
this nature, both to satisfy inquisitive men, why such and such Doctrines have
always been accounted fundamental by the Catholic Church, and to distinguish
what is fundamental from some more nice and curious speculations, which is of
mighty use in the present dispute about Catholic Communion.

And not to pretend to give a perfect Catalogue of Fundamentals, I shall only
give a taste of this in some few particulars, which have given occasion to the
fiercest Disputes in the Christian Church.

1. I shall begin with the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, which has in all Ages
been accounted a fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, and has as good
reason to be thought so, as any other, since we are baptized into this belief:
For to baptize into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, according to the most proper signification of the words, and the
exposition of the Catholic Church, signifies to baptize into the Faith and
Worship of the sacred Trinity; as I think, I could easily show at large, were
it proper upon this occasion.

And how essential this belief is to the right understanding of the Doctrine of
man's Salvation by Jesus Christ, which is the comprehensive fundamental of
Christian Religion, will easily be acknowledged by any man, who carefully
considers, how each Person in the ever blessed Trinity is concerned in the
Economy of man's Salvation.

The Father in infinite pity and compassion to fallen man, gives his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have
everlasting Life: He gives him to become man, and to die as a Sacrifice for
sin, and to seal a Covenant of Grace and Mercy in his blood.

The Son moved by the same love and pity, gives himself, becomes man, dies for
the atonement and expiation of our sins; rises again from the dead, and takes
possession of his mediatory Kingdom, becomes the Lord and Judge both of the
quick and the dead, and according to his promise sends his Spirit upon his
Apostles in miraculous gifts and powers, to qualify them for the work of the
Ministry; and bestows the same holy Spirit upon the whole Christian Church, and
every sincere member of it, as an abiding principle of Sanctification, and a
new Life.

The holy Spirit accordingly comes, and dwells in his Church, and in good men,
as in his Temple, sanctifies them in this World to be vessels of Honor, and
will hereafter raise their dead bodies into immortal Life.

So that each Person in the Sacred Trinity is peculiarly concerned in the
Salvation of Mankind; and we cannot truly believe the great fundamental
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, without the belief of the holy Trinity, of
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one eternal and infinite God.

The Godhead of the Father is acknowledged by all, but whoever denies the
Godhead of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, overthrows the whole Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, as it is taught in the new Testament, and makes it quite
another thing, and a very little thing too; as to show this briefly.

He who makes Christ to be either the most excellent Creature, as the Arians
did, or a mere man, as the Socinians do, mightily lessen the Grace and goodness
of God to sinners, which is represented as such a stupendous act of Love, that
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: now if this only
begotten Son, be only the most glorious and excellent Creature, especially if
he be but a mere man, the love and the design is not so stupendous and
astonishing; for God has an equal propriety in all his Creatures, and it is no
such prizing Mystery, that a good God should give one of his Creatures, though
never so excellent, especially if he be but one excellent man, for the
redmption of so many Millions; especially when he promises to reward this
undertaking with such a superexcellent degree of Glory and Power. The love of
God in redeeming us, by what means soever, is very great; but his love in
giving his only begotten Son for our redemption, where Christ himself lays the
emphasis, if this only begotten Son be but a Creature or a man, is not so
wonderful.

Thus it sounds very odly, for a Creature to be the Savior of mankind, to be
the object of a religious Faith, and Hope, and Trust, and Dependence: The
Worship of Christ cannot be divine Worship, if he be not God, and a made God is
a contradiction in the terms, unless we mean only a titular God, and a titular
God, cannot be the Object of Religious Worship. It is unintelligible, how the
blood of a Creature can make a proper atonement and expiation for sin, and
therefore the Socinians, who deny Christ to be God, are very consistent with
themselves in denying his satisfaction: A Creature is not capable of infinite
and omnipotent Power, no more than a finite Nature, (as the most excellent
created Nature is) can be the Subject of infinite perfections; and therefore if
Christ be not God, he cannot have all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to
him; he cannot have it in his own Person, because he is not capable of it, and
cannot exercise it: He can at most only bear the name, but the Government of
the World, must be in another hand, which is able to manage it.

Let us then now consider, what a fundamental difference the denial of the
divinity of our Savior makes in the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, which I
shall represent by drawing two Schemes of the Doctrine of Salvation, one
proceeding upon the belief of the Divinity of our Savior, the other upon
supposition, that he is only an excellent Creature, or mere man.

Christ the eternal Son of God.

1. God out of infinite love to fallen man, gave his eternal and only begotten
Son to be our Savior.

2. This eternal Son of God in the fullness of time, appeared in the World in
humane nature, preached the Gospel, confirmed his Authority by miracles, which
he wrought by his own divine Power, purchased and redeemed his Church by his
own Blood, by which he made a full and perfect expiation for our sins, and
sealed the Covenant of Grace and Pardon.

3. This incarnate God according to his promise, on the third day raised
himself from the dead by his own divine Power; and took possession of his
mediatory Kingdom, as the reward and the purchase of his death.

4. Which consists in his Power to forgive sins, as a Priest, in virtue of his
Sacrifice offered on the Cross; to give Commission to his Apostles to preach
Repentance and forgiveness of sins in his Name; to send the holy Spirit into
the World; to protect his Church from all Enemies; and finally to judge the
World, to raise the dead, topunish the wicked and unbelievers, and to reward
his true and faithful Disciples; and all this by his own Power and Authority,
inherent in himself, though received from his Father.

Christ an excellent Creature, or mere man.

1. God sent his most excellent Creature, or created a most excellent man to
redeem sinners.

2. This glorious and excellent Creature, or this excellent man, was at the
prefixed time born into the World, and preached the Gospel, and God confirmed
his Authority, as he did the Authority of other great Prophets, by Miracles;
and when he was persecuted for it, he owned the truth to the very death, and
set a great example of constancy, and patience, and submission to God in his
sufferings; as other great Prophets had done before him, though not in so
extraordinary a manner.

3. This crucified Jesus was raised by God from the dead the third day, though
being but a Creature or a Man, he was not able to raise himself; and was
advanced by God to great Power and Glory.

4. Which Power consists in all those Acts which are specified in the opposite
Scheme, with this difference, that his Power is not owing to his Priesthood or
Sacrifice, nor has any dependence on it, but he is a Savior, forgives sins,
etc. by a Sovereign Power given him by God, not by Merit or Purchase, or the
expiation of his Sacrifice: And there is this contradiction in it, that a
Creature is invested with Almighty Power; and this riddle in it, that God
should make a Creature the Savior of mankind, and this Blasphemy, that God
should advance a Creature to be his own Rival or Partner in divine Honor.

This short account makes it very evident, what a fundamental difference the
belief or denial of the Divinity of our Savior, makes in the whole Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ. The first makes it an Act of stupendous love in God, in
giving his own Son to be a Propitiation for our sins; the second is a great act
of love in saving sinners, but the manner is not so full of Wonder, and
mysterious Goodness. The first makes it an act of infinite Love and
Condescension in Christ to become Man, a Minister and a Servant, and to submit
to an accursed death for our sakes. That though he were rich, yet for our sakes
he became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich: But the second
infers no such thing, as I can see: If he were nothing greater than a man, it
was no condescension in him to be made a man; especially if he had no being
before he was born of the Virgin Mary, it was no more matter of his choice to
become man, than it is of any other man, who is born into the World; and
therefore could be no Act of Love or Condescension.

Nay, suppose that Christ were the most glorious and excellent Creature, yet
being a Creature, there is not such a vast difference between the most perfect
Creature and a perfect Man, as there is between a God, and the most perfect
Creature; it is no such mighty debasement for the most glorious Angels to
appear in pure and untainted Flesh and Blood; especially upon such a glorious
design as the redemption of mankind: Though the disguise and appearance may be
thought below an Angelical Nature, yet the Character with which he appears, as
the great Prophet and Savior of the World, is as much above it. The meanest
state and condition of humane nature, a poor despised and laborious Life, the
most painful and ignominious death, which makes the most excellent Creature,
the Savior of mankind, and advances him to be Lord and Judge of the World, is
so far from being an Act of condescending love in the most glorious Creature,
that it is above his Ambition, and would be like the pride of Lucifer, to be
equal to God.

To become man, to suffer and die for the redemption of the World, and to be
made the Lord and Judge both of the quick and of the dead, can be an act of
condescending love and goodness only in God. So that to deny the Divinity of
Christ, alters the very foundations of Christianity, and destroys all the
powerful arguments of the Love, Humility, and Condescension of our Lord, which
are the peculiar motives of the Gospel.

Thus the belief of the Divinity of Christ makes God to be our Savior, the
object of our Faith, and Hope, and Relyance; the denial of it makes a Creature
to be our Savior, and the object of a Religious Faith and Worship; which I
think differ as much, as the Worship of God, and of a Creature. The first
contains a visible union of our Nature to the Deity, which is a visible
demonstration of God's love and tender regard to mankind; the second deprives
us of this sensible Consolation.

The first exhibits to us a Savior by Purchase and by Redemption, which is
both more endearing, and a greater security to our guilty fears; the second
makes Christ a Savior, only as a Prophet or a King may be a Savior, who saves
by wise instructions, by preaching the way of Salvation, or by Power.

The first respects the guilt of sin, and the just Wrath and Displeasure of
God, which is the Object of our guilty fears. It offers a Savior to us, who is
a Mediator between God and man, and powerfully intercedes for our Pardon in
virtue of his meritorious Sacrifice; The second has no respect to the atonement
and reconciliation of God, which is the only security to a guilty Conscience,
but only contains proposals of Peace and Reconciliation without a Sacrifice: A
thing which mankind will not easily believe, when they are thoroughly convinced
of the evil of sin, and the inflexible purity and holiness of the divine
Nature; not to take notice now, how irreconcilable this is with all the
ancient Types of the Law of Moses.

In a word, he who believes Christ to be perfect God, as well as perfect man,
is easily satisfied of his Power to save, as well as of the Virtue of his
Sacrifice. For omnipotent Power is essential to the Notion of a God, and when
God becomes our Savior, he can exercise all that Power, which is necessary to
our Salvation; but he who believes Christ to be but an exalted Creature, can
never understand how he can exercise omnipotent Power, which is peculiar to
God: For I think it is somewhat harder to understand, how a Creature can be
made a God, and be possessed of divine Perfections, such as omnipotent Power is,
than to believe, that God can take a Creature into a personal union with
himself.

This, I think, is sufficient to satisfy any man, what a fundamental Change
the denial of Christ's Divinity makes in the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ.
It makes a new Gospel and a new Religion; and therefore the Divinity of Christ
must be acknowledged to be a fundamental Doctrine, because the denial of it
subverts Foundations.

Thus to proceed, our Salvation by Christ does not only consist in the
expiation of our sins, and the proposal of terms of Reconciliation, and the
promise of Pardon and a Reward, but in the Communications of divine Grace and
Power to renew and sanctify us; and this is every where in Scripture
attributed to the holy Spirit, as his peculiar Office in the Economy of man's
Salvation; and it must make a fundamental change in the Doctrine of divine
Grace and assistance, to deny the Divinity of the holy Spirit. For can a
Creature be the universal Spring and Fountain of divine Grace and Life? Can a
finite Creature be a kind of universal Soul to the whole Christian Church, and
to every sincere member of it? Can a Creature make such close Applications to
our minds, know our thoughts, set bounds to our Passions, inspire us with new
affections and desires, and be more intimate to us, than we are to our selves?
If a Creature be the only instrument and principle of Grace, we shall soon be
tempted, either to deny the grace of God, or to make it only an external thing,
and entertain very mean conceits of it. All those miraculous gifts, which were
bestowed on the Apostles and primitive Christians for the edification of the
Church, were the gifts of the Spirit, all the graces of the Christian Life, are
the fruits of the Spirit. The divine Spirit is the principle of Immortality in
us, which first gives life to our Souls, and will at the last day raise our
dead bodies out of the dust, works which sufficiently proclaim him to be God,
and which we cannot heartily believe in the Gospel-notion of them, if he be not.

Thus, we see, how fundamental the doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity is in
the Christian Religion, because we cannot rightly understand the Doctrine of
Salvation, nor the Covenant of Grace, without this belief; which seems to be
the true reason, why the more perfect discovery of this was reserved for
Gospel Times, and only obscurely hinted under the Law, because the peculiar use
of it is under the Gospel; each sacred Person having a peculiar interest and
concernment in the work of our Redemption. And therefore all those, who
expressly deny the Divinity of the Son, and of the holy Spirit, as many ancient
Heretics did of old, and as the Socinians do at this day, do err
fundamentally, however God may be merciful to their ignorance or prejudice,
which it does not concern us to meddle with.

But though it is necessary and essential to the Christian Faith, to acknowledge
Father, Son, and holy Ghost to be one eternal God, yet there are a great many
little subtilties started by overcurious and busy heads, which are not
fundamental Doctrines, and ought not to be thought so: God forbid that all the
nice distinctions and definitions of the Schools, about Essence, Subsistence,
Personalty, about eternal Generation and Procession, the difference between
Filiation, and Spiration, etc. should be reckoned among Fundamentals of our
Faith: For though we understood nothing of these matters (as indeed we don't,
and it had been happy the Church had never heard of them) yet if we believe the
Divinity of each Person, we believe enough to understand the Doctrine of
Salvation.

And though that fatal Dispute between the Greek and Latin Church about the
Filioque, be of more importance than such Scholastic subtilties, yet I cannot
see, that it concerns the foundation of our Faith. For the Gr^ek Church did
firmly believe the holy Spirit to be true God, though they would not own, that
he proceeded from the Father, and the Son, but from the Father only: And though
we must acknowledge this to be a mistake, yet it is not a fundamental mistake;
for the Doctrine of Salvation is secured by believing the holy Spirit to be
true God, without defining the manner of his Procession.

2. Upon the same account that the Doctrine of the sacred Trinity is a
fundamental Article of our Faith, the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation also,
and what he did and suffered in order to our Salvation, the meritorious
Sacrifice of his death, his Resurrection from the dead, Assenscion into Heaven,
Intercession for us at God's right hand, and that he shall come again to judge
the World, to reward his faithful Disciples with a glorious Resurrection, and
eternal Life, and to punish the wicked with eternal Death, must be reckoned
also among the Fundamentals of Christianity, because we cannot rightly
understand, nor rightly believe the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, without a
belief of these Matters.

This is so obvious at the first proposal, that I need not insist on the Proof
of it: And therefore those who deny Christ to be true and perfect man, as well
as those who deny him to be God, err fundamentally, for he could not die for
us, nor expiate our sins by his blood, if he were not man.

As for the Modus of this Hypostatical union, how the divine and humane nature
are united in Christ, it must be acknowledged to be very unconceivable by us,
and it is no great wonder it should be so when we do not perfectly understand
any one sort of natural union, not so much as how the parts of matter hang
together, much less how the Soul and Body is united to make one man. But yet it
is fundamental to the Christian Faith to believe, that the divine and humane
nature are united in Christ, that the same Christ is both perfect God, and
perfect man, or we must err fundamentally in the Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ; for neither God nor man distinctly and separately considered, can be
our Savior according to the Gospel-notion of Salvation. God cannot suffer and
die, and the death of a man cannot expiate sin, nor his Power save us; and
therefore we must acknowledge, that God and man is so united in Christ, that the
Actions and operations of each nature do as properly belong to one Christ, as
the distinct Operations of Body and Soul, are the actions of the same man.

Upon this account, the Catholic Church condemned the Heresies of Nestorius
and Eutyches. For Nestorius divided not only the Natures, but the Persons in
Christ, only united them in Authority and Dignity: And thus Christ was not an
Incarnate God in one Person; but the Man Christ was taken into a nearer
relation to the second Person of the Trinity, than any other Man or Creature
is, but not so as to become one with him; which destroys the Mystery of our
Redemption by the Blood of God: For whatever Dignity and Honor were conferred
upon the man Christ by his relation to the (...), or divine Word, yet his Blood
was not the Blood of God, because notwithstanding this Relation to God the Son,
he remained as much a distinct Person and Subsistence, as any other man is.

The Heresy of Eutyches is certainly equally dangerous; for he ran so far from
the Nestorian Heresy of two Persons, that he denied two natures in Christ: He
did not deny, but that there was a humane and divine nature before their union,
but he asserted such an union of natures in Christ, as made a mixture and
confusion of natures: That Christ did not remain perfect God and perfect man,
after this union, but the humane and divine natures were so blended together,
as to become one nature, as well as one Person: (...). Niceph. Calist. l. 14.
(...). Id. l. 15. cap. 6.
And therefore he denied the very Body of Christ to be of the same nature with
our Bodies, or subject to the same passions; nay, he asserts the divine nature
it self to be passible. And I think, I need not show, how this overthrows the
fundamental Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, which proves it to be a
fundamental Heresy.

I shall only observe that Leo Bishop of Rome in his Letter to Flavian, (who
was then Bishop of Constantinople, and was afterward murdered by the Eutychian
Faction in the packt Council of Ephesus) confutes the Heresy of Eutyches from
the very Principle, Et ad resolvendum conditionis noslrae debitum, natura
inviolabilis naturae est unita passibili, ut quod nostris remediis congruebat,
medlator Dei and bominum homo Jesus christus, and mori posset ex uno, and non
mori posset ex altero. Leo ep. ad Flavian.
on which I have all along proceeded, because it destroys the Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ. For says he, to discharge the debt and obligation of our
lapsed State; a nature which cannot suffer, is united to a nature, which can:
That so as our Redemption required the Mediator between God and man; the man
Christ Jesus might be capable of suffering and dying as man, and exempted from
all possibility of dying as God.

This I think is sufficient to show, how fundamental the belief of the sacred
Trinity, and the Incarnation of our Savior is in the Christian Religion;
Salvation by Christ is a fundamental Doctrine, or nothing is fundamental in the
Christian Faith; and yet the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ is necessarily
founded on the belief of the holy Trinity, each sacred Person being peculiarly
concerned in the Economy of man's Salvation. And I confess, it does mightily
confirm me in this way of stating the notion of Fundamentals, that it does so
plainly discover the necessity of that Faith, which has always been accounted
sacred and inviolable by the Catholic Church: This is the Faith we are
baptized into, according to our Saviors Command, to baptize in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

This is the sum of all the ancient Creeds: The Apostles Creed being little
else than the explication of the form of Baptism, what we are to believe of God
the Father, what of God the Son, and what of God the Holy Ghost. And when
Heretics arose, who corrupted this Faith, the Catholic Church expressed
greater Zeal in nothing, than in preserving this Faith pure and sincere: This
was the occasion of the first general Councils, wherein Arius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, Macedonius, and such other Heretics were condemned: This occasioned
the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, and the Athanasian Creeds, which contain only
the Catholic exposition of the Doctrine of the Trinity, in opposition to these
ancient Heresies. And it would be very strange, if that which is the chief, nay
almost the only Subject of all our Creeds, should not be thought a fundamental
of our Religion. And yet it is as strange, that is should be a fundamental, if
it be only an abstruse and difficult speculation, which is of no other use, nor
valuable upon any other account than pure Orthodoxy; which is the only reason
that can be assigned, why any men, who believe the Doctrine of the Trinity,
should not express a great and warm Zeal for it, because they do not observe,
how the whole Gospel-Doctrine of Salvation by Christ depends on it: The end of
Christian Faith is a holy Life, and if men may lead a very holy Life without
the velief of the Trinity, some think, this Faith cannot be absolutely
necessary to Salvation; but now this must be a great and dangerous mistake,
though we should suppose, that men may live very holily without the belief of
the Trinity, unless we suppose also, that a holy Life will carry men to Heaven
without Faith in Christ, or Salvation by him, for we cannot rightly believe in
Christ for Salvation without this Faith.

And thus I might shut up the Doctrine of Fundamentals; for indeed I know
nothing strictly fundamental in the Christian Religion, but the Doctrine of the
holy Trinity, and the several Acts and Offices, if I may so speak, of each
sacred Person in the Economy of man's Salvation, which I have already briefly
hinted: But having entered upon a Discourse of such vast Importance, to give the
greater satisfaction to inquisitive men, I shall venture one step further, and
I think no man need go any further.

3. The next inquiry therefore shall be, what is fundamental in the Doctrine of
Salvation it self. Now this our Savior briefly comprehends in that Commission
he gave to the Apostles, to preach Repentance and Forgiveness of sins in his
Name: Luke 24.47.
i. e. to preach forgiveness of sins to all true Penitents through Faith in his
Name, Romans 3.24, 25.
or through Faith in his Blood, as St. Paul expounds it.

Now not to dispute this point at present with the Socinians, all who believe
that Christ died to make atonement for our sins, must acknowledge the atonement
and expiation of Christ's death to be a fundamental Article of the Christian
Faith, whereon the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ is built: For therefore he
is our Savior, because he saves his People from their sins, and how this is,
we are often told, viz. by dying for our sins, the just for the unjust, that he
may reconcile us to God.

Now if this be true (as I shall at present take for granted) then it must be a
fundamental Doctrine, upon these two accounts; 1. Because the belief or the
denial of the atonement of Christ's death, makes a specifical change in
Religion. A Religion with a Sacrifice, and a Religion without a Sacrifice
differ in the whole kind; the first respects the atonement of our past sins,
and our daily infirmities; it respects God, as the Judge and avenger of
wickedness, as well as the rewarder of those, who diligently seek him; the
other is a kind of Philosophical institution to train men up in the practice of
Piety and Virtue: That is, a Religion without a Sacrifice is at most but half
as much as a Religion with a Sacrifice; and that half wherein they agree of a
quite different nature from each other. That Religion which requires an
expiatory Sacrifice, to make atonement for sin, and to obtain the Pardon of it,
does also strictly enjoin the practiee of an universal Righteousness, which is
the whole of a Religion without a Sacrifice. And yet this practical part of
Religion is vastly altered by the belief or denial of the Sacrifice and
expiation of Christ's death.

Those who deny the death of Christ to be an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins
of the World, may pay all that Homage and Worship to God, which is due to the
great Creator and Benefactor of mankind, and may observe all the duties of
moral Righteousness; but there are some new Acts of Religious Worship, or some
new instances of Duty, or new degrees and respects of Vertu^^ which necessarily
result from the expiation of Christ's death, which either cannot be observed at
all, or not in their true meaning and signification by those who deny it; as to
give some few instances of it.

The love of God as our Redeemer and Savior, who gave his own Son for our
Ransom, to die for our sins, and to make atonement and expiation by his Blood,
is very different from the love of God as our Creator, and Benefactor, nay as
our Redeemer by Covenant, Promise, and Power; it is a more transporting and
sensible Passion, and the peculiar Worship of the Gospel, which those cannot
give to God, who deny the expiation of Christ's death.

The Worship of a God Incarnate, a God in our nature and likeness, a God, who
is our Savior, Mediator and Advocate through his own Blood, vastly differs
from the Worship of a pure, infinite, eternal Spirit, or from the Worship of an
exalted Creature. And this is the peculiar Worship of the Lord's Supper, that
great and venerable Mystery of our Religion, which is a thin and empty Ceremony
without it.

To pray to God in the Name and Mediation of Christ, and in virtue of his
Sacrifice, vastly differs from a natural hope and trust in God's mercy, or in
his bare promise, or in the Power and Interest of a great Favorite, though
appointed to be our Mediator, not in virtue of his Sacrifice, but by Royal
Favor: Not but that God's Promise of Pardon and acceptance confirmed to us by
such a powerful Favorite, whom God himself has appointed to be our Advocate,
may give us sufficient security, that God will hear and answer our Prayers; but
this assurance is of a different nature from the virtue of a Sacrifice, and
affects our minds in a different manner, and excites different Passions, and
very different acts of Devotion, and makes our Worship differ as much, as a
Mediator by Sacrifice does from a Mediator by Interest and Power.

As for the other parts of Religion, which concern our Conversation with men,
or the Government of our own Appetites and Passions, there seems to be some new
instances, or new degrees of Virtue, which have a necessary dependence on the
Sacrifice of Christ's death, as the example or reason of them. As that high
degree of brotherly love which Christ requires of us, as the Badg of our
Discipleship, to love one another, as he has loved us, to forgive one another
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; all Acts of kindness and
charity to our poor Brethren, as knowing the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he were rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through
his poverty may be rich, the force and prevalency of which example, and of
which reason, I think is greatly abated by denying the expiation of Christ's
death. However I think it is very plain, that the true principle of
Gospel-obedience, that which makes all our actions in a strict and proper sense
Christian Graces and Virtues, has a necessary respect to the expiation of
Christ's death: We must cheerfully obey the Will of God, not only considered as
our Creator, but as a Redeemer; we must give up our selves to Christ, as the
purchase of his Blood, for we are not our own, but bought with a price, and
therefore must glorify God both with our Bodies, and with our Spirits, which
are God's; we must yield our selves willing Captives to the conquering and
constraining Power of his Love: the Love of Christ constrains us, for we thus
judge, that if Christ dyed for all, then were all dead, and that he dyed for us,
that we who live, might not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him, who
dyed for us. If Christ did not redeem and purchase us by his Blood, all this
signifies nothing; it is all but Phrase, and Metaphor, and Allusion, which
cannot form a principle of Action: And yet the Apostles of Christ do not so
much insist on the Authority of God, as our Maker and Governor, as on his
purchase as Redeemer, on the love of our dying Lord, who is our Priest, our
Sacrifice, and Mediator; and were it possible to obey the Gospel without any
regard to the redemption of Christ, and that stupendous love of God in it, it
were not true Evangelical obedience, no more than it is obedience to God, to do
what he commands for some private end and reason of our own, without any regard
to his Authority and Government.

So that whether the Doctrine of the atonement and satisfaction of Christ's
death be true or false, it is certainly fundamental either way, either a
fundamental Article of Faith, or a fundamental Error, because it alters
Foundations, and changes the whole frame of Christian Religion. If Christ have
made atonement and expiation for our sins, Christianity is one thing, if he
have not, it is quite another thing, as different, as it is possible; which I
think is a plain argument, that the expiation of Christ's Blood is a
fundamental or foundation. Doctrine, since the whole Fabric of Christian
Religion, as it is taught in the Gospel, is built on it.

2. There is one consideration more, which will confirm this, that the
atonement and expiation of Christ's death is a fundamental Doctrine, because
the Blood of Christ, that is, the expiation of his Blood, is the peculiar
object of justifying Faith; now certainly that must be fundamental, which is
essential to justifying Faith. Salvation or Justification by Christ being the
sum of the Gospel, whatever is essential to justifying Faith, is certainly a
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, if there be any such thing as
Fundamentals.

Repentance in its full Extent and Latitude, as it includes not only a sorrow
for our past sins, but the reformation of our lives, and an actual obedience to
all the Laws of the Gospel, is a necessary condition of our Pardon and
Justification, or necessarily required in those, whom God will justify: But
Repentance and a new Life cannot justify us: No Religion, that ever was in the
World, taught men certainly to expect Pardon of sin merely upon their
Repentance: And it is plain, that mankind never did; for both Heathens and Jews
thought the expiation of Sacrifices as necessary, and more prevalent than mere
Repentance, to obtain their Pardon: And the reason why God has appointed us no
Sacrifice but a broken heart, or the living Sacrifice of an obedient Soul and
Body, to offer to him, is because he has provided an expiatory Sacrifice
himself, has given his own Son to be a Sacrifice for us; and the Pardon of our
sins is every where attributed to the death of Christ, as the meritorious
Cause. But then as Christ has dyed for our sins, and redeemed us with his
Blood, and God for Christ's sake will pardon and justify all repenting
sinners, so we must consider, that mere repentance can no more apply or
appropiate the Sacrifice and Expiation of Christ's death to us for our Pardon,
than it can justify us without a Sacrifice: That is the peculiar Office of
Faith in Christ, or Faith in his Blood: as St. Paul expressly tells us. Being
justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24, 25.
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be
a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood. For though Faith in Christ is very
often used in a very large sense for the whole Gospel of our Savior, and to
comprehend all Acts of Obedience and a holy Life, as the Principle from whence
they flow, and no other is true justifying Faith, but that which includes
Obedience and a holy Life: Yet sometimes Faith is distinguished from Repentance
and a holy Life; and so has Christ, and in a peculiar manner his Blood, for its
Object. Thus the sum of St. Paul's preaching was Repentance toward God, Act.
20.21
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: And the Commission Christ gave to his
Apostles, was, Luke 24.47.
to preach Repentance and Remission of sins in his Name; that is, through Faith
in his Name: So that Faith in Christ is distinguished from Repentance in the
work of Justification; and so denotes a particular respect to the expiation of
Christ's death, as the meritorious Cause of Pardon.

Under the Law, a Sacrifice was available only for those, for whom it was
offered, but under the Gospel instead of offering a Sacrifice to God, we must
believe in that Sacrifice, which is already offered, which does particularly
apply the merit and virtue of it to our selves, as the Oblation of the
Sacrifice did under the Law; for if we would have Christ for our Savior, or
have any interest in the expiation of his death, we must choose him for our
Savior by Faith in his Blood. For I cannot see, but why Repentance may be as
well accepted from us without a Sacrifice, as without respect and relation to a
Sacrifice, and yet the only thing, that can entitle our Repentance in
particular to the virtue of Christ's Sacrifice, is Faith in his Blood, which, I
think, is a plain argument, that the atonement of Christ's death is a
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, because it is essential to a justifying
Faith.

But then there are a great many other opinions relating to the atonement. and
satisfaction of Christ's death, which are true or false, but not fundamental:
For as St. Paul observes, the Foundation is Christ, but yet men may build upon
this Foundation either Gold and Silver, or Hay and Stubble, that is, true or
false Doctrines, which are of great use in the Christian Life, or of very
dangerous consequence; but yet while they retain the Foundation, though their
works perish, i. e. the superstructure of their private Opinions be condemned
and rejected, yet they themselves may escape, though with great difficulty, so
as by fire.

Thus while men heartily believe, that Christ dyed for our sins, and has made
expiation for them by his Blood, and expect the Pardon of their sins only in
Christ's Name, that is, in virtue of his Sacrifice and Intercession, they may
fall into great mistakes about the Nature, Extent, and Application of this
Sacrifice, and yet not err Fundamentally, though their Errors may be dangerous,
and always are so, when they betray them to sin.

Of this Nature I reckon some of those unhappy Disputes, which have torn and
divided the Church in these late days of Liberty and Confusion, Whether Christ
bore our sins, or only the punishment of sin, whether he were the greatest
sinner, or only the greatest Sacrifice for sin: Whether he suffered the same
Punishments, which all sinners should have suffered, had they been damned for
their sins, or suffered that which was equivalent to it, and which God accepted
for a complete and perfect satisfaction. Whether the expiation of Christ's
death was so absolutely necessary to the Pardon of our sins, that God could not
forgive sin without it, or whether God choose this way, as most agreeable to
the wise methods of Government, and the most glorious Illustration of all his
Attributes. Whether the death of Christ made satisfaction to a natural
vindictive Justice, and was paid to God, as the offended Party, or as the
Governor of the World. Whether Christ made a general atonement for sin, or
satisfied only for the sins of the Elect; whether all the sins of the Elect
were actually laid upon Christ from Eternity, and actually pardoned before they
were committed, or whether they are pardoned in time, when we repent and
believe. Whether what Christ suffered for us, is so imputed to us, as if we our
selves had done it; which makes the greatest sinners perfectly Innocent, and
looked upon by God, as never to have sinned, or whether it be imputed to us
only for our Pardon and Justification. Whether the active as well as passive
Obedience of Christ be imputed to us for Justification.

These and such like Doctrines, some of which are of a very dangerous nature,
and a great state of temptation, yet are not fundamental Errors, because they
do not destroy the Foundation, the atonement and satisfaction of Christ's death
is acknowledged on all hands, though some of these Doctrines do greatly obscure
the grace of God, and his stupendous wisdom in the redemption of the World by
Jesus Christ, and therefore must be reckoned as Hay and Stubble built upon the
Foundation, which will prove a great loss and damage to such Builders, when
every man's work comes to be tried.

But to proceed; among the fundamental Doctrines of Salvation by Christ, we
must reckon, not only the atonement and expiation of his death, but the gift of
his holy Spirit to renew and sanctify us: For this makes him a complete
Savior, to deliver us from the punishment of our sins, and from the power and
dominion of them.

Now that it is fundamental to the Christian Religion, and to the Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, to believe the divine influences and assistances of the
holy Spirit to work Faith, and all other Christian graces in us, appears from
these considerations.

1. The gift of the holy Spirit is the most glorious effect of Christ's Power
and Intercession, and therefore one of the principal fruits and benefits of his
Sacrifice; by which we may understand the value and necessity of it; to deny
the intercession of Christ, whereby he daily dispenses and applies the merits
of his Sacrifice, does as much alter the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, as to
deny the atonement of his death, and to deny the assistances of the divine
Spirit, is in effect to deny his Intercession, of which the Communications of
divine Life and Power is the principal part.

2. To deny the assistances of the holy Spirit, turns the Gospel into a mere
external Ministration, which makes as fundamental a difference in the Christian
Religion, as there is between the Ministration of the Letter and of the Spirit.

3. This in a great measure takes away the Office of the holy Spirit in the
Economy of man's Salvation, and consequently destroys his Worship, which is
peculiar to the Christian Religion. The light of nature directs us only to the
Worship of one God, the Christian Religion consecrates us at our baptism, to
the Worship of three divine Persons, and one God. For since each sacred Person
is peculiarly concerned in the Salvation of sinners, each of them ought to be
acknowledged and adored by us. But whoever denies the efficacy of the holy
Spirit in the work of Salvation, destroys the foundation of his Worship too,
considered as a distinct Person in the Trinity.

4. To deny the assistances of the holy Spirit, makes the Sacraments of the
Christian Religion, mere external Ceremonies, which were instituted as the
Ministries and Conveyances of Grace, and so makes a fundamental change in the
Institutions of Christianity.

5. Nay it makes a fundamental change in the Worship of God, and of our
Savior. The Christian Worship principally consists, in praising God and our
Savior for spiritual mercies, in ascribing the glory of all the good we do to
his free Grace, and continual succors, in begging his holy Spirit, and the
constant supplies of Grace, that we may increase and persevere in all goodness;
this we have frequent examples of in the Writings of the Apostles; but whoever
denies the assistances of supernatural Grace, both defrauds God of his Glory,
and himself of the benefit and comfort of it. He cannot praise God for, nor beg
that of God, which he believes, God does not give; which makes our Worship very
defective, and deprives us of the assistances of Grace, which we shall never
have, if we never ask.

But then all, that I can judge fundamental in this point, is, that the
beginnings, progress, and perfection of all Christian graces and virtues, are
owing to the influences and operations of the holy Spirit. But those other nice
disputes about the manner of the Spirits working in us, whether it be a natural
or moral efficacy, whether it be a sufficient, or efficacious Grace, resistable
or irresistible, how the operation of the Spirit is reconcilable with the
freedom of humane action; whether the habits of grace be immediately infused,
or acquired by frequent Acts, these I say, and such like Disputes are not
fundamental; for though it is of great moment for the government of our lives,
which of these we believe, yet the Foundation which is the assistance of the
divine Spirit, is secured either way, and all that men are to look to is, that
they do not entertain such ill notions of God's Grace, as shall make them
secure and careless of a holy Life.

All that I can think necessary to add more concerning the Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, is what I have already sufficiently hinted, the necessity
of Repentance and a holy Life. There are, I confess, a great many dangerous
Disputes about this matter, what place Repentance and a holy Life have in the
justification of a sinner. And though it is of very great moment to understand
this matter rightly, and as particularly as we can, for fear of that ill
influence which such mistakes may have upon our lives, and too apparently have
upon the lives of many professed Christians; yet I cannot think, that man errs
fundamentally, who believes, that God will justify and pardon none but true
penitent and reformed sinners, and that not for the sake and merit of
Repentance and good Works, but for the sake of Christ, and through Faith in his
Blood, though he may differ about the necessity of Repentance and Obedience,
and what place it has in the justification of a sinner. Whether it be a
necessary Condition, or a necessary requisite and Qualification, or a necessary
concomitant and effect of Justification, or whether it be necessary only to our
Salvation, but not to our Justification: Whether Faith justify as an
Instrument, or as a Condition, etc. For while Faith in Christ and Obedience to
his Laws are both secured, without either derogating from the Grace of God, or
the Purity of the Christian Religion, other mistakes, though dangerous, when
persued to their just Consequences, and when men own, and live by such
Consequences, yet I hope, are very harmless and Innocent, when they do not
corrupt men's lives, nor hinder the efficacy of the divine Grace.

Thus I have given an Essay (and I hope it may pass for an Essay) toward the
Discovery, what are fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion. I have
strictly confined my self to the Fundamentals of Christianity, though there are
some principles of natural Religion, which are antecedently necessary to be
believed, but they are more generally known and agreed in. I have had a tender
regard to the weaknesses and mistakes of mankind, and to the enlargement of
Catholic Communion, and therefore have, as far as was consistent with
preserving the essentials of Christianity, cast most of our modern
controversies out of the number of Fundamentals; which, if carefully
considered, would assuage that intemperate heat, with which they are managed,
and more easily reconcile our differences; and yet I have not rejected any
Doctrine out of the number of Fundamentals, which was ever defined to be such
by any received general Council of the Christian Church; which gives me some
hope, that I am come pretty near the mark.

But to give some new light to this matter, and to prevent such objections, as
I can foresee, there are some few things, which I shall further observe, before
I proceed.

1. The first concerns the judgment of that truly great and learned Person Mr.
Joseph Mede. Mede's works. Epist. 84 to Mr. Hartlib.
He seems indeed to reject this way of stating the Ratio of Fundamentals, in
relation to some one great Fundamental Doctrine, as I have now done. For in his
censure of Mr. Streso's Book of Fundamentals (which I have never yet seen) he
observes, that he makes three sorts of Fundamentals. The first is the
Fundamentum ipsum, or the Foundation it self, though what that is, he does not
tell us, and therefore how far I agree with Mr. Streso in that, I know not. The
other two he measures by their relation to it, either a part ante, and such he
terms sub Fundamentales, (which by Mr. Mede's censure I perceive, did not
strictly belong to Christianity, but either to the principles of natural
Religion, or the Jewish State) or a part post, which may be called super
Fundamentales, which he makes such as are by immediate and necessary
consequence deducible from the Fundamentum salutis, where he observes, that he
had inserted some Doctrines of pure speculation among Fundamentals, which I
confess to be a great fault: But from this imperfect account of Mr. Streso's
notion, I cannot guess, how far my way might fall under the same censure. As
for those two faults, he has observed in Mr. Streso's way, viz. reckoning such
Doctrines among the Fundamentals of Christianity, as are not strictly Christian
Doctrines, or are matters of mere speculation, I have carefully avoided them
both; and as for judging what particular Doctrines are fundamental to
Christianity, from some general comprehensive Fundamental, which contains the
sum of Christian Religion, that is certainly the most demonstrative way that
can be: For though I do not like the way of making fundamental Articles by
deduction and consequence from such a Fundamental, because as Mr. Mede
observes, all men may not see the necessity of such a consequence, though it
appear plain and evident to others; yet if for instance, the Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ be the great fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel (and if
that be not Fundamental, I am sure nothing is) then though every true
consequence from this Doctrine be not Fundamental, yet whatever is necessarily
included in this Doctrine, without which we cannot rightly understand and
believe Salvation by Christ, must be as Fundamental, as the Doctrine it self
is, unless the Letters or Words of the Article be Fundamental, but not the true
sense of it; and within these bounds I have kept my self; I have asserted no
Doctrine to be Fundamental, but what is necessary to our belief of Salvation by
Christ, which is a very different thing from drawing fundamental consequences.

Mr. Mede indeed assigns another ratio of fundamental Articles; Ib. ep. 83.
in general that they be necessarii cognitu and creditu ad salutem, necessary
to be known and to be believed to Salvation simply and absolutely, and
therefore no Christian which shall be saved, incapable to understand them;
which exactly agrees with me, who make only the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ
in its true and proper signification a fundamental Article.

But then more particularly he tells us, that they must not be such truths, as
are merely speculative, and contained only in the understanding, but of such
only as have a necessary influence upon practice, and not all those neither,
but such as have necessary influence upon the Acts and Functions of Christian
Life, or whereon the Acts, without which a Christian lives not, depend.

Such namely, as without the knowledge and belief whereof, we can neither
invocate the Father aright, nor have that Faith and relyance upon him, and his
Son our Mediator Jesus Christ, which is necessary to remission of sins, and the
hope of the Life to come. Where he seems evidently to confine Fundamentals to
the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, for nothing else is necessary to what he
calls the proper acts and functions of the Christian Life. But he proceeds.

How far this ratio of a Fundamental Article will stretch, I know not, but
believe it will fetch in most of the Articles of the Apostles Creed; and by it
also those two main errors of the Socinians, the one denying the divine Nature,
the other the satisfaction of Christ, may be discerned to be Fundamental; for
without the belief of the first, the Divine Majesty cannot be rightly, that is,
incommunicably worshipped, so as to have no other Gods besides him. For he that
believes not Christ to be consubstantial to the Father, and yet honors him
with the same Worship, worships not the Father incommunicably, which is the
formalis ratio of the Worship of the true God, from whom we look for eternal
Life; and without the belief of the second, the satisfaction of Christ, there
can be, I suppose, no saving Faith nor relyance on Christ for the forgiveness
of sins. How well this agrees, with what I have discoursed about Fundamentals,
every one will easily perceive.

Some other learned men go the same way with Mr. Mede, in assigning the general
Ratio or Notion of Fundamentals, that they are such Doctrines, as have a great
influence upon a Christian Life, though they do not confine it, as he does, to
some peculiar acts of the Christian Life, and he could have no reason to do so,
had he not some other Notion of Fundamentals in his mind, than what he
expressed, for all the acts of Piety and Virtue are equally required of us by
the Laws of the Gospel, and therefore it is most reasonable in this way, to
extend the Notion of Fundamentals to all those Doctrines, which have an
universal influence upon a good Life; but I have something to offer with all
modesty, and just respect and deference to such great names against this Notion
of Fundamentals.

1. That a holy Life is not the only design of the Christian Religion, and
therefore if we will judge of fundamental Doctrines by the end, they are
intended to serve, we must take in the whole and entire end of the Christian
Religion, which is forgiveness of sins, as well as holiness of Life: And
therefore whatever is necessary to be believed for the forgiveness of sins is a
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, though we could not see, what direct and
immediate influence it has upon the reformation of our Lives.

2. The Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity, has in all ages of the Church
been accounted a fundamental Article, and yet nothing is more plain, than that
the belief of three divine Persons, considered only as three Persons, has no
greater force in it to make men good, than the belief of one supreme and
eternal God. It is true, when we consider all these divine Persons as concerned
in the Economy of Man's Salvation; so the belief of each Person has a distinct
and powerful influence upon our minds, but this is not owing immediately to the
Doctrine of the Trinity, but to the Doctrine of man's Salvation by Christ, who
was sent into the World by his Father, to accomplish the Work of our
redemption, and when he left the World, sent his holy Spirit to abide with us.

3. All those Doctrines, which have a powerful influence upon a good life, are
not in a strict and proper sense Christian Doctrines, much less fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith, and therefore this can be no good Criterion of
a Fundamental; such are all the natural arguments to Religion and a virtuous
Life, which though they be adopted into Christianity, yet will hardly pass for
fundamentals of Christianity with any man, who can distinguish between natural
knowledge and Revelation.

4. Men may live very holy lives without the knowledge or belief of many
Doctrines, which are excellently fitted to promote holiness, and therefore
every Doctrine, which will advance holiness, is not Fundamental, and yet this
general rule does not direct us, how to distinguish them.

5. Nay, many Doctrines, which are so far from being Fundamental, that they are
false, may yet prevail with, and incline some men to the practice of real
holiness.

6. Some Doctrines, which naturally tend to debauch men's lives, are not yet
fundamental Errors, for men may believe them and yet live well; and therefore
we shall still want a Rule to judge of fundamental Heresies by, unless no
Heresy be Fundamental, but when it debauches men's lives, and by the same rule,
no Doctrine is Fundamental, but when it actually governs and reforms our lives.

7. This leaves men at great liberty to believe what Doctrines they please to
be Fundamental, and to change even Christianity it self into a new Religion;
for if they think they can obey God without such Doctrines, nay without the
belief of Christianity it self, I cannot see, why they should believe
Christianity it self to be a fundamental Doctrine to them.

8. I readily grant, that no Doctrine can be a fundamental Article of Faith,
which has not one way or other an influence upon a Christian life. But then all
the peculiar Arguments of the Gospel, all the principles of pure evangelical
Obedience, as well as all the Fundamentals of Faith, are contained in the
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ. That it self is the great motive of the
Gospel, and every part and branch of it is big with arguments and perswasives
to Virtue. Take away the Doctrine of Salvation, and no other consideration can
have any force; and there needs no other Arguments to a Christian, nay, there
are no other Gospel-Motives, but what are contained in it. Whatever is
essential to the Doctrine of Salvation, is a Fundamental Article and a powerful
Motive of Christianity, and nothing else is either. So that there is no such
certain way to discern Fundamentals, though they were to be tried by their
tendency to promote real Righteousness, as to consider, what is essential to
the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, which is an acknowledged Fundamental, and
contains in it all the principles of a Christian Life.

2. I desire, it may be further observed, that when I discourse of
Fundamentals, I do not reject all other Doctrines besides what are strictly
Fundamental, as useless in the Christian Life, or unfit terms of Church
Communion. God affords us more than what is barely necessary, for our
spiritual, as well as for our natural life; and expects from us, that we should
make daily improvements in Knowledge and Virtue: And if this be the duty of
private Christians, it is much more the duty of particular Churches to arrive
at the greatest perfection of Knowledge, and to instruct her Children, not only
in those Doctrines, which are absolutely necessary to the being of
Christianity, but in all those great truths, which advance our Progress in the
Christian Life. And therefore no doubt, but every Church has Authority over her
own Members, to require, as the terms of Communion, an explicit assent to many
great and useful truths, and an abrenunciation of many dangerous Errors, which
are not in a strict sense Fundamental; or else she has no Authority to teach
the whole mind and will of God, nor to preserve the purity of Christian
Doctrine: For there are many Doctrines of vast use in the Christian Life, and
many very fatal and pernicious Errors, which are not properly Fundamental, and
yet it may be, have occasioned the final Damnation of many more, than ever
fundamental Errors have done. And if the Church be bound to take care of men's
Souls, she is bound also to root out such pernicious Doctrines. But the use I
designed the Doctrine of Fundamentals for in this place, is the preservation of
Catholic Communion between distinct Churches, which have no Power and
Authority over each other: For though a Church have entertained many corrupt
and dangerous Doctrines, yet if she profess to believe all the Fundamentals of
Christian Faith, we have no Authority upon the account of Doctrines to divide
from her Communion: We must not indeed communicate in her Errors, though not
Fundamental, and no Church, but the Church of Rome imposes such hard terms of
Communion upon other Churches, but while she retains all the essentials of
Christian Faith, she is so far a true Church; and if there be nothing to hinder
it, may and ought to be received into Catholic Communion.

3. When I assert, that such and such Doctrines are Fundamental, by
Fundamentals I understand the Fundamentals of Christian Knowledge, without
which, no man can understand and believe like a Christian, which plainly
proves, that they are necessary to the very being of a Christian Church, and
therefore necessary to Catholic Communion: Which is all I am concerned to
prove.

But if any man should put hard Cases to me with respect to the final Salvation
of particular Christians, and inquire how far the explicit knowledge and belief
of Fundamentals is necessary to Salvation: What shall become of so many
Christians as are guilty of gross ignorance for want of good Instruction, and
scarce understand any thing distinctly of the Christian Religion? or what shall
become of those, who through the prejudices and prepossessions of Education,
deny any fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, as the Divinity of Christ,
or his satisfaction for sins, and yet are otherwise very pious, devout, and
useful men? I say, I do not think my self bound to answer these Questions, nor
to search into the secret Counsels of God, to determine how he will judge the
World, or what allowances he will make in some favorable Cases; but yet I have
some few things to offer, which possibly may give some satisfaction to modest
Inquirers.

1. We must not deny the necessity of Christian Faith and Knowledge for the sake
of any difficult Cases; for that is to deny the necessity of Christianity it
self, or of Faith in Christ, to the Salvation of sinners; and thus our Charity
to other men will make us our selves the greatest Heretics of all. And if any
part of Christian Faith and Knowledge is necessary to Salvation, certainly the
knowledge and belief of Fundamentals is, which are therefore commonly described
by this Character, the knowledge and belief of which is necessary to Salvation:
And if Infidelity be a damning sin, why should not a fundamental Heresy be so,
which is infidelity with respect to some essential and saving Doctrine of
Christianity, and in its consequence overthrows some material and essential
part of the Christian Faith.

2. There is a vast difference between the Case of those men, who for want of
good Instruction, have not an explicit understanding of the Fundamentals of
Christian Faith, and of those, who deny any Fundamental. As for the first, a
very little indistinct knowledge of Christ, if it govern their lives, and teach
them to live in Obedience to their Savior, will carry them safely to Heaven,
for God requires little of those to whom little is given. Now there is no man,
that deserves the name of a Christian, who has not learnt his Creed, who does
not know and believe, that Jesus Christ came into the World to die for sin, and
to save sinners, and that God for Christ's sake will forgive our sins, if we
repent of them, and live a new life; now such a general knowledge as this,
without any fundamental Error to spoil the virtue and efficacy of it, may
suffice to produce all those Acts of a Christian life, which are absolutely
necessary to a state of Salvation, such as Repentance from dead works, and a
trust and affiance in God through the Blood of Christ for forgiveness of sins.
The Thief upon the Cross cannot well be supposed to have known so much, and the
Jewish Converts, who embraced the Faith upon St. Peter's preaching to them, and
were immediately baptized in great numbers, cannot be supposed at that time to
know more; and yet this was accepted from them at that time, and in that state
of things, and by the same reason will be accepted from those, who want the
opportunities of better instruction: And if there be any baptized and nominal
Christians, who do not know thus much, it is a great scandal to the Christian
Church, but I know not, how we are more concerned for their Salvation, than for
Pagans and Infidels.

But as for those, who deny any fundamental Article, they are got above this
state of a general and implicit Faith in Christ, and err not for want of
instruction, but from a certain wantonness and pride of understanding. They
inquire into the particular Doctrines of Faith, and understand, what has been,
and is, the general Faith of Christians in such matters, for otherwise they
would have no occasion to deny such Catholic Doctrines; it appears, they have
a great conceit and confidence of their own knowledge, that they dare oppose
their private opinions and reasonings against the declared sense of the
universal Church, which is such unpardonable immodesty, as admits of no excuse,
if they lose themselves in the Mazes and Labyrinths of their own making, and
mistake their way to Heaven. And though such Persons may be otherwise very
pious and useful men, yet I do not see, why we should deny the necessity of
believing the Fundamentals of Christian Faith any more for their sakes, than
for the sake of devout and virtuous Jews and Heathens.

2. Having thus, as plainly as I can, stated and notion of Fundamentals, the
next inquiry is concerning those Churches, which professedly own all the
Fundamentals of Christianity, and yet together with the belief of all
Fundamentals entertain such corrupt Doctrines, as in their immediate and
necessary consequences overthrow Foundations, and whether such Churches may be
said to err Fundamentally.

I will but briefly touch on this head, and though I might give too many
instances of it, I shall at present confine my self to the Church of Rome. I
know no fundamental Article of our Faith, that is expressly denied by the Church
of Rome. She receives all the ancient Creeds, professes the Faith of the holy
Trinity, the Incarnation, the satisfaction of Christ's death, his Intercession
for us at the right hand of God, but then she teaches such other corrupt
Doctrines, as all the wit of man cannot reconcile with this Faith: As to show
this briefly with reference to the satisfaction, and intercession of Christ.

The Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction seems many ways to be overthrown by the
Church of Rome: As by the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, which is offered
for the quick and for the dead: For if Christ made a perfect satisfaction for
sin by his death upon the Cross, what need of repeating this Sacrifice every
day, which represents the Sacrifice of Christ, to be as imperfect as the
Sacrifices of the Law, which could not take away sin, nor make the comers
thereunto perfect, and therefore were repeated again every year. Thus the
Doctrine of humane Penances and Satisfactions, especially the fire of
Purgatory, the merits of good Works, and the superabundant merits of some
eminent Saints, which compose the Treasury of the Church, and may be applied by
the Pope to other sinners to purchase their Pardon, which is the Foundation of
the Doctrine of indulgences, seem mightily to disparage the satisfaction of
Christ, for if he have made a perfect atonement for all our sins, we need not
invent so many other ways of satisfaction.

And whoever considers what the Church of Rome teaches about the Intercession
of Saints and Angels and the Virgin Mary, could hardly think that she did
believe, that there is but one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus.

But I need not enumerate many particulars, the truth of this being too evident
and notorious: The great Question then is this, whether such a Church may be
said to be guilty of Fundamental Errors; for this sounds like a contradiction,
that a Church which believes all the fundamental Articles of that Christian
Faith, should yet be guilty of fundamental Errors. And indeed if by fundamental
Errors, we mean such Errors as deny any fundamental Article, so it is plain,
that a Church which owns and professes all Fundamentals, cannot be guilty of
fundamental Errors, but if by fundamental Errors, we mean such Errors, as
contradict the Fundamentals of Faith, so she may be guilty of fundamental
Errors, because it is possible for a Church to believe two Doctrines, which
contradict each other, when the Contradiction is not in express terms, but
consequential: For all men or Churches do not see, or will not own the
immediate and necessary consequences of their own Doctrine; as may easily be
observed among a great many other men besides those of the Church of Rome. And
the use of this observation is very considerable upon many accounts, but
especially in our present Dispute about Catholic Communion, as will appear by
considering.

3. How far and in what Cases we may communicate with such a Church, as
believes all the Fundamentals of Christian Faith, and yet teaches such
Doctrines, as in their immediate and necessary consequences overthrow
Foundations. This is a very material difference between a Church, which denies
any fundamental Article of Faith, and a Church, which believes all
Fundamentals, but superadds some corrupt Doctrines, which in their Consequences
destroy Foundations; that the first is never capable of Catholic Communion,
because she denies Catholic Doctrine, which is the necessary condition of
Catholic Communion; but the second in some cases may be, because she retains
all saving knowledge, i. e. all which is of absolute necessity to Salvation,
though intermixed with dangerous Errors. Now to state this matter, how far we
may communicate with such a Church as professes all the fundamental Articles of
Faith, but yet superadds other very corrupt and dangerous Doctrines, we may
consider these two things.

1. I think, I need not tell any man, that we must not purchase the Communion
of such a Church, by professing our Assent to any corrupt Doctrine, though it
be not a fundamental Error. No one Church ought thus to impose upon another,
nor does any Church pretend to it, but only the Church of Rome. Every Church is
bound to preserve her own Faith, as pure and perfect, as she can; but she has
not that Authority over any other Church, as to impose upon their Faith. An
orthodox Church may and ought to admonish neighbor Churches of any doctrinal
Corruptions, but must not reject their Communion for every Error, though of
dangerous Consequence, if it be not Fundamental. The belief of all fundamental
Articles of Faith, does mightily qualify the evil and malignant influence of
many very corrupt Doctrines; which is the true reason, why many men are
observed to live much better than they believe, because, though they have
entertained a great many corrupt Doctrines, which in their natural Consequences
are very apt to tempt men to sin, and to encourage them in it; yet, when withal
they heartily believe all the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
this true Faith is so directly contrary to the ill consequences of their
Errors, that they do not see the ill consequences of such Doctrines, or are
sufficiently antidoted against the poison of them; nay many times it so
happens, that men are so far from seeing the ill Consequences of their
Doctrines, that they draw only good Consequences from them, which may make them
as good or better men, than many are, who have a better Faith.

Thus to instance at present in some very popular and prevailing Doctrines, not
disputing whether they be true or false. The Doctrine of absolute Election and
Reprobation, the Inconditionality of the Covenant of Grace, the no-necessity of
holiness to our justification, the absolute impotency of humane nature to do
the least good, the irresistibility of the divine Grace, and such like
Antinomian Doctrines, are charged by their Adversaries with as dismal
consequences, as any Doctrines are capable of, even to the overthrow of all
Religion; and I doubt not but have very ill effects upon men's minds, who are
not thoroughly possessed with some other Principles to qualify and allay them.
But yet if after all this, these men do firmly believe the infinite goodness
and justice of God, the inflexible holiness and purity of his nature, his
irreconcilable enmity to all sin, and that they shall never go to Heaven
without holiness, it is impossible, they should make any ill use of these
Doctrines to encourage themselves in sin; and on the other hand, if they
believe, right or wrong, that these Doctrines do mightily advance the grace of
God in the Salvation of sinners, it may increase their love to God, inflame
their Devotions; and make them very active in all holy obedience. For when men
are possessed with a prevailing sense of the grace and love of God and our
Savior, they may spare a great many other arguments to obedience.

Now we must not hence infer, that it is indifferent, whether men believe right
or wrong, for every practical Error is a state of Temptation, and erroneous
Doctrines do oftener hinder the efficacy of an orthodox Faith, than an orthodox
Faith prevents the mischief of an erroneous persuasion, as is lamentably seen
in the lives of too many men: But the only inference I draw from hence is this,
that every Error, though in it self of dangerous consequence, is not a
sufficient reason to deny Communion to such a Church, as notwithstanding such
Errors, professes all the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, if we
can maintain Communion with her without professing her Errors.

2. While the fundamental Doctrines of Faith are secure, no corrupt Doctrines
are a sufficient reason to break Communion, which do not corrupt the Christian
Worship. The principal Acts of Christian Communion consist in Christian
Worship; and if any Church have so corrupted divine Worship, that a good
Christian must not join in it, we must of necessity abstain from their
Communion, though we are not equally bound to deny them ours. For there are
some Fundamentals of Worship, as well as Faith, as the Worship of one God,
through one Mediator Jesus Christ, and when any Church corrupts the Worship of
God in its vital and essential parts, as the Church of Rome does in the Worship
of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and Images, and the consecrated
Host, it is necessary then to withdraw our selves from such a corrupt Communion.

But then as for those Doctrines, which though they may be corrupt and
erroneous, are neither fundamental Errors, nor introduce any such fundamental
Corruptions into religious Worship; I can see no imaginable reason, why they
should break Communion between neighbor Churches; if no Churches must
communicate with each other, which do not exactly agree in all the Disputes and
Controversies of Religion, it will be hard to find any two Churches in the
World, that can maintain this Christian Communion. Certainly, Catholic
Communion requires us to communicate with all those Churches, with whom we can
communicate without sin; and therefore when a Church denies no fundamental
Article of Faith, nor corrupts the Christian Worship in any fundamental and
essential part of it, nor requires us to believe any Doctrine, which we believe
to be erroneous, as the necessary terms of Communion with her, that is, when we
may communicate with her without doing any thing that is evil, nothing can
justify our breach of Communion.

As for instance, I take the Lutheran Doctrine of Consubstantiation to be a
very great Error, and if they should deny Communion to me, unless I would
profess my belief of it, I should judge it a sufficient reason to withdraw
Communion from them; yet if no such Condition be imposed on me, I would make no
scruple to communicate with them, because, though Consubstantiation be an
Error, yet it does not corrupt their Worship, as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation does the Worship of the Church of Rome. The Lutheran
Churches observe the Institution of our Savior, without any Idolatrous Worship
of the Host, their Doctrine makes no change in their Worship, and therefore can
be no reason to withdraw our Communion. The Errors of any Church cannot make
its Communion sinful, unless they make its Worship so. Were Transubstantiation
it self (as absurd a Doctrine, as it is) a mere speculation, without any
influence upon Worship, did the Church of Rome strictly observe the
Institutions of our Savior in celebrating the Lord's Supper, without either
taking from it, or adding a new Idolatrous Worship to it, they might enjoy
their Opinion, if they pleased, so they would let me enjoy mine, and I would
not break with them merely upon this score.

Nothing can be vainer, than to dream of reconciling all the Disputes of
Christendom, and of making all men or all Churches of a mind in every thing,
and if Catholic Communion cannot be maintained among Churches of a different
belief and persuasion in some controverted points, we must never hope for any
such thing: And if it may be, our only Inquiry is, what difference and variety
of Opinions is consistent with Catholic Communion; and I know no other answer
to it but this, that we may safely communicate with any Church, how different
soever our Opinions in other matters may be, while we agree in all the
Fundamentals of Christian Faith, and Essentials of Worship.

Those animosities indeed, which the heats of disputation occasion too often,
not only between private men, but Christian Churches, set them at a much
greater distance from each other, than the most distant Opinions; but yet that
this is practicable, to maintain Christian Communion notwithstanding this
variety of Opinions, is evident, not only from the intrinsic reason of the
thing, but from manifest experience.

We know how many Sects there were in the Jewish Church, especially those two
famous Sects of the Pharisees and Sadduces, and yet they lived in the Communion
of the same Church, offered the same Sacrifices, worshipped God at the same
Temple, and observed the same Rites and Ceremonies of Religion; and confined
their Disputes to their several Schools.

The Jewish and the Heathen Converts in the time of the Apostles differed about
a very material point, the observation of the Law of Moses, and yet according
to St. Paul's exhortation and command, they lived in the Communion of the same
Church, and in the joint exercise of all the Acts of Christian Worship,
Defense, p. 443. etc.
as I discoursed at large in the Defense.

How many different Opinions are there among the Doctors and Churches of the
Roman Communion, the Franciscans, Dominicans, Jesuits? The same points are
disputed among them, and that with as great warmth and keenness, as there are
between the Arminians and Calvinists, and abundance more. Nay, the Italian, and
Spanish, and French Churches differ upon those great points of Infallibility,
and the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, and yet all live in the
Communion of the same Church. And I cannot see, but that all the Christian
Churches in the World, excepting the Church of Rome, might maintain Catholic
Communion upon as easy terms.

The breaches between the Lutheran and Zuinglian Churches have been often times
composed, especially between the Polonian Churches; an account of which we have
at large in Pareus his Irenicum, which is a plain argument, that it is not
merely the difference of Opinions, but the distempers of men's minds, if such
agreement and concord be not perpetual; so that no doctrinal Disputes ought to
divide the Communion of the Christian Church, but such as subvert the
foundations of our Faith, or corrupt the essentials of Christian Worship, and
this may suffice for the first inquiry, what are the terms of Catholic
Communion with respect to Doctrines, from which it evidently appears, that
Catholic Communion is neither in its self an impracticable notion, nor the
practice of it very difficult to all good Christians.

II. It is time now to consider the next Inquiry, what are the necessary terms
of Catholic Communion, with respect to Church Government. And the only
Question I shall endeavor to resolve under this Head, is this. Whether, and in
what Cases, it is lawful to communicate with a Church, which is not governed by
Bishops, nor by Presbyters, who were ordained by Bishops.

The reason of this Inquiry is plainly this. It is sufficiently known, that
there are several Protestant Churches of great note, governed without Bishops,
by a College of Presbyters, who have no other Orders, but what they received
from Presbyters. Now if Episcopacy be so essential to the Constitution of a
Church, that we must not own any Church which has no Bishops, we must renounce
the Communion of the Protestant Churches of France and Holland, and Geneva, and
some others, which is both a very invidious and uncharitable thing, and a great
injury to the Reformed Profession, and does mightily streighten Catholic
Communion. If Episcopacy be not so essential to the Constitution of a Church,
but that we may communicate with those Churches which have no Bishops, why do
we, reject our Dissenters at home, and condemn them of Schism, for rejecting
the Episcopal Authority, and forming themselves into Church-societies without
Bishops? Why are we not as kind to our own Friends, Neighbors, and
Contrymen, as we are to Foreign Churches?

Now though the Church of England has always asserted the Authority of Bishops,
and condemned those of her own Communion, who have separated from their
Bishops, yet she has been so far from condemning Foreign reformed Churches for
the want of Bishops, that she has always lived in Communion with them, and
defended them against their accusers; and I resolve to steer by this Compass,
so to vindicate the Reformed Churches, as neither to injure the Episcopal
Authority, nor to justify our Schisms at home. And to do this with all
possible plainness, I shall proceed by these steps.

1. I observe, there is a vast difference between separating from Episcopal
Communion, where Episcopacy is the settled Government of the Church, and living
without Episcopal Government, where we cannot have it; which makes a great
difference between our Dissenters, and some Foreign Churches. Some of the
Foreign Protestant Churches indeed have no Protestant Bishops, nor ever had,
and it may be, could not have; but Episcopacy has been the established
Government of the Church of England, ever since the Reformation; and for any
Christians to separate from their Bishops, was always accounted Schism by the
Christian Church, unless there were some very necessary reasons to justify
such a Separation; but in some cases not to have Bishops may be no Schism.

If any man should object, that the Case of our Dissenters, and the reformed
Churches is the very same; for the Foreign Churches had Bishops also of the
Roman Communion, but separated from them, upon account of those intolerable
Corruptions, which made their Communion unlawful, and many of them set up no
Bishops of their own; and thus our Dissenters separate from the Church of
England, and her Bishops, upon account of the corruptions in her Worship, and
are as excusable as the French Protestant Churches, for setting up a Government
without Bishops; I answer. Not to take notice now, what a vast difference there
is between separating from the Church of Rome, and from the Church of England,
there is one very obvious difference in this very matter, which takes off the
whole objection. For our Dissenters make Diocesan Episcopacy to be one reason
of their Separation, which no reformed Church ever did before: The Reformed
Churches abroad separated from Popish Bishops, our Dissenters separate from
Episcopacy it self.

All the reformed Churches abroad owned Episcopacy, though they disowned Popish
Bishops; several of them retain both the name and thing, as the Churches of
Sweden, and Denmark: Others retain the Office, though they have changed the
name; as several Lutheran Churches, which have their superintendents, Generales
and Generalissimi, who answer to our Bishops and Archbishops; and as for those
Churches which have them not, they never reject Episcopal Communion, but all of
them have owned Communion with the Church of England, reverenced our Bishops,
highly commended the Constitution of our Church, censured and condemned our
Schismatics, and declared their judgments in favor of Episcopacy, and wished
the restitution of it, and the most some of their most learned men have
pretended to, was only to justify the Lawfulness of a Presbyterian parity.
Durel's Church Government. Saywell's Evangelical and Catholic Unity, etc. p.
228, etc.
It were easy here to fill up several Pages with the judgment of the most
famous Divines abroad, but this has been so often done by others, and very
lately by Dr. Saywell, that I shall refer my Readers to them for satisfaction
in this point. And is not this a very material difference between our
Dissenters, and the reformed Churches abroad, which have not Episcopal
Government? Our Dissenters separate from Episcopacy, which they own; from our
reformed Bishops, which they maintain Communion with, and therefore are as well
Separatists from the reformed Presbyterian Churches, as from the Church of
England.

2. As it is Schism without absolute necessity to cast off the Authority of our
Bishops, and to separate from them, so it is much more so to reject Episcopal
Communion and the Government of Bishops, as unlawful and Antichristian; which
makes a very material difference between our Dissenters, and those reformed
Churches abroad, who have no Bishops of their own.

There is nothing our Dissenters more vehemently oppose than Episcopal
Government, for which, they never think, they can find names bad enough: Not to
mention others at present, this is the great design of Mr. Baxter's late
History of Episcopacy, to prove, that Diocesan Episcopacy in the very Nature
and Constitution of it, overthrows the Government of Christ's Institution: This
is his great design in his Abridgement of Church History, to bespatter and
vilify the most renowned Bishops of the Church, to reproach all their Actions,
to charge them with all the Heresies and Schisms, which have disturbed the
Church, and to paint them in such frightful shapes, that all Christians may
fly from them as the great troublers of our Israel: I cannot imagine, what
service he could think to do by this to common Christianity, which is concerned
in nothing more, than in the Credit and Reputation of the chief Ministers of
Religion, but I must acknowledge, all this was admirably calculated to serve a
Faction.

But the Foreign Churches, which have no Bishops, do not condemn Episcopacy,
nor separate from it, as an unlawful Communion, and whoever does so, is a
Schismatic from the Catholic Church. This is so plain, that there needs no
proof of it. For let men talk never so ill of Bishops, and their Government,
the matter of fact is evident, that the Church of Christ has for many hundred
years had no other Government, than that of Bishops. They can show no Church
till the Reformation, which was governed without Bishops; even such Diocesan
Bishops; as our Dissenters now vent their Spleen against. Dr. Owen indeed and
Mr. Baxter would gladly except the two first Centuries, but what little reason
they have for it, has been already examined in the Defense; but however, they
are all forced to acknowledge, that in the succeeding Ages of the Church till
the Reformation, which was above twelve hundred years, the Church was governed
by Diocesan Bishops, as it is at this day; so that by renouncing the Episcopal
Communion of the Church in our Age, they separate from the whole Catholic
Church for so many hundred years. As far as Episcopal Government is concerned,
they condemn the whole Catholic Church in their separation from the Church of
England, as governed by Diocesan Bishops; nay herein they separate also from
all the reformed Churches, who hold Communion with the Episcopal Church of
England; and if this be not enough to prove them Schismatics, there is no such
thing as Schism from the Church; for there was no Church for near fifteen
hundred years, nor is there at this day, which they can communicate with upon
these Principles, but their own beloved Conventicles; for it has always been
accounted as unlawful, to communicate with such a Church, as communicates with
another Church, whose Communion is sinful, as it is to communicate with such a
Church our selves, and it must be so according to the Principles of Catholic
Communion. And therefore if it be unlawful to communicate with the Church of
England, as governed by Bishops, it must be unlawful also to communicate with
those Protestant Presbyterian Churches, which communicate with the Church of
England.

This, I suppose, may satisfy any man, what little reason our Dissenters have
to talk so much of Foreign reformed Churches, for their case is very different;
that which will justify those Foreign Churches which have no Bishops, will not
justify our Dissenters, who have Bishops, but separate from them. For though
they have no Bishops, they do not separate from Episcopal Churches, nor condemn
Episcopacy, as an unlawful or Antichristian Government, but hold Communion with
the Church of England, which our Dissenters have rent and divided by
Schismatical separations.

3. Let us then consider, what may be said in justification of those reformed
Churches, which have no Bishops, whether their want of Bishops does unchurch
them, and make it unlawful for us to hold Communion with them. This is a very
nice and tender point; for to condemn all the reformed Churches, which have no
Bishops, seems so hard and uncharitable, that the Church of England has always
declined it; but then absolutely to justify them, overthrows the ancient
government by Bishops, and is made use of by our Dissenters to pull down
Episcopacy, if the present Bishops do not please them; which is impossible for
any Bishop to do, who will be true to his own Authority, and to the
constitutions of our Church.

And therefore in stating this matter, I must go a middle way, neither
absolutely to condemn, nor absolutely to justify them; For, 1. As believing
the divine right of Episcopal Government, which I shall not now go about to
prove, I must acknowledge those Churches, which have no Bishops, to be very
imperfect and defective, and that they are bound, as far as they can, to
endeavor to restore the Episcopal Authority; and if they fail in this, so far
as they are chargeable with this neglect, what in some cases is a pardonable
defect, may become, especially in the Governors of such a Church, a very great
Crime. For no Church must wantonly change a divine Institution; we condemn the
Church of Rome for taking away the Cup from the Laity, and I think every divine
Institution has something so sacred in it, as not to be lightly rejected or
altered without absolute necessity.

2. But yet the case may be such, that the want of Episcopal Government may not
un-church such a society of Christians, nor make it unlawful for other
Christians to maintain Communion with them. As will appear from these following
considerations.

1. That the change of some positive Institutions does not presently un-church
those, who are guilty of it.

2. Especially if there be an absolute or very great necessity for doing it.

3. Especially if the case be such, that at least they have a presumptive
allowance from the Catholic Church to do it.

1. That the change of some positive Institutions does not presentlyun-church
those, who are guilty of it. I need not spend many words to prove this, for
when the case is proposed in general, I think no man will deny it. The
observation of all divine Institutions is necessary to the perfection of a
Church, but it is not so to the being of it: That is, though God does strictly
require the observance of all his Statutes, yet every positive command is not
of that moment, that God will disanul his Covenant with such a People for the
neglect or change of it.

If ever God would have done this, we might most reasonably expect it under the
Jewish Economy, in which every minute Circumstance was so strictly commanded
by God, as having something Sacred and Typical in it, and yet it does not
appear, that every deviation from their Rule, though in some very material
parts of it, did provoke God to cast them off.

God had appointed a certain place, where they should offer their Sacrifices to
him, and when this place was actually fixed and determined, it was unlawful for
them to offer Sacrifice in any other place. And yet when the Temple at
Jerusalem was built, which was the only place God had appointed for Sacrifice,
the People continued to offer Sacrifice in their high places, even in the Reign
of very good Kings, and though this practice was condemned, yet it did not
un-church them.

God had appointed Aarons Family for the Priesthood, 1 Kings 12.31.
and yet Jeroboam made Priests of other Tribes and Families, and the Law, which
expressly appoints Aaron and his Sons for the Priests Office, only threatens
death against Usurpers: Numb. 3.10.
Thou shall appoint Aaron and his Sons, and they shall wait on the Priests
Office, and the stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death. God did not
reject the Church of Israel for the irregularities of their Priests, but owned
them for his Church and People many years after this, till they defiled
themselves with the worship of Baal, and other Heathen Gods. And Josephus
observes, that after the death of Menelaus, Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. cap. 14.
Antiochus made Alchymus High Priest, who was not of the Family of the Priests;
and yet I should be loath to say, that such an irregular promotion did un-church
the Jewish Church; and whoever considers in what manner the Highpriests were
advanced and deposed even in the time of our Savior, possibly may think it, as
inconsistent with the first Institution of that Office, as the irregular
Ordinations of Presbyters.

2. We ought especially to consider the force and power of necessity to
dispense even with divine Institutions: No necessity can dispense with the
eternal Laws of good and evil, because no necessity can be pleaded to justify
men in sin, though in some cases it may extenuate the evil and guilt of it, for
the internal necessity in the nature of things is stronger than any external
necessity can be; no external force can compel men to sin, which is an Act of
their own will and choice, and the obligations to Virtue remain in the most
extreme necessity. But in positive Institutions, which depend upon the Will of
God, we find necessity has often dispensed, and that with God's allowance and
approbation. As to give some few examples of it.

1. The necessity of the divine Worship has dispensed with positive
Institutions. Thus in Hezekiah's Sacrifice, the Priests being too few, 2 Ch
ron. 29.34.35.11.
the Levites assisted them in doing the Priests work, in slaying the
Sacrifices; and the like we may see in Josiah's Passover. And by the same
reason we may suppose, that if the Family of Aaron had failed, other Families
of the Tribe of Levi might have succeeded into the Priest's Office, though
against a positive Law: For the necessity of the divine Worship is much greater
and more unalterable, than the confinement of the Priesthood to a certain
Family, and where the divine Providence makes a necessity, necessity: will make
a Priest.

And therefore I think, a late learned and ingenious Author, who disputes so
earnestly, that the Power of administering Sacraments must be derived from God,
and that this Power now is given only by Episcopal Ordination, ought to have
distinguished between the ordinary and extraordinary conveyance of Power.
Whoever administers in holy things, must derive his Power from God, because he
acts in God's Name, and when it may be done, he must derive his Power in such a
way, as God has appointed by a positive Law, and whoever rejects this way
without necessity, can have no valid Power, but whatever he does, is null and
void; as I doubt not, but all Ordinations of Presbyters are in opposition to,
and contempt of their Bishops, as I think, that learned man has sufficiently
proved: But the case of necessity ought to be considered, it being contrary to
the Nature of all positive Institutions to oblige in case of necessity; and I
take that to be a case of necessity, when Episcopal Orders cannot be had, and
yet the Church must sail without them. Bishops are for the Church, not the
Church for Bishops; and when the ordinary conveyance of this Authority fails,
necessity legitimates other extraordinary ways. We have all the reason in the
World to presume in such cases, that God will confirm and ratify the choice
and designation of the People, much more the Ordinations of the Presbytery,
where Episcopal Ordination cannot be had. For I see no reason, why Presbyters
may not do the Bishops work in case of necessity, as well as Levites do the
work of Priests.

2. The necessity of men's lives dispense with positive Laws. Upon this account
our Savior justifies David's eating the Shewbread, when he was an hungered,
which was not lawful for him to eat, Mark 2.24, 25, 26.
but for the Priests; and his Disciples plucking the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath day: Upon this Principle, Matathias allowed the Jews to fight on the
Sabbath Day, Joseph. antiq. l. 12. cap. 7.
in case they were assaulted by their Enemies; and our Savior resolves all
such cases by that general Principle, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice; and
certainly, mercy to the Souls of men is as considerable as any temporal
concernments.

3. But we may further consider, what force and Authority the presumptive
allowance of the Church has in such cases. The Christian Church in all Ages has
thought fit to dispense with positive Institutions in case of necessity, and by
her own Approbation and Authority to supply the defects and irregularities of
such Administrations, and therefore certainly did believe she had Power to do
it: And indeed if there be not sufficient Authority in the Church to provide
for cases of necessity, the Power of the Church is more defective than of any
other Society of men, and cannot in many cases without a miracle preserve her
own being; and therefore if the Church may be presumed in cases of necessity to
allow Persons to perform such religious Offices and Ministries, as otherwise
they are not qualified to perform; this very allowance supplies the incapacity
of the Person, and does virtually confer that Authority on him, which in other
cases he had not.

Now it is not only highly reasonable to presume, that the Catholic Church
will rather allow the Ordinations of Presbyters, though they are not regularly
qualified for that Office, where there are no Bishops to Ordain, than that a
considerable member of the Christian Church should want a succession of Pastors
to instruct and govern them, and administer all religious Offices to them; but
besides the reason of the thing, the practice of the Church is a sufficient
ground for this presumption.

For we know the use of Orders is to confer Authority and Power to administer
the Sacraments, and yet the Church has allowed even Laymen to baptize, Vbi
ecclesiastici ordinis non est consessus, and offers, and tinguis, and sacerdos
es tibi solus. Tert. de exhort. cast. cap. 7.
and if we will believe Tertullian to consecrate too, in case of necessity,
that is, where there have been no Bishops, nor Presbyters to administer those
Offices, and we may as well presume the allowance of the Church for Presbyters
to Ordain, when there are no Bishops, as for Laymen to administer the
Sacraments, where there are no Bishops nor Presbyters.

I allege Tertullian's Authority, not for the sake of his reason, but as a
witness of primitive Practice: The reasonings of particular men do not always
express the sense of the Church, but their own private Opinions, though they
may be allowed to be good Witnesses, what the practice of the Church was in
their days: Though I confess, I cannot see, that any thing Tertullian says,
does derogate from the Evangelical Priesthood, or destroy the distinction
between the Clergy and Laity, or encourage private Christians to invade the
Ministerial Function. Nonne and laici sacerdotes sumus? scriptum est, regnum
quoque nos and sacerdotes Deo. and patri suo fecit Ibid.
He says indeed, that even Laymen are Priests, Christ having made us all Kings
and Priests to God his Father; by which he means, that every Christian through
our great Advocate and Mediator, has now so near and free access to God,
Differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit ecclesiae Auctoritas, and
honor per ordinis consessum sanctificatus.
and such assurance of acceptance, as was thought peculiar to Priests in former
Ages. Well but is there no distinction then betwixt the Christian Clergy and
People? Yes, this he owns, but says it is by the appointment and constitution
of the Church. What does he mean by this? That it is a humane, arbitrary, and
alterable Constitution? By no means! But it is the honor of a peculiar
Sanctification and Separation of certain Persons to the work of the Ministry,
to which God has annexed his Blessing and Authority. And therefore the
Constitution of the Church here includes the Authority of Christ, and of his
Apostles, who from the beginning have made this distinction, as Tertullian
every where confesses.

To what purpose then is all this? Si habes jus sacerdotis in temet ipso, ubi
necesse est, habeas oportet etiam disciplinam sacerdotis, ubi necesse sit
habere jus sacerdotis. Ib.
How does he hence prove, that every man in case of necessity is a Priest to
himself? That he has the right of Priesthood in himself, when it is necessary,
and therefore may perform the Office of a Priest also, when it is necessary?
For if Christ and his Apostles have from the first Foundations of the Christian
Church made a distinction between the Evangelical Priesthood and the People,
and have instituted the Ministerial Office with a peculiar Power and Authority,
how can it be lawful for a private Christian upon a pretense of the general
Priesthood of Christians, in any case whatsoever, to perform such religious
Acts, as are peculiar to the Evangelical Ministry?

But the force of Tertullian's reason seems to consist in this; That all
Christians being an Evangelical Priesthood, to offer up the spiritual
Sacrifices of Prayers and Thanksgivings to God, through the merits and
mediation of our great High Priest, they are not debarred by any personal
incapacity, nor by the typical and mysterious Nature of the Christian
Institutions, from performing any religious Office, which Christ has commanded
his Church; but yet for the better security of public Instructions, for the
more regular Administration of religious Offices, for the preservation of
Unity, Order, Discipline, and Government in the Church, Christ has committed
the power of Government and Discipline, and public Administration of religious
Offices, to Persons peculiarly devoted and set apart for the work of the
Ministry. But the Institution of this Order being wholly for the service of the
Church, and not for any other mystical reasons, in case of failure, where there
are none of this holy Order to perform religious Offices, the universal
Priesthood of Christians takes place, and any private Christian without a
regular and external Consecration to this Function, may perform all the Duties
and Offices of a Priest.

For there are two things, wherein the Aaronical and Evangelical Priesthood
differ, which make a mighty alteration in this case. The Aaronical Priesthood
was Typical or Mystical, and Mediatory, the Evangelical Priesthood is neither:
Now all men cannot pretend a right to a Mystical, much less to a Mediatory
Priesthood, but only such, as have a divine appointment and designation to this
Office; for the nature of Types and Mysteries is lost, if the Person be not
fitted to the Mystery, and the virtue of the Mediation is lost, (at least our
absolute assurance of it) if the Person do not act by Authority and Commission:
But now under the Gospel, the Institutions of our Savior are plain and simple,
without any shadows and figures, and therefore there is nothing in the nature
of the Worship, which requires peculiar and appropriate Persons; and Christ is
now our only Mediator between God and men, and therefore we need not any other
Mediators of divine appointment, in virtue of the Sacrifice and Mediation of
Christ, every Christian is a Priest, who may approach the Throne of Grace, and
offer up his prayers and thanksgivings in an acceptable manner to God.
Gospel Ministers indeed are to pray for the People, and to bless in God's name,
but they pray in no sense as Mediators, but in the name of our great Mediator^
and that, which makes their Prayers more effectual than the Prayers of a
private Christian, is, that they are the public Ministers of the Church, and
therefore offer up the Prayers of the Church, which are more powerful than the
Prayers of private Christians.

And therefore St. Austin reproves Parmenianus the Donatist, for making the
Bishop a Mediator between God and the People, which no good Christian can
endure the thoughts of, but must needs account such a man rather to be
Antichrist, August. contra. ep. Parmen. l. 1. cap. 8.
than an Apostle of Christ. For all Christian men pray for each other, but he
who prays for all, and none for him, is the only and the true Mediator; of whom
the High Priest under the Law was a Type, and therefore no man was to pray for
the High Priest. But St. Paul, who knew, that Christ was our only Mediator, who
was entered into Heaven for us, recommends himself to the Prayers of the Church;
and is so far from making himself a Mediator between God and the People, that
he exhorts all Christians to pray for one another, as members of the same Body;
for if Paul had been a Mediator, the other Apostles had been Mediators too, and
so we should have a great many Mediators, and not, as he himself tells us, one
Mediator; and therefore he says, that the Prayers of wicked Bishops are heard
for the People, not for the Bishop's sake, but pro devotione populorum, for the
Peoples Devotion, or as they are the Prayers of the Church. And when the
Donatists proved, that wicked Bishops could not minister in holy things,
because under the Law no man was to officiate as a Priest, who had any blemish
or defect, he answers, that this was only Typical of Christ, Ib. cap. 7.
and fulfilled only in him.

So that the Apostolical or Episcopal Office, though it be frequently by the
Ancients called Sacerdotium, in allusion to the Aaronical Priesthood, yet
indeed it has nothing of the proper nature of the Aaronical Priesthood in it,
but is instituted by Christ for Instruction, Discipline, and Government, and
the public Administration of religious Offices. It was very requisite indeed,
that Christ himself should invest the Governors of his Church with Authority
and Power for this Office, and it is necessary to the Peace, Order, and Unity
of the Church, that no man should usurp this Power and Authority to himself,
but receive it from the hands of those, who have Power to give it; and
therefore this Apostolical Power, excepting the case of necessity, is as saored
and inviolable as the Priesthood it self; but in case of necessity, where the
succession of Apostolical Power fails, or a plenary Authority to convey it, it
admits of a more easy redress, than the failure of a Mystical or Typical
Priesthood would do: For there is no Office of Religion, but in such a case any
Christian may perform, we being all Priests to God through Jesus Christ; and as
for Authority, necessity and the designation of fit Persons by the Church, when
the regular ways of conveyance fail, may be very easily presumed to be approved
and confirmed by God.

This I take to be the true sense of Tertullian's argument, which I have
explained the more largely, because some men are very apt to abuse all such
passages to the diminution of the Ministerial Office, though with what little
reason, I think, is very evident; but whatever becomes of Tertullian's
Argument, or whether the Church proceeded upon these Principles, or not in
granting Liberty to Laymen, to baptize in case of necessity, the Practice of
the Church is plain in this matter, thus it was in Tertullian's time, and thus
it has been in most Ages of the Church ever since, and is to this day allowed
in the Church of Rome; and if the Church allows Laymen in case of necessity to
administer Sacraments; we may reasonably presume, it will in the same necessity
allow of the Ordinations of Presbyters.

I shall only observe further, that this practice of the Church in allowing the
baptism of Laymen in case of necessity, seems to me utterly to overthrow those
Principles, which a learned Author has Published in his late Discourse of
Schism. Some of his Principles are these; That Salvation is not ordinarily to
be expected without an external participation of the Sacraments. That the
Validity of the Sacraments, depends upon the Authority of the Persons by whom
they are administered; they being the Seals of the Covenant, which as in all
Covenants between man and man, are void in Law, if they be not applied by
Persons, who have Authority to seal. This Authority of applying the Seals of
the Covenant can be derived only from God, and that only by Episcopal
Ordinations.

Now I must profess my dissent from this Learned man upon more accounts than
one, at present it may suffize, that either these Principles are false, or the
Catholic Church has been in a dangerous mistake, in allowing the Baptism of
private Christians, where there were no Ecclesiastical Ministers to do it. For
if the Validity of Baptism depends upon the Authority of him, who baptizes,
then the Baptism of Laymen, who according to his Principles can have no such
Authority, must be actually void, and have no saving effect, and then the
Catholic Church ever since Tertullian's time has erred in a matter necessary
to Salvation: And how specious soever any Arguments may be, I shall be always
jealous of such a Conclusion, as charges the Primitive and Catholic Church
with ignorance and error, so dangerous and destructive to men's Souls.

This learned man was aware of this, Separation of Churches, etc. p. 143.
and therefore confesses, For my part I do not understand, how the validity of
Laics, and much more women's Baptism (who by the Apostles rule are much less
capable of Fcclesiastical Authority) can be defended, unless it may possibly be
by that general delegation, which may be conceived to have been granted to them
by the Governors, by those customs and constitutions, which permit them to
administer it. But it would then be a further doubt, how far such Persons as
these are capable of such a delegation? To which I do not intend at present to
digress. But indeed this had been no digression, or the most useful digression
in all his Book. The matter of Fact is confessed by him, that in case of
necessity Laics were allowed to baptize, which overthrows his whole
Hypothesis, whereby he confines this to Ecclesiastical Ministers in all cases
whatsoever. If the Church in case of necessity has permitted Laics to baptize,
we may presume, that in the same necessity, she will allow Presbyters to
Ordain; if Laics are not capable of such a delegation, then the Catholic
Church has erred in a fundamental Practice, which is necessary to Salvation; if
they be, then the administration of Sacraments is not in all cases absolutely
confined to the Clergy, for all such cases must be excepted, wherein the Church
has Power to dispense; for this delegated Power does not make them
Ecclesiastical Officers, but gives Authority or Permission to Laics in such
cases to do the work of a Bishop, or of other consecrated Persons.

And yet we find the first Foundations of a very great Church, laid in this
manner by Frumentius in India, who was only a Laick, and yet erected Churches,
whether those Christians, Dum regni gubernacula Frumentius haberet in manibus
Deo mentem ejus and animos instigante, requirere sollicitius caepit, si qui
inter negotiatores Romanos Christiani essent, and ipsis potestatem maximam
dare, ac monere ut Conventicula per loca singula facerent, ad quae Romano ritu
orationis causa constuerent. Ruff. l. 10. Hist. Eccl.
whom he found there resorted, to pray to God after the manner of the Church of
Rome, which in those days was performed with the celebration of the Eucharist,
and yet they had no Bishop, nor Presbyter among them; and though Ruffinus
mentions only their meeting together, to pray after the manner of the Church of
Rome, yet what that means, Theodoret tells us more expressly, that they met
together after the manner of the Church of Rome, to celebrate all religious
Offices, (...) Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 23.
which in the ancient Language peculiarly signifies the Celebration of the
Eucharist.

Our Author acknowledges, That when all diligence is used in securing
Succession, there may yet be real failures in it. But as God only can know
them, so I cannot but think him obliged, Separation of Churches, etc. p. 417.
both by his Covenant for the graces conveyed in the Sacraments, and by his
design of establishing Government through all Ages of succession to supply
those failures. So that it seems, there is great reason in some cases, that God
should supply the failures of a valid Authority; that God should make and
account those Sacraments valid, which have not the validity of a just
Authority: And if this may be done in any case, certainly the case of necessity
is as considerable as any: And the necessity of preserving the being of the
Church, seems to me as considerable, as the preservation of Government, which
is only in order to the preservation of its being.

But this is a matter of such great moment, that I cannot pass it over without
a more particular Examination of some Principles, on which that learned man
grounds that severe conclusion of the Invalidity of all Sacraments, which are
not administered by Bishops, or by Presbyters Episcopally Ordained; which, I
hope, I may do in such a Cause as this, wherein so many foreign Churches are
concerned, without the least infringement of that real honor and friendship I
have for him. And to proceed with all possible clearness in this matter, I
shall reduce the state of the Controversy between us to a narrow point, and
briefly show, wherein we agree, and wherein we differ.

1. Then I readily grant, that the external participation of the Christian
Sacraments, of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, is ordinarily necessary to
Salvation.

2. I grant also, that the Bishops and Ministers of the Church regularly
ordained, have the only ordinary Power of administering Sacraments, and that all
Sacraments administered and received in opposition to, and contempt of the
ordinary Governors of the Church, are invalid, or inefficacious.

3. But I absolutely deny, that the validity of the Sacraments depends upon the
Authority of the Persons administering This is the parting point, and therefore
must be carefully examined. And I find but two general Arguments this learned
man uses for the Proof of it. From the nature of the Sacraments, and from the
ends of Government, considering God as a Covenanter, and as a Governor.

1. From the nature of the Sacraments, or considering God as a Covenanter; and
so the administration of Sacraments is celebrating or making a Covenant in
God's Name, so as to oblige him to performance of it, which no man can do,
unless God signify it to be his Pleasure to empower him to do so, as in Law,
no man can be obliged by another act, who has not been empowered to act in his
Name by his Letters of Proxy. And he that presumes of himself to make a
Covenant, wherein God is by him engaged as a Party, without being so empowered
by God, as what he does, cannot in any legal exposition be reputed as God's
act, so neither can it infer any legal obligation of him to performance.

This Argument is drawn out to a great length, but this I take to be the sum of
it, and it were a very strong Argument, if the Foundation of it were not false;
but I must deny that, which this Author has all along taken for granted without
any Proof; that the administration of the Sacraments, as suppose of Baptism, is
the Ministers making a Covenant with the Person baptized in God's Name.

I know of but one Covenant, which God has made with mankind in Christ Jesus,
and that is the Gospel Covenant; and I know of but one sealing and confirmation
of this Covenant, and that is by the Blood of Christ; and therefore the
Sacraments cannot be such Seals, as ratify and confirm the Covenant, and give
validity to it, or pass an Obligation on God to stand to his Covenant. The
Christian Sacraments are necessary parts, duties, or conditions of the
Covenant, either for our admission to the Privileges, or conveyance of the
Grace of the Covenant, and therefore they cannot in a proper sense be Seals of,
or making a Covenant in God's Name. All mankind are capable of being received
into this Covenant; the Covenant is actually made to the Christian Church, and
every Member of it; Baptism is our admission into the Christian Church, and
consequently to all the privileges of the Covenant; it is very fitting, that
the ordinary Power of such admissions should be in the hands of Church
Governors, and so it is by divine appointment, but all this is a very different
thing, from making a Covenant in God's Name, which shall validly oblige God to
the performance of it. This, it is plain, no man can do, without the most
express Authority, but the external solemnities of a Covenant, which are
ratified, confirmed, commanded by God, need not in all cases such express
Authority; for in this case we do not presume to make a Covenant in God's Name,
or to oblige him by our Act, but only to do what he has required and commanded
to be done, though not expressly commanded us in particular to do it. We neither
make any new terms for God, which he has not already made, and obliged himself
to the performance of, nor admit any Persons to the Privileges of this
Covenant, whom God has excluded, for the Covenant is made with all mankind, who
believe the Gospel, but we only do the ordinary work of Church Governors,
without the regular Authority of Governors, upon a reasonable presumption, that
God will allow of this, where there are not ordinary Governors to do it: Which
is a reasonable presumption in all humane Governments, where a regular
Authority fails, and cannot be supplied in an ordinary way; a Topic, which
this learned Author makes great and frequent use of.

And methinks, it might satisfy any reasonable man, what a vast difference
there is between making a Covenant in God's Name, and performing some external
Solemnities of it, if he only consider that Covenant, which God made with
Abraham, and the sign of this Covenant, which was Circumcision, a Seal of the
righteousness of Faith.

Whatever this learned man urges to prove the necessity of a valid Authority in
the Administrator to make Baptism valid, will prove the same necessity of a
valid Authoirty to make Circumcision valid; for what Baptism is in the new
Covenant, that Circumcision was in God's Covenant with Abraham, both equally
alike Signs or Seals or external Solemnities of the Covenant; and yet it is
sufficiently known, Buxtorfii Synagoga Judaica, cap. 4.
that any Israelite might circumcise, that understood how to do it.

The Administration of Baptism indeed is confined ordinarily to the Governors
of the Church, whereas the administration of Circumcision never was the
peculiar Office of the Priest, and the reason of this difference is plain,
because every Israelite by birth had a right to Circumcision, and therefore
there was no need of any Authority to receive them into the Church of Israel,
and the external Solemnity might be performed by any man; but natural
Generation does not give any man a right to Baptism, but Faith in Christ, and
therefore it is fit, that the Governors of the Church only should have Power to
judge, who are fit to be admitted into the Christian Church, and therefore that
the power of administering Baptism should be reserved in their hands; but hence
it appears, that in administering the Sacraments, they do not act, as legal
Covenanters in God's Name, but as Governors of the Church.

2. And this brings me to consider his Arguments from the Nature and Ends of
Government, which as far as I understand them amount to this. That it is
necessary for God to maintain and preserve the Authority of subordinate
Governors. That the Authority of Church Governors consists in the power of
administering Sacraments, which confer a Title to all the Privileges and Graces
of the Covenant. That this Authority cannot be maintained, if unauthorized
Persons may validly administer the Sacraments, and therefore we cannot suppose,
that God will countenance such an usurpation of Ecclesiastical Authority, as to
confirm and allow, what is so illegally done.

Now in Answer to this, I readily grant, 1. That this is a very good Argument
to prove, that the Authority of administering Sacraments is in ordinary cases
confined to the regular Clergy, for indeed this is all the Authority Church
Governors have, to receive in, and to put out of the Church, and take away
this, and all Church-societies must immediately dissolve, or hang together only
by some arbitrary Compacts and Covenants, which last as long as every man
pleases.

But then 2. I observe, that it is sufficient to secure the Authority and
Government of the Church, to confine the administration of Sacraments, and all
acts of Ecclesiastical Authority to Church-Governors, wherever there are such
to be found. For if no private man must presume to administer Sacraments in a
constituted Church, where there are Ecclesiastical Ministers, though we grant
Laics the liberty of administering Sacraments, where there are no regular
Ministers to do it; this can be no reasonable pretense for their invading the
Ministerial Function, or disturbing the Peace and Order of the Church, where
there are. He who attributes the only valid Authority of administering
Sacraments to the regular Clergy, where there are such Persons to be found,
does as effectually secure the Authority of Church-Governors, as he, who makes
it absolutely unlawful for private Christians, in any case whatsoever, to
administer the Sacraments. For the Authority of Church-governors is a mere
notion without any effect, where there are no such Governors, and where there
are, their Authority is secure this way. No man thinks it any injury to the
Authority of Princes and Civil Governors, to assert, that every private man has
liberty to defend his own Life and Fortune, where he is not under the
protection of Laws, and public Justice, no more is it any invasion of the
Authority of the Clergy, for private Christians to do the Office of a Bishop or
a Presbyter, where there is no Bishop or Presbyter to do it. No doubt, but God
is greatly concerned to maintain the Authority of Church-governors, because the
welfare and preservation of the Church depends on it, but we cannot think, the
Rules of Order and Government are so strict, as to dissolve the Society of the
Church which it is designed to maintain.

If it be objected, that it is very dangerous to Ecclesiastical Authority, to
grant the least indulgence or liberty to Laics, or an irregular Clergy, in any
case whatsoever, to inermeddle in sacred Offices; for they will always be apt
to take more than is granted; and thus that Liberty, which is allowed in
extraordinary cases, will be improved into an ordinary usurpation of the
Ministerial Office. I answer, It may be so, and I know no way to prevent those
ill Consequences, which foolish Reasoners may draw from Truth it self, nor that
ill use, which wild and giddy People may make of the justest Liberties, but
must we deny Truth, or deny our own just Liberties and Rights for this reason?

But yet this is not the case here, for there is a greater security of
Ecclesiastical Authority, than the Power of Sacraments its self, and that is,
the necessary obligations to Catholic Communion, which cannot be preserved
without a just deference to Ecclesiastical Authority: It may be lawful in some
cases for Laics to administer the Sacraments, but it is never lawful for them
to separate from their Governors, or to oppose their Authority.

Should a company of private Christians on their own choice separate themselves
from their Bishops, and unite into a Church-Society, this were a Church-Faction
and Schism, and all they did were null and void; but if private Christians, who
live in Communion with their Bishops, and own their Authority, being reduced to
that necessity, that they cannot enjoy the Sacraments, nor other religious
Offices from Persons, who have a regular Authority, should administer the
Sacraments themselves, and celebrate religious Offices for their spiritual
Comfort, I cannot see, that it is either Schism, or Usurpation, and the
perpetual obligations to Catholic Communion will prevent both.

Indeed nothing can secure the Peace and Unity of the Church, and the Authority
of Ecclesiastical Governors, but the necessity of Catholic Communion; for the
Unity of the Church, and the just Authority of Bishops, may be destroyed by an
Episcopal, as well as by a Presbyterian, or a Lay Schism. Thus it was by the
Schism of the Donatists. They were governed by Bishops, as well as the
Catholic Church, and their Orders, and Sacraments administered by them were
allowed to be valid, and yet they were Schismatics, and their Sacraments,
though valid with respect to the Authority, which administered them, yet without
effect, as administered in a Schism, as I have already showed from St. Austin.
And therefore that Father in his Writings against the Donatists, does not
oppose their Schism from the Invalidity of their Orders, or of their
Sacraments, which is no argument against an Episcopal Schism, (though it be the
only argument used by this learned man, to show the evil and danger of Schism)
but from their breach of Catholic Communion, which made all their Sacraments,
though not invalid, yet inefficacious. So that Ecclesiastical Authority may be
secured, though we allow Laics in case of necessity a liberty to administer
Sacraments in the Unity and Communion of the Church.

It were easy to add a great deal more of this Nature, but this is sufficient
to my present design. And the result of this whole Discourse is, that it is not
in all cases and circumstances unlawful to maintain Catholic Communion with
such a Church, as being forced to it by necessity, is neither governed by
Bishops, nor by Presbyters Episcopally ordained.

III. There still remains the third and fourth terms of Catholic Communion to
be considered, the Discipline of the Church, and Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies, which I shall briefly speak to both together.

Now Discipline in the ancient use of the Word has a large signification, and
includes all religious Worship, as well as Church Censures, especially the
Christian Sacraments; for Church Discipline consists in admitting men to, or
excluding them from the Communion, Worship, and Sacraments of Christians. Thus
Disciplina sacerdotis, in Tertullian signifies the whole exercise of the
Priestly Office, even the administration of Sacraments, of Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper. And by Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, I mean such external
circumstances and appendages of Worship, Time, Place, Habits, Postures, or
significant Rites, as are of humane Institution, and may be either enjoined or
altered by Church Governors, and do actually differ according to the Customs of
several Churches.

Now to reduce what I have to say under this Head, into as narrow a compass as
I can, I shall premise several things, which I presume will be acknowledged
without a Proof by the Persons I have now to deal with.

1. That it is necessary to Catholic Communion, that every Church observe all
the essentials of Christian Worship, and particularly the Christian Sacraments,
as instituted by our Savior.

2. That their Worship be pure from all Idolatrous mixtures, and corruptions;
which is a sufficient justification of our separation from the Church of Rome.

3. I suppose, it will be granted also that there is no Church so pure, but
that it has bad men, and too often bad Ministers in its Communion.

4. That there have in all ages been various Rites and Ceremonies used in the
Christian Church, and very different in different Churches. This no man will
deny, but one, who is either very ignorant himself, or a very impudent imposer
upon the ignorance of others.

5. That among true and orthodox Churches, which believe all the Fundamentals
of Faith, and observe all the Essentials of Worship, there are different
degrees of purity in Discipline, and Ecclesiastical Constitutions and
Ceremonies, some more, some less, for the edification of the Church.

This having been in former Ages, and being now at present the state of the
Christian Church, it is evident, what a Catholic Christian must do, who will
maintain Catholic Communion with the several Christian Churches in the World.

As, 1. He must communicate with Churches, which are not so strict and regular
in their Discipline, as he could wish. There being few Churches in the World,
so exact in this matter, but a wise and good man may discover such defects in
their Discipline, as he could wish amended. And he, who will not communicate
with any Church, nor live in any Commonwealth, which has any defects in its
Government, is not fit to live in this World, where there is no absolute
perfection to be found, either in Church or State.

2. He must communicate with such Churches, wherein there are a great many bad,
as well as good men, for this is the state of all Churches on Earth, where the
Tares grow up with the Wheat.

3. They must communicate with Churches, which observe several uncommanded and
significant Ceremonies, for thus most Churches in the World do, and have always
done.

4. Nay they must communicate with Churches, which have very different, if not
contrary Customs. There being few Churches, wherein the external Modes, Rites,
and Ceremonies of Worship are in all things alike.

It is evident, as any matter of Fact can be, that no true Christian Churches
in the World, can communicate with each other upon any other terms than these,
and therefore it is a vain thing to talk of any other, and to condemn these
terms of Communion, as unlawful, makes Catholic Communion impossible.

Whoever separates from any Church, upon a pretense of some defects and
imperfections in Worship or Discipline, when all the essentials of Christian
Worship are preserved entire and pure, without any such corrupt mixtures as
make their Worship sinful; whoever separates from a Church, because there are a
great many bad men in it, or for the sake of some indifferent Customs, and
significant Ceremonies, must for the same reason separate from all the Churches
in the World, even from the most Primitive and Apostolical Churches of the
first ages of Christianity.

Now if Catholic Communion be so essential to the being and notion of the
Catholic Church, those Principles must be false and Schismatical, which are so
irreconcilable with Catholic Communion. For it is plain we cannot at this
day, nor ever could, communicate with the Catholic Church, if every defect in
Worship or Discipline, if indifferent rites and usages in religious Worship, if
corrupt and vicious Members make the Communion of any Church unlawful, and be a
just reason for Separation.

This indeed has always been the pretense both of ancient and modern
Schismatics. The Novatians and Donatists separated for a stricter Discipline,
and purer Communion, and were condemned for it by the Catholic Church. And St.
Austin proves at large against the Donatists, that neither the wickedness of
the Minister, nor of the People, corrupt the Worship, or make the Communion of
such a Church sinful, though through the defect of Discipline, the one should
not be deposed, nor the other removed from Christian Communion.

For indeed the ancient Fathers thought Catholic Communion so absolutely
necessary, that very few things could come in Competition with it. We have a
famous example of this in St. Cyprian, who disputed very earnestly for the
necessity of baptizing those, who had been baptized by Heretics, whenever they
returned to the Communion of the Church. Stephen Bishop of Rome did as
vehemently oppose it, with some sharp reflections upon St. Cyprian, and did
admit those to Communion without Baptism, who had been baptized by Heretics.
But St. Cyprian, like a true Catholic Christian, Neminem jadicantes, aut a
jure communionis aliquem, si diversum senserit, amoventes, prefat. Council.
Carth.
declares in his Preface to the Council of Carthage, that he would not deny
Communion to any of his Colleagues, who differed from him in this point. And in
his Letter to Jubaianus, Nos, quantum in nobis est, propter Heretices
cumcollegis and coepiscopis nostris non contendimus, cum quibus divinam
concordiam and dominicam pacem tenemus. Cyp. ep. ad. Jubai.
he professes that he will not quarrel with his Colleagues for the sake of
Heretics. And yet as St. Austin well observes, this Dispute was of great
consequence to the Communion of the Church: For if St. Cyprian was in the
right, then the Bishop of Rome, August. de baptismo. l. 2.
who received those to Communion without Baptism, who had been formerly
baptized by Heretics, received those to Communion, who never had any valid
Baptism, and yet St. Cyprian, who did believe this, rather chose to communicate
with that Church, which admitted unbaptized Persons into her Communion, than to
disturb the Peace, and divide the Communion of the Christian Church. For indeed
that Father looked upon the Communion of the Church, as necessary and effectual
to Salvation, as the Sacraments themselves, nay able to supply the defects of
Sacraments. For in his Epistle to Jubaianus, in answer to that Question, what
shall become of those, who have formerly been received into the Church without
Baptism, he tells him, the Lord is able of his own mercy to grant Pardon and
Indulgence to those, who returning to the Church, and being only barely
admitted to the Communion of it, dyed in its Peace and Communion, and not to
separate them from the Rewards of his Church. That is, that living in Communion
with the Church, is able to supply even the want of Baptism itself. And St.
Austin discourses very much to the same purpose; Homines enim sumus, unde
aliquid aliter sapere, quam se res habet, humana tentatio est, nimis autem
amando sententiam suam, vel invidendo melioribus usque ad praecidendae
communionis, and condendi schismatis vel haeresis sacrilegium pervenire,
diabolica praesumptio est. Aug. de bapt. l. 2. cap. 5.
and observes, that whatever different apprehensions we may have of many
things, the safest way is to continue in the Communion of the Church, which
will sanctify our very errors and mistakes. To be sure you cannot name any
thing in Ecclesiastical Discipline of greater moment, than this Dispute about
the re-baptization of Heretics, Aug. contra Parmeniani epist. l. 2. cap. 11.
and yet St. Cyprian did not think this a sufficient reason to break Communion.
In a Word, nothing can be better said about Discipline, than what St. Austin
has observed; that many times things are at that pass, that it is necessary to
loosen the reins of Discipline to prevent a Schism, which an unseasonable
severity may threaten the Church with; the number of bad men in a Church may
make Discipline unpracticable in some cases, and it is better for good men to
tolerate the bad, who cannot defile their Communion, than to break communion
with those who are good.

As for Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, there is an admirable Epistle of
St. Austin to Januarius, which states this whole matter. He first observes,
Aug. ep. Januario 118.
that the Yoke of Christ is very easy and gentle; that he has united his
Church into one Body and Society, by very few Sacraments, easy to be observed,
and excellent in their signification, such as Baptism, and the Lod's Supper, or
whatever other observances we find enjoined in the holy Scripture, excepting
the servitude of the Mosaic Law.

But there are other things observed by the Church, which are not written in
the Scriptures, but received by tradition, and such observances as these which
are received by the whole Catholic Church, are either of Apostolical
Institution, or the Decrees of General Councils, which have the greatest and
most beneficial Authority in the Church. Such are the Annual Solemnities in
memory of the Passion, Resurrection, Ascension of our Lord, and the descent of
the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, which are observed in all parts of the
Church. For it seems, in St. Austin's time the superstition of these days had
not been discovered.

But there are some Customs, which are observed differently in several
Churches. As some fast on the Saturday, others do not. Some receive the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ every day, others only at certain
times, others only on Saturday, and Sunday, others only on Sundays. Totum hoc
genus rerum liberas habet observationes, nec disciplina ulla est in his melior
gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere viderit
ecclesiam, ad quamcunque forte devenerit. Ib.
Now all things of this nature, may be observed either one way or other; nor is
there any better Rule for a grave and prudent Christian in such matters, than
to observe the custom of the Church, in which he lives, or whither he travels.
For whatever is commanded, which is neither contrary to Faith, nor to good
Manners, is to be accounted indifferent, and to be observed for the
preservation of the Communion in which we live. Quod enim nequecontra sidem,
neque contra bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro little
inter quos vivitur societate servandum est.
And this St. Austin confirms with that sage Advice he received from St.
Ambrose, when he was at Milan, which he says, he always, as often as he thought
of it, took for a divine Oracle. For the Church of Milan did not fast on the
Saturday, according to the custom of many other Churches, and St. Austin's
Mother following him thither, and being uncertain what she should do; whether
observe the custom of her own Church, to fast on Saturday, or the custom of the
Church of Milan, where she then was, not to do it; he consulted St. Ambrose
about it, who returned him this answer. When I am at Rome, I fast on Saturdays,
when I am here, I do not. And thus I would have you do, to observe the Custom
of the Church, whither you come, if you would neither be a scandal to others,
nor have them a scandal to you. A great deal more to this purpose there is in
that excellent Epistle, and indeed these are the only terms of Catholic
Communion. For if every different Custom, Usage, and Ceremony in a Church,
shall cause a Separation, there are few Churches can live in Communion with
each other. And thus I hope, I have made it appear, that Catholic Communion is
not an impracticable notion, but is indeed as easy, as it is necessary to be
observed.

CHAP. VI. An Examination of Mr. Lob's suggestions to prove the Dissenters,
according to my own Principles, to be no Schismatics, and a further inquiry
who is the divider.
IT will not be amiss now after all this grave and serious Discourse, to divert
my Readers a little with a more pleasant and entertaining Scene. For Mr. Lob
seems to me to be a great Droll, and to maintain a Dispute by the irresistible
power of Wit, and pleasant Conceits, where Arguments fail. It is wonderful to
observe with what admirable art and dexterity he has retorted my Arguments upon
my self, and given life to a dying and languishing Cause, with the same
Weapons, which gave it its mortal Wound. I thought, I had proved our
Dissenters, who separate from the Church of England, to be Schismatics, as far
as proving their Separation to be Schism, and answering their several Pleas for
Separation, proved them Schismatics; but Mr. Lob has discovered, that I have
been kinder to them, than I was aware of, and by my own Principles have excused
them from Schism, which, I assure you, if it prove so, will be the best
Confutation of my Principles, and make me greatly suspect them my self. There
are several insinuations of this nature scattered here and there in his reply,
which require no very serious answer; for if he designed them for serious
Arguments, he is a wit indeed. As to give some instances of this nature.

1. He says, Reply, p. 13.
I place Schism in a separating from the Catholic Church, which notion taken
singly will stand the Dissenters, and all true Christians, who must be
acknowledged to be Members of the Catholic Church, in great stead, freeing
them from the odious sin of Schism. The Dissenters divide not themselves from
the Communion of the Universal Church, ergo not Schismatics. Now I would
desire all Dissenters to remember, what Mr. Lob grants; that there is such a
sin as Schism, and that it is a very odious sin, which would stand them in more
stead, if they seriously thought of it, than his Defense and Apology will do.

But Dissenters, he says, do not divide themselves from the Communion of the
Universal Church: What he means by this I cannot well tell, for I am sure,
their Principles, upon which they divide from the Church of England, do equally
divide them from all the Churches in the World: And if upon mere humor they
will divide from one Church, and not from another, where the reason of
Separation is the same, they are nevertheless Schismatics for that. Let Mr.
Lob tell me, what Church for above twelve hundred years, they could have
communicated with upon so good terms, as they may now with the Church of
England? If Diocesan Episcopacy, Forms of Prayer, Defects in Discipline,
Corrupt Members in Church Communion, Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, or
unscriptural Impositions, as they call them, be a sufficient reason to justify
Separation, what Church they ever could, or can to this day communicate with?
The Foreign Protestant Churches, though they differ in some things from the
Church of England, not in Judgment, but in Practice, of which I have given some
account above, yet they communicate with the Church of England, which according
to the Laws of Catholic Communion, makes it as unlawful to communicate with
them, as with the Church of England it self.

But he says, Dissenters, and all true Christians (though I hope, all true
Christians are not Dissenters, whether Dissenters be true Christians or not)
must be acknowledged to be members of the Catholic Church: How far this must
be acknowledged, I have examined above; Schismatics in a loose general Notion
belong to the Church, though they are not Members of the Catholic Church,
which is but one Communion; and thus dissenting Separatists are Schismatics
still.

But though it were possible, that our Dissenters might find some other Church,
beside their own Conventicles, to communicate with, yet they actually divide
themselves from the Catholic Church, by breaking Communion with any one sound
part of it, especially with such a part of the Church, as they are more
particularly bound to communicate with. The Catholic Church is but one
Communion, and whoever causelessly breaks this Communion, as he does, who
separates from any sound part of the Church, is a Schismatic, especially he
that separates from the Church wherein he lives, which is the case of our
Dissenters in separating from the Church of England. If you separate the Arm
from the Shoulder, you separate it from the whole Body; the Union of every
Member with the Body, is its Union to that part of the Body which is next; for
the whole Body is nothing else, but all the parts united to each other in their
proper place and order: And if the Church be one Body, and one Communion, he
that separates from the Communion of the Church, where he lives, is a
Schismatic, though he may pretend to an imaginary Communion with French or
Dutch Churches, with the Churches of Greece or Russia.

But as much as Mr. Lob pretends, that notion will stand the Dissenters in
stead, that Schism is a Separation from the Catholic Church, it is plain, he
does not like it, and therefore reproaches it, as a Popish notion, generally
asserted by Papists: I should be heartily glad to see any Papist assert this,
for it would bid fair to put an end to Popery; but I doubt, Mr. Lob wrongs the
Papists, and mistakes Catholic for Roman Catholic Church: They own no
Catholic, but the Roman Catholic Church, and know no Schism, but a Separation
from the Church of Rome.

But Mr. Lob thinks this is no great matter; for I only change England for
Rome, and set up an English-Catholick, instead of the Roman Catholic Church,
which whatever other fault it have, I hope, he will acknowledge to be a change a
little for the better; but let us hear his own words. He says, I close with the
same Popish Faction, Ibid.
in asserting, that separating from the Church of England, is a Separation from
the Catholic Church, as if the Catholic Church had been as much confined
within the bounds of the Church of England, as the Papists say within the
limits of Rome: What a blessed thing is Ignorance, which helps men to confute
Books without fear or wit! What Papists are those, who confine the Catholic
Church within the limits of Rome? Do not they own the Churches of Italy, Spain,
France, Germany, to be Catholic Churches, and would own all the Churches in
the World to be so, would they subject themselves to the Pope of Rome? They do
not desire to confine the Catholic Church within the limits of Rome, but
desire to extend it as far as England, and all the World over. But still Rome
is the beginning of Unity and Catholicism, and no Church must be owned for a
Catholic Church, which does not live in Communion with the Church of Rome, and
pay homage and subjection to the Bishop of Rome: This is the Roman Catholic
Church, not which is confined within the limits of Rome, but which has the
Bishop of Rome for its constitutive Regent Head.

And is not Mr. Lob a very pleasant man, who would persuade the World, that I
am for setting up such a Catholic Church in England, as the Papists have done
at Rome. The Papists make it Schism from the Catholic Church to separate from
the Bishop of Rome, considered as the Head of the Church; I assert it to be
Schism from the Catholic Church, to separate from the Church of England, not
merely as the Church of England, but as a true and sound part of the Catholic
Church, which we especially are bound to communicate with: And is there no
difference between these two?

But who-ever separates from the Church of England, cuts himself from the
Catholic Church, puts himself out of a state of Salvation. He is extra
Ecclesiam, extra quam nulla salus, they are all the while Schismatics in a
state of Damnation: This no jesting matter, but a sad and serious Truth, which
I would beg Mr. Lob, as he loves his own Soul, to consider better of at his
leisure, and out of the heat of Dispute. Separation from the Church of England
is a Schism, and Schism is as damning a sin, as Idolatry, Drunkenness, or
Adultery.

And here he has a notable fetch. But surely if these men believed so much,
methinks they should not be at rest, until all their unscriptural Impositions
were removed, unless they have greater kindness for such trifles, than they
have for such immortal Souls for whom Christ dyed. And methinks, they should be
as much concerned to take care of their own Souls, as we are to take care of
them, and not to divide the Church for the sake of such Trifles, as they call
them. As for removing all unscriptural Impositions, as he calls them, by which
he means the whole Constitution of the Church of England, this we cannot do
without destroying all the external Solemnities of Worship, and dissolving the
Bands of Church-Society; of which more presently: And if this could be done,
they would be Schismatics still, unless they could persuade all the Churches
in the World to do so too: For they could not maintain Catholic Communion with
any Church, which used any unscriptural Rites and Ceremonies, as most Churches
in the World at this day do: Nay they would be Schismatics from the Catholic
Church for many hundred years before the Reformation; for their very Principles
are Schismatical, and it is not the removing some few Ceremonies, which would
cure their Schism. But suppose the Church of England were out of their way,
would that cure their Schism? would Presbyterians, Independents, and mere
Anabaptists, cement into one Communion? We know, how it has been formerly, and
have reason to guess, how it would be again; when they cease to be Schismatics
from the Church of England, they will be Schismatics to one another. And
therefore we may without breach of Charity defend our Church, and they are
bound in Charity to look to their own Souls.

And therefore I wonder, what our Author means, when he puts the whole Dispute
upon this issue: Let their terms be as Catholic, as they pretend their Church
is, and we'll comply; i. e. let them keep to a few, certain, and necessary
things; let them not impose as terms of Union, any thing but what is according
to the Word of God in Scripture, Reply, p. 7^.
we are satisfied, the Controversy is at an end.

This is a certain Argument, that our Author is no great Traveller, not so much
as in Books; that he knows nothing of any Church, but his own dear
Conventicles, unless he modestly dissembles his knowledge to serve his Cause.
For the terms of our Communion are as Catholic, as our Church is; Diocesan
Episcopacy, Liturgies, and Ceremonies, have been received in all Churches for
many hundred years, and are the settled Constitution of most Churches to this
day; and this is the Constitution of the Church of England, and the terms of
our Communion; and must be acknowledged to be Catholic Terms, if by Catholic
Terms, he means, what has actually been received by that Catholic Church, and
not what he fancies, ought to be made the Terms of Catholic Communion: Could
Mr. Lob indeed have the new Modelling of the Catholic Church, and make what
Catholic Terms of Communion he pleased, he would be satisfied, and the
Controversy were at an end; but wiser men consider, that Catholic Terms of
Communion are not to be made now, no more than the Catholic Faith is; and
therefore it is not our private Reasonings, but the Practice of the Catholic
Church in all Ages, which will acquaint us, what the Catholic Terms of
Communion are; and he, who will not maintain Communion with the Church upon
such Terms, must be a Schismatic, and there is an end of that Controversy.

And if by according to the Word of God, he means, that nothing must be made a
Term of Catholic Communion, but what is agreeable to the general Rules of
Scripture, I readily grant it, and assert, that the Church of England requires
nothing, as a Term of Communion, but what is so: But if he means, that the
Church must require nothing, but what is expressly commanded by the Word of God,
I deny, that this ever was a Term of Catholic Communion, nay nor of any
particular Church Communion; Dr. Owen himself rejects it, and of late, it has
been thought a very great Scandal upon the Dissenters to charge them with; but
it is happy for a Faction to have some ignorant Writers, as well as Readers;
for the first are bold, and the other credulous, and the Argument must be
acknowledged, to be very useful to divide and disturb the best constituted
Church, though wise and cunning men are ashamed to use it. And that Mr. L.
means this by according to the Word of God, appears from an admirable Argument,
he uses to prove it. That we our selves look on them as indifferent, i. e. as
what is not enjoined us in the Word of God, q. d. as what is not according to
the Word of God. Reply, p. 79.
Which also he explains by such things, as are not to be found in Scripture.
Now we do indeed by indifferent things, mean such things, as are not commanded
in Scripture, but are left to the prudence of Governors to enjoin or alter, as
the Edification of the Church shall require; but yet we assert indifferent
things to be according to Scripture, both as the use of indifferent things is
allowed in Scripture, and as these particular usages, which are enjoined by the
Church, though they may be in their own natures indifferent, yet are agreeable
to the general Rules of Scripture for decency and order.

But Mr. Lob requires us to show the Scriptures, that declare the things
imposed, to be so necessary a part of true Religion, as to be a Form of our
Communion with the Catholic Church; that we must not only show, Ibid. 78.
that these things are agreeable to true Religion, but moreover that it is such
a necessary part thereof, that whoever conforms not to them, when imposed, is,
ipso facto, cut off from the Catholic Church.

Now this were something to the purpose, did we assert, that the bare not doing
these things, as for instance, the not wearing the Surplice, or not using the
Cross in Baptism, or not kneeling at the Sacrament, did in their own nature,
ipso facto, cut men off from the Catholic Church; but we never said, we never
thought this: But we say, that to separate causelessly from any true and sound
part of the Christian Church, cuts such Separatists off from the Catholic
Church; and to separate, where no sinful terms of Communion are imposed, is a
causeless Separation. So that it does not lie on us to prove, that every thing
that is enjoined, is in its own nature necessary to Catholic Communion; but if
they would justify their Separation, they must prove, that what is enjoined,
is sinful.

I will only ask Mr. Lob, whether it be a sufficient justification of
Separation from any Church, that there are such things imposed, as are not
indeed expressly commanded, but yet are agreeable to the Word of God, and to
true Religion; if this be a just Cause of Separation, it is impossible, that
any Schismatic should ever want Reasons for their Separation; for there is no
Church in the World, but does something or other, which they have no Command to
do: If this be no sufficient reason of Separation, then it is sufficient for us
to prove, that the Church imposes nothing, but what is agreeable to true
Religion, to prove them guilty of a causeless Schism.

Can any thing be sinful, which is agreeable to true Religion? Or can the
Church sin in commanding things which are not sinful? If not, it is sufficient
to prove, that the Church imposes nothing, but what is agreeable to true
Religion: For whatever justifies the Church, condemns the Schismatics.

It may be, it is a harder matter than Mr. Lob is aware of, to determine, what
is in its own nature absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion; but I can
tell him, de facto, what is, viz. a Compliance with the Order, Government,
Discipline and Worship, as well as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church; he who
will not do this, must separate from the Catholic Church, and try it at the
last day, who was in the right; I am content, that Mr. Lob, and his beloved
Separatists, should talk on of unscriptural Terms of Communion, so they will
but grant, that the Church of Englan is no more guilty of imposing unscriptural
Terms, than the Catholic Church it self has always been; and that they
separate from the Church of England for such Reasons, as equally condemn the
Catholic Church; and when they have the confidence to deny this, I will prove
it, and shall desire no better Vindication of the Church of England, than the
Practice of the Catholic Church.

But Mr. Lob observes, that this is the Rule Costerus the Jesuit gives his
young Scholar, If any object, Ibid.
where are these points, viz. of Invocation of Saints, the worshipping of
Images, the abstaining from Flesh, and the like, found in Scripture, and
because not found in Scripture, therefore to be rejected? To which, says the
Jesuit, answer thus: Ask, where it is forbidden in Scripture? If not forbidden
in Scripture, it is no sin to observe them, for where there is no Law, there is
no Transgression: But what of all this? The Rule is a very good Rule, though
used in a bravado by the Jesuit. Does Mr. Lob think, that Popery is established
by this Rule, as well as indifferent and uncommanded Ceremonies? Do we separate
from the Church of Rome, only for the sake of some things, which are neither
forbid, nor commanded in Scripture? Our Dissenters, I see, have better thoughts
of Popery, than the Church of England has, and are in a nearer capacity of
reconciliation with the Church of Rome.

But there is one admirable Paragraph, which I cannot let pass without some
short remarks, and it is this; To make that a part of our Religion, Ib. p. 79.
which is not to be found in Scripture, is to take that for a part of our
Religion, which God has not made a part thereof, which is sinful. How much
more so, is the making it a Term of Communion. Wherein there are as many absurd
Propositions included, as can well be in so few words.

1. He takes it for granted, that for the Church to require the observation of
any thing which is not commanded in Scripture, is to make a part of Religion of
it; and yet the Church may and does enjoin such things, not as parts of
Religion, but as Rules of Order and Discipline. Who then makes it a part of
Religion? If it be made a part of Religion, it must be made so by God, or the
Church; he acknowledges, God does not make it a part of Religion, and the
Church declares she does not, how then does it come to be a part of Religion?
Or does the Church make a part of Religion against her own Mind, Intention, and
Declaration?

In some cases indeed men may do, what they never intended to do, and contract
a Guilt, which they utterly disclaim, and disown, but then it is in such cases,
where a positive Law, or the nature of the thing, determines the nature of the
Action, whatever he, who does it, intends by it. Thus the Papists abhor the
thoughts of Idolatry in the Worship of Saints, and Angels, and Images, and the
consecrated Host, but are nevertheless guilty of Idolatry for that, because the
Law of God, and the Nature of the Worship makes it so. But now how can that
come to be a part of Worship, which is not so, neither by a positive Law, nor
by the Nature of the thing, nor by the Institution of men? For is there any Law
of God to make every thing a part of Religion, which is commanded by the
Church? If there be, the Dispute is at an end; we will then own these
unscriptural Ceremonies as parts of Religion, and justify our selves, by the
Command of God, and the Authority of the Church. Or can the Nature of things
make that a part of Religion, which is not so in its own Nature? That is, can
the Nature of things make an Action to be that, which in its own Nature it is
not? Or can the Institution of the Church make that a part of Religion, which
the Church never instituted as a part of Religion? I would desire Mr. Lob and
his Friends to take a little time to answer these Questions, before they talk
again of the Churches making parts of Religion and humane Sacraments, against
her own express Declarations to the contrary.

2. Mr. Lob here supposes, that nothing must be a Term of Church Communion, but
what is a necessary part of true Religion; for that is the subject of the
Dispute, and to make any thing a condition of Communion, he thinks, makes it a
necessary part of true Religion: And now I begin to wonder, what he means by
Religion, or a part of Religion. Is Government and Discipline Religion, or a
part of Religion? If they be, I would gladly know, Mr. Lob's definition of
Religion; if they be not, are they any Terms of Communion? Or may Catholic
Communion, and Church-Societies be preserved without any Government and
Discipline? Mr. Lob is mightily out, to think that nothing is necessary to
Catholic Communion, but the profession of the true Religion; Government and
Discipline is necessary to preserve any Society, and therefore obedience to
Ecclesiastical Governors is a necessary Duty, and a necessary Term of Church
Communion; and let a man be never so sound and orthodox in Faith and Worship,
if he be of a restless, turbulent Spirit, and disobedient to his Governors, and
their Orders and Constitutions, he deserves to be flung out of
Church Communion, if he does not separate himself, and will be damned for it
too without Repentance. Though a very little thing may make a Schism, yet a
Schism is a great and damning sin, and the less the Cause is, the greater is
the Sin. For the guilt of Schism and Disobedience is not estimated from the
intrinsic value of the thing, in which they disobey, and for which they
separate, but according to the Nature of Schism and Disobedience.

3. But the sting of all is in the Tail. He says, That to take that for a part
of our Religion, which God has not made a part thereof, is sinful. How much
more so is the making it a Term of Communion. Which few words contain several
very absurd and contradictory Propositions, and the Foundation of all is
ridiculously false; the Absurdities are notorious.

1. That it is worse to make such uncommanded things, Terms of Communion than
parts of Worship; and yet the only reason Mr. Lob and his Friends do or can
assign why they are unlawful Terms of Communion, is, because they imagine them
to be made parts of Worship; for if they be not parts of Worship, what is the
evil of them? Why should men separate for the Surplice, or Cross in Baptism,
etc.? When there is no evil in these things? The only evil they charge them
with, being only this, that we make new Sacraments, and new parts of Worship by
humane Authority.

2. This supposes, that that may be a part of Worship, which is not a Term of
Communion. Otherwise it can be neither better nor worse to make any thing a
part of Worship, and a term of Communion. But this is a new Notion, which I
believe mankind was not instructed in before, to make that no term of
Communion, which we make a part of Worship; which signifies to live in
Christian Communion together, without an obligation to communicate in all parts
of Christian Worship.

3. What can be more ridiculously absurd and false, than the Foundation of all
this, that the terms of Communion are more sacred than the Worship of God. That
it is a less Crime to make a new part of Worship, than a new term of Communion.
That the purity of the divine Worship is not of that Moment and Consequence, as
the conditions of Union between Christians; and yet the only reason, why
Christians are to unite into one Body, is to worship God together? Methinks
this should make our new Projectors careful what they do, and make Mr. H.
seriously reflect, upon what he has done, who has proposed such new materials
for Union, as were never known in the Christian Church before.

11. His next Argument to vindicate themselves from Schism, is made up, as he
says, Reply, p. 80.
of Dr. Stillingfleet's own Rule compared with his Substitutes notion, but the
Application and Conclusion, which is the only thing considerable, is his own.
Dr. Stillingfleet's Rule is, that Separation is lawful, in case men make things
indifferent necessary to Salvation, and divide the Church upon that account.
But the Church of England according to my notion, makes indifferent things
necessary to Salvation. Ergo, we may, yea, we must separate, or it is our duty,
and therefore not our sin to separate, (i.e.) we are no Schismatics. Wonderful
subtle! The Dean's Rule I own, and will stand to, that if men make indifferent
things necessary to Salvation, and divide the Church upon that account, we may
lawfully separate from them; where the Dean makes two things necessary to
justify a Separation. 1. That they make indifferent things necessary to
Salvation, that is, that they assert the very doing of such a thing to be
necessary to Salvation, as the false Apostles asserted Circumcision was. But
yet 2. This of it self is not sufficient to justify a Separation, unless these
men divide the Church upon this account. This Mr. Lob thought fit to leave out
of his Argument, because it would have spoiled his Argument to have put it in.
The bare asserting indifferent things to be necessary to Salvation, if they do
not divide the Church upon it, will not justify a Separation. This many
believing Jews did. They thought Circumcision and the Observation of the Law of
Moses necessary to Salvation, and yet St. Paul commands Jews and Gentiles to
receive each other, and to maintain one Communion; and St. Paul himself
complied sometimes with them to avoid any scandal. But when some false Apostles
did not only assert the necessity of such things to Salvation, but would impose
this upon all Christians, or break Communion with them; when they separated
from the Church, it was very lawful to separate from them. And therefore we
must correct Mr. Lob's Major Proposition thus.

From such as make indifferent things necessary to Salvation, and divide the
Church upon that account, we must separate. This is Dr. Stillingfleets.

Let us now consider his Minor Proposition, which, he says, is mine.

But the Church of England makes indifferent things necessary to Salvation.
This is the Dr's. Substitutes notion.

God forbid! My notion, I never had such a thought in my life. Well! But if Mr.
Lob can prove this against me, I know no help for it, I Will make my Defense, as
well as I can. But let us hear what he says.

He attempts two or three ways to prove this, but blunders in each; the first
way is this. Ibid.
That which is necessary to our Communion with the Catholic Church, is
according to his Doctrine, necessary to Salvation. Now this I deny. Communion
with the Catholic Church is necessary to Salvation, but whatever may be
necessary to our Communion with the Catholic Church, is not therefore in its
own nature necessary to Salvation. It may be necessary in order to Catholic
Communion, to comply with many inconvenient, though not sinful terms of
Communion, and all wise and good men have thought themselves bound to do so,
when there is no other Remedy, does it hence follow then, that these good men
account these inconvenient things necessary to Salvation? But to proceed, But
indifferent things (says Mr. Lob) are necessary to our Communion with the
Church of England, which is one with the Communion with the Catholic Church,
in that, according to him, they are made necessary to our Communion with the
Church of England, which is one with the Communion with the Catholic Church,
according to his constant judgment. Ergo, I confess, what he means by this, I
cannot well understand; I suppose, it may be this. That I make Communion with
the Catholic Church, and consequently with the Church of England, as a sound
and orthodox part of the Catholic Church to be necessary to Salvation. But the
observation of some indifferent things is de facto, necessary to the Communion
of the Church of England, because the Church enjoins the Observation of some
indifferent things. Ergo, indifferent things are made necessary to Salvation.

Now, 1. I would only ask Mr. Lob in his ear, whether his own Conscience don't
tell him, that he has prevaricated here; whether he has not used that term,
Necessary to Salvation, in different senses, on purpose to abuse the Dean and
his Substitute together, and to impose upon his ignorant Proselytes. By making
indifferent things necessary to Salvation, the Dean plainly meant, that they
taught, that those things, which were indeed indifferent, though not
acknowledged so by them, had such a natural and moral, or instituted virtue and
efficacy to our Salvation, that without observing of them, no man can be saved;
that they are necessary to Salvation, as any other necessary and essential part
or duty of Religion is, the neglect of which, merely upon account of such a
neglect will damn us. Now does the Dean, does his Substitute, does the Church
of England, teach indifferent things to be necessary in this sense, to have an
immediate and direct influence upon our Salvation? Can any man in his wits, who
owns these things to be indifferent, in the same breath assert them to be
necessary in this sense? And therefore Mr. Lob's Argument is a ridiculous
Sophism, or as Mr. H. speaks, has four terms in it. For necessary to Salvation
in the Major Proposition, signifies very differently from necessary to
Salvation in the Minor Proposition; and thus the Dean and his Substitute are
reconciled.

But, 2. How shall I bring my self off; for though I do not assert a direct
necessity of indifferent things to Salvation, yet I bring in a necessity at a
back Door, and necessity is necessity, and if it be a damning necessity, it is
no matter of what kind and nature the necessity be. I make Communion with the
Church of England necessary to Salvation, and indifferent observances are
necessary to the Communion of the Church of England, and therefore are
themselves necessary to Salvation. But yet I doubt not to make it appear, that
though the Church of England does require the observance of such indifferent
things from all in her Communion, yet she makes these things in no sense
necessary to Salvation. For,

1. In many cases she does not charge the bare not observing such indifferent
Rites with any guilt, and therefore is far enough from making them necessary to
Salvation. Such indifferent things are not enjoined for their own sake, but for
the sake of public Order and Decency; and therefore when they can be neglected
without public Scandal and Offense, without a contempt of the Government,
without the guilt of Schism and Separation, it is no fault, nor accounted such
by the Church. And yet did she enjoin these things as necessary to Salvation,
they would equally oblige in all times, and in all cases without exception.

2. Though Schism be a damning sin; yet the imposition of such indifferent
things is no necessary cause of a Schismatical Separation. Men may communicate
in all or in most parts of Christian Worship with the Church of England,
without assenting to such unscriptural Impositions, or yielding any active
obedience to them, and I suppose, Mr. Lob will confess, that there is a very
material difference between an active and passive Obedience in doubtful cases.
The terms of Lay-Communion are as easy, as ever they were in any settled and
constituted Church; as for public Forms of Prayer, I must except them out of
the number of indifferent things, for they have at least equal Authority, and
are infinitely more expedient, not to say necessary for public Worship, than
their ex tempore Prayers. And then what is there required of a private
Christian to do, to qualify him for Church Communion; if he does not like the
Surplice, he does not wear it himself, and let the Minister look to that. What
hurt is it to Parents or their Children, to submit to the Authority of the
Church, in using the sign of the Cross in Baptism? They only offer their
Children to be baptized; if the Minister does something more, than what they
think necessary and expedient, let the Church look to that, which enjoins it:
Private Christians, who have not Authority to alter public Constitutions, are
not concerned in that: So that there is but one Ceremony, wherein they are
required to be active, and that is, receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper kneeling, which men thus peaceably disposed, may easily be satisfied in
the lawfulness and fitness of, and till they can be satisfied, may more
innocently abstain from the Lord's Table, and join in all other parts of
Christian Worship, than they can separate from the Church: So that these
indifferent things can be no just cause for any private Christians to separate,
and if notwithstanding they do separate, and are damned for it, they must not
charge these innocent Ceremonies with their Damnation. And as for those, who
cannot conform as Ministers, they may, and most of them own they can, conform
as Laymen, and therefore these Ceremonies are no cause of their Separation.

3. Suppose men do take occasion from the Disputes and Quarrels about
indifferent things, to separate from the Church, and be damned for it, yet they
are not damned for not observing such indifferent Customs, though that may be
the remote occasion of it; but for their pride and self-conceit, for their
disobedience to their Superiors, for their dividing the unity of the Church,
and disturbing the peace of it. Suppose two men should be so well employed, as
to play at push-pin, and should quarrel and fight, and one should be killed,
and the other hanged, would you say this man was hanged for playing at
push-pin? Thus it is here, it is not the occasion which peevish (...) take to
divide the Church, which must be charged with their Damnation, but their Pride,
their Faction, their Obstinacy, their Disobedience and ungovernable temper of
mind, which takes such small occasions to divide, and disturb the Church. If
Mr. Lob does not think this enough in answer to his Argument, I think, he is a
little unreasonable.

III. Our Author has another device still to prove from my own Concessions,
that Dissenters are not Schismatics. He says, that Dr. Gunning, and Dr.
Pearson, (now two learned and reverend Prelates, whose bare Authority, I
confess, is more considerable to me, than all our Author's Arguments) in a
Conference with the Papists, Reply, p. 82.
assert, That a Superiors unjust casting out of the Church, is Schismatical.
And this I heartily assent to. But according to my notion, the Church of
England is guilty of such impositions, and does unjustly excommunicate
Dissenters. This I utterly deny. But let us hear, how Mr. Lob proves it.

1. He says, That the Impositions are sinful, is evident, in that indifferent
things (as has been proved) are made necessary to Salvation. But I presume the
Reader will see, that this has not been proved yet, and therefore it is not
evident. I will only ask our Author, whether these reverend Bishops by unjust
Excommunications, mean excommunicating those, who refuse to submit to the just
Authority of their Superiors in indifferent things. If they don't, as it is
evident they don't, he only abuses them, and his Readers, by their Authority.

2. That the Church of England excommunicates unjustly, he says, is very
demonstrable, even in that the Church does, as I would have it, by
Excommunication, cast thousands out of the state of Salvation, for not
complying with little uncommanded things: But now here are two great mistakes.
For, 1. The Church casts no man out of a state of Salvation, but casts them out
of her own Communion; that this excludes them from a state of Salvation, is not
the Act of the Church, but God's Act. The Church does not desire, nor design
the Damnation of any man, but excommunicates them for their correction and
amendment, that God would give them repentance unto life: And there may be very
just Reasons for the Church to excommunicate, when God, who knows every
circumstance of things more particularly, than Church-Governors can, may
continue those in the Communion of the invisible Church, who are cast out of
visible Communion. Wilful Schism is in all cases a damning Schism,
Excommunication is no sin at all, but a severe punishment, when it is deserved,
and contracts the guilt of Schism, when it is despised. He who is unjustly cast
out of the Church, ought not to despise such Censures, but to use all just and
lawful means to be restored again to Communion. But the Excommunication of the
Church, and the wilful Separation of Schismatics, are two as different things,
as can well be imagined. I never asserted, that Church Censures and
Excommunications always put men out of a state of Salvation, but I assert, that
wilful Schism does.

2. Nor does the Church excommunicate merely for the sake of some little
uncommanded things, but for Schism and Church-factions, and disobedience to
Government, which are inconsistent with the order and preservation of any
Society, and are not the less sins, because the Dispute and Quarrel is about
some little things. To excommunicate any man because he will not yield to
sinful terms of Communion, i. e. because he will not break the express Laws of
God, to comply with the Laws of the Church, is an unjust and Schismatical
Excommunication; but it is necessary to the good Order and Government of any
Society to Excommunicate those, who will not own the just Authority of the
Church, be the thing never so little for which they separate.

For we must consider, that a Church must first be Schismatical her self,
before she can excommunicate Schismatically. Any Church, which either forbids
the doing what God has commanded, or commands, what God has forbid, is so far
a Schismatic from the Catholic Church, whose Communion must be regulated by
the divine Laws; and if she excommunicates any single Persons, or Churches, for
not complying with these unlawful and Schismatical terms of Communion, her
Excommunications are Schismatical, because her terms of Communion are so, which
is the case of the Church of Rome. But it is impossible, that a Church, which
is not Schismatical, can excommunicate Schismatically.

A man, who is unjustly excommunicated, is cast out of the external Communion
of the Church, but does not schismatically separate himself. Nay, though he be
upon other accounts unjustly excommunicated, if there be nothing unlawful in
the Communion of that Church, (which is the unjust Excommunication, which these
learned Bishops assert to be schismatical) or he be not excommunicated upon any
such account, he must patiently bear it, and use all means to be restored, but
must not set up a distinct and opposite Communion, which would be a causeless
Schism. For mere Excommunication, though in some respects never so unjust, is
not a sufficient reason to justify a formed Schism and Separation from any
Church, no more than any acts of injustice, which private men suffer, will
justify a Rebellion against their Prince; God is the Judge and the Protector
of oppressed Virtue and Innocence, whether it suffer from Church or State, and
there only lies our last Appeal. So that mere Excommunication can never make
any Church schismatical, or though it may occasion, yet it can never justify a
Schism.

But now when any Church by enjoining sinful terms of Communion, separates so
far from the Catholic Church, and excommunicates all Persons and Churches, who
will not communicate with her in such unlawful things, it is lawful and
justifiable, nay necessary for such Persons to preserve the purity of their own
Communion, or to form themselves into a distinct Communion in the Unity of the
Catholic Church, and to leave such a Church to stand by her self: Here now is
a formed Schism between these Churches, and the Question is, who is the
Schismatic, the excommunicating or the excommunicated Churches. And the answer
is very plain, the excommunicating Church is the Schismatic, because she has
departed from Catholic Communion, by imposing unlawful terms of Communion.

So that Excommunication can never be Schismatical, but when the terms of
Communion are a Schism from the Catholic Church; and therefore the whole of
the Dispute comes to this, whether the enjoining the observance of some
indifferent and uncommanded Ceremonies be a Schism from the Catholic Church;
and when Mr. Lob can prove this, I will readily grant the Church of England to
be schismatical, whether she excommunicate Dissenters or not. But this will be
a hard matter for him to do, when the Catholic Church has always asserted the
Authority of the Church in these matters, and has always practiced a great many
uncommanded Ceremonies in all Ages; but this I have discoursed sufficiently
above.

Thus we see, how Mr. Lob fails in his new attempts, to prove the Church of
England the Schismatic from my own Principles and Concessions. Let us now
consider, how he justifies his old Argument to prove the Church the divider;
and certainly never any man was more hard put to it, to make some little
insignificant appearance of an Answer, than he was, and yet he puts a very good
face on it, and with a brave Confidence, huffs it off, as if there were nothing
said that deserved an Answer. And I confess, it abundantly satisfies me, what a
vain attempt it is, to convince men, who are resolved, not to be convinced.

If Mr. Lob, or any other for him will give a fair and particular Answer to
those few Pages in the Defense, from p. 22. to p. 53. I promise them to be
their Convert, and a zealous opposer of all indifferent Ceremonies in Religion.
But because Mr. Lob would have the World believe, that he has done this
already, I shall desire my Readers to look over those few Pages in the Defense,
and compare them with his Reply; and if this could be obtained, I would venture
to leave it, just as it is without any further remarks. But least he should
boast, that I decline the Dispute, I shall briefly consider, what despicable
Arts he uses to impose upon his Readers.

Mr. Lob undertook to prove the Church, not the Dissenter, to be the divider by
this Argument. The Church without sin can part with their indifferent
Ceremonies, but Dissenters without sin cannot comply with them; what then must
be done for Union? Must the Episcopal comply in things, wherein they can
without sin? Or must the Dissenters sin and loose their Peace with God for
Union? And a little after, he adds; This is the state of the Case, the
Dissenters would unite, but cannot, the Episcopals can, but will not. The
cannot of the Dissenters, and the Episcopals will not, does make the division;
but who is the faulty Divider? If the true reason of our division lay on the
Dissenters will not, when they can, 'twould be easy to conclude them obstinate
and perverse (that is, in plain English, Schismatics) (...) not to do, what
they can for Peace? But since they would, but cannot without sin, how can they
be the Dividers?

This I showed particularly, Defense, p. 27. etc.
was all trick and fallacy. When he says, the Church without sin can part with
their indifferent Ceremonies; if by the Church he means any thing less than the
King and Parliament, it is false. For all the Bishops and Clergy in England
cannot without sin part with these indifferent Ceremonies, till the Law
enacting them be repealed. And if by indifferent Ceremonies he means Diocesan
Episcopacy and Liturgies, as it is plain he does, the Church of England does
not account these indifferent Ceremonies, nor think, she can part with them
without sin. And when he says, that the Dissenters without sin cannot comply
with them; if by without sin he means without breaking some divine Law, it is
false; for there is no Law to forbid our obedience to Civil and Ecclesiastical
Governors in indifferent things: If he means, that they must act contrary to
their Conscience, that is, their own Opinion and Judgment of things, they may
be the Dividers and Schismatics for all that; unless we will say, that no man,
but a profligate Knave, who sins against his Conscience, can be a Schismatic.

Thus as for his will not and cannot. If by the Episcopals will not, he means,
that they will not do, what they may by divine and humane Laws, and with a just
respect to the good Order and Government and Edification of the Church, and
regular Administration of holy Offices, they are faulty in it, but may be no
Schismatics notwithstanding, so long as they exact no sinful terms of
Communion: and if by the Dissenters cannot, he means their private Opinions and
Persuasions, which hinder their Compliance, they may be the Dividers still, if
their persuasions be erroneous.

All this and a great deal more our Author passes over very wisely without the
least notice; but to convince him of the Sophistry of this Argument, I proposed
another like it, which as fairly cast the Schism upon the Dissenter, as his did
upon the Church; and it was this: If the Dissenters can without sin obey their
Governors in indifferent, that is, in lawful things, but will not; and the
Episcopal would be content to part with indifferent things for Union, but
cannot; who is the faulty Divider? What must be done for Union? Must the
Dissenters comply in things, wherein they can without sin? Or must the
Episcopal sin, and lose their Peace with God for Union? And I added, I would
desire our Inquirer to think better of it, and answer this Argument if he can,
without showing the Sophistry of his own.

Mr. Lob it seems, had enough of his own Argument, and durst not venture his
Readers with it a second time; but he repeats my Argument by it self, without
taking notice upon what occasion it was urged, which must needs make it look
oddly; only wonders, why I call this an Argument, and that I should say, that
this cannot be answered without a showing Sophistry to be, Reply, p. 87.
where it is not. So that it is plain, that he durst not let his Readers know,
that he had made any Argument like this, or that this had any relation to his
own way of reasoning, but turns it off with, without a showing Sophistry, where
it is not, instead of let him answer this Argument, if he can without showing
the Sophistry of his own. It is apparent, Mr. Lob was here convinced, that he
had reasoned foolishly, but had not the honesty and ingenuity to own it. For
indeed the fallacy of both these Arguments consists in the different
acceptance of cannot, and will not; in one sense, they may be turned against
the Church, in another sense against the Dissenter, with equal force and truth;
and therefore without a more particular explication of these ambiguous terms,
it is a good Argument against neither; which must needs make it a very pleasant
entertainment to any man, who understands the Laws of reasoning, to see Mr. Lob
so gravely confute my Argument without taking any notice of his own; when all
that I pretended was, that this was as good an Argument against Dissenters, as
his was against the Church, and were both to be answered the same way, by
distinguishing the different significations of those terms, as I have showed
above.

But that this Inquirer might not say, that I had used some Art to wave the
Dispute, but had not answered his Argument, I granted him his own sense of the
Words, and reduced the force of his Argument to these two Propositions. 1. That
all things, which are in their own nature indifferent, may without sin be
parted with: 2. That the Opinion of Dissenters, that indifferent things are
unlawful in the Worship of God, is a just reason for parting with them. The
first I discoursed at large from this Topic, That there can be no public and
solemn Worship, no face or appearance of any Discipline or Government in the
Church, without the use of some such indifferent things. For all actions must
be clothed with some such external Circumstances, as though they are not
essential to the moral nature of the Action, yet are necessary to the external
performance of it: Which is proved at large in the Defense. Defense, p. 30. etc.
All that Mr. Lob replies to this, is, that the force of his Argument does not
lie in this, That all things which are in their own nature indifferent, may
without sin be parted with. How then will he prove, that the Church without sin
may part with her indifferent Ceremonies, if every thing, that is indifferent
may not be parted with without sin? I can think of no other way to prove this;
if he can, I shall be glad to hear it. But wherein then does the force of his
Argument consist? Why he tells us it is this: Reply, p. 85.
That no one indifferent Ceremony must be made so necessary a part of Religion,
as to be a term of Communion. Though I doubt, he would be troubled to apply
this Proposition dexterously to the proof of his Argument, yet to make as few
Disputes as may be, we will suppose the force of his Argument to lie here, and
does not this come much to one? Must not the Church part with any indifferent
Ceremony, which any Dissenter is pleased to dislike, if she must not make any
one Ceremony a Term of Communion? And if all indifferent things must not,
cannot be parted with without sin, then some indifferent things may be made the
terms of Communion.

But here are two things Mr. Lob craftily or ignorantly insinuates, which must
not pass without remark. 1. He will not venture his Argument merely upon
indifferent things, he has had enough of that already, but on making
indifferent things necessary parts of Religion, whereas the Church of England
makes them no part of Religion at all. They are not necessary to the moral
nature of any religious Action, but to the external performance of it, as I
showed at large. 2. He insinuates a proof of this, that these indifferent
things are made necessary parts of Religion, because they are made terms of
Communion. Whereas the terms of Communion are of two forts, either the
essentials of Faith and Worship, and what is in this sense made a term of
Communion, is indeed a necessary part of Religion; but the Church of England
never made indifferent things terms of Communion in this notion of it, but does
expressly declare against it. But, 2. The external Circumstances of Worship, and
the Rules of Decency and Order are terms of Communion also, because some such
external Circumstances or Ceremonies of Worship, are necessary to the external
solemnities and decency of Worship; and it is fit, that they should not be left
at liberty, but determined by the public Authority of the Church, and of the
State in a Christian Kingdom, to which all private Christians are bound to
submit, as I discoursed in the Defense. But the great difficulty seems to lie
here, that any man should be denied the benefits of Christian Communion, and
excluded from the ordinary means of Salvation, for not complying with some
indifferent things, which God has no where commanded, and which no Christian
had been bound to observe, had they not been commanded by the Church, which
seems to make these indifferent things as necessary, as the most substantial
parts of Worship.

Now as great as this difficulty may seem to be, it is but turning the Tables,
and there are as great difficulties on the other side.

For, 1. It is as unaccountable to me, that any Christian should exclude
himself from the Communion of the Christian Church, and the ordinary means of
Salvation, for such things, as have neither any moral evil in them, nor are
forbid by any positive Law of God, which makes the not doing such things to be
more necessary than the Communion of the Church, or the Worship of God it self.
Now, 1. Is not every man as accountable to God for his own Soul, as the Church
is? 2. Has any man any more warrant for excluding himself from Christian
Communion, for not doing what God has not forbid, than the Church has for
casting them out of Communion, for not observing some innocent Rites and
Usages, though not commanded by God? For, 3. Is it not a greater encroachment
on the divine Power and Prerogative to make that unlawful, which God has not
forbid, than it is to enjoin the observance of that, which God has not
commanded? The first alters the nature of things, makes that sinful, which God
has not made sinful. The second only determins the circumstances of Action,
which God had not determined, but left to the Determination of humane Prudence,
or Ecclesiastical Authority. And, 4. Which is likely to be the best
justification, the Opinion of a private man in opposition to the Authority, and
to the disturbance of the Peace and Communion of the Church, or the public
Judgment and Authority of the Church in preserving her own Discipline and
Government, and censuring obstinate and disorderly Members. Let Mr. Lob
consider, how to justify themselves in making that unlawful, which God has not
forbid, and separating from the Communion of the Church for that reason, and I
will more easily justify the Church in denying Communion to those, who refuse
to comply with innocent, but uncommanded Rites.

But, 2. This Difficulty is the same in all Communions, as well as in the
Communion of the Church of England. Neither Presbyterians, nor Independents,
will allow disorderly Members in their Communion, who will not submit to the
Constitutions of their several Churches; and thereby they make the
Peculiarities of their Churches necessary terms of their Communion. They will
no more suffer a man to receive the Sacrament kneeling, nor to pray in a
Surplice, nor to baptize with the sign of the Cross in their Churches, than the
Church of England will suffer her Members to neglect these Ceremonies; and
therefore they make the not doing such indifferent things as necessary terms of
Communion, as the Church of England does the doing of them, and do as strictly
enjoin Conformity to their own way and modes of Worship, as the Church of
England does to hers, and therefore the Church may as easily defend her self
from this difficulty, as the Conventicles can.

But the bare retorting of a difficulty does not answer it, though such men
ought in modesty to be silent, till they can answer for themselves, and then
they will be ashamed to urge this Argument against the Church: And it is a
sign, such men think but of one side, who use such Arguments against their
Adversaries, as recoil upon themselves. But indeed the Difficulty it self, when
it is fairly stated is no difficulty, as will appear in these following
Propositions, some of which are already proved in the Defense; and therefore to
save my self the trouble of transcribing, I shall only direct my Reader, where
to find them proved.

The Difficulty is, why those things, which are acknowledged to be indifferent,
should be so strictly enjoined, as to exclude those from Christian Communion,
who will not, or cannot comply with them. Now to this I answer by these steps.

1. That some things, Defense, p. 30. etc.
which are indifferent in their own nature, are yet necessary solemnities of
Worship, without which the public Worship of God cannot be performed at all,
or can have no face or appearance of Worship, as I have proved in the Defense.

2. The Peace, Ib. p. 44, 45
and Order, and Unity of the Church, and the due care of the divine Worship,
requires, that the external Circumstances of public Worship should be
determined, and not left to the choice of every private Christian.

3. Since some external Circumstances and Solemnities of Worship must be
determined, and yet are not determined by any positive Law of God, it is plain,
that they are left to the determination of the public Authority of the Church,
which must determine all private Christians. For every thing of a public
nature, wherein a whole Society is concerned, must be determined and overruled
by public Authority, or no Society can subsist. Every private Christian. in
his private Capacity may choose for himself; every Master of a Family may and
ought to choose for his Family, as far as concerns the Government of it; and
the supreme Authority of every Society must choose for the Society. For how is
it possible, there should be any decency or uniformity of Worship, any Order or
Government maintained in the Church, if it is in the Power of every private
Christian to make the most wholesome Constitutions of a Church, unlawful and
sinful Impositions by his private dissent, and obstinate refusal of Obedience.

4. If it be lawful for the public Authority of the Church, to determine the
indifferent Circumstances, and external Solemnities of Worship, it is necessary
to make them the terms of Communion; that is, it cannot be avoided, but it must
be so. For when the Church determines the indifferent and undetermined
Circumstances of Worship, all that is meant by it, is, that she requires all in
her Communion to worship God in such a manner, which is the only sense, wherein
indifferent things are, or can be made the terms of Communion. So that the
Controversy must return, where it first began, about the lawfulness of
indifferent Circumstances, and Ceremonies of Worship, and the Power of the
Church to determine them; for making them terms of Communion is no new
difficulty, for it signifies no more than prescribing such a way of worshipping
God; and if it be lawful for the Church to prescribe the Modes and
Circumstances of Worship, she cannot mistake in making them terms of Communion.

For, 5. If the Church have Authority to prescribe the Order and Circumstances
of public Worship, it is unreasonable to think, that she may not justly deny
those her Communion, who will not submit to her Authority, and comply with her
Orders and Constitutions; Which is to say, that she has Authority, and that she
has none. For it is sufficiently known, that the Church, as such, has no other
Authority, but to receive in, or to shut out of her Communion; and if she
cannot assist her commanding Authority, with her Authority of Censures, it is
little worth.

Nay, 6. In the nature of the thing it cannot be otherwise. Those, who will not
conform to the Constitutions of the Church, must forsake her Assemblies, for
there is no other way of Worship to be had there. And therefore we need enquire
no further, than whether it be lawful for the Church to prescribe a form of
Worship to her self; if it be, she needs exercise no other Authority; for
those, who will not conform to it, will separate themselves without her
Authority. And as for the sin and danger of Schism, let the Church look to her
self, that she give no just occasion for it, and let scrupulous and tender
Consciences look to themselves, that they take no unjust Offense; and this is
the only remedy I know of in this case, without prostituting Church Authority,
and the Worship of God, to a blind and factious Zeal. And yet I suppose, no
Church is bound to own those of her Communion, who separate from her Worship,
and despise her Authority.

7. And whereas Mr. Lob founds his Objection upon making indifferent things
terms of Communion, every one, who understands the nature of Government, knows,
that it is an unsufferable mischief, to disturb and dissolve humane Societies,
though for very little things. Schism is a very great evil; and nevertheless
because the Dispute is about indifferent things, the preservation of the Peace
and Unity of the Church, the decency and solemnities of Worship, and the
sacredness of Authority, is necessary to Christian Communion, without which the
Church must dissolve and disband into private Conventicles, as we see at this
day; and therefore whoever disturbs Christian Communion for indifferent things,
does as well deserve to be cast out of the Church, as the most profligate
sinners. But to return to Mr. Lob.

The only Objection he has against all that I urged in the Defense, is, that I
run from Circumstances to Ceremonies, and yet his Conscience tells him, if ever
he read the Defense, Defense, p. 38.
that he knows the contrary; for I particularly answered that Objection in the
Defense, and it seems, I have so answered it, that Mr. Lob thought it the wiser
course to dissemble his knowledge of any such Answer, than to attempt any Reply
to it.

And now let any man judge, what an unreasonable task Mr. Lob has put on me.
Reply, p. 84.
It lies on him (says he) either to prove to our Conviction, that we may
without sin comply with their Imposition, (i. e.) he must so far effectually
enlighten our Consciences, as to help us to see, that the Impositions are not
sinful, and that we may lawfully conform. But how is this possible for me, or
any other man to do, when he will not so much as see, what we show him? When he
is so far from an impartial Examination of the Reason of what is proposed, that
he will not so much as own, that it was ever proposed. It is not in our Power
to give him eyes, or to make him open his eyes, when he wilfully shuts them.
Much less do we desire, as he proceeds, That they should conform against their
Consciences, and yield a blind obedience to such Commands; we have had too much
experience of such conscientious men in the Church already, who have conformed
against their Consciences, that they might raise a Church of England-Rebellion,
as this Author impudently suggests, and takes the first opportunity to pull
down the Church, and to expiate their sins of Conformity by a thorough
Reformation. There is something lies on them to do, as well as on us; and that
is freely and impartially to consider, what is offered for their Conviction; to
acknowledge themselves convinced, when they are convinced; to prefer the
Salvation of their own Souls, and the Peace of the Church, before private Fame,
or serving a Party; that is, in a word, to be honest, and then there will be no
need for the Church to part with her Impositions.

II. The second thing wherein I observed the force of his Argument lay, was
this: That the Opinion of the Dissenters, that indifferent things are unlawful
in the Worship of God, is a just and necessary Reason for parting with them.
Now he does not take notice of any one word of Answer I return to this, nay,
does not so much, as represent the Reason, why I place the force of his
Argument in this, which is, that if the Opinion of Dissenters, that all
indifferent things are unlawful, be not a sufficient Reason for parting with
them, then there may be no fault in the Episcopals will not, or a sufficient
justification or excuse in the Dissenters cannot. Instead of which, he says, I
give this Reason for it; if it be not lawful to part with every thing that is
indifferent, those who retain the use of ( some, which he leaves out)
indifferent things, cannot merely upon that account, be called Dividers or
Schismatics, which does not refer to the second, but to the first thing,
wherein I placed the force of his Argument. That all things, which are in their
own nature indifferent, may without sin be parted, with. Certainly never any
man was in a greater turmoil and confusion of thoughts, than Mr. Lob appears to
have been in all this time, when he was resolved to answer, but knew not what
to say. No man, I fear, need convince Mr. Lob, that he may conform against his
Conscience. Make it but his Interest to conform, and his Conscience seems ready
prepared.

Well, but however, that he might seem to return some Answer to my Confutation
of that Principle, that the Opinion of Dissenters, that indifferent things are
unlawful in the Worship of God, is a just and necessary Reason for the Church
to part with them; he just names it, and then picks some Quarrels with what I
had said upon the first thing, that all indifferent things cannot be parted
with, without sin, and this must pass for an Answer to the second. And how is
it possible to enlighten such a man as this?

But let us hear, what he says. You should remember, that I distinguished
between Ceremonies and Circumstances, between what is a part of Religion, and
intrinsecal thereunto, and what is extrinsecal only. But you run to external
Circumstances that are necessary in these; which is off from the point in hand.
Had I done so, I believe Mr. Lob would not have been so sparing of Paper, as
not to have shown his Readers, how I did it. But I have already answered that
Suggestion, and directed my Readers where they may find the contrary, if they
dare believe their own eyes.

But he says, Ib. p. 85.
I run from what is indifferent, to what is necessary, as if we called you to
part with any necessary thing. This is another trick. The case is this: He
charges the Church of England with being the Divider, because she does not part
with indifferent things, which she may part with without sin. I prove, that
though no particular indifferent Ceremony can be said to be necessary, for then
it were no longer indifferent, yet some indifferent things are necessary to
public Worship, not to the moral Nature, but the external performance of
Religious Actions, and therefore all indifferent things cannot be parted with
without destroying public Worship; and yet if we must part with indifferent
things, merely considered as indifferent, by the same Reason we must be obliged
to part with all. This he calls running from what is indifferent, to what is
necessary; whereas it only proves, that some things, which are indifferent in
their own Natures, are necessary to public Worship, which was very much to my
purpose, though not to his.

I gave an Instance of this in some Actions, which cannot possibly be stripped
from all external Circumstances. As a man, who is to travel from London to
York, is not bound either to go thither on Foot, or to ride on Horseback, or
in a Coach, each of these ways are in themselves indifferent; but yet if he
will travel to York, he must use one or other of these ways of Motion, not any
one in particular is necessary, but yet some or other is. But says Mr. Lob, One
has not strength to walk, Ib. p. 86.
another cannot bear riding in a Coach, yet to York they must go. If you will
keep to your point, you must say to him, that cannot walk, some way of Motion is
necessary to your going to York, if you will go thither, therefore you shall walk,
or not go thither. The force of which Answer amounts to this, that every man
must be left at liberty to choose the external Circumstances of Worship for
himself, as he is to choose his own way of Traveling, whether on Foot, or by
Horse, or Coach. But this also, I had particularly considered, and answered in
the Defense, though our Inquirer is pleased to take no notice of it, and I
suppose, should I repeat what I have said, he will take as little notice of it
the second time, as he has done the first. The Inquisitive Reader may find
directions in the Margin, Defense, p. 44.
where to seek for an Answer to it. And if Mr. Lob cannot think of some better
Defense, he and his beloved Dissenters must be the Dividers and Schismatics
still.

CHAP. VII. Mr. Humphrey's Materials for Union, examined.
THE last thing I proposed to my self for the Conclusion of this Work, was to
examine Mr. Lob's Preface, and Mr. H's Materials for Union: But this
Vindication is already much larger, than I intended it, and I find this Work
done very sufficiently by Mr. Long, in a late Treatise, Entitled, No
Protestant, but the Dissenters Plot; and therefore though it were easy to
enlarge upon this Subject, I shall make but some brief Remarks upon the
Materials for Union, and refer those who are inquisitive, for further
satisfaction to the forementioned Treatise. And I shall only observe these four
things in Mr. H's. project: 1. That it destroys the present Constitution of the
Church of England. 2. That it sets up no National Church in the room of it. 3.
That it cures no Schism. 4. That it is not a likely way so much as to preserve
external Peace and Union in the Nation.

1. These Materials for Union destroy the present Constitution of the Church of
England; and is not this a modest Proposal in a Dissenter, to pull down the
Church of England, which is established by Law, and is owned by the greatest
and most considerable part of the Nation, to make way for Union? Does Mr. H.
imagine, that the true Sons of the Church, will so easily part with so ancient
and Apostolical a Government, which owes not its Institution to Civil Powers?
And what would the Civil State get by this, to exchange the Church for
Dissenters? To make an Imaginary National Church by a Combination of
Dissenters, and to part with a much better Church for it? To attempt a Union on
between Dissenters, who, as Mr. H. owns, can never agree their Disputes, and
therefore can never unite, though they may be tied together, or comprehended in
the same Vessel, as Sand or Water is, and to dissolve a Church, which is all of
a piece, firmly united within it self, and to its Prince?

But what need all this? Will Mr. H. say, I never designed to dissolve the
Constitution of the Church of England, but only to bring Dissenters into the
legal Establishment. Let this then be tried, whether his Materials for Union do
not destroy the present Constitution, Root and Branch.

The present Constitution of our Church, in Conformity to the Ancient
Apostolical Government, consists of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; let us
try then, whether we can find either of these in Mr. H.'s Materials for Union.

As for Deacons, he has not one word of them, though Mr. Lob. acknowledges,
they were owned for an Ecclesiastical Order by the necessary Erudition; but a
great Oracle thinks, this Order may be spared, though it has been continued in
the Church ever since the Apostles days, and therefore we will let this pass.

But we must not deny, but Mr. H. owns Bishops, nay, proposes, that some
leading Dissenters themselves should be made the next Bishops; and that his
Project shall advance, and not lessen the outward Power and Honor of Bishops.

But still we must have a care not to be cheated with a Name, instead of the
thing. Are Mr. H.'s Bishops true Apostolical Bishops, as the Bishops of the
Church of England are? Otherwise he may retain the Name of Bishops, and yet
destroy the Episcopacy of the Church of England.

And this is the plain truth of the Case. Mr. H.'s Bishops are not Bishops of
the Church, but the King's Ecclesiastical Officers acting circa sacra, only by
virtue of his Authority and Commission. And therefore can exercise no other
Authority in the Church, than the King can, which is not the Authority of a
Bishop. Mr. Humphrey's Bishops may be Laymen, as well as Ecclesiastics; for
though called Bishops, they cannot do any one Act of a primitive Bishop. They
have no Ecclesiastical Superiority over their Clergy, but what the King has,
which used to be distinguished from the Authority of the Bishop. They have not
the Power of Ordination, nor Confirmation as the King's Bishops, whatever they
may have as Congregational Bishops, for the King has no Power to ordain or
confirm. They cannot excommunicate as Bishops, as Mr. H. expressly asserts, That
as the Magistrate does not take away or invade, but preserve the Power of the
Keys (invested in the Minister, but given with the Pastor himself to the
Church) no more can the Diocesans that derive from him, assume it to
themselves, and deprive the particular Churches of it.

And since Mr. H.'s Bishops have no proper Ecclesiastical Authority, it is no
wonder, that they have no body to govern; for these are all such Diocesan
Bishops, as have no Presbyters under them, every Congregational Minister being
a Congregational Bishop, as Mr. H. owns. Defense, p. 260. etc.
These things I discoursed at large in the Defense, and all that I am concerned
for now, is to observe, how charitable Mr. H. is to the Church of England in
his Materials for Union, for he leaves the Church neither Bishops, Presbyters,
nor Deacons. If they can talk at this Rate, when they cry out of Persecution,
and pretend to Petition for Peace, what may we expect from them, if they should
be rampant once more? We see they are the same men that ever they were, when
they covenanted against Root and Branch; and have the Impudence at this time a
day, when they plead for Peace and Union, for Toleration and Comprehension, or
other nameless Models, to make Proposals for comprehending or tolerating any
thing but the Church of England. Upon these terms we may be at peace, and unite
with Dissenters, if we will sacrifice, not merely some indifferent Ceremonies,
(though they make a great noise about them, as if they were the only
Impediments) but the Church of England it self to Peace and Unity; which I hope
will open men's eyes at length to see, what these men would be at, and I pray
God it may be, before it be too late.

2. As Mr. H's Materials for Union overthrows the present Constitution of the
Church of England, so it sets up no National Church in the room of it. This is
his great design, I confess, to make a National Church of all the divided and
separated Congregations in England, which he thinks may be done by the virtue
of an Act of Parliament. I would (says he) have all our Assemblies that are
tolerable, to be made legal by such an Act, and thereby parts of the National
Church, as well as the Parochial Congregations. But though the Power of an Act
of Parliament, I confess, is very great, yet it cannot reconcile
Contradictions, nor make Division to be Union, nor a great many Schismatical
Conventicles, which divide from one another, to be one Church. For a Church is
a Communion of Christians, a Parochial Congregation is a Parochial Communion, a
Diocesan Church is a Diocesan Communion, a National Church, is a National
Communion, and the Catholic Church, is one Catholic Communion, as I have
proved at large in the Defense, but Communion is always essential to the notion
of a Church, of what denomination soever. Now suppose a Parliament should by
Law establish Presbyterian, and Independent Churches of all sorts, as well as
the Church of England, yet how can an Act of Parliament make them all one
National Communion, when after such an Act, they would remain as much divided
and separated from one another, and from the Church of England, as they are
now, and the design of such an Act of Parliament is, to make it lawful or legal
for them to continue so.

Are the Presbyterian and Independent Congregations one Communion with
themselves, or with the Church of England now? If they be, why do they complain
for want of Union? If they be not, will such an Act of Parliament which
establishes the Schism, and makes it a Law, make them unite into one Communion?
No man knows indeed, what may be, because these men love to act in
contradiction to Laws, and possibly may grow out of love with Schism, when it
is made the Law of the Land; but if they do not, how are they more united into
one Communion by such a Law, than they are without it? If their Churches,
Government, Discipline, Worship, be all distinct, and separate, and contrary to
each other, what a strange kind of Communion is this? Every Member of the
National Church, is a Member of the whole National Church; but can a
Presbyterian, Independent, or Episcopal Church be Members of one another? By
what name shall we call this Monster? It is neither an Independent,
Presbyterian, nor Episcopal Church, but one National Church which consists of
as heterogeneous parts, as Nebuchadnezar's Image, or like some monstrous Birth,
with the Head of a man, the Paws of a Bear, and the Tail of a Serpent.

Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne.

An Act of Parliament may give a legal establishment to all these divided
Churches, as the Popish and Protestant Churches of France, are both established
by the Laws of the Land; but does this make French Papists and Protestants to
be one National Church? Mr. H. according to his Principles must assert them
both to be but one National Church, but he will have but little thanks for it
neither from Papists, nor Protestants. Not from Papists, who call the French
Protestants Schismatics, and therefore do not own them to be any part of their
National Church; nor from the Protestants, who do as much abhor to be thought
Members of the Popish Church; and yet this is such a legal National Church, as
Mr. H. contends for, united under one Prince, who, according to his Principles,
is the accidental Head of this accidental National Church, and yet this Union
does not cure the Schism; for they still are two distinct and separate
Churches, and are accounted Schismatics to each other.

There are but two or three things, so far as I can observe, whereon Mr. H.
founds this National Union between all these divided and separate Churches.

1. That they are all united under the King, as the constitutive Regent Head of
the National Church. And this, I grant, makes them all legal Churches, as he
speaks, or legal parts of the Church, but it does not make them one Church. You
may as well say, that England, Scotland, and Ireland, are one Kingdom, because
they are united under one Prince; or that all the Corporations in England are
one National Corporation, though they have distinct Charters, and different
Privileges and Immunities. Nothing is National, but what extends to the whole
Nation, and where several Churches are established by Law, there can be no one
National Church, though they be all under the Government of the same Prince,
because there is no one Church-Constitution, for all the Churches in the Nation
to be governed by; which is the notion of a National Church in the sense we now
speak of.

2. Another way of uniting all these separate Churches, is by the King's
Ecclesiastical Officers, whom he calls Bishops, who have an equal supervising
care of them all. Their work in general being to supervise the Churches of both
sorts in their Diocesses, that they all walk according to their own Order,
agreeable to the Gospel, and to the Peace of one another. Now that this cannot
make them one National Church, will appear from these Considerations.

1. That these Bishops, though they may be Ecclesiastical Persons, yet are not
properly Ecclesiastical, but Civil Officers, they act not by an Ecclesiastical
Authority, but are Ministers of the Regal Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as I
have already shown; and therefore if their Union under one Prince, cannot make
them one Church, much less can their Union under the King's Ministers.

2. Suppose they were true Primitive Bishops, yet where there are separate
Churches in any Diocese, they cannot all live in Communion with their Bishop,
and therefore cannot be one Church. For Communion with the Bishop is essential
to the notion and unity of an Episcopal Church, as I have proved in the
Defense. Defense, p 469. etc.
A supervising Power, not to govern the Church according to his own Judgment
and Conscience; but to see, that they govern themselves according to their own
Forms and Models, is no Episcopal Authority, much less any Act of
Church Communion. Those only communicate with their Bishop, who submit to his
Pastoral Authority, and partake with him in all Religious Offices, and those
who do not, according to the notion of the Catholic Church, are Schismatics,
and therefore not of the same Church with him. It is a very different thing to
be a mere Visitor and a Bishop, and it is as different a thing to be in
Communion with a Bishop, and to be subject to the Visitations of the King's
Ecclesiastical Minister; and therefore a supervising Power cannot make those
one Church, who are of different Communions.

3. If Mr. H.'s Project should take, to make some leading Dissenters Bishops,
it is still more evident, that they could in no sense make a National Church,
because the Bishops of the Church would be of different Communions, For it is
the Communion of Bishops with one another, which unite all their Churches into
a National, Patriarchal, Ibid. cap. 7. 8.
or Catholic Church, as I have proved in the Defense. This is abundantly
enough to show, that Mr. H.'s Episcopal Visiters, cannot make a National Church.

4. Another way Mr. H. proposes, to unite all these Churches into one National
Church, is by the Virtue of occasional Communion. That when a man has his
choice to be of one Church, which he will, in regard to fixed Communion, he
should occasionally come also to the other, for maintaining this National Union.

But, 1. No occasional Acts of Communion can unite Churches of distinct and
separate Communions. To be in Communion with a Church, is to be a member of it;
no man ought to communicate with any Church, of which he is not a Member, and
no Acts of Communion can unite Churches, which do not make them Members of each
other, as I have also proved in the Defense; and therefore such occasional Acts
of Communion, Ibid. p 132, etc
can contribute nothing to a National Union.

2. Of what nature shall this occasional Communion be? Shall they communicate
in all Acts of Worship, or only hear a Sermon now and then together? If in all
Acts of Worship, why should there be distinct Communions at any time? Why
cannot he communicate always with that Church, with which he can communicate in
all Acts of Worship some times? If our occasional Communion be only in some few
less material Acts, this makes no Union of Churches; for if there be any Acts
of Worship, wherein they can at no time communicate with each other, no man
will say such Churches are united in one Communion.

3. What is the meaning of this should: would Mr. H. have an Act of Parliament
to enjoin this occasional Communion; and what will this differ from an Act of
Uniformity? For it requires Uniformity sometimes, and if Uniformity be
sometimes lawful, why should it not be made always necessary? If Mr. H. by
should -- only intimates, what he would have them do, what then, if they will not,
notwithstanding his should? What will become of this National Union then? This
occasional Communion is either necessary to this National Union, or it is not.
If it be not necessary, why does Mr. H. make this an expedient for National
Union? If it be, how will he prove, that all Dissenters will occasionally
communicate with each other, and with the Church of England?

3. Mr. H.'s project for Union, will cure no one Schism, and therefore can make
no Union. This is evident from what I have already discoursed; for if it cannot
make one Church, it cannot cure the Schism; where there are two distinct and
separate Churches, which are not Members of each other, there is a Schism; for
Church-Unity consists in one Communion, as I have abundantly proved in the
Defense. Defense, chap. 4.
Should Mr. H.'s Materials for Union be confirmed by Act of Parliament, it
would be neither better nor worse, than either an Universal, or a limited
Toleration, (as they can agree that matter among themselves) established by
Law. Nay, should such an Act declare, that all such separate Churches should be
parts of the National Church; the Power of Parliaments may certainly alter the
signification of words, but it cannot alter the Nature of things. They would
still be as many Churches as they are now, but could never be one Church,
though they might be called a National Church, as that may be made to signify
all the Churches of professed Christians in the Nation established by Law. Such
an Act of Parliament would deliver the Dissenters from temporal Punishments,
and might deliver them from the sin of Disobedience to Civil Governors; but the
guilt of Schism will remain still, unless he thinks, that the Donatists were
not Schismatics, when Julian the Apostate with an uniting Design, granted a
general Toleration. So that this Project may secure the Estates, but cannot
secure the Souls of Dissenters; Schism will damn men, though they should get it
established by Act of Parliament; but Mr. H. and I, I perceive, have very
different designs, and therefore no wonder, if our Materials for Union differ:
He is concerned for this World, I am concerned for the next. He would secure
Dissenters from all Trouble and Molestation here, which I am by no means
against, as far as it may be done, with the security of the Church and State,
and honor of Religion; but if it were in my Power, I would Sacrifice my ease
and quiet, and all that is dear to me in this World, to secure their immortal
Interests, which no humane Power can secure, while they live in Schism.

But Mr. H. thinks, he has found out a device to cure the Schism, viz. That it
should be decreed in the Convocation, that neither Church should un-church one
another. This is a wonderful Power he gives to the Decree of a Convocation;
that Churches, which separate from each others Communion, yet shall not
un-church one another. For what does he mean by un-churching? To assert the
Communion of any Church to be sinful and unlawful, I think, is to un-church it,
that is, to make it no Church to us; and whoever separates from any Church,
though he be never so silent, does by his Separation, either condemn the
Communion of that Church to be unlawful, or condemn himself of Schism, for
nothing can justify a Separation, but sinful terms of Communion. How is it
possible then, that two Churches, which separate from each other, should not
un-church one another, or un-church themselves. There is but one Church, and
one Communion, and therefore where there are two separate Churches, and two
Communions, they cannot both be true Catholic Churches; and Mr. H.'s
contrivance to declare these separate Churches, to be all true Catholic
Churches by the Decree of Convocation, is like his Act of Parliament, to make
all the separate and divided Churches one National Church.

4. Mr. H.'s Project is not a very likely way, so much as to preserve the
external Peace and Union of the Nation; and if it be not good for this, it is
certainly good for nothing. We see, how troubled and disturbed the State of the
Nation is at this day, occasioned by the Disputes of Religion; how envenomed
their Spirits are, how furious and factious their Zeal; now not to enlarge upon
this unpleasant Theme, which possibly may be called railing; I would only ask
Mr. H. whether such an Act of Parliament, as he dreams of, would heal any
differences in Religion, would make the Dissenters think better of one another,
or of the Church of England, than now they do? Would make them more Loyal in
their Principles, more Charitable to one another, more cool and temperate in
their Zeal? Whether such an Act could set bounds to the several Sects among us,
and make them contented with their own private Persuasions, and with the
Liberties and Privileges, which the Law grants them, without encroaching upon
their Neighbors, or affecting Rule and Dominion, and using all imaginable Arts
to make Proselytes, and enlarge their Party? This is the Original of all our
Disturbance now, and what hope is there, when the Cause remains, that the
Effect will cease? If men still have the same fondness for their own Opinions
and Churches, the same Aversion to others, the same Zeal to promote a Party; if
still they think themselves as much bound as ever, to advance the Cause of God,
and to set Christ on his Throne, according to their old pretense, how fond is
it to imagine, that we shall enjoy more Peace and Security, than we do now?

If it be answered, that the Dissenters are at present uneasy and troublesome,
because the Laws are against them, and they are in constant danger of the
execution of them, to the loss of their Liberties, and the impoverishing their
Families, but if they had the same favor, and the same security from the
Government, as others have, they would be as quiet and peaceable, and as
dutiful Subjects, as others are. I reply,

1. It does not seem very probable, that those, who are so Insolent, Daring,
and Factious, when the Laws and Government are against them, should grow modest
and governable, when the Law is on their side. If they cannot be governed with
the Bridle in their mouths, it is hard trusting to their good Nature.

For, 2. We have had sufficient experience, how busy, turbulent, and factious
the Spirit of Fanaticism has always been, and we see no Symptoms of their
changing for the better.

3. We know by experience, how impossibly it is to oblige these men by any
favors. The kindness and moderation of Government is always thought a just
debt to their great merit and desert, or the effect of fear and weakness, or
the overruling Power of God, who turns the hearts of Governors to favor his
People, even against their own Inclinations, and therefore no thanks is due to
them.

4. These men never yet let slip an advantage and opportunity to disturb
Government, or to serve their Cause. Every thing, that is granted them, gives
them only a new confidence to ask and to demand more. And if ever they can
stand upon equal ground with the Church of England, they will as boldly
challenge a Superiority, and be as much disobliged, if they be denied. If once
they get a legal Rite to their Conventicles, they will next demand the Temples
and Tithes too, and declaim against the Magistrates as Sacrilegious Usurpers,
if they be denied. Their Discipline will not long be confined within their own
Conventicles, will reach Bishops and Princes too, whose Authority shall be no
longer owned, than they submit to the Scepter of Christ. These things are not
yet forgot among us, and I suppose, it will be hard to persuade any Prince to
make a second Experiment, when he paid so dear for the first.

5. We have made a sad Experiment already, how tame and gentle Dissenters
prove, when the restraints of Laws are gone. When the Church of England was
dissolved, and the enclosures flung open, and every man did as he list, there
was no more Peace, than there is now, only instead of railing at the Church of
England, they railed at one another. But enough of this.

Mr. H. thinks all this will be prevented by his Episcopal Visiters, who are to
see, that the Churches of both sorts walk according to their own Order, and the
Peace of one another.

But, 1. Who shall undertake, that all these Churches shall quietly submit to
these Visiters, and quietly obey their Orders, any more than they do to the
Visitation of their Ordinaries now? And what means of Union is there left, if
they don't?

2. Who shall undertake, that these Visiters themselves shall not prove
factious and partial, and secretly foment, instead of suppressing Disputes and
Quarrels between the Churches, for the Visiters are to be of all sorts too, as
well as the Churches; Independent, Presbyterian, and Episcopal Visiters, by the
name of the King's Bishops, or Ecclesiastical Officers? now I doubt Episcopal
Churches would find no great comfort in the Visitation of such Independent and
Presbyterian Visiters, as Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter; I confess for my own part, I
should not much care to come under their Visitation. And I will not answer for
all Episcopal Visiters, that they shall always carry an equal hand to
Dissenters. As for Instance.

Mr. H. says, That no Members of either Church should depart from one Church to
another, without a sufficient peaceable Reason. Now who must be Judge of this,
but the Visiter? Suppose then, a Member of a Presbyterian Church think fit to
return to the Episcopal Church, do you think, that a Presbyterian Visiter will
be casily satisfied, that he has a peaceable and sufficient Reason for this?
Will not every Visiter be greatly inclined to favor and enlarge the Communion
of that Church, to which he himself belongs? And what Quarrels is this like to
occasion between the several Churches? It may be much greater, than any thing
else has yet done.

But the great Trial of Skill will be in the promoting of these Visiters. For
though the King have the Nomination and Appointment of them, their Ordination
being only a broad Seal (a new way of Consecrating Bishops) yet what Art will
be used by the different Churches in the Diocese, to get a Visiter of their own
Communion? What a task will the King have to please all these several
Interests? What a noise and clamor will the Dissenters raise (who know how to
take every occasion for that) if they have not a dissenting Visiter? Nay, it
will not be enough then, that he is a Dissenter in general, but he must be a
Presbyterian or Independent Dissenter, according to the Interests of these
several Churches. This will be a perpetual occasion of Quarrel, and every Party
will think themselves injured and disobliged, who have not a Visiter of their
own Communion.

These are Mr. H.'s Materials for Union, and if Princes and Parliaments think
fit to make the Experiment, I cannot help it. But I will venture to turn
Prophet for once, and foretell, that they will soon find Reason to repent the
Experiment.

FINIS.

