Imprimatur.

March 30, 1691. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

AN ANSWER TO A Socinian Treatise, CALLED, The Naked Gospel, WHICH WAS Decreed
by the University of Oxford, in Convocation, August 19, Anno Dom. 1690. to be
Publicly Burnt, as containing diverse Heretical Propositions.

WITH A POSTSCRIPT, in Answer to what is added by Dr. Bury, in the Edition just
Published.

By THOMAS LONG, B. D. One of the Prebendaries of St. Peter's Exon

Contra rationem nemo Sobrius, contra Scripturam nemo Christianus, contra
Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit. August. de Trinitate, l. 4. c. 6.

Sanctius and reverentius visum est de actis Deorum credere quam Scire. Tacitus.

London: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1691.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JONATHAN, By Divine Permission, Lord
Bishop of EXON.
I May justly fear, that in the Dedication of these Exercitations, I have done
as some inconsiderate Persons, who seek to excuse a less, by committing of a
greater Offense: It was, I confess, a great Presumption, that I prefixed your
Lordship's Name to a Hasty Scrible against the Crime of Persecution charged on
the Church of England; and now I presume upon your Lordship's Patience and
Patronage in a Case of greater Importance; it is not a Scandalum Magnatum, nor
any of the Plea's of a Temporal Crown, but a Crime Laesae Majestatis, an Overt
Attempt to overthrow the Crown and Kingdom of our Blessed Savior; as if he
also were a King de Facto, and not de Jure; which I now lay before your
Lordship, it is the Crown and Dignity of him in whose Person and Due Worship
and Honor our common Salvation is wrapped up: The Sanction of our Law, (viz.) de
Heretico comburendo, was, I confess, too severe; but if there be not some
Powerful Restraint laid on such Damnable Heresies as deny the LORD that bought
them, the Sons of Belial, will not forbear to deny him on Earth, with a Non
Obstante to our Savior's threatening, Him will I deny before my Father which is
in heaven: The Ecclesiastical Laws are but as Bruta Fulmina, to such as
wilfully Excommunicate themselves; and unless the Temporal Power supply the
Defects of the Spiritual, we are like to run into a worse Confusion than
hitherto we have; this sort of Men being as great Enemies to the one as to the
other.

Ruarus who incurred a Banishment for his Socinianism, though as modest as any
of them, in a Tract of Magistracy, printed with his Epistles, p. 461. says, The
times may be such, and if we consider the state of all Ages and Nations, they
have been, and still are such, that it is more hard for a Christian to
discharge the Office of a Magistrate, especially of a Supreme, than for a rich
Man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. They are for an Independent Ministry;
no Friends to either of our Lord's Institutions, the Sacraments of Infant
Baptism, and the Eucharist; and though while they are under the Power of the
Civil Magistrate, they plead for an enlarged Charity, yet if at any time they
get the Sword to hang at their sides, their Cruelty will be much more
extensive: This I speak the more positively, because,

First, Their Principles lead them to it; for if the Papists, with whom we
agree in the chiefest Articles of Religion, be such implacable Enemies, as to
design the utter Extirpation of our Church, how much more will the Socinians,
who condemn us as Polytheists and Idolators, for worshipping those whom they
account mere Creatures, execute their Fury on us?

But 2ly, their Practices have abundantly declared their Inveterate Malice, for
when one Arian Presbyter had drawn Constantius to be of his Opinion, I tremble
to relate what Havoc was made in the Church; and before that time under
Dioclesian, having gotten the Donatists and other Heretics to strengthen their
Party, they committed more Outrages on the Catholics than Dioclesian himself,
though that was the fluctus Decumanus, the most impetuous Wave that overflowed
the Church: I shall give a brief Account from a Witness above all Exceptions,
Vincent Lirinensis, Chapter 6. Contr. Her. with whom St. Augustine agrees, in his
Discourses against the Arians, Vol. 7. and Socrates l. 2. c. 10. l. 4. c. 13.
and Sozomen l. 3. c. 6. the words of Vincentius are these: Cum prophana ipsa
Arrianorum, Novitas velut quaedam bellona aut furia Capto prius omnium
Imperatore cuncta, deinde Palatii culmina legibus novis subjugasset, nequaquam
deinceps destitit Universa Miserere atque vexare privata and publica sacra,
prophanaque omnia nullum boni and very genere descrimen sed quoscunque
collibuisset tanquam deloco superiore percutere tunc temeratae conjuges,
depopulatae viduae prophanatae Virgins, monasteria demolita desturbate,
clerici verberati Levitae acti in exilium sacerdotes oppleta sanctis ergastula
carceres Metalla quorum pars Maxima interdictis urbibus protrusi, atque
extorres inter deserta spleluncas feras saxa, nuditate fame siti affecti,
contrite and tabe facti sunt. Atque haec omnia nunquid ullam aliam ob causam,
nisi utique dum pro caelesti dogmate humanae superstitiones introducuntur, dum
been fundata antiquitas scelesta novitate subruitur, dum superiorum instituta
violantur, dum rescinduntur scita patrum dum convelluntur definita Majorum, dum
sese intra sacratae, atque incorruptae veritatis castissimos limits prophanae,
ac novellae curiositatis libido non continet. This one Testimony of so good an
Author, is enough to make us abhor the Authors of the Arian, and much more of
the Socinian Heresy, which is more Impious, and guilty of the greater
Blasphemy, the more sacrilegious Novelty, and of such intolerable Pride and
Contempt of all Mankind but themselves, even while they are under severe Laws,
that I believe, if their Power were equal, it would be as well for our Temporal
as Spiritual Condition, to live under the Roman, as the Racovian Harrows.

The Statute 29 Car. 2. which abrogated that De Heretico Comburendo, declares,
That it does not take away or abridge any Jurisdiction of Protestant
Archbishops, Bishops, or other Judges of his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Courts,
in Causes of Atheism, Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism, or other Damnable Doctrines
or Opinions; but they may proceed to punish the same according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, by Excommunication, Deprivation, Degradation, and other
Ecclesiastical Censures, not extending to Death. So as before the Act, the
Learned Judge Hales, in the beginning of his Plea's of the Crown, gives an
Account of the manner of Conviction of Heretics, which he says, is, First, By
the Common Law. (Whereof he gives some Instances.) Secondly, By Archbishops and
Bishops in a General Synod. Thirdly, By the Bishop in his Diocese. The Common
Law, he says, inflicts no Forfeiture, neither indeed does the Ecclesiastical,
if the Criminal abjure his Opinions, being pro salute Animae, but if he
relapsed after Abjuration, he is left in a worse condition. The matter of
Heresy was to be judged of by the Canonical Scripture: Or, 2. By what has
been determined by the four General Councils. 3. By any General council
according to express Scripture. 4. By Parliament, with Assent of the
Convocation. What Power your Lordship has over the Head or Members of Exeter
College, in case of Heresy, I refer to their Statutes.

What Operation these Methods may effect, I know not, but there needs a speedy
Application, where the Gangreen gains so visibly, and may be so mortal: But why
talk I thus to so great a Master in our Israel, who has a more perfect
knowledge of all those things whereof I speak? Your Lordship has been a
constant and eminent Assertor of the Faith established in the Church of
England, the Foundation whereof is that of the Ever Blessed Trinity, on which
all our Worship, and all our Hopes are built; but ungodly Men have in this too
licentious Age, endeavored with all their Might and Subtilty to subvert this
Foundation: and that which has caused this Address to your Lordship, is a holy
Indignation, when I considered, that there are more who appear in Print to
destroy, than to establish this Foundation, which has caused me, though the
weakest of many Thousands, (that my Zeal may provoke others, that have more
Knowledge and Abilities) to solicit the Cause of the Eternal Son of God,
against whom that Outcry in the Gospel is revived, This is the heir, Come let
us kill him, and seize on his inheritance; which they attempt to do by force of
their own Merit, and a Natural Righteousness; making void the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith in Christ, who is Jehova, The Lord our righteousness:
He that says of Faith in Christ, as the eternal Son of God, That it is
impertinent to our Lord's design, fruitless to the Contemplator's purpose, and
dangerous in respect of Blasphemy, and because we have no sure grounds to go
upon, see p. 29. of the Naked Gospel, in 2 Col. He that shall say, that it is
made the most mischievous Incendiary in the Christian World, To the Reader, p.
7. of the last Edition. He that shall say of those who altogether deny our
Savior's Deity, and dare not worship him at all, That he dares not in Charity
deny the name of Christians, or hope of Salvation to such, p. 55. of the last
Edition, gives great encouragement to the Infidelity of Jews and Turks, and
contradicts the Scripture which assures us, That there is no other Name under
Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. And the pretense
of enlarging Charity, is too short a Cloak to cover so much Nakedness; it is
not Charity to spare a Barrabbus and crucify Christ; it is as much against the
Law of the Land, and the Constitutions of the Church, as against the Law of
God, to cherish such Vipers: The Act 10 Guilel. and Mariae, made for exempting
their Majesty's Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England, from the
Penalties of certain Laws, provided that such as will have benefit by that Act,
shall subscribe a Profession of the Christian Belief, in these words: I A. B.
profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, and in
the Holy Spirit, one God blessed for evermore. This is the Faith which I
contend for, and for which I beg your Lordship's Patronage, who has already so
eminently and successfully appeared in its defense, against that unlimited
Toleration which would have destroyed it: He that is now your Client is the
Eternal Son of God, to whom as the Author of our Salvation, we were dedicated
in our Baptism, and have been taught by the undoubted Oracles of God, That he
is our Creator by whom all things were made that are made; that God that
redeemed his Church with his own proper Blood, neither is there Salvation in
any other Name; the true God and Eternal Life, to whose Almighty Protection,
and All-sufficient Grace, which are able to save to the utmost, all that come
to God by Him, I shall daily recommend your Lordship, and all your Relations
and Affairs, as is in Duty bound,

Your Lordship's most humble and obliged Servant, THO. LONG.

THE PREFACE.
MAresius in the Preface to the Second Part of his Hydra Socin. takes notice of
the Printing in England, Anno 1654. The Socinian Catechism of John Beedle,
Master of Arts, containing all the Impieties and Blasphemies of Socinus; to
which he says was added a Catalogue of Socinian Books; his Twelve Reasons
against the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and the Life of Faustus Socinus: and that
Learned Man thus complains of it, O the deplorable Condition of England, which
having driven out their King, now constrains the King of Kings to be banished,
and seems to have no greater value for that Liberty which was purchased by
Christ's Blood, than to obtain a License of Hearing, Writing, and Believing
what they please. If this were a Scandal to the English Nation in those lawless
Times, and gave so great an offense to foreign Divines, How much more will the
Offense and Scandal be, when the Gospel shall be sent naked abroad, by the
hands of a Doctor of Divinity, and Rector of a College, and one that writes
himself a True Son of the Church of England; especially considering, that we
have now a Protestant King and Queen, (whom God long preserve) Defenders of the
Ancient Catholic Faith, which has been so long professed in the Church.

It is greatly to be deplored, that the Racovian Catechism is so commonly sold
both in Latin and English, as is Crellius also, and Beedle's Catechism, and
his Arguments against the Deity of the Holy Ghost. And lately, a Swarm of
Pamphlets, like venomous Insects, in all parts of the Land, of Theists,
Anti-Trinitarians, Unitarians, Arians, and Socinians, darkning, as much as they
may, the Light of the Gospel, and poisoning the People.

Grotius, in his Vindication of the States of Holland, professes, that he knew
not one in all the Assembly of the States, that was not ready to denounce an
Anathema, as well to the old Doctrines of Samosatenus, as to the new of
Socinus, against the Consubstantial, and unconfused and undivided Trinity; yet
at that time, the Heresy of Servetus had taken root and spread itself secretly
among very many, so that he himself, to avoid suspicion of being a Patron to
them, thought fit to write his Book of the Satisfaction of Christ; and we have
this Expression in his Book, De Pietate Ordinum Holland. Seeing that Heresy is
the Poison of the Church, and is quick in its Operation, and there are certain
Degrees of Heresy, one being more hurtful than another, there cannot be found
any that is worse than the Heresy of Socinus, at the mentioning whereof all
good men do tremble.

We have reason to bless God, that in such lioentious Times as we have seen in
the former Age, when a General Toleration was granted, and all sort of Heresies
were impunely permitted, and Orthodox Doctrines discountenanced, there are so
few persons infected with Heresy, and so many learned persons left us to
vindicate the Truths of the Gospel; yet are there some Thousands infected with
Anabaptism, and Quakerism, among whom the Pelagian and Socinian Doctrines have
got the Ascendent. They talked formerly of being Godded with God, and Christed
with Christ; and now they deny the Godhead of Christ; and Man it with Man: what
number of such Heretics are now among us, the Author of the NAKED GOSPEL may
know better than others; doubtless he presumes of a large Muster, otherwise he
would not appear as a Leader to head them; but that he should appear under the
Notion of a Son of the Church of England, is the greatest Affront that could be
done it; for as Plutarch says, he had rather Men should say, there was never
such a Man as Plutarch, than that they should say he was a Vicious Person: So
is it a less reproach for the Papists to say, there never was such a Church as
the Church of England, than to say it is a Church professing Pelagian and
Socinian Doctrines. The Fathers and Sons of our Church, have not, and by the
Grace of God will not be wanting in their Duty to Assert her Doctrines, and to
Silence all her Adversaries.

The University of Oxford have manifested their Abhorrence of it, in Condemning
the Book to the Fire: And the Right Reverend the Bishop of Exeter, Visitor of
that College, whereof the Author was Rector, has (as the Statutes of the
College directed him in Case of Heresy) very seasonably repremanded him,
whereby it is hoped the Gangreen of his Heresies will be mortified and cut off
from infecting the Members of that Famous College. Nor do I doubt but all that
have any Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, will show the like Detestation of
that Damnable Heresy, that denies the Lord that bought them. The Ancient
Fathers were very severe against such; Ignatius, mentioning that passage in
Jer. 17. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, says, that they are under the
Curse, that affirm Christ to be a mere man. Origin, on Job, l. 1. c. 4.
Whatever men shall do without Faith in the Holy Trinity, they do in vain, and
shall have no reward. Fulgentius de fide, p. 9. says, he cannot be a
Christian, that shall not confess the Lord Christ to be his God. The Fathers
have said as much concerning the Arians, that they were Antichristians rather
than Christians.

Yea, they say the like of Arius as of Julian, That they were both guilty of
the Sin against the Holy Ghost; and if to the rest of our National Sins, we
should add this, to suffer the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity to be thus
publicly derided, and made the Subject of profane Pamphlets; that the Writers
should confidently own them, and falsely profess themselves Sons of the Church
of England; that there should be a Secret Press still in Labor to be delivered
of such Monsters; that there should be a Club to Father them, and such Hectors
to defend and support them, and so many to applaud them; and such Books as were
long since written in Latin, are taught to speak English and French; and our
English Books in requital, are taught to speak Latin and French Arrianism, is
one of the great Provocations for which the Lord's hand is not withdrawn, but
is still stretched out to be avenged on us.

Luther on his Death bed, was wont to exhort those who came to visit him,
Oremus pro Domino, nostro and ejus Evangelio: Let us pray for our Lord, and for
his Gospel. The Gospel was then reviving, and gaining its liberty, it is now
imprisoned in all Countries where Popery does prevail, and it is like to be
stripped Naked at home, if some charitable Hand does not seasonably prevent it;
to which, that Doom which our Savior has denounced, Mat. 25.43. Go ye cursed;
for I was naked, and ye clothed me not, should excite every good Christian;
otherwise we may justly fear, that for all the Affronts and Indignities which
the Profane on the one hand, and the Heretics and Blasphemers on the other
hand, between whom our blessed Savior is crucified afresh, and put to open
shame, he deal with us, as he did with the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. I will
come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick; except thou repent. And the
great haste which so many do make to banish the true knowledge of God out of
the Land, is a fearful Prognostic, that our Savior will come quickly, to be
avenged on such a People.

My present Undertaking is only to do the Office of a Watchman, or Sentinel,
to discover the approach of an Adversary, and to sound an Alarm to such as are
better furnished with Arms and Abilities to vanquish them, of which by the
Blessing of God, our Church is provided with many thousands, who, I doubt not,
will fight it out, Usque ad Triarios: If I have for the sake of my Countrymen,
collected a few Arguments against the Socinian Tenets, it is what the Discourse
of the Author led me to; my intent was to discover the dangerous Design of the
Naked Gospel, which the Author pretends was for the enlarging of Charity, and
for condemning of Impositions in Matters of Faith, under which Notion he
industriously condemns those Doctrines of the Nicene Fathers, and of
Athanasius, which have been received in the Church of England, not only from
them, but from the most Primitive Times: But the Doctor says, We have no firm
ground to go upon; not from Scripture, because the Arrians capt Scripture with
the Orthodox; nor from Antiquity, which they claimed with the same confidence;
nor from Councils, which determined sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the
other. p. 37. c. 1. Yet he grants, that the Catholics have the advantage of
long possession, and that after Sentence; and at last leaves both the Arrian
and Athanasian Doctrines on the same level with Roman Impositions, equally
unworthy of our Faith or Study. By this, and what I shall further urge from the
Naked Gospel, it will evidently appear, that if the Doctor be of any Religion,
that names the Name of Christ, he must be a Socinian.

As to the Author's design, he pretends it to be, 1. For the enlarging of
Charity; (i. e.) for a Toleration of his Opinions.

2. To prevent Impositions in Matters of Faith, to both which I have replied,
and shown, that the real design is to ridicule the Athanasian Creed, and the
Council of Nice, and to prefer a Natural Religion, above that which is taught
by them, which he accounts among his unreasonable Impositions; as having 1. No
footing in Scripture; in answer whereto, I have shown the Harmony of the Old
and New Testament, in Confirmation of those Doctrines. 2. Whereas he says, they
have no Foundation in the Fathers, I have produced their Authorities. And
thirdly, as for the Councils, Because the Socinians decline their Authority, I
have but briefly touched them. As to my Method, having first considered his
Preface, in the next place I have considered his Apology. 3. I have made some
general Reflections on the Book; and lastly, I have discovered what Socinian
Doctrines are covertly delivered in each Chapter; for I find his Oracles, like
those of old, to carry a doubtful or double Sense, to be as a Reserve and
Refuge, that being driven from the one, he might fly to the other; and indeed
it is more difficult to discover and draw him forth from those Ambushes wherein
he lies in wait to deceive, than to baffle his greatest Strength in a plain and
open Field; the first is my chief endeavor, though I have not on occasion
declined the other: what I have attempted was not in confidence of my own
Abilities, having never been exercised in this spiny Controversy, and being
now by Age, Miles emeritus; but only to excite and provoke others to contend
for the common Salvation in the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and
whatever the success be, I hope I shall obtain the Pardon of all good Men,
seeing I have according to my power cast in my Mite into the Church's Treasury.

AN ANSWER To a Late TREATISE, ENTITLED, The Naked Gospel.
THE Author of the Naked Gospel calls himself a true Son of the Church of
England; now the Doctrine of the Church of England is declared in her Liturgy,
her Articles, and Homilies; in her Liturgy she has inserted the Three Creeds,
viz. that called the Apostles, the Nicene, and the Athanasian; these two last
our Author would have to be restrained to the Letter of the former, because
that only is used in the Offices for Administration of Baptism, and Visitation
of the Sick; but if he be a true Son of the Church, he has or should, ex
animo, have given his Assent and Consent to all the Doctrines avowed by the
Church. However, it is well that the Doctor seems to approve of the Apostles
Creed, because I find the Socinians deny the Godhead of the Son and Holy Ghost,
being it is not expressly affirmed in that Creed, yet certainly they had not
been made Objects of our Faith, if they were not of the Godhead. This Creed is
but a larger Profession of our Christian Faith, which we made at our Baptism,
where we dedicate ourselves to the Service of that one God who is Father Son
and Holy Ghost. The Right Reverend Bishop of Chester has sufficiently proved
the Deity of the Son and Holy Ghost, in his learned Exposition of that Creed:
Nor have we ever heard of any of the Fathers that have interpreted it
otherwise, than as the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds have done; yet I have been
credibly informed, that a Doctor, who styles himself of the Church of England,
gravely declared, That this Creed also might be reformed. But in the Church of
England we find the reiterated Acknowledgment of the Blessed Trinity, Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, so in the Doxology, in the Form used in Baptism, and in the
Litany, O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and One God, etc
And in that very ancient Hymn after the Communion, it is said of our Savior,
Thou only art Holy, thou only art the Lord; thou only O Christ, with the Holy
Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father. In the Te Deum, Thou art
the King of Glory O Christ; thou art the Everlasting Son of the Father.

In the first Article concerning the Trinity, the Church of England says, That
in the Unity of the Divine Nature, there are three Persons of the same Essence,
Power and Eternity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In the Homely for Whitsunday
she says, The Holy Ghost is a Spiritual and Divine Substance, the third Person
in the Deity, distinct from the Father and the Son; Which thing may most easily
be proved, by most plain Testimonies of God's Holy Word.

Canon (...) 1640.
And in the Canons it is forbidden to read Socinian Books; And in the former
Book of Canons we are forbid to teach any thing but what is agreeable to the
Doctrine of the Old and New Testament; and what the ancient Fathers and Bishops
have collected out of them.

It was therefore a Protestatio contra factum, to style himself a true Son,
etc. and under that Title to publish to the World what is so opposite to her
Doctrine: May not the Church complain of such Sons in the words of the Prophet
Isaiah, c. 1. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me? But God be thanked, the Church of England does not want more
dutiful Sons, such as on all occasions are ready and able to vindicate her
Doctrines, and assert her Discipline: That famous University, whereof the
Author was a Member, seasonably manifested her Detestation of his Heretical
Opinions, by condemning them to the Flames, that there might not be a Spark
left to kindle such dangerous Fires in the Church; which Decree, for the
Reader's satisfaction, is here inserted: The Judgment and Decree of the
University of Oxford, delivered in a Convocation held August 19th, 1690.
against some Impious and Heretical Propositions, transcribed and quoted out of
an Infamous Libel of late, perfidiously printed within the said University, and
published with this Title. The Naked Gospel, which do Impugn and Assault the
principal Mysteries of our Faith, always retained and preserved in the Catholic
Church, and especially in the Church of England.
IMPRIMATUR,

Jonathan Edwards, Vice-Can. Oxon.

WHereas there is lately published an Infamous Libel, entitled, The Naked
Gospel, which under that specious Title destroys the Foundation of the
Primitive Faith once delivered to the Saints, assaults the chief Mysteries of
our Religion, and not only denies, but reproacheth him that bought us, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is God blessed for ever. And whereas it appears that this
Libel deserving to be condemned to eternal Flames, has been by an unheard of
Persideousness printed and published within this University, therefore for the
Honor of the Holy and Individual Trinity, for Preservation of the Catholic
Doctrine in the Church, and moreover, for the Defense (as much as in us lies)
of the Reputation and Esteem of this University, which with all care we desire
to preserve entire and inviolable, We the Vice Chancellor, Doctors, Proctors,
the Regent and Non-Regent, Masters convocated in a full Senate of Convocation,
on the 19th of August, 1690, in manner and place accustomed, certain.
Propositions in the said Libel contained, which we have caused to be
transcribed, and hereafter recited, being first Read, have by our Common
Suffrages and the Unanimous Consent and Assent of Us all, Decreed in manner
following:

I. We do Condemn all and every of these Propositions (and others to them
belonging, which for Brevity's sake are pretermitted) as False, Impious, and
Contumelious to the Christian Religion, and especially to the Church of
England; And we Decree and Declare most of them to be Heretical, as contrary to
the Holy Scriptures, and the Catholic Faith received and inviolably preserved
by all Orthodox Christians in all the World in all Ages, from the beginning of
the Church to this present time; and as repugnant to the Decrees of Councils,
especially that of Nice, the most Solemn of all that are extant, and most
worthy of our Faith and Acceptance; And lastly, as contrary to the Writings of
the Fathers, especially of St. Athanasius, whole Faith and Patience in Defense
of the Cause of Christ, was great beyond Example, will be memorably celebrated
wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached.

II. Moreover, We enjoin under the Penalty of the Law, all Students not to read
the said infamous Libel, or any of that kind, which do re-call, as from Hell,
those anciently condemned Heresies; commanding and firmly enjoining all and
every the Praelectors, Tutors, Catechists, and others to whom the Institution
of Accademical Youth is entrusted, that they diligently instruct and establish
those that are committed to their Charge, in that chief and necessary Article
of our Faith, upon which, as on a Foundation, all the rest do depend, by which
we are taught to believe and profess, That there is One Living and True God,
and in the Unity of this Nature, there are Three Persons of the same Essence,
Power, and Eternity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

III. We Decree the abovenamed Infamous Libel to be Burnt by an Infamous Hand,
in the Area of our Schools.



The Propositions referred to in the Decree.
Pref. That Mahomet professed all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Whether Mahomet or Christian Doctors have more corrupted the Gospel, is not so
plain by the light of Scripture, as it is by that of Experience, that the later
gave occasion, encouragement, and advantage to the former. For when by nice and
hot Disputes, (especially concerning the Second and Third Persons of the
Trinity) the minds of the whole People had been long confounded, and by the
then late Establishment of Image Worship, the Scandal was increased, so that to
vulgar Understandings the Doctrine of the Trinity appeared no less guilty of
Polytheism, then that of Image Worship did of Idolatry -- Then was there a
tempting Opportunity offered to the Impostor, and he laid hold on it, to set up
himself for a Reformer of such Corruptions, as were both too gross to be
justified, and too visible to be denied.

Cap. 7. page 40. The great Question concerning the Godhead of Christ is, 1.
Impertinent to our Lords design. 2. Fruitless to the Contemplators own purpose.
3. Dangerous.

Cap. 8. page 46. Two Evangelists trace our Lord's Genealogy; but as they
derive it not from his real but supposed Father, so do they take two several
ways, not to satisfy but to amuse us. What is this but to admonish us against
Curiosity? The Pedigree of his Flesh might easily have been, either cleared or
unmentioned: Had the Evangelists been wholly silent concerning it, we had less
wondered; but that they should profess to instruct us, yet doubly disappoint us,
first by deriving it from a wrong Father, and then by distracting us between
two ways; What is this but to verify the Prophets description, Who shall
declare his Generation? And what does this so careful Concealment of his
Generation according to the Humane Nature signify more plainly, than a warning
against searching after his Eternal Generation of his Divinity? If it were
needless (and therefore left impossible) to prove him derived from David, which
was one of his most revealed Characters; how can it be otherwise, to understand
that Generation of his, which must needs be so much the more above our
Understanding, as the Nature of God is above our own.

Page 48. And might not a Heathen at this rate justify Polytheism, provided his
Gods disagreed not among themselves? The Schoolmen therefore will not stand to
this State of the Question, but distinguish between Person and suppositum
rationale; which (yet) they cannot so do, as to satisfy themselves, and
therefore shelter themselves in their impregnable Fort, Mystery, and thence
thunder upon the Adversaries both of this, and of another no less beloved
Mystery: For they make this their Cock argument for Transubstantiation; That
since the Scripture is no less express for the One than the Other, and the
Contradictions no less gross in the One than in the Other; therefore we must
embrace the one as well as the other.

To this Objection of the Romanists, and to others of the Unitarians, we have
found an Answer, That we must not infer from our Own Nature to God's; for that
Ours is finite, and God's is infinite; Three Persons among Us are Three Men,
because they agree in one Common Nature; but the Divine Nature is not a Common
One, but a Singular; and therefore Three Persons do not make Three Gods. If you
understand not this, you must not wonder, or at least you must not Gainsay it;
for it is a Mystery, which Reason may not pretend to fathom.

Page 51. Thus have we pointed (and only pointed) at some of the many
intangling Questions, which puzzeled and divided the subtilest Wits of seveal
Ages, and were at last decided by no other Evidence, but of Imperial and Papal
Authority; sufficient to silence Disputes, but not stablish Truth. And who is
he that is not discouraged from giving a confident Assent to what is this way
obtruded upon his Belief?

Cap. 9. page 53. I. There is danger of Blasphemy in examining the Silly
Question (as he calls it) concerning the Eternity of the Godhead of Christ.

This is a second danger, That we have no firm ground to go upon --

Page 54. The only advantage of the Catholics is long Possession, and that
after Sentence -- They have indeed so handled Matters, as to hide much, and
varnish all; yet even so, we may pick out enough to justify an Appeal, by
observing how that Possession was first obtained, then continued, and at last
settled -- The Sentence which first determined the Controversy [in the Council
of Nice] was not by the Merit of the Cause, but Interest of the Parties.

Page 56. This long and mischeivous Controversy was at last settled by
Theodosius; who having received his Instructions and Baptism from a
Consubstantialist, required all his Subjects to conform to that Religion, which
Peter the Prince of the Apostles from the beginning had delivered to the
Romans, and which at that time Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria held; and that Church only should be esteemed Catholic which
worshipped the Divine Trinity with equal Honor; and those which held the other
should be called Heretics, made infamous, and punished.

This therefore we may call settling the Controversy; because thenceforth all
succeeding Emperors, and Bishops wrote after this Copy, and both the Parties
have ever worn these Titles, which the Emperor by his Imperial Power, as the
unquestionable Fountain of Honor, was pleased to bestow upon them. -- Behold
now the Ground upon which one of our Fundamental Articles of Faith is Built;
behold the Justice of that Plea, which from such a Possession would prescribe
to our Belief.

Page 57. of the Interpolated Edition, What more ridiculously silly than to
build so weighty a Doctrine upon Implicit Faith in two Bishops, partial to
their own Sees, whereof the one gave it Birth, and the other Maintenance? And
what more odious than to persecute as Heretics and Malefactors, all such as
should refuse to be so grossly imposed upon.

Page 57. of the first Edition, Certainly whoever shall carefully observe how
the now established Doctrine was from first to last advanced by gross
Partiality of the most guilty kind, and at last imposed by a Novice Emperor,
upon Implicit Faith of two Bishops, of whose Sees, the one brought it into the
World, and the other maintained it, and a new coined Tradition lately obtruded
by the guiltier of those Sees, but unpleaded, because unheard of in those
former, long and miserable Times, which it might, and ought to have delivered
from the Convulsions they suffered: Whoever, I say, shall carefully observe
this, and withal what foul Tricks the Church of Rome used in the West, and with
what ill Success in the East, whose Churches did at last more Universally
embrace Arrius 's Opinion, than at first they condemned it; may be tempted to
number the Athanasian, among the Roman Doctrines, and cannot but think it
fairly dealt with, if (its boasted Possession pardoned) it be left upon the
same level with the Arrian, equally unworthy not only of our Faith, but of our
Study.

Page 57. If further we consider (what the Historian expressly declares) that
at the rise of this Controversy, most of the Bishops understood not it is
meaning, we cannot think it necessary to Salvation, that every private
Christian should believe that as an Article of Faith, which the best Ages of
the Church thought not worth knowing. -- [This upon second thoughts is thus
expressed in a 2d Edition. An Opinion which so many wise and good Men as lived
within 300 Years after Christ, were so far from believing Matter of Faith, that
they did not receive it as Matter of Certainty, nor perhaps of Credibility.
Page 59]

Page 58. The Athanasians abhor Polytheism, no less than do the Arrians. If
their Positions seem to infer it, they deny the consequence; if this contradict
the Rules of reasoning, they avow it; for they allow Reason no hearing in
Mysteries of Faith: if this make them Heretics, it is not in Religion, but in
Logic.

On the other side, the Arrians profess to believe of Christ whatever himself,
or his Apostles have spoken; and where one expression in Scripture seems to
contradict another, they take such a Course to reconcile them, as the Laws and
Customs of all the World direct. It is very frequent for Rhetoric to exceed,
but never to diminish the Grammatical Character of a Person, whose honor the
Writer professes to advance: and upon this account they think it more
reasonable, that those Expressions which exalt our Savior's Person to an
Equality with the Father, should stoop to those which speak him Inferior; than
that those which speak him Inferior should be strained up to those which speak
him Equal. And however, this is the safer Way; since it will lead us to such a
Belief, as will suffice for that end, for whose sake alone Belief itself is
required.

Page 70. To this Question, Whether any Promise of God does necessarily import
a Restitution of the same Numerical Matter?

He answers, That the Words of St. Paul; Thou fool, that which thou sowest,
etc. plainly deny the Resurrection of the same Numerical Particles.

P. 70. To another Question, Whether it be more honorable to God, and more
serviceable to the design of the Gospel, that we believe the Contrary?

He answers, That it is the same, as to ask, Whether it be more honorable to
salve all his Perfections, or to robb one, that we may cloth the other.

The very mentioning of these Opinions is a sufficient Confutation to all such
as have heartily embraced the Doctrine of the Church of England. But the
Author, in his Vindication, pretends, that what he has written was only to
enlarge Charity, (i. e.) to procure a Toleration of such Opinions as he has
published: I shall only discover that Line of Socinianism, much blacker than
his Ink, which runs through his whole Book, and then the Reader may judge to
what his enlarged Charity does tend.

The Design of the Preface is to show, says the Doctor, that the Success of
the Gospel, which made such great Conquests at first, has been hindered by the
difference of the Modern Gospel from the Primitive, in its Doctrine, which
difference, he says, is so great, that if an Apostle should return into the
World, he would be so far from owning it, that he would not be able to
understand it.

Answ. If the Gospel which we receive be so entirely corrupted, he does utterly
overthrow that Providence of God which he admires in giving it so great a
success, whereas all good Christians believe the Gospel to be the same, and
bless the Providence of Almighty God in preserving it pure and incorrupt to
this present time; and we still say, if an Apostle or an Angel from Heaven
shall preach any other Gospel, contrary to, or (...) besides what we have
received, let him be accursed. I hope therefore the Doctor does not think of
setting up any other Judge of Controversies than what the Church, whereof he
calls himself a True Son, does own and profess; if the Success of it has been
hindered in any Age, it may not be imputed to the Doctrine therein delivered,
nor to the Providence of God, in preserving it entire, but to those false and
contrary Doctrines, which by the Instruments of Satan, transforming themselves
into Angels of Light, endeavored to destroy in its infancy, such as St. Peter
calls damnable errors, denying the Lord that bought them, and teaching that
Jesus Christ was no^ come in the flesh; (i. e.) that God the Word was not made
flesh, but the flesh was made God. Such were Ebion a Jew, Cerinthus and
Marcion, who spread their Errors against the Deity of Christ, while St. John
was living, with which Errors the Church of Ephesus was so infested, that she
besought St. John to write in confutation of them, as he did both in his Gospel
and Epistles. The other Apostles were diligent in confuting the Errors of the
Gnostics, who would have brought in the worshipping of Saints and Angels as
inferior Gods. These generally condemned St. Paul's Epistles, and kept to the
Jewish Observations, which (the Apostles wrote against) the Nicolaitans also
mentioned, Rev. 2.6. were of the like Opinion with the Gnostics and Cerinthus.
For hating of whose Deeds the Church of Ephesus is commended. Ireneus, l. 3. c.
11. says, that St. John wrote his Gospel to destroy that Error which had been
sown by Cerinthus, and before him by the Nicolaitans. So that the Success of
the Gospel was hindered by not only those false Doctrines, but the impure Lives
of the Gnostics and Nicolaitans, whose deeds God hated. Mahomet was of the
same Opinion with those Heretics; for though the Doctor says, he professed all
the Articles of the Christian Faith, yet it is evident he denied the Deity of
Christ, though he owned him to be a true Prophet and Messenger of God; in which
respect (the Doctor might say) he owned as much of the Christian Faith as the
Socinians do, and we may say he was for a Naked Gospel as well as the Doctor.

The Question therefore which the Doctor makes, whether Mahomet or Christian
Doctors have more corrupted the Gospel and hindered the success of it, is easily
resolved; for the Gnostics, Cerinthians, Ebionites, etc. all which called
themselves Christian Doctors and Reformers of the Gospel, as he calls Mahomet.
Were those Christian Doctors, who by their corrupt and Antichristian Errors,
defamed the Gospel, and opposed the Deity of its Author? And these and such
others made way for Mahomet, by showing, that they held a Gospel, whereof every
Article was to be found in the Alchoran. And had our Doctor lived in the days
of Mahomet, it is not unlike but he might have been one of those Christian
Doctors, that would have reformed the Gospels according to the Alchoran. As for
any new Additions or Impositions in Matters of Faith, the Doctor knows the
Church of England utterly disclaims them. And to avoid such traditionary
Impositions, the Church of England (retaining whatsoever is agreeable to the
Scriptures and Primitive Churches,) has reformed herself from all the corrupt
Innovations and Impositions of the Church of Rome, as well in Matters of
Doctrine as of Government and Discipline.

And now to the Doctor's Question, Whether Mahomet or the Christian Doctors
have more corrupted the Gospel, etc.

This was the Tempting Opportunity (says the Doctor) offered to the Impostor,
and he laid hold on it, to set up himself for a Reformer. Sir W. Temple, p.
107. of the Second Part of his Essays, may inform him who was the forerunner
of Antichrist, as the Fathers termed Arius. About the Year 600, the time when
Mahomet appeared, the Provinces of the East were overrun with Arianism, who
denied or undermined the Divinity of Christ, and allowed only his Prophetical
Office. The Countries of Arabia and Egypt were filled with great numbers of the
scattered Jews, who on the destruction of their Country in Adrian's time, had
fled into these Provinces, to avoid the utter ruin of their Nation, threatened
by that Emperor. Arabia and Egypt were inhabited by Gentiles, who were given
to pleasures and Riches. Mahomet, to humor and comply with these three sorts
of men, and by assistance of Sergius a Monk (an Arian Heretic,) who fearing
the Censure of the Church of Constantinople, which then resolved to suppress
that, and the Heresy of the Monothelites, fled into Arabia, and was
entertained by Mahomet's Master, where he grew into acquaintance with Mahomet,
and became his only Confident, framed a Scheme of Religion which might take in
the common Opinions and Dispositions of all those three Parties, which yet
might be agreeable to his own temper and designs. He professed One God, Creator
of the World, and that God sent Moses his first and great Prophet, to give his
Laws to Mankind, which were not obeyed by the Jews, nor received by the
Gentiles, therefore in later Ages he sent Christ, who was the second Prophet,
and greater than Moses, to preach his Laws in greater purity, but to do it with
gentleness, patience, and humility, which found no better reception or success
among Men, than Moses had done; and therefore God had now sent his last and
greatest Prophet Mahomet, to publish his Laws with more Power, to subdue them
by Force and Violence, who would not willingly receive them; that such as would
not obey, should be ruined; but the obedient should have the possession of his,
and their Enemies, as a Reward in this Life, and a Paradise hereafter, with all
sensual enjoyments, especially of beautiful Women, newly created for that
purpose: these prevailed with Arians, Jews, and Gentiles, in those parts, etc.

Hence it appears, what this Reformer was, and what were the tempting
opportunities which he laid hold on.

To please the Jews, Mahomet observed Circumcision, in imitation of Abraham,
and recommended to them the Laws of Moses; to please the Gentiles, he permitted
Polygamy, to the number of four Wives, and as many Concubines as they could
maintain; and to please the Christians, he permitted them to have a Naked
Gospel, and a Natural Faith in Christ, as a Messenger of GOD, greater than
Moses; but not God, or the Savior of the World; for they deny that he was
crucified, but was taken up alive into Heaven: but these are not all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, he denied the Crucifixion of our Savior, his
Resurrection, Ascension, and that he should come to Judge the World, to reward
or punish Men according to their Works. Sandius, p. 347. mentions some other
of Mahomet's Doctrines: As that God is One both in Essence and Person, and that
there are not Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that Christ is to be worshipped, but
not with that Divine Worship as his Lord and God is: He says, That Jews and
Gentiles, and every one that worshippeth and fears God, and does Good Works,
may be saved; and he quotes Baronius, saying, That the Mahomitans do worship
Christ, as the Arrians and Nestorians do, p. 348.

The Author of Mahomet's Life, Printed before the English Alchoran, says, He
was ordained to be a Scourge for the Christians, who in multitudes at that
time, had forsaken the Truth, to follow the Sects and Heresies of the Arrians,
Nestorians, Donatists, and others. By such as these, the Candlestick, by God's
just Judgment, was removed out of the Asian Churches at first; and the pure
Light of the Gospel is much darkened in these later Ages, by Anti-Trinitarians,
Servetians, and Socinians, who have well nigh extinguished that Gospel, which
is the Light of the World, and would leave Mankind as naked, and as much
ashamed as our first Parents, when they had eaten of the forbidden Fruit.

I confess, that when I first read, that Mahomet professed all the Articles of
Christ's Faith, I was not aware, that the Doctor might mean according to his
New Gospel, or the Socinian Creed; but on enquiry into the Alchoran, and
computation of Time, when the Alchoran was written, (viz) about the year 600,
before which time the whole World, as St. Hierome observed, was become Arrian;
and Sergius the Monk, that had a chief hand in contriving it, was an Arrian, I
found that the Doctor makes a very great Agreement in Matters of Faith, between
the Alchoran and his Naked Gospel; so that as he says, Mahomet set up for a
Reformer of the Gospel in his time; so we have another Sergeus who sets up for
a Reformer of the Gospel according to the Alchoran in our time, as by the
following particulars will appear.

The English Alchoran, as it is Reprinted 1688, (is that which I quote) p. 3.
speaking to the Christians: Mahomet, says, Say not God has a Companion equal
to him, because you know the contrary. P. 4. God created the Heavens and the
Earth, and then ascended into Heaven. P. 44. Zachary prayed to God for a
Progeny, the Angels declared to him from God, That he should have a Son called
John, he shall affirm the Messiah to be the Word of God; Jesus is with God, as
is Adam, God created him out of the Earth; I do not associate (God) him with
any one, and acknowledge no other Lord but him. P. 46. There is no God, but God
alone, the Omnipotent and Wise. P. 86. There be some that alter the Scripture
in reading it, and will make us believe that what we read is in the Scripture,
though it be not; they blaspheme, and know it well: God gave not to Men the
Scripture, Knowledge, and Prophesies, to say to the People, Worship me instead
of God; but that they should say, Observe exactly what you read in the
Scripture: God does not command you to adore Angels or Prophets. P. 48. We
believe in what was inspired by Moses, Jesus, and generally by all the
Prophets: Abraham was not of them that believe in many Gods. P. 49. Follow ye
the Law of Abraham, that is pleasing to him; he professed the Unity of the Divine
Majesty; he was not of them that believe in many Gods. P. 94. Certainly they
that believe Messiah, the Son of Mary, to be God, are impious. The Messiah
commanded the Children of Israel to worship God, his, and their Lord. Paradise
is forbidden to him that shall say, God has a Companion equal to him. Such as
affirm, there are Three Gods, are impious. P. 86. The Messiah, the Son of Mary,
is a Prophet and Apostle of God, like to the Prophets that came before him: His
Mother is Holy, say to him, Who can hinder God to extirminate the Messiah, and
his Mother. P. 86. Of the Jews, he says, few of them shall believe, because of
their Malice and Blasphemies vomited against Mary. They said, We have slain the
Messiah, Jesus the Son of Mary, the Prophet and Apostle of God: Certainly they
slew him not, neither crucified him; they crucified one that resembled him:
such as doubt it are in a manifest Error; for God took him up to himself. Such
as have the knowledge of the Scripture, ought to believe in Jesus before his
Death, he shall be a Witness against them in the Day of Judgment. P. 80, 81.
You shall hear many Christians that have an inclination toward true Believers,
and have Priests, and Religious that are humble, and their eyes full of tears,
say, Lord we believe in thy Law, write us in the Number of them that profess
thy Unity. P. 95. He shall say in the Day of Judgment, O Jesus, did thou
enjoin thy People to Worship Thee, and thy Mother, as two Gods: Jesus shall
answer, Praised be thy Name, I will take heed of speaking what is not true; I
delivered nothing but what thou command me to speak, (viz.) Worship God your
Lord, and mine, p. 99. Infidels believe not in his Unity, p. 101.

The Jews say, That the Son of God is most just and powerful. The Christians
say, That the Messiah is the Son of God: their words are like the words of
Infidels; but God shall lay on them his Curse, p. 153. Consider how they
blaspheme, they adore their Doctors and Priests, and the Messiah also, the Son
of Mary, who commanded them to worship One God alone; there is but one sole
God, there is nothing equal to him: they would extinguish the Ligqt of God, but
he shall not suffer them.

How the Naked Gospel agrees with the Alchoran in most of these particulars,
might be shown; but he that reads it will be soon satisfied, that it is a
Commentary on that Text.

But since the Doctor, or some one for him, has written his Vindication, I
shall briefly consider what is said in Defense of those Propositions condemned
by the University.

And first I observe, That in these Propositions, and what may be added to them
from the Naked Gospel, the quintessence of the Arian and Socinian Controversies
is contracted and composed, Secundum Artem; and by him, or some other on his
behalf, recommended as a safe means to promote a General Comprehension, and an
enlarged Charity; but to the destruction of Catholic Verity.

Now because these Propositions are not only published in several Impressions
of that Libel, but defended by the Author, or some other on his behalf; and the
Gangreen begins to spread among profane and unstable Wits, which too much
abound, it seemed necessary to provide an Antidote against those old Errors, to
which the Author has given a new Resurrection, like that which he maintains of
our Bodies, not in the same form, but another more agreeable to his new
Divinity and Philosophy, and equally opposite to the written Gospel, as
understood by the Primitive Fathers, and received by the Church of England.

The difference which the Author fancieth to be made in the Gospel, is the
preaching of the Doctrine of the Eternal Deity of our Savior, which this
Author explodes, as not to be comprehended by his Reason, and not agreeable to
that Natural Religion which he makes the Foundation of the Gospel; now, if
there be any alteration made, it is by those which have denied the Eternal
Deity of our Savior; for as I said, while St. John was yet living, Ebion and
Cerinthus began that Heresy. Ebion taught, That Christ was a mere Man, and had
no existence before he was born into the World; of which the Church of Ephesus
then complained to St. John, desiring him to write in Confutation of that
Heresy; and Justin Martyr, and Ireneus brand this Heresy, as did Ignatius
before them, and St. John before him; who called such as denied that Jesus
Christ was come in the Flesh, Deceivers, and Antichrists.

Cerinthus held a pre-existence of Reason, or the Word, which he says descended
on our Savior at his Baptism, and ascended from him into Heaven, when he was
crucified; for which Opinions, St. John meeting him in a Bath, fled from his
company, as fearing least the Walls of the Bath, wherein he was, might fall on
him.

Against these Heresies St. John being importuned, wrote his Gospel purposely
to assert the Divine Essence of the Son of God, as he tells us, chapter 20.31.
These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life through his name. And
besides the Historical part of that Gospel, the whole is one continued Argument
for the Confirmation of this Truth, which we shall have occasion to speak of
more at large; and shall only observe here what he says, 1 Job. 5.20. We know
that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, to know him
that is true. This is the true God, and eternal life: And in the 2 Epistle, v.
7. Many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver, and an Antichrist. And 1 Job. 5.7. he
plainly asserts the Doctrine of the Trinity, There are three that bear witness
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One.
It is very observable what Grotius says in the Preface of his Annotations on
St. John, The Ancients, among other causes of St. John 's Writing this Gospel,
do generally assign this as the chief, that he might apply a Remedy to that
Poison, which at that time was dispersed in the Church among all that professed
the Name of Christ: which could be no other, than the denying of the Eternal
Deity of the Son of God, which that Evangelist asserted.

Now though it may seem a superfluous work to enquire into the Opinions of the
Author of the Naked Gospel, after the Censure of the University, the reading
whereof may satisfy any Judicious and Impartial Reader, yet least I should
seem to make an Adversary where I find none, and to fight against my own
Shadow, as against some formidable Monster, I shall 1. Consider what the Author
has said to clear himself from the Reasons of that Decree. 2. Make some few
general Remarks on the design of the Naked Gospel. And 3ly, More particularly
Examine the Opinions asserted, or insinuated by the Author.

In his Vindication, p. 4. he declares his Faith to be no other than that of
the Church of England, and renounceth any word, which in that, or any other
Book may seem to contradict it.

The Contradiction is not seeming, but real, and differs as much as Time does
from Eternity; or the Doctrine of the Church of England, of which I have given
an account from the Arrian and Socinian Heresies; if he renounceth any thing,
he must renounce almost all; but how he will do it, so as to remove the Scandal
from the Church of England, which, as Monsieur Jeru observes, is now conceived
to be tainted with Socinian Doctrines, from such Writings as this of the Naked
Gospel, I cannot well conceive, unless he disclaim his being a true Son of the
Church of England.

He says, The Author of that Book is so far from denying the Divinity of
Christ, that he plainly asserts it. But what Divinity is that? is it the
Eternal Godhead, and Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father? This is not
to be found, yea, it is the whole design of the Author to impugn it; he grants
him (no other Divinity than the Arrians did, of a created God, nor indeed so
much; for he speaks of our Savior under the same Notions and Expressions as
Socinus and Smal^ius did, granting him a Divinity but not a Deity, of which
more hereafter.

But he would prove his Assertion from these words of his, That the Author of
our Gospel was not only great but infinite: But the Question is, whom he means
by our Author, whether God the Father the prime, or God the Son as the
immediate Author; for thus the Moral Law was given by Moses, yet God was the
prime Author; and in this sense an Arrian may, and the Socinians do say Christ
wa^ the Messenger of God, and received all his Commands from God, and so the
Author of the Gospel in the Socinians sense is infinite; for th^s Crellius on
Heb. 2. v. 3. says, Christ was not the first Author of the Gospel, as neither
were the Angels of the Law, but God was the prime Author of both the Law and
Gospel, though the Law was published by Angels, and the Gospel by Christ; so
that Christ was no otherwise a Lawgiver in publishing the Gospel, than Moses
was in proclaiming the Law: which Crellius in his Book de Uno Deo endeavors to
maintain at large; and in the same sense I fear the Doctor calls the Author of
our Gospel infinite, viz. that God the Father is the Author of the Gospel. But
being conscious that some Expressions unsuitable to so plain an Assertion as
that of the Infinity of the Author of the Gospel, might drop from his hasty
Pen, he says p. 5. that such hasty Expressions ought to be thereby (i. e.) by
the word Infinity, to be interpreted.

Answ. And so it might, if he had applied it to the Person of Christ, but he
tells us the occasion of that Expression was, Chapter 11. from the assurance of a
Christian grounded on the Resurrection, beyond the hopes of a Heathen, and the
Persons in whom the one and the other believed: Now whom do the Arrians believe
to be the Author of that Resurrection, but God the Father, whom they often
affirm to have raised our Savior from the Dead; and its no wonder if they own
his Infinity, this being the substance of what they say is necessary to be
believed, viz. That God raised Jesus from the Dead, and to confess him our
Lord; denying that Christ arose by any power of his own.

Therefore he would not have his Expressions imputed to his settled Opinion, but
his too great have and heat in a Question which did nor concern the Divinity of
Christ, but the manner of his Generation; the former (as he adds) was on both
sides acknowledged, the latter was the whole subject of the Dispute, which
Constantines Letter so often calls Silly.

Answ. If the Divinity of Christ in its proper sense, (i. e.) his Deity, had
been acknowlegded, I believe there had been no dispute concerning the manner of
his Generation; the Question was, Whether he were Consubstantial with the
Father or not; not concerning the manner or modus, but whether he were (...),
of the same Substance with the Father?

If the Dispute in Constantine's time had been only about the manner of
Christ's Generation, the Doctor might have taken in the Parenthesis of Dr.
Wallis, (that it is not distinctly declared by God, nor are we able fully to
comprehend it, nor is it necessary for us to know) but it is necessary to know
that this Generation was from Eternity, that we may ground our Faith and Hope
in him that is God, and so is able to save to the utmost all that come to God
by him, he being the Lord, (i. e.) Jehovah) our Righteousness. What the
Controversy in the Nicene Council against Arrius was, and how it was decided,
shall appear anon.

2ly, He says, the design of his Book was only to disable Humane Authority from
imposing on our Belief more Doctrines than Christ and his Apostles declared to
be necessary. Here are two bold Strokes; first the Doctor will determine what
those necessary Doctrines are, and then he will disable Magistrates from
imposing any other; and so we shall lose the great Fundamental, the Eternal
Godhead of Christ, which his Naked Gospel does impugn.

3ly, Another design of this Author, he says is, By a due confinement of Faith
to enlarge Charity. Ans. The Apostles method to enlarge Charity, was not to
confine, but propagate the Faith once delivered to the Saints, as the best
motive to Charity, we have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, but (such as the
Author is) the Socinians, deny the Lord that bought them, destroy the
Foundation of Faith in the Godhead, and satisfaction of Christ, and wholly
disannul Baptism, and so cut asunder this triple Cord that obliges Christians
to Charity; and indeed as they acknowledge not the one Lord, so they nullify
the one Faith in him, and make the one Baptism of no effect, and therefore have
utterly destroyed Charity.

The next charge of exposing the Divinity of Christ, he says p. 5. has no
other evidence but this, That he is sometimes styled a crucified Vagabond; and
this he says is but once, viz. in the Introduction. But was it not said with as
little modesty, p. 21. c. 2. That he was a Vagabond Galilean; which expressions
by the Rule of Fortiter calumniare aliquod adherebit, will not excuse him, by
saying he personated an Infidel; such playing with Holy Things, is much worse
than his play at push Pin.

P. 6. he protests, That in his whole life he never spent so much time in
reading Socinian Books, as put altogether would amount to one whole day. By
spending so much time, I suppose he means he did not lose or mispend it, but it
was well bestowed; or perhaps he made the Arrian Controversy his chief Study,
which is as contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as the Socinian.
So Socinus protested he never read Arrius, Credat. Judaeus.

I would here remind the Doctor of the excellent Advice of the incomparable
King Charles the First, mentioned by himself, in his Preface, I would have you,
as I hope you are already, well grounded and settled in your Religion, the best
Profession whereof I have ever esteemed that of the Church of England, in which
you have been Educated, etc. It is well known that the Doctor was not only
educated in the Church of England, but to that very time when he wrote his
Naked Gospel, that is till he was sixty five Years old, as he computes his Age,
he has lived in the Communion of that Church; we may therefore marvel, how he
was so soon removed from him that called him to the Grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel (as St. Paul expresses it, Gal. 1.6.) which would pervert the
Gospel of Christ: Did he not judiciously make the Doctrine of the Church of
England his own, as that Blessed King advised? Did he not by his own judgment
and reason, but by his hand only seal to the Bond which Education had written,
or take it up only on Men's Customs or Traditions, as that good King speaks; if
so, he was guilty of great Oscitancy in the matter of Religion, on which
Salvation depends; or if after so long Profession of the Doctrine of the
Church, he began to entertain some doubts of the truth of it, he was guilty of
great Levity in so weighty a Matter, not to bestow many Years in the
Examination of the Errors of that Doctrine which he forsook, and embracing
another vastly and dangerously differing from it, without bestowing so much as
one Day's reading the Grounds and Reasons of it. On supposition therefore, that
the Doctor has embraced either the Arrian or Socinian Doctrines, he was
unaccountably rash (there being so many Books written by learned Men of both
Parties) to leave a Religion which he had so long professed, and had time to
enquire into, and without more than one Days study, in a Case of such
consequence, to fall off to a contrary Opinion. This may tempt Men to think it
was done in a Pet; some may think, because he was not removed to a higher
Station, as he intimates, somewhere, the Archbishop promised he should in some
short time, but being not done, he thought to remind him of his Promise by
Dedicating that Book of a Constant Communicant to his Grace; yet after all he
was left in that Place where he spent three Pence of his own to every Penny of
his Preferment: For my part I have a better opinion of the Doctor, and that he
had long studied, and often discoursed with learned Men concerning the Socinian
Controversy, and that the Naked Gospel was the product of many Years spent in
Reading, Conference and Meditation on those Points, before he came to a
Resolution. For I have heard of a Doctor of his Age, who often discoursed with
his Father, a Reverend Divine, concerning some Arminian, Pelagian, and Socinian
Points, and in heat of disputation did tell his Father, That it would not be
well till we came up to the Socinian Doctrine; this was many years since. And
what means his sitting down when the Athanasian Creed was said, but his
contempt of it.

The next Charge is, That the Godhead of our Savior is declared to be an
impertinent and dangerous Speculation. This he thinks is discharged by the
former distinction, of the manner of the Generation, etc. and adds, That those
Fathers who were the most earnest Assertors of the Doctrine of Christ's
Divinity, (he does not say of his Eternal Deity) were also the most severe
Censurers of Curiosity concerning the manner of his Generation. And our Author
is a Son of those Fathers, who granted a Created Deity to our Savior, and most
severely censured those that held his Eternal Generation, as being guilty of
Polytheism, which is often intimated by him. This is the sum of the Author's
Defense.

I would willingly know of what sort of Divinity it is, that he ascribes to our
Savior, because I find that the Arrians acknowledge, that he is a Created God;
and the Socinians grant a Divinity, but not so much as a Created Deity. I see
no more granted him, as to his Person, by the Socinians than by the Turks,
which acknowledge he was a Divine Man, and a true Prophet, or Messenger of God:
This Divinity he learnt of Smalcius, as I shall show hereafter, or of Crellius,
as is already shown, whose words as well as sense he so often repeats, as will
give great cause to the Reader to conclude, that he spent more than one whole
Day in reading the Socinian Controversies.

The general Remarks which I shall make on the Naked Gospel, are as follow:

1. That whereas the Author pretends the special Design of it is to enlarge
Charity, yet that Charity is only designed for a Toleration of the Arrian and
Socinian Doctrines, and he sharply reflects on all such as he perceived to be
averse from such his enlarged Charity, p. 39. Col. 1. If Bishop Alexander the
first Author of the Nicety, thought fit to tolerate the Arrians, we can ill
prentend to Charity if we allow them no title to God's Pardon, or his Church's
Communion.

P. 57. of his interpolated Edition, he pleads, That nothing can be more odious
than to persecute as Heretics and Malefactors, all such as should refuse to be
imposed on, viz. by the Bishops that asserted the Trinity.

P. 11. of his Vindication, he recommends the charitable Heresy of the
Latitudinarians, under which term he may comprehend all sort of Heresies, an
universal Toleration without any reserve, which has been pleaded for in former
times.

2. That through the whole Book it is not so much the manner of the Generation
that is insisted on, but the Eternity of it is denied, and to this end the
Arguments of the Arrians are applauded, and the Reasons and Scriptures that
affirm it, are either suppressed, or ridiculed.

To begin with the Propositions referred to in the Decree, he tells us, That
Mahomet did profess all the Articles of the Christian Faith: but Mahomet did
not profess the Eternal Generation of the Son of God; therefore this is no
Article of the Christian Faith, in the Doctor's Opinion.

What the Charity of the Socinians is, toward such as hold the Doctrine of the
Church of England, we may learn from Smalcius, at the end of his Book,
concerning the Divinity of Christ: We doubt not to affirm boldly, that not one
of all those who believe Jesus Christ of himself God, can ever by any means
have certain hope of Eternal Life, by virtue of his Opinion concerning Christ.
Hence they call us, Polytheists, Antichristians; and say, we are not worthy of
the Name of Christians. This is Charity enlarged.

In the same Paragraph he says, When by nice and hot Disputes, concerning,
especially the Second and Third Persons of the Trinity, the Minds of the People
had been long confounded, so that, to vulgar understandings, the Doctrine of
the Trinity appeared no less guilty of Polytheism, than that of Image Worship
did of Idolatry; then was there a tempting opportunity offered to the Impostor,
and he laid hold on it to set up himself for a reformer of such corruptions as
were both too gross to be justified, and too visible to be denied. Now what did
this Impostor reform, but the Doctrine of the Trinity, denying the Godhead of
the Son and Holy Ghost, as such corruptions which were too gross to be
justified, and too visible to be denied. It is a credible History of those
Times, which I have related, that one Sergius a Monk, and some other Apostate
Christians, joined with Mahomet in compiling the Alchoran; these retained so
much veneration for our Savior as to grant him what the Socinians do, a kind
of Divinity; for they acknowledge him to be a true Prophet, and so he may be
called Divine, as we call St. John, by way of Eminency, The Divine: and so our
Socinian Reformers agree with the Mohammedan, some say the Doctrine of the
Trinity was laid aside to make way for the Turks to become Christians; but we
find a contrary effect, that many Christians turn Turks.

I hope the Reader is satisfied, by what I collected out of the Alchoran, that
Mahomet and his Arian Genius purposely designed to overthrow the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and to represent our Savior as a mere Man, though as a Messenger
of God. And what less is implied in these words of the Doctor's, That to vulgar
understandings the Doctrine of the Trinity appeared no less guilty of
Polytheism, than that of Image Worship did of Idolatry?

The next Proposition is This, When the great Question concerning the eternity
of his (i. e.) Christ's Godhead first embroiled the World, Constantine
condemned it as a silly Question, fitter for Fools and Children, than for
Priests or wise Men. Note here; The Question was not concerning the Manner of
the Generation of our Savior, but the Eternity of his Godhead, and how justly
this Censure of Constantine's was past on that Question, this Author says, we
may discover in three particulars. 1. It was impertinent to our Lord's Design.
2. Fruitless to the Contemplator's own purpose. 3. It is dangerous. This is
Socinianism in grain.

Now, because the Author would excuse himself from this Charge, by pleading,
that he only relates the Opinion of Constantine, the consideration of that good
Emperor's management and determination of this great Question, is more strictly
and fully to be weighed. This Author tells us, p. 31. Col. 2. Such was the
judgment of the great Constantine, when the Game was first set on foot. How it
was then by the Arian party represented to him, is not evident: they dealt
subtily, but after that, he had called the Nicene Council, and was fully
informed of the state of the Question; he was so far from thinking it silly and
vain, that he wrote Letters to several Churches to inform them, that after
mature consideration, the Opinion of Arius was condemned, branded the Arians
with the Name of Porphyrians, caused their Books to be burnt, and threatened
death to any that should conceal them; and hearing of the miserable end of that
wretched man, as it is described by Socrates, he made it his business to
extirpate it. No doubt the Doctor knew these passages related of Constantine,
as well as those which he mentions, calling it a Silly Question, and fitter for
Boys than for Priests; what can he plead then for proclaiming the one, and
wholly suppressing the other, which were Constantine's second and best
Thoughts, and his settled Judgment after mature deliberation?

Yet our Author still ridicules the Athanasian Doctrine, as a Pushpin
Controversy, and says, that Leonas reprimanded that party, with, Go and play
the Fools at home.

Leonas was an Arian, sent by Constantius the Arian Emperor, to awe the
Council; nor did he bid them go and play the Fools at home, I find no such
thing in the place quoted by the Doctor, viz. Socrates, l. 2. c. 23. But there
is a full Character of this Leonas, in Soz. l. 4. c. 22. how that Acacius an
Arian Bishop, held private Conference with him, and consulted for that
Interest, but could not prevail; insomuch, that when both Parties were met in
his Lodgings, and he found the Arian Party like to be baffled, he bid them in
these words, (...) (...); which I think no good Man would translate, Go and
play the Fools at home, Socrates l. 2. c. 40. which signifies only, Go and talk
it out in the Church. Leonas supposing they would be more modest and reverent
in that Holy Place, than in his House. But of this the Historian observes in
the next chap. 42, That Acacius and Eudoxius made great advantage; For (says
he) they perceiving the Indignation of the Emperor against Macedonius, and
other Heretics, deposed many of them, and advanced Eudoxius to the Bishopric
of Constantinople; for the contention was not so much for Religion, as for
Preferment; the contending Parties having deposed each other, and Acacius and
Eudoxius with their Party did especially endeavor to depose the adverse Party,
and coined their New Creeds to that end, being so confident of the Emperor's
Favor; and hence grew those various Confessions of some Councils under
Constantius, whereof, p. 34. c. 4. the Doctor says, That Socrates reckoned no
less than Nine, (not Nine Councils, but Confessions; of which the Historian
gives this particular Account, (calling them a Labyrinth of Expositions) two of
which were set forth at Antioch; a third by Narcissus, and some Bishops with
him; the fourth by Eudoxius; three others at Sirmium, one of which was read at
Ariminum; the eighth was that of Acacius, published at Selucia, which was the
same that was published at Constantinople, with an Appendix, forbidding the use
of the words Substance and Hypostasis.

Now all these were conceived and brought forth in a few Years together, under
Constantius; and by the influence of that Arian Emperor, who made it his
business to advance and propagate that Heresy: But what are these scuffles for
Interest and Promotion, (which though favored by an Arian Emperor, were not
only strenuously opposed, but generally defeated) to the constant and unanimous
Decrees of the four first General Councils, and many others of the Eastern
Churches, and by all the Western or Latin Churches, who constantly asserted the
Doctrine of the Trinity.

I cannot better compare these Alterations in Matters of Faith, which were made
after the Nicene Council, than to the various Revolutions that happened in this
Kingdom, after the Dethroning of King Charles I. of blessed Memory; wherein the
several Factions, as they got into Power, strove not so much for Religion,
(which was always made the pretense) as for Interest and Advantage, to the
overthrow both of a well-establish'd Government and Religion, which now,
through the Blessing of God, are returned to their ancient Channels; and may
they ever bear down all opposition, and run on without interruption to make
glad the City of God.

I cannot omit one Remark more in this place, namely, how partial the Doctor is
in relating the History of Athanasius and Arius. He sums up in few words,
whatever Philostorgus and Sandius the Arians had suggested against Athanasius,
How he was banished by the Council at Tire, Antioch, Sirmium and Ariminum; but
is ashamed to mention those Sham-Plots that were contrived against him, and
retorted upon his adversaries, to their perpetual Infamy, as Dr. Cave and Dr.
Sherlock have discovered; nor have we a word how at the Council of Millan,
where the Catholics were forced to condemn Athanasius, Constantius drawing his
Sword, and telling them, That he himself accused Athanasius, and ought to be
believed, and banished such as would not consent to it. But as for Arius he
pleads for him, as if he had been as much a Messenger sent from God as our
Savior in his opinion was; as much does he speak in defense of Arius. That he
was justified by such as had condemned him by the Emperor, and a Council at
Jerusalem, p. 37. c. 2. And Athasius threatened to be deposed, if he did not
receive him into communion, though the Doctor confesses he would not admit the
word Consubstantial into his Creed. That the Eastern Bishops (but such as the
Doctor says, p. 38. c. 2.) were generally Arians, took Arius his part against
Athanasius, and condemned him in the Council of Sardica. But all this trouble
was not occasioned upon the account of Athanasius his Faith, but the Arian
perfidy, who falsely accused and maliciously condemned him. Wherefore it will be
seasonable in this place to give you a short Account of what the most
Authentic Historians have related; which you shall have presently.

In the third Proposition, he says, That the Evangelists in setting down our
Lord's Genealogy, do not satisfy, but amuse us; and professing to instruct us,
do doubly disappoint us: first by deriving it from a wrong Father, and then by
destracting us two several ways; which, he says, is a warning against searching
after the Eternal Generation. As supposing it to be needless, and therefore
impossible to prove him derived from David, (though the Scripture calls him
both David's Son, and David's Lord) he concludes it to be impossible to
understand his Eternal Generation. And thus the knowledge both of the
Generation of our Savior as Man, as well as that as God, are both concluded to
be impossible to be known, because they are above our Understandings. So that
he first raises a doubt of our Savior's Descent from David, according to the
Flesh, that he may make that a ground of his Eternal Generation by the Father.

In the fourth Proposition he intimates, That a Heathen might justify
Polytheism, at the same rate as the Athanasian Fathers have done the Doctrine
of the Trinity; and that the Papists may justify their no-less-beloved Mystery
of Transubstantiation (as he calls it): and affirms, with them, That the
Scripture is no less express for the one, than the other; and the
Contradictions no less gross in the one, than the other. And then ridicules
that learned and ingenuous Tract, which was lately Printed, to show what better
grounds the Doctrine of the Trinity has in the Scripture, than that of
Transubstantiation, for want of Argument to confute it: As if we could as
easily apprehend the Nature of Things immaterial, and removed above our Reason,
as well as our Sense, as we can of those corporeal Beings, such as the
consecrated Hosts, which contradict both Reason and Sense.

In the Fifth Proposition he affirms, That the Questions concerning the Trinity
were decided by no other Evidence, but of Imperial and Papal Authority.

The Pope would be much more obliged and grateful to him, than the Church of
England, if he could prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome over all the
Churches, and that in Matters of Faith, as ancient as Constantine.

In the Sixth, That there is danger of Blasphemy, in examining the silly
Question, concerning the Eternity of the Godhead of Christ; and that we have no
firm ground to go upon. But is not that Rule of Vincent Lirinensis, a good
ground, Quod semper quod ubique quod ab omnibus: But in this he joins with
Smalcius, to call us Blasphemers, and Antichristians.

In the Seventh, That the only advantage of the Catholics, is long possession:
That they have so handled matters, as to hide much, and varnish all. That the
Sentence which determined the Controversy in the Council of Nice, was not by
the Merit of the Cause, but the Interest of Parties.

Answ. Long possession of such Truths as have a good Foundation in the
Scripture, is a Title beyond any that pretends against it; when the Universal
Church has in all Ages, (except only a short interruption, under one or two
Arian Princes) judged the Doctrine against the Deity of our Savior, as a
destructive Herosie: If we may thank the Doctor for any thing, it is for
granting us this long possession, even ever since the Gospel was first
published.

In the Eighth Proposition he says, This long and mischievous Controversy was
at last decided by Theodosius; who receiving his Instructions and Baptism from
a Consubstantialist, required all his Subjects to conform to that Religion,
which Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, from the beginning delivered to the
Romans; and which at that time Damasus Bishop of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria
held: and that Church only should be esteemed Catholic, which worshipped the
Divine Trinity with equal Honor: and those which held the contrary, should be
called Heretics, made infamous, and punished. (All this Constantine, and the
Council of Nice had done long before.) He adds, Behold now the ground on which
one of our Fundamental Articles of Faith is built. The meaning of this is, that
it is an Imperial Imposition; to which we shall give an Answer anon.

Prop. 9. What more ridiculously silly, than to build so weighty a Doctrine
upon implicit Faith in two Bishops, partial to their own Sees, whereof the one
gave it Birth, the other Maintenance; and what more odious, than to prosecute
as Heretics and Malefactors, all such as should refuse to be so grossly imposed
on?

Answ. What can be more falsely said, than that this Doctrine has no other
Foundation than what this Author allows it? When it was confirmed by that
famous Council, not as their own Opinions only, but as the constant Doctrine of
the Churches of God in former Ages, grounded on the Holy Scriptures; and
therefore to reflect on it, as the first and most uncharitable Dispute that
ever rent the Christian World, does not become any Christian, much less a true
Son of the Church of England. See p. 55. col. 1.

In the 10th Proposition he affirms, That (on his Premises being considered)
Men may be tempted (as it seems he has been) to number the Athanasian, among
the Roman Doctrines, and to leave it on the same level with the Arrian, equally
unworthy of our Faith and Study.

It appears then, that our Doctor never studied this Doctrine, whereof he has
long been a Professor, so far, as to make it an Article of his Faith; and if
his Pelagian Doctrines and Sermons concerning Original Sin; for which many
learned Men have severely censured him; with which the University was so
offended, as to oblige him to explain, by way of a Recantation; and of his
Opinion of Turkish Devotion, and his Naked Gospel, were duly considered, the
Considerator must be persuaded, that the Doctor had made the Socinian Doctrines
his constant study, and never thought the Catholic Doctrines worthy of his
Study or Faith; or that instead of not bestowing one days study in reading
Socinian Writers, he had not bestowed so much time in reading the Articles or
Liturgy of the Church of England.

In the 11th he says, We cannot think it necessary to Salvation, that every
private Christian, (and by the same reason, that no private Christian) should
believe that as an Article of Faith, which the best Ages of the Church thought
not worth knowing. Which in the Second Edition he thus expresses: An Opinion
which so many good and wise Men as lived within three hundred years after
Christ, were so far from believing as matter of Faith, that they did not
receive it as matter of certainty, nor perhaps of credibility.

Answ. St. John lived many Years after Christ, he not only received it, but
asserted it throughout his Gospel and Epistles against Ebion, and Cerinthus.
St. Ignatius calls them Serpents, that did deny it.

Polycarp called Marcion, The first begotten of the Devil, for believing the
contrary; these, I trust, every true Son of the Church of England will
acknowledge to have been good and wise Men.

But you shall hear anon of an Army of Martyrs that have sealed it with their
Blood, and what a fruitful Seed of this saving Doctrine, the Blood of these
Martyrs has been in the Church of God.

That learned and seasonable Collection of Mr. Bull's, concerning the Judgment
of the Fathers in the first 300 Years after our Savior, shows abundantly, what
was their belief concerning the Deity of our Savior, which may silence the
Dispute, and save the labor of any farther Collection; an account whereof, for
my Country-mens sake, who either understand not the Latin Tongue, or cannot
compass the Book, I shall present to my Reader, and refer the Learned to the
Book itself, where they may find all their Testimonies vindicated, and
irrefragably asserted, against the Objection of Sandius, Petavius, and other
Socinian Authors, in their proper place.

In the Twelfth Proposition he insinuates, That the Positions of the
Athanasians seems to infer Polytheism: and when they deny the consequence, he
says, They contradict the Rules of Reasoning; and that they do so, because they
allow Reason no hearing in Mysteries of Faith; and that this cannot excuse them
from being Heretics in Religion or Logic.

Whereas for the Arrians he pleads, That they profess to believe of Christ
whatever himself or his Apostles have spoken, and wherever one expression
seems to contradict another, they take such a course to reconcile them, as the
Laws and Customs of all the World direct. This shows plainly what Party he
adheres to.

The Rule which he gives us for the justification of the Arians is this: It is
frequent for Rhetoric to exceed, but never to diminish the Grammatical
Character of a Person, whose Honor the Writer professes to advance; and
therefore they think it more reasonable, that those expressions which exalt our
Savior's Person to an equality with the Father, should stoop to those which
speak him inferior; rather than those which speak him inferior, should be
strained up to those which speak him equal.

As if Christ and his Apostles, which wrote the History of Christ, did not deal
more faithfully in relating the truth concerning his Person, as being one and
equal to the Father; than those Rhetoricians, who to advance the Doctrine of
Arius, would depress him beneath himself, and leave him as Naked as the New
Gospel does, stripping him of all those glorious Attributes that should support
his Worship, and depriving the Church of that satisfaction which he made for
it, when he redeemed it with his own most precious Blood; which by the Socinian
Doctor's is trampled under foot, and counted a vain thing. These Propositions
will fall under our farther Consideration, of the several Chapters: To which I
now proceed.

Chap. 1. He treats of the Gospel preached by our Savior and his Apostles, as
necessary to Salvation; the Character whereof, is either that of a Covenant, or
a Message. Of the Gospel as a Covenant, he speaks as slightly as short, quoting
only Jer. 31.33. and Heb. 8.8. and says, It is delivered more succinctly, chapter
10.17. This Covenant he says, Leans on the Law of Nature, which also keeps it
firm in its place. Thus the Covenant of Grace is confounded with the Law of
Works, though the Apostle sets them in opposition: We are not under the Law,
but Grace.

That Christ is the Foundation of the Evangelical Covenant, ratified and sealed
by his Blood, the Scripture teaches so plainly, that he that runs may read,
Covenants were wont to be made by Sacrifice, as Dr. Outrede has proved; and so
was this Covenant, it was sealed in the Blood of the Son of God, without which
there could be no remission. The Apostle calls him, the Surety of a better
Covenant, and bringing in a better hope: the first Covenant was, Do this, and
live: the second is, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: And
this Covenant, Dat quod Jubet, it assists us in willing and doing what is
required, Heb. 8.6. It Is a better Covenant, established on better Promises. And
Heb. 8.10. and Romans 16. This is my Covenant, I will put my Law into their
hearts, and write them in their minds; and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People: and I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

But he commends especially the Character of the Gospel as a Message, and so
makes our Savior only an eminent Prophet, that came to advance the Natural
Religion a little higher than other Prophets had done; his design being no
other than to advance Natural Religion to a higher perfection, by nobler
Precepts and richer Promises, as he says. This is no more than what the Turks
will grant in Honor of our Savior.

But there is another Notion of the Gospel more common than the other two,
though purposely omitted by the Doctor; which is, as we render it, the New
Testament of our Savior, who was not only (as Socinus says) a Witness of that
Testament, but the Testator himself; that Testament whereby Christ makes us
Heirs of all that he has purchased for us; that Testament which was sealed by
his Blood, and took effect by his Death and Resurrection for the Salvation of
all that believe in him, and obey his Commandments; Grotius on the word (...),
makes it parallel with the Hebrew (...), which he says is derived from (...),
signifying to kill or cut down.

But as he observes, the Gospel is not called (...), a Covenant, in a strict
sense, wherein two Parties do mutually Covenant, but (...), (i. e.) the Will or
Testament of a Superior, who adds Rewards to the performance of his Will; and
it is called, the New Testament, being a Covenant of Grace, not of Debt upon
our Works, but Mercy upon our Faith: So that Grotius concludes, the most proper
Notion of the Gospel, is that of a Testament, by which the Heir is obliged
under certain Conditions, and by way of a Trust reposed in him; and he defines
it to be the Will of Christ confirmed to us by his Death, whereby we have a
Right to all his Promises, on performance of his Commandments.

But the Doctor carefully avoids any word that might imply the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction, and therefore as he wholly suppresseth that of a
Testament, which has its effect from the Death of the Testator, (as our
Savior often calls it, the New Testament in his Blood, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor.
11.25.) so he slights that of a Covenant, as being wont to be confirmed by the
Death of the Sacrifice (for in all Languages, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, as well
as in English, to strike a Covenant, imported the Sanction of it, by shedding
of Blood) and prefers the Notion of a Message, as if Christ had done no more
for us than Moses, or any of the Prophets, (i. e.) only declared the Precepts
of God, which is pure Socinianism.

Chap. 1. p. 1. Col. 2. he says, The design of the Gospel is no other, than the
advancement of Primitive Natural Religion to a higher perfection: for which he
alleges those words of St. John, 1 John 1.3. These things we write unto you,
that you may have fellowship with us, etc. The Patriarchs knew only the Father,
but our Fellowship is with the Father and the Son; as therefore in the face of
Jesus Christ we see more of the Father's goodness, so are we thereby obliged to
higher strains of love to him, and one another, which is the sum of Natural
Religion. And again, p. 2. Col. 1. The design of the Gospel is to exalt us to
the highest perfection of the Natural Law, by making us perfect, as our Father
which is in heaven is perfect: This is the Authentic General Test, (says he)
whereby every Doctrine must be tried, that claims our entertainment as a
Gospel truth. And thus he equalleth Moral Virtue with Cristian Faith, and
teaches Pelagianism; which makes the strength of Natural Endeavors sufficient
to Salvation, without the special Grace of Christ, as if that were not
necessary to humble us in the sense of our Sins, to mortify our Lusts,
inlighten our Minds, subdue our perverse Wills, and purify our Hearts; they
may be good Moral Men that conform to the Rules of Reason, but no good
Christians, unless they are assisted by the Grace of the Holy Spirit; they may
have a form of Godliness, but not the power thereof.

He greatly extols Natural Religion, affirming, That the Faith which the Gospel
requires, had its Foundation in Natural Religion.

Natural Faith, as he says, is proposed as the Mother of Evangelical, p. 14. c.
2. p. 14. Col. 2. I have proved, says he, that Faith in God is a Duty of
Natural Religion, a Moral Virtue, a participation of the Divine Nature in one
of God's Attributes, his Justice to be valued as self-good, etc. P. 1. Col. 2.
He makes the Law of Nature the Foundation on which the New Covenant so leans,
as to be kept firm in its place. I fear that the Reason of his thus extolling
Natural Religion, is, because that in its highest perfection it can attain only
to the knowledge of the Unity of the Godhead, (though in the depraved State of
Nature, Men generally worshipped many False, instead of the One true God) but
this Natural Religion suits better with the design of Arius, than of the
Gospel, and therefore the Author espouseth and magnifies it.

He adds, That as Abraham is proposed as the Father of the faithful, Natural
Faith is also proposed as the Mother of Evangelical. Here therefore we must
enquire, whether the Faith of Abraham were merely a Natural Faith, and he had
no Revelations that begat and strengthened his Faith.

The Arians grant, that as our Savior says, Before Abraham was I am, that
Christ was before the Creation of the World, the Lamb slain from the beginning,
that by him the World was made; yet the Doctor declares his opinion, that the
Patriarchs had the knowledge of God the Father only, but it is like that of
Abailardus, contrary to the opinion of all other Doctors of the Church, and the
tenor of the Scriptures; for how then is it said, that Abraham rejoiced to see
my day, and saw it, the day of his Incarnation in Isaac's wonderful Conception,
his Death and Resurrection in Abraham's readiness to sacrifice him, and God's
delivering him from death, from whence Abraham received him in a Figure or Type
of Christ, Hebr. 11.19.

Tertullian thus expounds that place, That as Christ being a man was after
Abraham, so as God he was before Abraham, and as being a man he was the son of
David, but as God he was David 's Lord, as man he was born into the world, as
God he made the world. Tertul. de Trinitat.

Page 9. Col. 2. He takes occasion to mention the two great Institutions of our
Savior, viz. Baptism, and the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; these he calls
Positive Rites, which he, (i. e.) Christ, appointed, thereby to engage us to
profess our selves his Disciples, and are not Parts of his Covenant, but Badges
of his Followers, and Acknowledgments of our Homage to his Person. These
Rituals, says he, we shall not neglect: yet I find not one word of the
Eucharist; all that he says of Baptism is, Page 22. Col. 2. That the Design of
Baptism, as he had said before, was an open Profession of Faith, in defiance to
the World and all its Powers, forgetting what he had said before, on our
Savior's words, and Commission to his Disciples, whom he sent to baptize, He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, not simply as he notes, he that
believes, but he that believes and is baptized, and as the Apostle, Hebr. 6.
reckons Baptism among the Fundamentals, so it has the Characters which our
Author requires in a Fundamental, viz. a Precept with a Promise annexed, shall
be saved, yet he thinks it but a Ceremony and Badge of outward profession.

I cannot but take notice how the Doctor pretending to be an Advocate for
Infant Baptism, turns Prevaricator, and instead of giving them a right to it,
robs them of the benefits thereof; he says indeed, that the Church may upon
small security from other sureties admit any Infant for a Member, (i. e.) of
such a Society as do profess the Faith of Christ; and by his argument they may
(as well omit as) admit the Baptism of Children; for, says he, since the Gospel
is the established Religion, and the Profession of the very Parents makes
great odds against any danger of the contrary, the Church may, etc. So that the
Profession of the Parents may supersede the small security of other Sureties,
and if there be no other end of Baptism but to engage Infants to the Profession
of Faith in Christ, it may be omitted till they are adult, or if they should
die before, they who are not baptized are in no worse condition, than they who
are baptized.

And is not our Author deeply baptized into the Sentiments of the Socinians in
all this, and become a Disciple of them, and the Antipedobaptists? A Son of the
Church of England is taught, that Baptism is generally necessary to Salvation.
That it is certain by God's Word, that Children which are baptized, dying
before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved, in the Rubric after
Baptism; and in the Catechism, Baptism is defined to be an outward and visible
Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself
as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof; and
the benefit of it is this, That being by nature born in Sin and Children of
Wrath, we are thereby made the Children of Grace; or as it is more largely
expressed, the baptized are made Members of Christ, Children of God, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. But the Socinians reason cannot apprehend
how this can be.

As to the other Sacrament, one Egg is not better like another, than his
Discourse of the Lord's Supper is with that of Smalcius, in the Doctor's Book
called the Constant Communicant, which he that reads will find to be but a
Comment on Smalcius his Text, who, as generally the Socinians do, teach that
this Sacrament which they call a Rite, was instituted only for a Remembrance of
the Death of Christ, not that we receive any new benefit by it, or that any
thing is therein conveyed or sealed to us; and so the words of Consecration are
interpreted by the Doctor, as by a Socinian, thus, (i. e.) This whole action
which is now doing is my Body which is given for you, (i. e.) signifies my
giving myself to Death for your Salvation, so that ye ought always to
commemorate my Death by this Rite or Ceremony. And Socinus plainly denies,
that the Sacraments are strengthners of our Faith, or seals whereby the
Promises of God are confirmed to us, or the strength of heavenly Grace
increased.

The Doctor also calls the Sacraments Rites, makes the Lord's Supper only a
Grace-cup, to be commended to one another after a Feast, and breaking some
Bread prepared for that use; and therefore we need not dread to be constant
Communicants, or to be precise in our Reverence at it, as if he would have us
forbear kneeling, as the Socinians do, lest we should be thought to Adore. On a
design to deny that there is the presence of Christ's Body or Blood in any
sense, or that any Grace or Promise is thereby conveyed or sealed to us, these
things are some of them obscurely, and some of them too plainly asserted in
that Book.

One general Remark more, which I formerly mentioned is, That he often speaks
of a Divinity of Christ, but never of his Deity, which is noted to be
studiously done by the Socinians, that though they grant our Savior a kind of
Divinity, as a Man of God, yet will not honor him with the title of a Deity,
as God and Man; wherein they deal with Christ as the Heathen dealt with their
Hero's, as Servius notes on Virgil, Deos vocabant perpetuos, Divos ex Hominibus
factos; or as we call our ancient Writers, Divus Angustinus. This is observed
by Cloppenburgh against Smalcius, that he allowed our Savior to be (...), a
Partaker of the Divine Nature, which St. Peter speaks of 2 Pet. 1.4. which may
be attributed to all holy Men. Smalcius placing in his Frontispiece the 9th
Verse of Col. 2. keeps to this word, and thus renders it, In Christ dwelt all
the fullness of the Divinity bodily: on which Cloppenburgh observes, that with
Smalcius the Deity and Divinity do differ as much as Infinite and Finite. And
it is to be feared, that the Doctor has the same Notion, though not only our
Translation, but Pagnine and Arias Montanus read, as we do, the Fullness of the
Godhead, etc. for he still keeps to the word Divinity, when he speaks of
Christ, as Smalcius did before him.

Another Remark is, his depraving the nature and necessity of Evangelical
Faith, and setting Reason and Natural Religion above and against it.

Here, first, I remark how well the Doctor agrees with Volkelius in his
Discourse of Faith, There are, says the Doctor, but two Articles of Faith at
most, and sometime they are reduced to one, and either of them Faith and
Repentance, There are, says Volkelius, two general Precepts of the Gospel,
Faith and Repentance, which are sometime joined in one Precept, and sometime in
distinct Precepts, De fide. And he mentions the same of the Gospel as our
Doctor often does, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. But then Volkelius by this Faith means an effectual opperative Faith,
(which all that profess to believe both these Articles have not) and to which
we appropriate Salvation; and therefore the Doctor's disputing in general of a
Notional Faith, and a Credulity, as he calls it, and under that Notion
condemns, is a Sophistical way of arguing, much worse than any that Volkelius
himself is guilty of; for he discourses of such a Faith as includes Repentance
and Evangelical Obedience, not such as is the effect of Natural Reason, but of
the Opperation of the Spirit of Patefaction, as he calls it, but more plainly
such as he describes from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man (such as he
says are all that are destitute of the Divine Spirit) does not understand the
things of the spirit of God; and v. 9. Eye has not seen nor ear heard, nor the
mind conceived what things God has prepared for them that love him, but God
has revealed them to us by his spirit, Spiritu Patifactionis, l. 3. c. 14. If
these and other Opinions of Volkelius be compared with our Doctor's Natural
Faith, it would appear to any impartial Reader, that the Doctor is the grosser
Socinian of the two.

On this Subject he spends several Chapters, the Contents of the first is to
show, he says, in what sense Faith justifies; but indeed he shows that it does
not justify; and first he condemns it as the unhappy Occasion of the
Gnosticism which so much troubled St. Paul, by corrupting the Disciples minds
from the Simplicity of the Gospel, which is all he says; and he might as well
charge good Laws with all the Villainies that are committed against them; for
the Scripture had foretold there must be Heresies, and there would be Schisms,
and that men would walk after their own lusts, and deny the Lord that bought
them; though the Evangelical Faith do no more cause these than the Sun does
those Works of Darkness, which are committed in its light. To make amends for
this, he says, 2ly, That it is so happy as to be honored by our Lord and his
Apostles as to be made the sole Condition of our Salvation. But after this he
asks, p. 10. And now what need of Repentance, of running the Gantelope of
Mortification, crossing our Appetites, and afflicting our Souls? As if the
Doctrine of Faith did not include or presuppose Repentance, or as if any sort
of Repentance were available without Faith, and as if the merit of good Works
were a necessary and efficacious Ingredient to the Cause of Justification; for
thus he joins Justification by Works upon account of Natural Religion with
Justification by Faith upon account of the Gospel. Hence in the 12th Page he
makes a large Harangue, Col. 2. What are the great merits of Faith which may
any way entitle it to so great a Reward as Everlasting Life? Whatever can
pretend to worth, must make its claim good by showing how it partaketh the
Nature of God who is the first Good; but to be credulous is so far from the
power of Divine Life, that it is a plain confession of Weakness, it is nothing
else but leaning on another for want of knowledge of its own: The simple
believes every word, but a wise man looks well to his going, said the wisest
of all Men; and experience tells us, that Children and Dotards, Women and
Fools, the Sick and Ignorant are most easy, and by how much any Man is wiser,
by so much he is warier that he be not imposed on. Had it any worth we should
have heard of it in Moses and the Prophets, and the Philosophers would have
allowed it a place among the Virtues: and the Old Testament mentions it but
once or twice, and that not by way of Precept, but occasionly; and what reward
can it possibly deserve, if I believe either I do it on good reason or not, if
I see good reason for my belief, I cannot deserve reward, because no Man can
choose but must necessarily believe as far as reason requires; if I believe
without reason, then I am a Fool, and so far from deserving a reward, that I
deserve blame; and if it seem hard to justify our Lord's wisdom in promising so
great a reward to a performance that deserves none at all, it will appear no
less so to justify his goodness in imposing such a Task no less difficult than
worthless; for whereas no small part of the good Tidings of the Gospel is our
Manumission from the Burden of Moses's Law, the Yoke of Christ will seem harder
of the two; it is easier for a rich Man to sacrifice whole Hecatombs, when he
has Wealth enough to purchase them, than to pull out his Eyes; yet can a Man
easier pull out the eye of his Body, than his Reason, which is not only the eye
but the heart, for it is his very definition, without which he cannot be a Man,
it is God's Image; and the Apostle exhorts us to put on the new Man, which is
renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him: Now that God
should print his Image in our hearts, require us to renew it, yet promise
eternal Life for reward if we deface it, is a saying harder to be believed,
than all the Ceremonies of Moses's Law were to be practiced. This and more,
says he, is objected against Faith in general, and against what Faith, but in
particular against that of the Holy Trinity, and the Eternal Deity of Christ.

Now when the Doctor so industriously suggests all these Objections against
Faith, and takes no care to assoile them, he betrays that Cause which he would
seem to defend, as it will appear in his fourth Chapter.

The Socinians affirm with our Doctor, That nothing must be believed that
cannot be apprehended and understood by Reason. To this we say, that it is not
contrary to any Principle of right Reason, that the Eternal Creator and
Lawgiver, in revealing his will, should propose Articles to be assented to,
upon his own Authority revealing them, though his Creatures cannot by their
Reason apprehend how those Articles should be true: Divine Faith is grounded on
a Divine Testimony as it is Divine, T(...) de Pae(...).
Neque enim quia bonum est id circo ausculture debemus, sed quia Deus precepit;
For we do obey the Command not because we judge it good, but because God
commands it. And as St. Augustine, Judicatur ad id quod possumus creditur ad
quod non possumus; How can the corrupt and finite reason of Man comprehend the
Reasonableness of an Alwise and Infinite God. We allow to all Governors some
Arcana Imperii, which the Vulgar cannot judge of; and shall we not allow it to
the only Wise God, the Governor of the World? is there nothing above the sphere
of natural Reason? How then comes it to pass, that it is baffled in so many
natural things? in Sympathies, and Antipathies, and Occult Qualities, the
Effects whereof are demonstrated, but the Causes cannot be known; And shall Man
presume by his short line of Reason, and Discourse, to fathom the deep things
of God, which the Apostle says are past finding out?

When the Socinians say, (though it be contrary to Reason and Scripture) That
Divine Worship must be given to a Creature, (as they affirm Christ to be) why
may not the same Scriptures be believed, when they tell us, that Christ is One,
and equal with the Father, God over all, etc. though Reason cannot apprehend
how the Divine Essence can be communicated to more than one Person, yet is it
good Logic, (though no Socinian Reason) that though the Divine Essence be
singular, yet it may be predicated of more than One, without Multiplication or
Division.

But are the Socinians the only Masters of Reason, that all Mankind must stand
or fall at their Tribunal? Are they the Light of the World, and all Men else in
Darkness? Yea, even Christ himself, who has taught many things as contrary to
their Doctrines, as Light is to Darkness; then we may say, that neither God is
true, as well as that all Men are Liars. The Socinians grant, That the Man that
makes Reason his Judge, ought to have diverse necessary qualifications, as that
his Reason be clear and incorrupt, that the Person be of great Probity and
Sincerity, free from Vice and prejudicate Opinions, well instructed and
exercised in Human and Divine Knowledge, one that has studied, discoursed, and
meditated on the Things he doubts of, considering what is said pro and con by
learned Men. And when all these Things meet, one thing more is necessary, the
Illumination and Assistance of the Spirit of God: And has this Spirit and
sound Reason forsaken the Universal Church in all Ages, and confined itself to
the Raccovian Catechists? or is every private Man thus qualified? Are not the
most, carnal, ignorant, or obstinate, ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the Truth, being lead away with diverse Lusts, which darken
their Understandings, and cause them to imprison the Truth of God in
Unrighteousness, and lean more to their own Understandings, than to the
Revelation and Assistance of the Holy Spirit: I doubt not, but the Socinians
will grant, that such Men are not fit Judges for themselves, or others, in
Matters of Salvation; Who then shall judge for them? If they choose another, it
will be probably one of whom they have such a good Opinion, as most inclined to
their own Sentiments: And how are they assured that he is not tainted with some
of the same Failings as himself is, he ought therefore to consider what the
Church of GOD has held in all Ages, what the most general Councils, after
mature deliberation, have approved of; and above all, what is most consonant to
the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and make these his Rule, and
then he will plainly see, how contrary the long approved Doctrines of Original
Sin, and of Eternal Death, the Wages of Sin, the Necessity of Satisfaction to
the Divine Justice, and in order thereto, the Incarnation of the Son of God,
which are as clear in the Holy Scriptures, as the Sun in the Firmament are to
his clouded and carnal Reason; we may not wonder, that there are in all Ages
Men of perverse Minds, etc. because we have been foretold, there should be
such; or that the Sophistry of such Men, may raise prejudices against the most
evident Truths, even against the Being of a Deity, and the first Principles of
any Religion; but for any who hold the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
yet deny the Fundamentals of the Religion therein taught, and shine as the Sun,
throughout one end to the other, is against Reason as well as Scripture; what
is more plain, than the Creation of the World by God, in Genesis 1. yet may an
Atheist urge the same Reason by his Metaphorical Sense of that History, as the
Socinians do, by their absurd Interpretation of that of St. Joh. 1. and apply
the particulars of the History of the Creation, to the Erection of the Jewish
Pedagogy, and Policy by Moses, as the Socinians do the first Institution of the
Christian Religion, to be the Sense of the Creation of the World by Christ, Who
was with God, and was that God by whom the World was made; as is most express,
Col. 1. and Heb. 1. See the Bishop of Worcester against Crellius.

Whence is it that the Ancient Fathers and Modern Doctors have lost their
Reason, and the Socinians found it, that they, as the Chinese say, are the eye
of the World, Quid est quod Velleius intellegere possit, contra non possit, as
Cicero de Natura Deorum: Sure they have as good Intellectuals, and as good
helps to improve them, and have given as great Testimonies of their Probity, as
any Socinian whatsoever; their boast of Reason therefore may be checked with
that of Lucan of the British Druids: Solis nosce Deos and Coeli numina vobis,
aut Solis nescire datur. Socinus grants, That we ought not to forsake the
common and usual sense of the Scripture, (and apply a Metaphorical Sense) when
the matter is capable of it: And if his Disciples would grant but one thing
more, viz. that we ought not to wrest little words and particles, which may
admit of various significations, contrary to their common import, to which the
subject matter does determine them, the Controversies between us and them would
be soon decided; for as the R. R. Bishop notes, concerning that great Point of
the Satisfaction of Christ, (which is so obstinately denied) that it cannot be
more clearly expressed by any Man, than it is in the Scripture; and if any
Company of Learned Men should purposely write of it, as the Apostles have done,
the Socinians would find the like evasions from the Sense of the one, as they
have to elude the other.

We say then, that no Man of sober Reason, assisted by the Illumination of the
Word and Spirit of God, can dissent from the Revelations of the Gospel; because
first, it does propose such things as are above the reach of human Reason, but
not contrary to it; for one Light may be greater than another, but not contrary
to another; and that Mind or Reason which is improved and elevated by the Light
of Faith, beyond the Sphere of its natural activity, and is endowed with a
spiritual understanding, does not only believe those Mysteries to be true, but
also may perceive many Reasons for their credibility, which are hid from others
that have not the same Optics; such as he may infer from the Wisdom of God,
who proposes them, and from the Nature of the Things proposed. And if the
Socinians talk of human Reason in the Concreate, (i. e.) such as yet remain in
the natural and corrupted Man, of which St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.14. it
cannot be expected that this should agree with the Gospel; for if to the eye of
the body, many things appear otherwise than in truth they are, which Reason
does correct, as an Oar in the Water seems broken to the view of the eye, which
Reason tells us is still strait and sound; and Reason demonstrates the Sun to
be more than Two hundred times greater than the Globe of the Earth, though to
our sight it appear not above four or five Foot in diameter; Why may not the
eye of Faith as much excel that of Reason, as that of Reason does the corporeal
sense? As for the Quotations of Volkelius from Romans 12.1. Of our reasonable
service; it does not prove, that Evangelical Worship, as prescribed, ought to
be measured by human Reason; but implies, that such Worship is just and
reasonable, as well as spiritual, in opposition to the carnal Worship under the
Law; where Sheep and Doves were offered to God, which were unreasonable
Creatures, and dead Sacrifices; whereas now we are to offer up ourselves a
living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God; in which respect it is called a
reasonable Service.

The Platonists were Masters of as much Natural Reason as the Socinians, and if
they, on I know not what Tradition and Enquiry, did believe a plurality of
Persons in the Godhead, it is strange, that the Socinians by the help of the
Scripture, should not yield their assent.

The Platonists had no temptation nor interest to lead them to the Notion of a
(...), but perhaps some Tradition from the Jews, which their Reason judged
probable.

St. Basil, on the words of St. John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, says,
I have known many that had not the knowledge of the Scripture, to magnify this
Truth. St. Aug. l. 10. c. 29. de Civitate Dei, speaks of a Platonist, that was
wont to say, That the beginning of St. John 's Gospel, (whom yet he counted a
Barbarian) was worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, and preached in the
greatest Congregations. That in many Books of the Platonists, mention was made
of God, and his (...), or Son, whom Zenon styled, the Maker of the World: And
Numenius calls God, Creantis Dei Patrem, The Father of that God that created
the World. And what is yet more to be admired, some Platonists reckoned the
Word, or Reason, the (...) to be in the beginning, to be with God, and to be
God, by whom was made whatever was made; that he descended into a Body, and put
on Flesh, but even then manifested the Dignity of his Nature. Of these we may
say, That they were, Naturaliter Christiani, as Tertullian does. And they spoke
the same sense, though not with the same affection; for the Platonists speak of
Three Principles, the First they call, the Being; the Second, Reason; the
Third, the Soul of the World: The Being begets Reason, not by a Decree, or Act
of Will, but by Nature, as Fire begets Heat and Light, and Reason produces the
Soul of the World. Platinus says, The Father and Reason are One and the same
Being coexistent, and not forsaking each other. The Enneads wherein he speaks
this, is entitled, Concerning the Three Hypostases. Amelius, another
Platonic, says, according to that of St. John, That Plato taught, That in the
beginning was Reason, and Reason was with God, and was God, that she made all
Things, and was the Light of Man. Justin Martyr says, That Christ was known in
part to Socrates, under the Notion of Reason, which foretold things future; and
taking the same Infirmities as we, has instructed us by himself. And that the
Opinions of Plato are not very remote from those which we have of Christ, St.
Augustine agrees with him, that changing a few Words and Sentences, they would
become Christians, as some of the later Platonicks have done. And Tertullian
says, That when the Christians say, that God made the World by his Reason, they
speak after the manner of the Sage Heathen. Tertul. Apology.

Now if the Heathen saw so much, (by whatever means) as to give their assent to
a plurality of Hypostases, or Personalities in the Godhead, our Masters of
Reason, the Socinians, seem to contradict the wiser sort of Philosophers, as
well as the generality of Christians, in their Opinions.

Those that write the History of the Pagans in America, do assure us, that
among some of them, there are Notions of the Trinity still preserved; and it is
supposed, that by Tradition from the Ancient Jews and Chaldeans, in whose
Cabala there were some dark Speeches concerning the Trinity; which though they
were careful not to make known to the Heathen, yet some Notions of it were
entertained and spread abroad into the World.

Having shown in what sense the Ancient Greek Philosophers understood the word
(...), it may very much confirm the sense of St. John, if it appear, that among
the Jews the same signification was familiarly received; and this will appear
from the Targum, where in Expounding the 110th Psalm, these words, The Lord
said to my Lord, sit thou, etc. they read, The Lord said to his Word: which
Targum was written about the same time when the Gospel of St. John was; and
Philo, who lived about the same time, calls the (...), or High Priest,
agreeably to what the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking of our
Savior, says, chap. 4.12. For the word of God is quick and powerful: and to
explain what he meant, he adds, Seeing therefore we have a great High Priest
passed into the heavens, etc.

In this sense the Hellenists used the word (...). Grotius says, That the
Ancient Jews and Christians teach, That when an Angel in the Old Testament is
called Jehova, it was not a mere Angel, but cui ad fuit (...): and such
appearances we often read of in the Old Testament.

So that the Notion of the Messiah did pass among the Jews, for the Son of God,
under the Name of the Word of God. The Gnostics also, and Cerinthus, used it
in the same sense, which gave occasion to St. John to describe our Savior by
that Word which was left known in those days, and to assert the Divinity of our
Savior under that Word; which he does so effectually, that the Socinians
finding they could not object against it, have thought on a New Exposition, and
a New Creation made by this Word; which as it has no Foundation, being ex
nihilo, so it resolves into nothing: but the Word of God shall endure for ever.
And this is his Name, The Word of God, Rev. 19. So the Syriack Translators of
St. John's Gospel gives it this Preface: In the Name of our Lord, and of our
God Jesus Christ: and the like to the other Gospels and Epistles; and they
celebrate a Festival in commemoration of the Mother of God.

Because Philo was a Jew, and one well skilled in the Greek as well as the
Hebrew Idioms, which were in use about our Savior's time, it is worth our
observation, how he speaks of this (...), he calls it, the (...), The Word of
God, and the Divine Word, the Idea of Idea's; and says, That it is the
beginning and end of the good pleasure of God; that it abides with God; that
God had a power of Generation; that the First-begotten is comprehended in the
Mind only, Tractat. Allegor. Post sex dies: and in the Treatise of the Modesty
of Women, the first (...) is called, The Eternal Character of God, and is God.

Now these obscure Notions, which both Jews and Gentiles had of the Son of God,
are by St. John more plainly delivered for the Instruction of all Men, and
applied to the Person of our Savior, to convince us, that he is the true
(...), or Word, and that this Word is God; that God that was made Flesh, and
dwelt among Men; and that they beheld his Glory, the Glory of the only begotten
Son of God, full of Grace and Truth: And the Jews in our Savior's time
concluded, That Christ calling himself the Son of God, made himself equal.

When our Savior requires our belief of such Propositions as exceed our
understanding, it is a contempt and undervaluing of his Authority and Veracity,
to expect Demonstrations for them. The Notion of a Christian, is one that
believes in Christ; and St. August. Sermon. de Tempore, 189, speaks of Adult
Persons that were Baptized, saying, I am now one of the Faithful, and believe
what I cannot comprehend. And St. Basil de S. S. c. 7. I testify, says he, to
all that profess Christ, and yet deny him to be God, that Christ shall profit
them nothing. What Philosopher knows the Nature and Motions of his own Soul,
how it informs the Body, and is Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part: or by
what Ligaments it is united to the Body, and shall we presume not to believe
the Union of the Godhead to the Manhood, and other Revelations of the Gospel,
because our Reason cannot demonstrate how these things can be: Si potes Cape si
non potes Creed, says St. August. Tract. in John 35. The way to get a right
understanding in spiritual things, is to believe and practice them. It Is not,
we know and believe in Matters of our Salvation; but we believe, and are sure,
as the Original is.

Joh. 6.69. Believe that thou may understand, says St. Aug. on St. John,
Tract. 29. If ye believe not that I am he, says our Savior, (i. e.) he that
said, Joh. 8.16. I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me; I, whom if
you had known, you should have known the Father also, v. 19. I that came to die
for your sins. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. It is
well, says an ingenious Commentator, that he said not, Except you know that I
am he, ye shall die in your sins.

Tu rationare ego miror tu disputa ego Credam, says St. Augustine: Do you
reason, I admire; do you dispute, I will believe. And what was that he would
believe, Ipse Deus tria est, and unum quodque horum trium Deus est, and Omnia
tria non Dii sed Deus est, (i. e.) God is Three, and each of these Three is
God, and all Three are not many, but One God.

Tertullian was a Person of as profound Reason as any Socinian, yet he
submitted it to Revelation: Natus est Dei Filius non pudet quia pudendum
mortuus est Dei Filius, prorsus Credibile quia ineptum certum est quia
impossible. And Christianorum est Deum mortuum credere contra Marcion, l. 2.
n. 41.

When in the Primitive Times Adult Persons were baptized, they were questioned
thus, Credis in Deum Patrem: the answer was, Credo. and so Credis in Deum
filium, and Credis in Deum Spiritum Sanctam. And hence they were called, The
Faithful. St. Ambrose de Sacrament. l. 2. c. 7. 1.

The Doctor adds, And if we descend to particulars in the Doctrines that are
imposed as Articles of Faith, the more Objections will rise in force and
number. By the way, it is necessary to consider of what sort of Faith and
Articles thereof he speaks; if of an Antinomian Faith, as separated from new
Obedience, and such Articles as are the Inventions and Impositions of Men, then
the Doctor acts impertinently, and fights his own Shadow, which he would ill
resent. His following Discourse will evidence what Faith he speaks of, for p.
13. col. 2. It is, says he, an acknowledged foundation in all Sciences, that we
must seek Truth by application of generals to particulars; and it is the
general scope of the Gospel, to advance Natural Religion. It Is then the Faith
of the Gospel which he treats of, under his Notion of advancing Natural
Religion; and the sting of the Objection he says is this, That Faith has no
place among Virtues, but Credulity has one among Vices. So that the truth of
Evangelical Precepts and Revelations must be sought and approved by application
of the Generals in Natural Religion.

The Objection which he says has a Sting, p. 13. Col. 2. is this, That Faith
has no place among Virtues, but Credulity has among Vices: The Doctor well
knows, that the Faith we of the Church of England do profess, is such a Faith,
as for the Objects of it, is contained in the Creeds, which we receive, and
such as for the nature of it, does work by Love, and does both purify the
heart and makes the Believer fruitful in every good Work; a Faith that keeps us
humble and holy, not presuming to be justified by the merit of any Works of our
own, but through the Satisfaction made by Christ, for which God will accept us
and our sincere Obedience, not imputing our Sins to us: Moreover, we
acknowledge this Faith to be the Gift and the Work of God in us, as Joh. 6.28.
and St. Paul, To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer; And Phil.
1.29. By faith ye are saved, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8.

This is the Faith which he would make as Naked as his Gospel; as if it were an
effect of natural Reason as the Pelagians hold, and wholly in our power,
without any operation of the Spirit of Christ; without whom we can do nothing,
as to obtaining of the Grace of Faith, or bringing forth the Fruits of
Holiness: If this be the Faith which he opposes, a belief of the Holy Trinity,
the Redemption of Mankind by the Eternal Son of God, the Operation of the Holy
Spirit in our Sanctification, as it clearly appears, he leaves all Christians
in a State of Nature, without any remedy by the Fountain of Grace, of whose
Fullness we have all received grace for grace.

In this Chapter, Page 14. the Doctor mentioning that Scripture, Romans 4. ult.
Christ was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification,
he says, That though the same particle (...) be used in both places, yet the
Apostle meant not to use it in the same sense in both; the sense of it in the
former is contrary to the later; we rejoice that our Sins are taken away by his
Death, but are sorry to have our Justification taken away by his Resurrection;
we are justified by his Blood, because thereby our Sins are blotted out, but we
are justified by his Resurrection, because thereon our Faith is built. The
inference which he makes is this, So plain it is, that the Faith which the
Gospel requires had its foundation in Natural Religion. We see here how hard
the Doctor strains to advance his Natural or Pelagian Religion, he will not
admit that the Apostle spoke sense, but contradictions in the same Period; he
speaks our sense (not his own) in the first part, (viz.) that Christ died in
our stead, and we are justified by his Blood, because thereby our Sins are
blotted out; but he speaks his own sense in the other part, because he grounds
our Justification on his Natural Religion, and thereby evidently destroys the
Evangelical Faith, which we assert, (viz.) That Christ by his Death made an
Expiation or Satisfaction for our Sins.

In this the Doctor Yoaks himself with the Socinians; for so Crellius speaking
of the Propositions (...) and (...), says, They do not always signify a
meritorious Cause, but only a final, C. 1. Sect. 6. (i. e.) That he died for
the good of Mankind, as St. Paul is said to suffer for the Church; and we are
to lay down our lives for the brethren, Col. 1.24. 1 John 3.16. But can this be
the sense of those plain places, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ has suffered for our
sins, the just for the unjust; and 2 Cor. 5.14. He gave himself a ransom for
all, and to taste death for every man; and Luke 22.19, 20. This is my blood
which was shed for you; and Mat. 20.28. The son of man gave his life a ransom
for many? And ought we not to interpret this of Romans 4. by the Analogy of those
other places wherein the Scriptures do abound, as Col. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1 Timothy 2.
Heb. 7.27. 1 John 1.7. Revel. 1.5. against all these Socinus urges, that in 1
Kings 14.16. where it is said, God shall deliver up Israel for the sins of
Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin; where he contends that the
same signification of the words for the sins of Jeroboam, ought to be
interpreted, as we do interpret that of Rom 4. which would be a kind of
Blasphemy to say, That Christ was delivered for our sins, because not only we
had sinned, but had made him to sin, as Jeroboam made Israel to sin.

Chap. 3. He applauds that Faith which is a Duty in Natural Religion, It is,
says he, a Cardinal Virtue, Justice toward God that pays him his due; this
was taught before Moses brought the positive Law into the World, and that the
Gospel builds on that foundation, read Romans 4. This speaks of the Faith of
Abraham, which has been already considered.

Another Commendation of Natural Faith is, That it is a great Promoter of
Obedience; wherein the Old Testament being silent, as he says, he sends us to
Heb. 11. in the New Testament, But had not those worthies any notice of the
promised seed? Had they no knowledge of a future state? Did not they look for a
heavenly country? v. 16. And for a city which had foundations? v. 10.

Did not Abraham receive his Isaac in a type? v. 19. Did not Moses see him who
is invisible, and had respect to the recompense of reward? v. 26, 27. Did not
he write of Christ? Did not the rest suffer in confidence of a better
resurrection? And did natural Faith instruct and enable them to do and suffer
all these things?

If all these were the fruits and effects of a Natural Faith, I cannot see what
need there was of the Gospel; if Nature showed the way to Life and Immortality,
which 2 Timothy 1.10. says was brought to light by the Gospel; if it taught so
much Obedience, Constancy, and Patience, how can Christ say, John 14.6
I am the way the truth and the life; and no man comes to the Father but by me?
How is it said, That grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, in opposition to
what was revealed by Moses? John 1.17. The law was weak, Romans 8.3. through the
flesh, and what that could not do, God did by sending his own Son, etc. and
made nothing perfect but the bringing in of a better hope, Heb. 7.19. This it
seems the Doctor would teach the Apostle, for Gal. 3.3. This I would learn of
you, Received you the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? was this hearing of Faith the voice of Nature, or the preaching of the
Gospel? It was the knowledge of Christ crucified, which the Apostle so valued,
that he accounted all other vain and ineffectual to Salvation.

P. 63. c. 1. And as our Author says, What Devotion is there without Love, and
what Love without some knowledge of the Object: And doubtless the more
excellent the Object is, the more will our love be increased, when we consider
that he who first loved us, was the Eternal Son of God, and that he so loved us
as to die for us, that we might live to and with him; this will heighten our
love to him above all things; for what are Moses and the Prophets, or the
Apostles, were they crucified for us? have they redeemed us from the wrath of
God? They indeed taught us the will of God, and gave us Divine as well as Moral
Precepts; but Christ only can write them in our hearts, he only can pardon our
sins, having obtained Remission at the expense of his own Blood: We therefore
join with the Doctor in recommending the Duties of Natural Religion, and say
these ought we to do, but by no means to leave the Duties of Evangelical Faith
undone or disbelieved, for though that has done virtuously in many respects,
yet this excels them all.

In Chap. 4. he strikes again at the Foundation of Faith, under the name of
Credulity, which he calls a Vice, and the danger in this is, when we pay that
to a Does not this insinuate that Ch^^^t is a Creature?
Creature which is due to God only; and mentions a Question of Mr.
Chillingworth's to the Romanists, Why implicit Faith in our Lord might not as
well avail for Justification, as implicit Faith in the Church? By implicit
Faith in the Church, the Romanists mean to believe as the Church believes; yet
I do not believe the Papists think this implicit Faith will justify them
without good Works: And if by implicit Faith in Christ he means only a general
belief of his Doctrines, without obedience to his Commands, neither is this
available for Justification; so that it was no such difficult Question, but it
might be answered. Our Doctor mentions it for another reason, viz. how any
Church dare challenge, or any Man dares pay that Faith to any, yea, all the
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, which is due to God only. And on the Socinian
and Arian supposition, that Christ is a Creature, there is no more Faith or
Obedience due to him, than to other Messengers of God, but we must seek for
Salvation by a Natural Religion, and then, blind as we are by Nature, and
having but blind Guides, we may soon fall into the Ditch; For the natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit; flesh and blood cannot reveal them,
nor can any man say that Jesus is the Christ, but by the Holy Ghost: That this
seems to be the Socinian sense of the Author, is probable from the following
words, Those who require implicit Faith on any other authority, so as to
contradict reason, give God the lie, making him contradict himself; for Reason
is no less the word of God, than is the Scripture: So that if the Doctrines of
the Gospel contradict the Reason of Arians and Socinians, they are not to be
received; for therefore only are we to believe the Scripture, because we are by
plain Reason convinced that it is the Word of God: But what if some Socinians
be tainted with Quakerism, and their Reason tells them, the Gospel is not the
Word of God, but that Word is written in their Hearts, and the Light within
them is the only Word of God, and not the Word incarnate, or that which is
written with Pen and Ink: that is in our Doctor's Opinion the Natural
Religion; for though the evidence we have, that what is offered us for the Word
of God, is really such, to this we must pay neither more nor less belief than
Reason will prove due, p. 18. col. 2.

P. 19. c. 2. The Doctor speaking of Belief, says thus: The same Natural
Religion which claimed it as due to God, forbad to pay it to any Creature, upon
the former account there was no need of an express Precept, and upon the later
there was the greatest need, not only of an express Command, but such repeated
Importunities as might out voice both Reason when it should decry such a
Command, and Interest when it should rebel against convinced Reason; both
whereof concurred against the belief which our Lord required. The sense of this
Paragraph seems to be this, That as the Faith which Natural Religion claims as
due to God, needed no express Precept; so Natural Religion forbidding to pay
Faith to any Creature, there was the greatest need not only of an express
Command, but repeated Importunities to pay it to Christ, such as might
out-voice both Reason and Interest, seeing they both concurred against the
belief which our Lord required: I wish the Doctor would give a more rational
inference from these words then this, that both Natural Religion, Reason and
Interest do forbid to pay Faith to Christ, as forbidding to pay it to a
Creature; for he says they concur against the belief which our Lord required.

If the Doctor by implicit Faith means more particularly a readiness to
believe, as Articles of Faith, and as necessary to Salvation, whatever
Propositions are imposed on him by his Superiors, he well knows we have no such
Custom in the Church of England; we call no Man on Earth our Master or
Lawgiver in Matters of Faith. He that advances his own Reason (which is often
against, and then it must be) above Scripture, he is in as bad a condition as
the most bigoted Papist, for he makes himself and all his Faculties and
Reasonings as Infallible as they believe the Pope to be.

Chap. 5. The Contents of this Chapter is thus expressed: Why Faith under the
Gospel makes a greater figure than under the Law? This state of the Question
he presently alters, and makes it his business to show, That when our Savior
first claimed the public profession of Faith in him, there were extraordinary
reasons for his Importunity and Promises, some whereof in these days, when the
Christian Religion has been long established, have lost their influence, and
by consequence the importunity of those Precepts, and the influence of those
Promises do now cease. These extraordinary Reasons, (viz.) for professing Faith
in Christ, he draws from, 1. The Difficulty; and 2. the Danger of professing
Faith in Christ; and 3. the Necessity of it: All which, are readily granted,
viz. That though it were both difficult and dangerous, yet it was necessary
that the Disciples of Christ should publicly own Faith in him: but then the
Inference which he makes is not conclusive, p. 23. col. 1. (viz.) Now that our
Education makes it as difficult, and our Laws as dangerous to deny Christ, as
it was then to confess him, and consequently what extraordinary merit Faith
might draw from those Topics, must now be lowered; and so Faith will appear a
common Grace, worthy of no greater than common rewards. Is false, for (as he
confesses) though in extraordinary respects, that necessity be now abated, yet
there is a permament necessity from the influence which Faith always has on the
action of Believers, because as he says, The Christian is always a Soldier, and
must fight against all kinds of Enemies to Christ's Kingdom, not only Flesh and
Blood, but spiritual Wickedness, and whatever would not have the Lord rule over
them. He must follow the Captain of his Salvation, who was made perfect by
Sufferings; and when tempted he must walk in the steps of his Father Abraham,
sacrifice his Lusts, though no less dear than was his Isaac: So that Faith must
be habitually the same, and therefore needs the same encouragements now as it
did when it was first required.

And I see no great need of that which he so carefully requires, that we must
distinguish the times, for we are still under those later times which St. Paul
calls perilous, wherein we shall meet with diverse Trials and Temptation, and
therefore need the whole Armor of God, etc. And we still need the same degrees
of Faith to overcome the World, (i. e.) The lust of the Flesh, the lust of the
Eyes, and the pride of Life.

To this great Work he says Christ came furnished with no other power, but of
working Miracles; but the Scripture tells us of other powers, for St. John
says, Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ; He had the power to confer Grace,
to give Repentance and Remission of Sins, to give Faith, and to increase it, to
open the eyes of their Understandings, and turn them from Darkness unto Light,
and from the power of Satan to God; without which powers that of working
Miracles was insufficient; for we read of many that wrought Miracles in
Christ's name, and yet had no saving Faith: and a Heathen may have a Natural
Faith and Moral Virtues, and yet come short of Salvation.

He adds in the conclusion of this Chapter, That if we believe him, (i. e.)
Christ, to require Faith for any other reason than as it is necessary for our
encouragement to Holiness, in order to Happiness, we dishonor him, because no
other reason is worthy of his Majesty or Goodness. This indeed is one great
end, viz. our Salvation, in which the Glory of God and our Savior are also
concerned; that as we believe in God we should also believe in Christ, John 5.
and that all Men should honor the Son as they honor the Father, and the
honor of the Son tends to the honor of the Father; therefore we need Faith in
the Merits of Christ and his Intercession and Mediation to present our Prayers
to God, and that we may come boldly to the Throne of Grace.

Nor does this derogate from the Glory due to God, for all tends to the Glory
of God the Father; And he that honoreth not the Son, (...)
honoreth not the Father. We cannot honor the Father more than by believing
that he so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for us;
for the greater the Gift is, the greater is our Obligation to Gratitude and
Obedience.

So that what the Doctor urges to the disparagement of Faith, That the
Precepts requiring Faith, and the Promises encouraging it, were calculated for
those Primitive Times, and are now ceased, is to recommend Infidelity and not
Faith; and plain it is, that his chief design is, to exalt Natural Religion, on
the Ruins of Christian Faith, which will also take off the Motives and
Encouragements to Obedience and Thankfulness.

Chap. 6. In this Chapter he enquires what are those saving Truths to the
belief whereof Eternal Life is promised; These truths, he says, concern the
Person in whom, or the Word which we believe on credit of the Person. Here he
enquires first, what kind of Person our Savior requires us to believe him to
be; this Person he describes from 7 Dan. 13. To be one to whom was given
dominion and glory, and a kingdom that all nations and kingdoms should serve
him: The Title there given him is the Son of Man, which in the Jewish Idiom
imports the eminence of the Subject spoken of; that is, a Man of some singular
note, but a Man still. Another Idiom of the Jews for advancing a thing or
Person, was to entitle it to God, as Rivers of God, and Mountains of God; so
Man of God, and Son of God, by Daniel are made a Character of the greatest
Beauty and Majesty, but a Creature still. He mentions also that Character
which Christ assumed, The only begotten Son of God; these Characters speak him
a Person of super-eminent and unmeasurable Greatness, like his Emblem the
Light, and that is but a Creature; which whatever the Traveller believes it to
be, still it is his faithful Guide: But have we no other benefit from the Sun
but its light only? Does it not also warm, comfort, and enliven us? Yet the
Scriptures gives more noble operations to Faith, it is as much the life of the
Soul, as the Soul is of the Body, it gives spirit and motion to every faculty
of the Soul; so the Apostle Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I but Christ lives in
me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. But our Doctor frustrates this
Grace of God, for if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain; what good can the Light do to a Traveller that wants legs and life, or
that is blind from his birth. As to his two Idioms, I only ask the Doctor, Why,
when that Scripture calls Christ the Son of Man, it means a Man of Eminence and
Perfection? So when it calls him the Son of God, does it not mean a perfect and
supreme God?

The Doctor objects from John 10.36. that our Savior spoke nothing what he had
been from Eternity, when, if ever, he ought to have done it, but only what he
was in relation to other Messengers of God.

Smalcius confesses that in this Scripture, John 10.36. Christ affirmed
himself to be God; yet in his Answer to Smagl^cius, he minceth the matter, and
says, Christ did neither affirm nor deny himself to be God, for he does not
say, v. 30. Say ye that I blaspheme, because I said I am God? but say ye that I
blaspheme because I said I am the Son of God? But Smalcius says, as the Doctor
does, That if Christ had been the very God, he ought to have expressly affirmed
it. See Cloppenburgh's Anti-Smalcius, p. 309.

This of St. John being one of the best pieces of Armor wherein the Socinians
put their trust, to defend themselves against all the Arguments for our
Savior's Deity, we must try what Mettle it is made of; P. 28. Col. 1. he thus
infers: That it seems plain, as by other Evidence, so by Christ's own words,
that a practical Faith is all that our Savior requires; for when the Jews came
about him, and said, How long do thou make us to doubt, if thou be the
Christ, tell us plainly. And he in answer thereto called God his Father: They
took up Stones to stone him, because (said they) thou being a Man make
thyself God. He did not on so urgent occasion assert his Right, but abating so
much as exceeded their comprehension, satisfied himself (that he might satisfy
them) with what might be sufficient for their Conviction to Salvation. Is it
not written in your Law, I have said you are God's, etc. He speaks nothing of
what he had been from Eternity in himself, but what he was in relation to the
World, and in comparison with all other Messengers of God, To them, says he,
God sent his Word by their betters, but it is not sent to me by my betters, but
by me to my inferiors: They were sent into the World the common way, and were
afterward sanctified by receiving God's word. N. B. but I was first sanctified,
and afterward sent, and if they who were less extraordinary were honored with
a higher Title, can it be Blasphemy in me, who am their Superior, if I take a
meaner Title?

This Scripture is made the Cornerstone of all the Socinian Babel, which they
endeavor with all their Art and Might to establish, and raise as a Tower of
Defense against the Power of Heaven and Earth. The late Author of Thoughts on
Dr. Sherlock 's Vindication of the Trinity, makes it the Subject of his Letter,
he says p. 3. c. 1. That Christ brought in a sense of Unction and
Sanctification instead of a sense of Nature, (i. e.) a Socinian sense instead
of an Orthodox. And c. 2. That the Orthodox, as they call themselves, can no
way escape, because if Christ made use of the reason taken from his
Sanctification, he has at the same time given away the former from the eternal
Generation. P. 4. c. 1. he says, That the other Passages which Dr. Sherlock
alleges for Confirmation, (viz.) of the eternal Generation,) as that the Word
was with God, (he omits that the Word was God) that it was in the bosom of the
Father, ought to be explained with respect to this express Declaration of the
Savior of the World; so that if he said he was the Son of God, it was because
the Father had sanctified him, and sent him into the World; and according to
this Passage I may (says he) lawfully explain any other Passage wherein Christ
is called God, or Son of God, for they are all taken from the Economy or
Ministry of Christ.

We shall meet this Gentleman again anon, in the mean time we must not be
uncivil to the Doctor, who has been so civil as to grant, That Christ was
first sanctified and afterward sent; whereas others were first sent into the
World the common way, and afterward sanctified: To them God sent his Word by
their Betters, but it is not sent to me by my Betters, but by me to my
Inferiors. Now if Christ were first sanctified and then sent into the World,
then he had a Being before he came into the World, and that Being must be as a
Creator or a Creature, or a middle Nature, a made God as the Arians call him;
the Arians say more, That he was God's Instrument or Agent in creating the
World; which is so evident in the Scripture, that no Man of sense can deny,
that diligently reads John 1. Colos. 1. and Heb. 1.

Now if God to qualify him for so great a Work as that of the Creation, did
communicate to him the great Attributes of Divine Wisdom, Omnipotence and
Omnissience, which are Infinite, why might he not communicate to him also that
other Attribute of his Eternity in his Generation. But to come to the Doctor's
Argument, viz. That Christ spoke nothing to the Jews of what he was from
Eternity in himself, but what he was in relation to the World: Does not the
Doctor grant he was first sanctified, and then sent into the World? And what is
that Sanctification, but his being ordained by God to be the Redeemer and
Savior of the World? So Crellius says, l. 1. sect. 2. c. 31. To sanctify
signifies in Scripture to separate one, and choose him to a singular Office.

Now Christ by an everlasting Decree was set apart to be the Lamb slain, as an
All sufficient Sacrifice for the Sins of all Mankind: his Sanctification or
Ordination to the Office of a Redeemer, was by that Decree of which the
Psalmist gives us a Copy, Psalm. 2. I will declare the decree, the Lord has
said to me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; which the ancient
Jews affirm to be spoken of the Messiah; And the Hodie, the day was from all
Eternity; for the Redemption of Mankind could not be effected but by an
Infinite Price, as Scripture teaches.

The Argument urged by our Doctor, and the Socinians, is, That our Savior on
so pressing an occasion ought to assert his Right, yet spoke nothing of what he
was from Eternity: So Crellius, and our Doctor.

But we affirm, that our Savior was not obliged so to do on this occasion, it
was sufficient for him to clear himself from the Accusation of being a
Blasphemer, which he does by an Argument out of their own Law, which may be
thus illustrated: The Doctor styles himself, A true Son of the Church of
England; to which it may be said, that he being an Arian or Socinian, does
blaspheme, (i. e.) speaks evil of the Church of England, in making himself, who
is a Socinian, a true Son of that Church, which owns no such for her Sons, that
are of that Belief. Now how will the Doctor vindicate himself from this
Accusation? will he say, I was baptized into the Faith of that Church, in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; I was for Twenty five Years a
Professor of Divinity in that Church, a Rector of Exeter-Colledge. This would
be an impertinent Argument; for there have been many of that Church which are
gone from it, some to the Church of Rome, others to Socinian Conventicles: the
most proper Argument would have been, to show, that in our Law, the Articles of
our Religion, our Litany and Homilies, the Arrian Religion, or Socinian
Religion asserted; or that neither in his Writings or Sermons he has affirmed
any other Doctrine than what is established in that Church: for the Question is
not, concerning the Dignity of his Person, or his Birth or Qualifications; but
whether he be a true Son of that Church, and can show the consonancy of his
Faith to that of the Church of England. This was our Savior's Argument to
vindicate himself from the Jews Accusation, who accounted him a Blasphemer, in
that he being a Man made himself the Son of God; he does not argue from his
being the Son of God, or from his doing such Works as no other Man did; but
proves from their Law, wherein the Title of God is given to Men that were
inferior to him, viz. to Princes, Priests, and Prophets; he was not concerned
to tell them, whether he was the Son of God, by distinguishing between a Son of
God by Nature, and a Son by Office; he does not deny, but still asserts the
first, both before v. 30. I and my Father are one: and after ver. 38. The
Father is in me, and I in him. And his being sanctified, and sent into the
World, proves the same, (viz.) that he was the Son of God; for otherwise God
sent not his Son, and sanctified him before he came into the World; but first
sent him into the World, and then sanctified him to be his Son; which though
contrary to what the Doctor grants from the Text; yet the Socinians generally
deny, and ascribe his Sonship to his Birth, his Baptism, Unction, to his
Office; his Resurrection and Exaltation, on any thing but his Eternal
Generation, and Ordination, to be the Savior and Redeemer of the World; for
which Office all the Angels of God were not sufficient.

And now we return to the thoughtful Gentleman:

This Gentleman thinks to thrust home this Argument to the Ruin of the
Catholic Doctrine; For, he says, it is written with the Finger of Truth, and
unanswerable, p. 3. col. 2. But that the Orthodox are wont to swallow all sorts
of Contradictions, and to cast dust in the eyes of the simple. This Reproach
notwithstanding, we will go hand in hand with him, in search of that Truth,
which this Scripture propounds; for we are agreed, that our Savior delivers
his Doctrine in profound Wisdom, having regard to the Circumstances of Place,
Time, and Person; by these Particulars we shall examine the Text, laying down
this general Observation, That St. John was desired by the Church of Ephesus,
who were pestered with the Heresies of the Gnostics, Ebion, and Cerinthus, who
denied the Deity of the Son of God, and ascribed the Creation to certain
Aeones, or Angels, denying it to be ascribed to Christ; both which Errors he
particularly refutes: 1. Then consider the Persons with whom he had to do in
this Chapter, they were such as our Savior had exasperated against himself,
calling them Thieves and Robbers, that came to no other end, but to kill and
destroy, whereas he came to give them Eternal Life; which St. Joh. 20. says,
was the end of his Writing the Gospel: That ye might believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing, ye might have life through his
name. This our Savior proves, stiling himself the good Shepherd, that came to
lay down his Life for his Sheep, (i. e.) all that should hear his Voice; and
that they might not doubt of his power to do it, he tells them, v. 18. I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again: And this he was to do
by Commission or Commandment from his Father, who loved him, v. 17. As being of
one will with his Father in this, v. 15. As the Father knows me, even so know
I my Father. Again he proves his Divine Power by his Works, which were such as
the Jews confessed, the Devil himself could not do; and to them he appeals, v.
37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. Now the same Divine
Works in specie, argues the same Divine Power; and therefore our Savior tells
them, I and my Father are one: that is, as the Jews themselves understood him,
One in Essence as well as in Operation: the Jews on these Doctrines and
Arguments of our Savior, take up Stones to stone him, as guilty of Blasphemy,
who being but a Man, made himself God; for v. 36. as Christ himself says, it
was because he said, I am the Son of God: so that it seems, to be the Son of
God, and to be God, were equivalent terms, and so understood by the Jews; for
by either of these they concluded, that he made himself equal with God. To
silence the Jews Accusation he urges a Scripture which they owned, being
written in their Law, Psalm. 82.6. Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are
Gods: and the Argument is thus formed and applied, a majore ad minus. If he
called them Gods, unto whom the Word of God came, say ye of him, whom the
Father has sanctified and sent into the World, thou blasphemest, because I
said I am the Son of God?

This his being the Son of God, he proves by another Argument, from the Works
which he did, and they acknowledged that none but God could do; therefore he
argues thus: He that does the Works of God, and such as you grant none but God
can do, he is God; and ye ought to believe that he is in God, and God in him,
v. 38. That is, that they are of the same Nature and Essence; and in this sense
the Jews still understood him, for they still sought to take him and stone him.
So that our Savior still maintained his Doctrine, That he was the Son of God,
in that sense which the Jews counted Blasphemy; our Savior does not draw them
off from their sense of his being the Son of God by Nature, to a sense of his
being so only by Unction and Sanctification, (i. e.) to a Socinian instead of
an Orthodox. But as the Gentleman observes, our Savior answered them in
profound Wisdom, with regard to the Circumstances of Place, Time; and Persons;
all which we shall now consider, and manifest our Savior's Wisdom in respect
of all these: 1. As to the Persons, they were resolved Enemies to the Life and
Doctrine of our Savior, and such as would not believe him, though he told them
never so plainly, as our Savior says, when they asked him the like ensnaring
Question, v. 25. If you be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them, I
told you, and ye believe me not, because you are not of my sheep. Their present
Honor and Interest was a bar to their belief: How can ye believe that seek
the honor that comes of men, and not that which comes of God? They
understood not that plainer Parable in v. 6. of the true and false Shepherds.
And our Savior tells his Disciples, Luke 8. v. 10. To you it is given to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to others in parables, that seeing
they might not see, and hearing they might not understand. These were those
obstinate Jews, in whom was fulfilled the Prophecy of Isai. 6.9. as St. Matthew
relates, chapter 13.13. for this cause probably our Savior in his Wisdom thought
it not fit to cast Pearls before Swine, he knew they would not believe, though
he had asserted his Deity never so expressly.

2ly, As to the time, it was the Wisdom of our Savior, not to expose himself
to the Rage of the Jews, the Time designed for his Death, and the Manner of it,
viz. by Crucifixion, not by Stoning, being not yet come; and he had many
Doctrines to instruct his Disciples more perfectly in them; some they could not
yet bear, and some they knew but imperfectly, even that of the Resurrection;
and these things required his Presence with them for a longer time, and
therefore he withdrew himself from them.

Unless this Gentleman will make himself wiser than his Maker, he must
acknowledge, that when our Savior answered those Jews, so as to silence their
Accusation of Blasphemy, and stop their Rage who sought to stone him, though he
did not by that Argument which he used, assert his Deity, (which yet he still
maintained) that he used his profound Wisdom in the Argument which he urged.

But what if from this Scripture from which this Gentleman would prove, that
Christ is called the Son of God by virtue of his Mission only, it shall appear,
that he is the Son of God by Nature and Essence, may we not then retort, that
he only casts a Mist on the eyes of the Simple, and has a Spirit of
Contradiction, if it shall appear, that the first Question was, Whether our
Savior was the Christ? as it is clear, v. 24. (i. e.) the Messiah. If 2dly, It
appears that the Messiah was the Natural Son of God, then this Scripture from
whence he makes the Objection, will be an utter Confutation of it.

Now this was the sense which the Jews had, (viz.) that Christ, or the Messiah
was the Son of God, and they accused him of Blasphemy, because he whom they
thought to be but a mere Man, made himself the Messiah, that is, God; for they
would by no means grant him to be the Messiah. That the Messiah was to be the
Son of God, R. Sclemo proves from the second Psalm, of which he says, our
Fathers expounded this Psalm, concerning the Messiah, of whom it is said, Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and thou art my Son: which explains what is meant by
the word Son, (viz.) that it could not agree with any other Interpretation, as
that of, Be ye instructed, or worship purely: for the Psalmist expounds
himself; for it being said, v. 7. Thou art my Son, viz. he whom the Gentiles
conspired against, it follows according to the interpretation of the same word,
(...), Kiss the Son least he be angry; and our Savior applying this expression
to himself, makes it beyond doubt. So they apply Psalm. 89.26. He shall call me,
thou art my Father, etc. which also is applied to the Messiah, and that God was
his Father; and that the Psalmist speaks of Christ, St. Peter, Acts 4.27. puts
beyond doubt; and that he was that Cornerstone, which these Builders refused,
though there is not Salvation in any other, verses 11, 12 So that in the sense
of the Jews, our Savior making himself the Messiah, and the Son of God, he
made himself God, and did blaspheme.

And now having proved, that this Author cannot by all his Art, wrest this
Scripture to his Socinian sense, I hope he will be so civil as to grant us the
same advantage as he challenged for himself; if Christ being the Son of God
only by Mission, had been the genuine sense of St. John in this Chapter;
namely, that as he would have all other Scriptures that speak of Christ as of
God, and the Son of God, ought to be accommodated and understood in his
Socinian sense, of being so only by Mission; so it being clear, that our
Savior calling himself the Son of God, made himself the Natural and Eternal
Son of God, as the Jews understand and counted him a Blasphemer for it, he
ought to grant that those other places which speak of our Savior as God, and
the Son of God, ought to be understood of his Eternal and Natural Generation:
And thus it is evident, that there are some Men who can swallow Contradictions
and Absurdities more gross than this Gentleman imputes to the Orthodox; for to
give Divine Worship to one whom we acknowledge to be a mere Man, is a boldfac'd
contradiction to the First Commandment, and to our Savior's Command of
worshipping the Lord God, and serving him only; whereas if we acknowledge One
God only, and believe that this Supreme God subsists in Three Persons; this
cannot be accounted a Contradiction, it is something above our apprehensions,
through our ignorance of the Nature and Operations of the Supreme Deity, which
cannot be fully known unto us, it is above our Reason, but not contrary to it;
because it is agreeable to Divine Revelation, as the Harmony of the Old and New
Testament, and the Reason and Judgment of the most and best Divines in all Ages
have asserted. If a sober and learned Heathen should diligently read the Gospel
of St. John, and find the words, God, and Son of God, so often ascribed to him,
and such Divine Works done by him, and consider that St. John assisted by the
Spirit of God, did write his Gospel on purpose to vindicate the Deity of our
Savior, which was denied by many Heretics, he could not rationally conclude
otherwise, than that he was the Natural and Essential Son of God.

Bisterfield against Crellius, gives this sense of the controverted place, Do
ye not read that I the Messiah said, ye are Gods, etc.? If they that were, such
as they are described, Psalm 82. ignorant, v. 2, etc. Unjust, Oppressors, and
ignorant Judges, were honored with the Title of Gods, who yet must die like
other Men, and the Scripture, which cannot lie, owns them for such, how can ye
say, that I who am ordained to be the Judge of the whole Earth, and stand in
the midst of the Congregations of such Gods, as an Almighty, and Omniscient
Judge, to break in pieces, as with a Rod of Iron, all such unrighteous
Magistrates as oppose themselves against me who am sanctified and appointed to
be the Redeemer and Savior of the World, that I blaspheme in saying, I am the
Son of God?

But I insist not on this, though it may have more of Argument in it than the
Socinians can confute, it being said in the close of that Psalm 82.8. Arise O
God, judge thou the earth; for thou shall take all the heathen for thy
inheritance: which is very applicable to our Savior.

The Doctor seems to grant, That Christ was before he was sanctified and sent
into the World. Crellius grants, That to sanctify, in Scripture, signifies to
separate one, and choose him for some singular Office, and to qualify him by
special Gifts for the discharge of that Office; but this cannot be affirmed
(says he) of him that is the most high God, such Sanctification and Mission
belongs to Christ only in respect of his humane Nature. To this Bisterfield
answers, That he must be a Stranger to the Scripture, that is ignorant who it
was, and to what end Christ was sent into the World, both which will prove his
Godhead, not barely from his Mission, but his Mission to that end for which he
was pre-ordained, which none could effect but he that was God; the Work was too
great for any, or all the Angels of God, much more for any one Man; he
therefore that was sent to such an end, (viz.) the Redemption of the World, and
Satisfaction to the Divine Justice, must be more excellent than Men or Angels,
or the Mission had been in vain; therefore, as St. Peter says, We were redeemed
by the precious blood of the Son of God, and by nothing else as a meritorious
cause.

Against this, Crellius objects, from John 17.18. As thou (O Father) have sent
me into the World, even so I have sent them (my Disciples) into the World. And
1 John 4.1. Many false Prophets are gone out into the World, but neither of
these were in Heaven before they were sent into the World, therefore neither
was Christ.

Answ. The word, As, does not signify a likeness in all respects, for then
false Prophets, as he supposes, (or else he urges the place to no purpose)
were sent to the same end as Christ and his Apostles; it signifies only some
particular likeness in the Mission; for Christ was sent by another, and for
another end than the Apostles were; they were not sent to redeem the World by
suffering in the stead, and for the sins of Men; but as Christ was sent into
the World to perform this singular Office, so were the Apostles sent and
qualified to do their Office, (i. e.) to publish those glad Tidings. Lastly,
Whereas Crellius says, That this Sanctification cannot pertain to the Divine,
but Humane Nature of Christ only.

The Answer is, That this Sanctification being the Pre-ordination of Christ to
that great Office, of a Mediator between God and Man, for the Sanctification
and Salvation of his People, he is said to be sanctified, (i. e.) as Crellius
says, to be set apart and ordained by his Father for that Office, or to
sanctify himself, by undertaking to accomplish it, and to that end by his
Divine he sanctified his Humane Nature; the Sanctification of the Divine Nature
was relative not absolute or internal, as if any new Virtue or Divinity were
added to it, but the Sanctification of the Humane Nature was the Union of it to
the Divine Nature, in respect of both which Nature (...)t was qualified for
that Great End and Office of a Mediator; and ^oth the Sanctification and
Mission of our Savior were but a Manifestation of his being qualified both as
God and Man for that great End of our Redemption. If our Savior's
Sanctification and Mission into the World, were a sufficient reason to convince
the Jews that he was not a Blasphemer, in saying that he was the Son of God,
why may it not be a sufficient Argument to prove that the Socinians blaspheme
Christ, who say he was not the Son of God, until his Conception and Ascension
into Heaven? Might not the Jews argue then as the Socinians now do, Why tell
you us of your Sanctification and Mission, as if that made you the Son of God;
if we could see you ascend into the Heavens, we might believe that you came
down from Heaven, but till then we must believe our eyes rather than your
words; we see you are a Man, and know your Mother and Brethren, and therefore
you blaspheme in saying, I am the Son of God. The truth is, that Christ's
Sanctification or Unction, his Mission, etc. were but as St. Paul speaks of his
Resurrection, a Declaration only of what he was before.

Again, the Question was not in what respect he was the Son of God, but whether
he was the Son of God, in any such manner as might excuse him by their Law from
being a Blasphemer? and herein also he shows his Divine Wisdom, he argues from
his Works and from their Law, which they knew to convince them of what they
were ignorant of, if he should have proved that he was the Son of God, because
God was his Father by eternal Generation, that had been to prove ignotum per
ignotius; and the Jews would have equally rejected both, and adjudged him
guilty of Blasphemy in the highest degree, as not believing that God had a Son
begotten of him from Eternity, or that Christ was this Son, but they having
heard of a Messiah, whom they expected about that time to come into the World,
the best means to convince them that he who did the Works of God, which no Man
could do except God were with him, was that Messiah; and if that he was first
sanctified and then sent into the World, in a more eminent manner, and for
higher End, than any of those to whom the Word of God came in former times, to
commissionate them as Magistrates for the Government of Mankind, then he did
not blaspheme in saying I am the Christ, or I am the Son of God.

So that if our Savior's Argument were more opposite and convincing than those
of the Socinians, we have gained this Fortress from them, and on their
surrender of this, their other little Sconces will fall into our hands; for
whatever is spoken of our Savior as God, or the Son of God, they refer to his
Designation and Mission into the World, (i. e.) to his Humane Nature; as where
it is said, He received power from the Father; that he did the works of his
Father; that he was one with the Father, by consent of his will. And they will
allow no such Phrases any way to imply his Deity, because those expressions of
Gods giving and Christ's receiving, God's sending and his being sent, imply a
Superiority and Inferiority in the Persons, and that the one received somewhat
which he had not before: But the Fathers and late Divines do easily answer all
these, thus, To the Objection of Receiving, it is said, what Christ received of
his Father, was not given as he was God, but Man. St. Ambrose de Fide, l. 3. n.
22. Christ prays as the Son of Man, and obtains as the Son of God; he
possesses as the Son of God, what he prays for as the Son of Man: so he was
anointed and grew in Grace, etc. not as God but Man. Perfecit non Deus sed
caro; So the Father is greater than I, and the Father gives life to the Son;
and he received the Spirit without measure. All such Phrases belonging to
Christ as Man, as Christ says of himself, All things are delivered to me of the
Father, as he was then incarnate.

The next most considerable Objection is from 1 Cor. 15.24, etc. How Christ can
be said to be that true God, it being there said he shall deliver up the
kingdom to the Father, and then the Son himself shall be subject to him.

Answ. This does not imply an Annulling or Abdication of his own Dominion as
God, no more than when God the Father is said to deliver all things to the Son,
and Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and earth; the Father did
exclude himself by that Gift. 2ly, This Kingdom is peculiarly his Church: and
St. Aug. de Trinitate, l. 1. c. 8. n. 60. thus explains that place, Tradere
regnum est credentes perducere ad contemplationem Dei: To present his Church
pure and without spot, free from all impurity of Flesh and Spirit; from all
Sins and all Enemies, which shall be trodden under their feet, as Seneca's
Phrase is, Reddam te tibi meliorem; that whereas God was obeyed by them
formerly but in part, now God shall be all in all.

And when it is said, Christ shall reign till he has put all his enemies under
his feet, it does not imply that he shall reign no longer; but that he shall
reign so long maugre all the Powers and Polity of the Gates of Hell, which
shall not prevail against him; for the word until does not exclude the future
time; as Matthew. 28.28. But how shall the Son himself then be subject? shall he
become a subject of whose kingdom it was promised there should be no end, and
that he should reign forever? Luke 1.33.

Object. Christ while on Earth, and now in Heaven, is subject to his Father;
What other Subjection can be conceived, Then when he shall deliver up the
Kingdom?

Answ. This by the Ancients was understood of the mystical Body of Christ, over
which he is Head and King, and when the whole Church is subject, then Christ as
the Head may be said to be subject; so Athan. Contr. Apolon. n. 22. and St.
Ambrose de Fide, l. 5. c. 6. n. 24. Christ shall be subject in us who are not
yet fully made subject. And St. Aug. Q. 93. 69. n. 87. it is spoken of Christ
and his Members, Christus universus est caput cum Membris.

This Subjection is spoken in the future Tense, Then shall the Son be subject.
Now Gregory Nazian. asks the question, Annon nunc est subjectus est? Orat. 36.
Christ as Man never disobeyed or rebelled, but we that are Members of his
Mistical Body do sin and disobey God and Christ; and till our mortal Body shall
put on Immortality, we shall not be wholly brought into subjection; but when
Christ shall have brought down all Authority and Power, subdued all his
Enemies, purified all his Members, and presents them to his Father, as his
Church and his Body, then the Son is said to be subject; not the Godhead of
Christ, but the whole Church of Christ, which is the Head and Members, which
then make one Christ.

It is the Mediatorial Kingdom that shall be delivered up, not his Everlasting
Kingdom; he shall reign in the one, till he has subdued all his Enemies, but
of the other there shall be no end.

P. 27. c. 1. The Doctor restrains his Singularity of being the only begotten
Son of God, to his being anointed before his coming into the World. And p. 26.
c. 2. he says, That anointing was a Complement of the greatest Kindness and
Honor that could be bestowed on a Guest; and from that Office in Festivals was
preferred to a Ceremony for enseating Kings, Priests, and Prophets; and our
Lord by it is charactered but indefinitely, whether Prophet, Priest, or King,
or all. I persuade myself that the Doctor learnt this from Crellius on Heb.
1.9. upon which he says, Our Savior received an immense measure of the Holy
Ghost, (but not as the Scripture says, without measure) but some degrees more
than what other Messengers of God received.

Chap. 7. is to show, That it is no more necessary that we should understand
what the Person of Christ is, than for a Traveller to understand the Features
of the Sun, etc. Which he says concerning Constantine's calling this Enquiry a
Silly Question, has been already considered; to which he adds, That our
Savior could not require a belief of the whole truth concerning the Dignity of
his Person, because the Gospel was preached to the Poor; And must they, says
he, be excluded from the means of Redemption, because they are excluded from
the means of understanding the Mysteries of his Incarnation? Must they perish
for want of such a belief as is morally impossible for them to acquire?

Ans. But is it morally impossible to believe what the Blessed Jesus has
revealed of himself? Indeed if the Traveller shut his eyes, he may walk in the
Dark, though the Sun shine clearly on him: And is the Traveller benefited only
by the light of the Sun? does he owe nothing to the comfortable influence of
it? Or the Poor to whom the Gospel belongs, are they only the Ignorant and
Unbelievers? Christ tells us, That the poor to whom the kingdom of heaven
belongs, are the poor in spirit; such are sensible that they are naturally
blind, and miserable, and poor, and naked, not such as are rich and increased
in Goods, and have need of nothing, as the Laodiceans, Revel. 4.17. This is the
Doctor's Pelagian sense, which has led him into other gross Errors. The Poor
in the Gospel are such as can submit their understanding to the Revelations of
God; and though with the Blessed Virgin they doubt a while how these things can
be true, yet they believe them to be true, on the Revelation; and this is that
Humility and Lowliness for which she is commended; and this is the Power of the
Gospel, which is mighty through God to cast down the strongholds and
imaginations of every one that exalts himself against the knowledge of God, and
brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5,
6.

Is it not necessary we should know him in whom we believe? Then is not the
knowledge of God necessary? Is it not necessary to know him, on the knowledge
of whom our Hope and Belief of Eternal Life is founded? Then it is not
necessary to know, whether CHRIST or Mahomet were an Impostor, and if Mahomet
have delivered as good Natural or Moral Precepts as our Savior has done; we
may make him the Object of our Faith, and expect Eternal Life by Mahomet as
well as by Christ: Therefore doubtless it is necessary to believe of Christ as
St. Peter and St. Thomas did, That he is the Son of the living God; our Lord
and our God, which Flesh and Blood has not revealed to us; and on which Faith
Christ has promised to build his Church. They who saw his Miracles, and heard
his Doctrine, confessed that God was with him: but in the Confessions of St.
Peter and St. Thomas, there was something extraordinary which they believed of
the Person of Christ.

P. 32. c. 1. Two Evangelists, says the Doctor, trace our Lord's Genealogy, but
as they derive it not from his real but supposed Father, so they take two
several ways, not to satsfie but amuse us.

The design of St. Matthew was, to show that Christ descended from Abraham and
David by Joseph's being of that Tribe, viz. of Juda, being the natural Son of
Jacob; to which it is objected, That though Joseph, more of that Tribe, yet
Christ could not be so by descent from Joseph, who was not his natural Father;
and by the Virgin Mary he could not be of the seed of David, she being of the
Tribe of Levi, and not of Juda. Vossius recites the Opinion of some Ancients,
who thought it was enough to entitle Mary to the Tribe of Juda, because she
married into that Tribe; therefore he proves Mary to be of the same Tribe with
Joseph, because Numb. 36.6. It was not lawful for a Virgin to marry out of her
own Tribe. Nor would Joseph, being a just Man, have taken one of another Tribe;
and this practice of marrying in the same Tribe, was especially observed where
the Virgin was an Heiress, that the Inheritance might be kept not only in the
Tribe, but the Family; and therefore they usually married the next of kin; the
Virgin therefore having no Brother, was married to Joseph, who was of near
consanguinity with her. See Vossius's Genealogy.
And he proves the same Descent of the Blessed Virgin from St. Luke's
Genealogy, viz. from David; to which I refer the Reader.

But if it he questioned, why if Joseph and Mary had been both descended from
David, why St. Matthew had not named Mary rather than Joseph, who was only a
supposed Father? To this he answers, 1. Because the Husband was not to be bard
of his Honor. 2. It was not the Custom of the Jews to derive the Genealogy
from the Woman; and the Kindred of Joseph and Mary being well known, there was
no necessity of mentioning it among the Jews, which dwelt in Palestine, to whom
the Evangelist wrote. And they were very curious in preserving their
Genealogies: and it would much have prejudiced St. Matthew's Gospel, if
undertaking to prove the Descent of Christ from David, he should have failed in
that chief design, and in the beginning of the Book: and doubtless the Jews who
were living at that time when he wrote, which was about forty Years after our
Lord's Nativity, had their Genealogy preserved, and probably some of our Lord's
Kindred then living; and they having seen his Miracles, by which they were
induced to believe him to be the Son of God, knew also that he descended of
David, according to the Flesh, as the Gospel teaches; and there was no
Objection made to the contrary, by Jews or the Phari^^s, his greatest Enemies,
who heard how he was honored by the Name of the Son of David, and knew that
the Messiah was to be of the Seed of David; the contrary whereof if they could
have proved, it would have been their first and best Argument against our
Savior.

Now it is a profane thing to think, that the Evangelists did undertake to
prove what they were not able to perform, and that they should be guilty of
such an Error, as the Doctor imputes to them, in the beginning of their
Gospels, to amuse us with Uncertainties, and so draw an invincible Prejudice
upon their Gospels.

That the whole Mystery of the Incarnation should be understood, was not
necessary, but that it should be believed was so; and this was not impossible
to the Poor, except upon the Socinian grounds, viz. That we cannot believe what
our reason cannot comprehend.

The belief of the Virgin Mary, on the Message of the Angel, That she should
conceive a Son that should be called, (i. e.) be the Son of God; for which the
Angel pronounces her Blessed. The belief of St. Peter, of Martha, St. Thomas,
and the Eunuch, who believed Christ to be the Son of God, do show that such a
belief was not impossible, though they understood not the whole Mystery of the
Incarnation: the Blessed Virgin did question, How shall this be? Luke 1.34. she
could not conceive the manner, but believed the Message; and v. 45. Blessed is
she that believes.

He quotes Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Triphon the Jew, p. 31. c. 1. in
these words, Though I shall not prove, that Christ is God, otherwise than by
proving, that this is the Christ, and that it was foretold that Christ should
be such, (i. e.) by the Harmony of the Old and New Testament. Yet there are
some among us (my Friends) who profess him to be the Christ, and affirm him to
be a Man born of Men; with whom indeed I do not agree, nor will many speak so,
who are of the same Opinion with me. By which words it is plain (says the
Doctor) that however the belief of Christ's Godhead was then most generally
received, yet were not the otherwise minded excluded from the benefit of his
Redemption as Unbelievers. How this Conclusion can be inferred from his saying,
that he does not agree with such, is not so plain to me; the right Inference
from these words of Justin Martyr is, That the Godhead of Christ was generally
received in his Age. What he adds, That the Controversy has gotten a new
value, not from any new intrinsic Worth, but from the Price which it has
cost, is an invidious Reflection on the Orthodox Christians, who were on the
defensive Part, being, as he grants, in possession, and in all Ages suffered
more vexation and cruelty from the Arians, Donatists, and other Sectaries that
joined with them, than from their Heathen Persecutors, whom yet the Doctor
would accuse as the Authors of all that Confusion and Bloodshed, occasioned by
the Heresies and Divisions of the Arians and Donatists.

This I suppose the Doctor knew so well, that he seems ashamed to retort, as he
offered, p. 39. c. 1. The Sentence of Theodosius of Heresy, Infamy, or
Punishment.

Chap. 8. is spent to prove, That the Question concerning Christ's Godhead, was
decided by no other Evidence but of Papal and Imperial Authority; whereas
indeed it was determined by the first Christian Emperor, in the Council of
Nice, wherein I agree with the Author, That if Authority must determine it,
none is better than that of the Great Constantine; whose Decision you have
heard before, and may more fully hereafter. Certain it is, that there was no
Papal Authority when the Question was first determined.

P. 33. The Doctor endeavors to expose Athanasius as saying, (in defense of
the Trinity,) That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are as Bishop, Priest, and
Deacon; but Bishop, Priest, and Deacon are (...), therefore so are Father, Son
and Holy Ghost. The words indeed are mentioned by Athanasius, but as the words
of Anonaeus the Arian, which Athanasius retorts upon him, for thus says
Orthodox: He that owns the Coessentiality is a Christian, but he that thinks
him to be no Christian who owns the Coessentiality, and yet owns it himself,
condemns himself as that wicked Servant, by his own mouth. Anom. But where am I
found to own it? Orth. You said, We think the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be
as Bishop, Priest and Deacon. Anom. I confess that I said so, as Bishop Priest
and Deacon. Orth. But Bishop, Priest and Deacon are Coessential, therefore you
confess Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be Coessential. It is evident then that
Athanasius only takes advantage of his Adversary, by a necessary consequence
from his own Argument. Sandius as learned a Person as the Doctor, is much more
ingenuous, for p. 71. l. 1. he says, Thus I do certainly think, the Arians to
have taken this Comparison of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, with Bishop, Priest
and Deacon, from Clemens Romans and Ignatius, for so we read in Athan. Diolog. 1.
de Trinit. And then repeats the same words, Thus some furious Men resolve to
hurt their Adversaries through the sides of their own Friends. And all Men may
perceive how irrational that Inference is, which immediately follows in the
Doctors Discourse, Might not a Heathen at this rate (says he) justify
Polytheism, etc.

The Doctor represents Athanasius as a Man void both of Reason, Religion and
Sense, p. 33. Might not a Heathen (says he) justify Polytheism at the same
rate, (viz.) as Athanasius does the Trinity. Thus the Arians represent all the
Nicene Fathers as a company of stupid and ignorant Dunces; and the Socinians
think the Trinitarians Idolaters and Blasphemers, void of common Reason; and in
their sense, the Worship of God by our Liturgy, is in many parts counted
Idolatry.

And if the Doctor had bestowed but as much time to read the Arian Controversy,
as the Socinian, (which he says was not more than the space of one Day,) we
should likely have had all the Sham-plots (which were so shamefully detected
and exploded) against Athanasius revived, as some modern Arians have done: And
in truth, their Slanders and false Reports are the best Weapons they have;
hence it is, that they attempt for the Reputation of their Cause, to blast the
Honor of the Great Constantine, as if he became an Apostate, and died an
Arian. Which is as true, as the Fiction of the Heathen, That he was a Leaper,
and intended to make a Bath of the Blood of Christian Infants for his Cure.
Whereas Eusebius, who knew him intimately, does testify, that at sixty Years
old he was in perfect health, active, strong, and fit for Military Exercises,
L. 4. c. 53. Nor has any Heathen, however provoked by Constantine, through his
Zeal for the Christian Religion, ever mentioned him to be an Arian: which had
there been any truth in it, either Julian, Marcellinus, Zosimus, or some other
Heathen that wrote his History, would have done; but we see some that call
themselves Christians, dare to do what the Heathen abhor: And of this kind is
that Calumny of Sandius, which I could not read without great wonder, That
Constantine the Great did never entirely believe the Unity of the Trinity, L.
2. p. 186. for proof whereof, he produces one Benedictus Presbyter, (who might
be an Irish Priest for ought I know, or can judge by his evidence) his words
are these, p. 159. l. 2. Constantine was not wholly a Christian, but as
(Tentator) one that would make trial, was baptized by Silvester in the name of
the Trinity, but not confessing the Unity: And he was baptized by Eusebius of
Nicomedia -- And having obtained Victory, but lost his Sense, (Sensu alienatus)
said, I will go to Nicomedia; where he was rebaptized, declining to the Opinion
of the Arians. Such a rambling inconsistent Evidence as this, is enough to draw
a Prejudice against all the rest: I have not all the Records whereby to examine
the other Witnesses which he does produce to prove Constantine an Arian:
Orosius whom he quotes, says nothing of it. Sulpitius Severus, l. 2. p. 138.
says, That by the two Arius's, the great Authors of the Arian Perfidy, the
Emperor was corrupted, and thinking to do a religious Office, he became a
Persecutor; he banished the Bishops, dealt severely with the Clergy and Laity
that departed from the Communion of the Arians. Now this being the first
particular which this Witness mentions of Constantine, and for remedy
whereof, he says, the Nicene Council was called, cannot be understood of
Constantine's settled Judgment, or constant Practice, which is otherwise related
by other Authentic Historians, and by himself, who says afterward, that the
Emperor embraced the Decrees of the Nicene Council, which condemned the Arians,
who thereby were calmed and joined in Communion with the Catholics. So that
neither is this Witness consistent with himself, for he was a professed Enemy to
the Arians, Who (he says) not being able to overthrow the Faith by Argument,
sought to destroy the Champions of it by suborning false Accusers, and feining
Faults where they could find none; of which he gives Instances.

3ly, That Optatus calls Constantine an Apostate, he only says, but quotes not
the place, which is so much for his Cause, that I believe he would not have
omitted it, if it were really so, for it would have weighed much more than that
rabble of Quotations which he collects, as so many St. Omers Evidences, such as
Philostorgius and his Rhemenses, and his Anonymous Authors; what Socrates,
Sozom. Evagr. and other known Writers, especially Eusebius Pamph. have said, he
durst not produce, though he uses their names: But he quotes at large the
words of St. Heirome Chron. ad Am. 340. That Constantine at the end of his life
was baptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, declining to the Opinion of
Arius: And (says Sandius) here is no Evasion left that it may be understood of
Constantine the Son, etc. Perhaps Sandius had read, that it was Constantine the
Son that was baptized also at Nicomedia, as he may in Marianus Scotus, and
certainly it was after his Death that the Persecution of the Catholics begun,
when Constantius favored the Arians. By the way I observe, that the first
Witness Benedictus said, Cessavit persecutio; That on the Death of Constantine
the Great, the Persecution ceased: which is contrary to what St. Heirom says,
That from the time of his Baptism the spoil of Churches, and Discord of the
whole World was continued home to his days. But there is more to be replied to
St. Heirome, as first, He does not say he was of the Arian Opinion, but
declined to it; which was only a Conjescture of St. Hierom's, because he was
baptized by Eus. Nicod. who was reputed an Arian. But as it is observed by
Richerius, a Doctor of Sorbon, p. 639. in his History of General Councils, That
this Eusebius did not openly profess himself an Arian as long as Constantine
lived, and the opposition that he made against Athanasius was persued on other
pretenses; and that Constantine banished him upon a false Accusation, that he
had intercepted the Customs which were to be sent him from Alexandria to
Constantinople. And he was also so kind to Arius upon another false Suggestion,
That he differed nothing from the Nicene Faith. Now St. Hierom hearing of these
Actions of Constantine, and not being truly informed of the reasons of them,
might conjecture that he inclined to the Arian Opinion; and why might he not be
mistaken in his Relation of Constantine, as well as in that concerning Meletius
(in the same Chronicle) whom he reports to be an Enemy of the Church; and yet
it is most certain, (says Richerius) that none besides Athanasius did do, or
suffer more for the Catholic Faith, as St. Basil in his Epistles, and Greg.
Naz. who familiarly conversed with him have attested. Doubtless neither
Eusebius, Pamph. nor Athanasius, nor the rest of the approved Catholic
Writers, would have so recommended the Actions of Constantine, if he had been a
known Arian, and for the sake of that Opinion had persecuted the Orthodox and
Bishops; such are the Weapons of Naked Gospellers, who licking themselves clean
with their Tongues, are wont to spit out the Filth and Venom in Calumnies and
Reproaches, in the face of their Adversaries; hence Athanasius is represented
as a Drunkard, and incontinent Person; and the Fathers of the Nicene Council,
as a company of rude, unexperienced, unlearned, and inconstant Men, and the
great Constantine, who confirmed the Nicene Faith, suffers as an Arian to
this day. See Sandius, p. 167.

It is the Judgment of a very great Man, Gothofred, in his Notes on
Philostorgius, That while Constantine was living, no Man durst open his mouth
against the Nicene Creed; and that those who followed Eusebius, did profess
their assent to it, p. 62. And that Eusebius Nicomed. and others of his Party
in that Council, did subscribe to the same, p. 36. which Theodoret says, they
did, that putting on the Sheep's skin, they might act the more like Wolves,
Theod. l. 1. c. 19. As they did shortly after the Death of Constantine. And
Philostorgius says, Some of them recanted while Constantine lived, and
confessed, that they had done wickedly in subscribing to that Council, for fear
of his displeasure, Gothof, p. 43, 44. And Photius observes it to be a Fiction
of Philostorgius, That Constantine sometime after the Nicene Council, should
send forth his Letters, condemning the word (...); and that Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, should subscribe to the same; of whom Athanasius, Orat. contra
Arianos, p. 132. says, That he died firm in the Nicene Faith, about a Year
after that Council, viz. Anno 326. And that Constantine dyed in the same Faith,
besides the Testimony of Athanasius in his Ad vitam Solitariam agentes, Epiph.
Her. 69. Theod. l. 2. c. 5. And Lex 1. Cod. Theodos. contra Heretic. do attest.
See Gothofrede, p. 46.

Chap. 8. p. 34. The Doctor amuseth us with the variety of Creeds published by
Councils, under the influence of the Emperor Constantius, whereof I shall give
the Reader this brief account. After that Athanasius fell under Constantines
displeasure, and was banished, it is said, he never saw his face more; though
it is reported, that Constantine did it out of kindness to secure him from the
Attempts of such as sought to take away his life; and Constantine his Son
declared as much, and that it was his Fathers mind to recall him; and some say
he would have put it on his Will, had not Eusebius of Nicomedia hindered it.
Athanasius himself was of the same mind; and evident it is, that his Son
Constantine recalled him soon after his Fathers death, and sent Letters to the
people of Alexandria on his behalf. A Synod at Alexandria vindicate him, and
write to Julius Bp of Rome on his behalf; but a Synod being met at Antioch,
which had the favor of Constantius, they coin new Creeds in opposition to the
Nicene Faith; there are in Ecclesiastical History four sorts, one is of a
larger size, which has this Preface, We are not the disciples of Arius; yet
they consented to the Condemnation of Athanasius, who made his Appeal to Julius
Bishop of Rome, who summoned the Eastern Bishops, intending a hearing of
Athanasius his cause in a full Synod; but they refusing to come, the Synod
acquitted Athanasius, and condemned Photinus. Constans befriended Athanasius so
far, as to write to his Brother Constantius on his behalf, not without
threatening to restore him by Arms, if it were denied. They therefore agreed
that there should be a general Council summoned at Millan, but that requiring a
long time, there was a Synod held at Sardica, where the Arrian Party thought
that Athanasius durst not appear; but he deceived them, and came so provided,
that they thought not fit to revive their accusations against him; though a
Party of the Arrians decreed to omit the word (...), and without hearing,
condemned Julius Bishop of Rome, Hosius of Corduba, and Athanasius. But the
Council of Sardica confirmed the Nicene Faith, acquitted Athanasius, and found
the Arrian Party guilty of diverse Tumults, which had occasioned much shedding
of blood; they Condemned George, who had intruded to the Bishopric of
Alexandria, as a person not worthy of the name of a Christian; and wrote their
Letters to Julius, to confirm their Decree for the restoring of Athanasius,
which was agreed to by more than Three Hundred Bishops; and sent Letters also
to the people of Alexandria to receive their Bishop; and it happening that George
the Intruder, having been slain in a Tumult, Constantius himself fearing the
consequence of such Tumults, wrote to the Citizens on the behalf of Athanasius.
And thus that Church enjoyed some respite, Constantius being employed in a War
against Magnentius. In his March toward Mursa, where the Battle was fought, he
made a stop at a Church under the Jurisdiction of Valens the Arrian Bishop,
waiting the Success of the Battle; in which retirement Valens carest the
Emperor, and as Sulpitius Severus relates the matter, Valens had provided some
Messengers to attend the Army, and as soon as they saw to which Party the
Victory inclined, to bring him the News with all possible speed, designing that
if the Emperor was overcome, he might secure himself by flight; if he
conquered, Valens might ingratiate himself, by giving the first Intelligence of
a Victory, which accordingly fell out; for Magentius was totally routed, and
the News came when the Emperor seemed much dejected; but on hearing of it by
Valence, the Emperor could scarce believe it, demanding to speak with the
Messenger: but Valens told him, He might be confident of it, for it was
revealed to him by an Angel: and shortly after the Messenger entered to confirm
the News of the Victory. This so ingratiated Valens with the Emperor, that he
was wont to say, The Victory was owing more to the Merits of Valens, than to
the Valor of his Army. Sulp. Sever. l. 2. p. 143. Edit. Amstel. 1641.

After this Battle, Valens having regained the good Opinion of the Emperor,
which he had almost lost by his inconstancy, declaring sometimes for, and other
times against the Nicene Faith. And now was a fit opportunity to mind the
Emperor of his Promise for Summoning a General Council at Millan, the Emperor
being then resident there; and the Council being met, Valens pursues his design
against Athanasius, requiring Subscriptions for his Condemnation; but the
Orthodox Party perceiving many Arians there, desired that Matters of Faith
might have the precedence, and so propounded the Nicene Creed to be first
subscribed; which Valens opposing, it was cast in his teeth, That he had
formerly subscribed it more than once, and therefore it was hoped he would not
refuse it now: yet when Dyonisius Bishop of Millan, took his Pen ready to
subscribe his Name, Valens snatched it out of his hand, and bid him, forbear,
until Athanasius 's Case was decided; and then was an Arian Creed read, and
Subscriptions required thereunto; which the Catholics refused, and thereupon
arose a great Tumult among the People; insomuch, that the Emperor fearing the
event, adjourned them to meet at his Court, where the Accusations against
Athanasius being renewed, the Catholics pleaded, that they had been adjudged
to be false, (viz.) in the Synod at Tire, Anno 335, where the Woman that was
brought to accuse him for Incontinency, was convicted of a false Accusation;
for Timotheus who accompanied Athanasius, stood up, as if he had been
Athanasius, and asked her, Whether he ever used any force or other temptation
to deprave her? which she confidently affirmed; and thereupon that sham was
detected.

So was the Second Accusation about the Death of Arsenius, who being deprived
by Athanasius, and denied Communion with the Church at Alexandria, the Arian
Party persuaded him to withdraw, and lie hid for a while; and in the mean time
they gave out, that Athanasius had been the cause of destroying him: but there
were two sufficient Witnesses produced to prove, that Arsenius was alive, and
that they saw him lately in good health.

They accused him also of several other Crimes, but wanting sufficient
Evidence, the Emperor being present, stood up and said, That he himself
accused Athanasius, and knew him to be a turbulent and seditious Person, and
demanded who would refuse his Testimony. Liberius Bishop of Rome was the first
whose Subscription to the Condemnation of Athanasius was required, who stoutly
refused it, and argued against the Emperor, and others who urged it, and still
refusing was banished by the Emperor; then Hosius Bishop of Corduba was
assaulted, sometime by Promises, and then by Threats, and being of great Age,
and overcome by Reproaches, as if he alone withstood the Emperor's Pleasure,
and the Church's Peace, and having suffered in his Body, as well as his good
Name, at last, to save his Carcass, (as the Historians say) was prevailed with
to subscribe; but returning home to Spain, Athanasius says, that Hosius on his
Deathbed repented, complaining of the Violences which were offered him, and
anathematized the Arians, charging all the People to avoid that Heresy.
Athanasius gives him an excellent Character, and in allusion to his Name, says,
He was truly (...), (i. e.) a Holy Man.

Another Synod was made up by some of these Men at Sirmium, where they
condemned as well the (...), as the (...), as being not Scriptural words; and
it is observed, that in their address to the Emperor, among other Titles which
they gave him, they termed him Eternal, which they denied to grant to the Son
of God, whom they affirmed to be a Creature. This Synod was held Anno Dom. 359.

But there needed yet a farther Confirmation of the Arian Doctrine, and
therefore the Emperor is persuaded to send to the Bishop of Rome, to summon
all the Bishops of the Latin, as the Emperor undertook for the Bishops of the
Greek Church; and there was like to be so great a concourse, that one place was
not thought capable to entertain them; wherefore Ariminum in Italy was
appointed for the Western, and Selucia for the Eastern Bishops. Here Valens
finding the Nicene Faith likely to be confirmed, read a Creed very like to that
of the Nicene, one only expression being subtily inserted, (viz.) That Christ
was not a Creature like unto other Creatures; and all the rest being agreeable
to the Nicene Faith, they were unwarily prevailed with to sign that Creed,
which implied our Savior to be a Creature; the same after much Controversy
was confirmed at Selucia, by the means of Leonas, whom the Emperor sent there
for that purpose. Some of the Eastern Bishops in their Return stayed at a place
called Nice, in Thracia, where they confirmed the same Faith, thinking to
recommend it to the common People under the name of the Nicene Faith. These
were headed by Ursacius. And at Antioch some others met Anno. 360. and
condemned the use of the word Substance, whence they were called Anomaeans and
Exoucontians. But about this time Constantius dies, (viz.) Anno 361, whose
great business was to establish the Arian Faith, employing the Bishops in one
Synod after another, and influencing them all by his own Presence, or his
Deputies, and his Threatening Letters. But on his Deathbed (it is said) he
repented of these three things: 1. That he had caused the Death of so many of
his Kindred. 2ly, That he had named Julian to be his Successor in the Empire.
And 3ly, That he had occasioned so many Troubles and Innovations in the Church
and Faith. See Theoderet, l. 3. c. 1. p. 125. But Athanasius survived him many
Years, and died in a good old Age, having established the Foundation of the
Christian Faith, and thereupon raised a perpetual Monument of his Learning and
Piety, which shall be happily remembered in all Places where the Gospel is
preached.

Chap. 9. He says, The Dispute is dangerous, and the Danger is twofold, 1. Of
Blasphemy. 2. Contention. 1. Concerning Blasphemy: They who held the (...) were
thought to blaspheme, as denying that the Son had any substance of his own: The
others were accused as Heathen that brought in the Worship of many Gods. And
thus, he says, either Party charged the other with Blasphemy. As for the
Arians, it may well be thought that they had their superior and inferior Gods,
in that they worshipped a Created God; but the Consubstantialists worshipped
one God only, (i. e.) the Trinity in Unity.

There is no doubt a Blasphemy against the Son of God, when as the Pharisees
that would have stoned him because he said he was the Son of God, thinking that
he acted by the help of Belzeebub the Prince of Devils, and if they had only
denied him to have wrought his Miracles by the Spirit of God, this had been a
Blaspemy. An ancient Divine of our Church, Mr. Porter, writing of the
Incarnation of our Savior, gives his sense of Matthew. 12.31, 32. which I only
repeat, and leave the Reader to judge of it, being alien from the common
Interpretation, Christ having cast out a Devil by his Divine Spirit, the
Pharisees knowing it must be done by some supernatural Power, would not grant
it to be by the Power of God, but of the Devil; our Savior convinces them
that it was done by the Spirit of God, though they would not acknowledge it, but
against the Evidence of a Divine Power, blasphemed the Spirit by which our
Savior had done that Miracle.

They had reproached him as a Man before, calling him a gluttonous Person, a
Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners: This was remissius ventire de
felio hominis. But when they blaspheme the Spirit of God by which he had cast
out a Devil, as if by consent of Devils he had cast them out: this he
denounces an unpardonable Sin, the Sin against the Holy Ghost, (i. e.) says
he, Against the spirit of God in Christ, not taken personally, for the Holy
Ghost, but essentially for the Godhead of Christ: for which he quotes St. Basil
saying, Spiritus appellatio est Communis tribus personis. And Tertul. Jesus
Christus est Spiritus dei. St. August. also, Quia deus Spiritus est potest dici
Pater est Spiritus, filius est spiritus, etc.

2. He says the Pharisees had not heard of the Person of the Holy Ghost, of
which some of the Disciples were not fully instructed: The Question was,
Whether Christ acted by the Spirit and Power of God, or the Devil? And Christ
proves he did it by the Spirit, (i. e.) by the Power of the Godhead.

The sense then of our Savior's Answer, to make it pertinent to the Objection,
is this; What I have now done, I have proved to be done by the Spirit of God;
and though what you have spoken against me as the Son of Man, may be forgiven,
yet what you, or any other shall speak against me as the Son of God, shall
never be forgiven. Therefore he concludes, that to deny the Deity of Christ, is
that Blasphemy; for to rob Christ of his Godhead, which is the foundation of
the Remission of Sins, is to exclude ourselves from that benefit, Qui negat
deum in Christo caret omni Misericordia; He that denies Christ to be God,
cannot obtain mercy.

Hence the Fathers affirm, Arius and Julian who denied the Deity of Christ, to
be guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, 2 St. John 4.3. Every spirit or
doctrine; Qui soluit Jesum. (So St. Heirom Prosp. etc. read that Text) That
divides the Deity of Christ from his Humanity, is Antichrist, St. Ambrose de
Fide. And he is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22.

He adds, It is dangerous because we have no firm footing from Scripture,
Antiquity, or Councils. Which because he only affirms, without show of proof,
it will be sufficient to deny. And though this Position were rash enough, yet
what he adds is much worse, viz. That the Athanasian may be numbered among the
Roman Doctrines, and to be leveled with the Arian, equally unworthy of not only
our Faith but our Study.

Now the Athanasian Doctrine is not only agreeable to the Nicene, but they are
both retained in the Doctrine of the Church of England, and how can he affirm
himself a Son of the Church of England, who bids such an open Defiance to the
Doctrine of that Church? The Nicene Council grounded their Decrees on the
Scripture, as they had been understood by the Primitive and Apostolical
Fathers, before there was either Imperial or Papal Power in the Christian
Church: and it is very strange, if this be not a more firm Foundation, than his
corrupt Reason, when it is contrary both to Scripture, Antiquity, and Councils,
and the sense of the Catholic Church in all Ages, as much as to the Faith of
the Church of England.

In this Chapter the Doctor tells us of the Council of Ariminum, which was many
Years after that of Nice, and was the greatest for number that ever was, but
one of the worst (for the major part were Arians;) the Doctor confessing, p.
38. col. 2. That the Arians had all the Eastern Churches, except that of
Jerusalem; that in this Council the Latin Church were circumvented by the
Greeks, who when it was proposed by the Greeks, Whether they would worship
Christ, or (...); they cried, they believed not in (...), but in Christ. Before
I answer this Objection, I shall add another which the Doctor urges, p. 14. c.
1. speaking of the Consubstantiality, he says, It was a Mystery to those very
Councils which determined it; and as it appears, says he, by those contrary
Determinations of several Councils, and by the wavering of the same Council;
for that of Sermium framed two or three, one whereof they would have reneg'd
and labored to recall its Copies.

Answ. This Variety of Councils was occasioned partly by the influence of Arian
Emperors, under whom at that time St. Hierome observed the whole World became
Arians, but more especially by subtilty of those Greeks, of whom he speaks, who
pleaded the Cause of the Arians in that Council of Ariminum, against the Latin
Church; for those sort of Greeks were possessed of the Eastern Churches, as our
Doctor observes. But the Latin Church adhered to the Athanasian and Nicene
Creeds; and as Ignorant as the Doctor accounts them, they discovered and
baffled the Sophistry of his subtle Greeks, even in that Declaration of
theirs, That they believed not in the (...), but in Christ; (i. e.) not in such
a (...) as some of those subtle Greeks would have imposed on them, contrary to
the Opinion they had of Christ.

Now this piece of Sophistry will thus appear: Athanasius speaking of some
Heretics, who used the word (...), says, That Paulus Samos. used it in a sense
that might confirm his Error, and destroy the true Notion of the Word. The
Council of Nice agreed the meaning of it to be, That the Son had a proper
Personality which made him the second Person in the Trinity, but was of the
Substance with the Father. And Socrates, l. 1. c. 8. says, They held the Son to
be of the Father, but not as a part of his Substance; (which was the Error of
Paulus Samos. Sabellius, etc.) declaring the Divine Essence to be undivided;
contrary to the Opinion of those Heretics, that held the Divine Substance to
be divided between the Father and the Son.

And in this sense they used the word (...), which the Council of Nice
accounted Heretical: this was known to the Latin Church, and when they
proposed that word in a sense opposite to the Nicene Faith, they did (as they
had just cause) reject it, and answered that subtle Question with a plain
renouncing of the Error of those Heretics that thought to impose their sense
on them, We will not worship (...), but Christ.

In this sense it was that the Fathers in that Council renounced the word
(...); Eustathius had this distinction from Marcellus his Master, whom St.
Hilary and St. Basil call an Heretic. See Socrates l. 1. c. 23. and Sozomon l.
2. c. 11.

I shall here once for all give my Reader a short Account of the Controversy
between St. Athanasius and Arius: Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, having heard
of the Blasphemy of Arius, a Priest under his Jurisdiction, called a Synod of
his Province, to enquire into his Opinions, and censure him: Arius appeared and
maintained, That there was a time when Christ was not; that he was Deus Factus,
made a God, and so a Creature. For these and other Heretical Opinions, he was
Excommunicated, together with some others, whom he had drawn to his Opinion;
and by their means the People were also divided, denying to hold Communion with
each other.

The Emperor being informed how far the Dissension spread, and what Tumults had
been already occasioned by the Controversy between the Catholics and Arians,
though not fully informed of the truth of the Question, made it his business to
apply a seasonable Remedy to so great an Evil; and first he sent Letters by
Hosius Bishop of Corduba, both to Alexander and Arius, enjoining them to Peace
and Brotherly Communion: I find, says the Emperor, that the rise of the
Controversy between you is this: That when you Alexander, required of your
Presbyters what they thought of a certain place in the Law, or rather of a
needless Question; and you Arius did imprudently reply, what you neither ought
to think, nor being thought, you ought to have suppressed by silence; the Discord
between you caused a breach in your Communion, whereby the People also were
divided from the Unity of the Church: wherefore I Exhort, that each of you
pardoning each other, do embrace what I your Fellow Servants most justly
require: for it was neither fit to move such a Question at first, nor being
moved to return such an Answer to it; for such Questions which no necessity of
the Law does prescribe, ought to be kept in our own Breasts, and not to be
unadvisedly committed to the Ears of the Vulgar, lest we for the infirmity of
our Nature, not being able to explain what is proposed, and the People through
their dullness being not able to apprehend it, they necessarily fall into
Blasphemy or Schism, for the Contention is not about any great Command of the
Law, nor is there any new Opinion started concerning the Worship of God, but
you both retain one and the same Opinion, (so it seems the Emperor was
informed) and therefore may well live in the same Communion, as the various
Sect of Philosophers do. Let us duly consider how unequal it is, that by your
Contention about light and vain words, the People that lived as Brethren,
should be divided as Enemies, by your strife about small and unnecessary
things: These Actions are more agreeable to the Ignorance of Boys, than to the
Wisdom of Priests, and wise Men; but seeing you have the same Faith, and the
same Opinion of our Religion, and our Law requires concord of Minds, and the
Controversy between you does not concern the Substance of Religion, there
ought not to be any discord between you.

This he said before he had been duly informed of the State of the
Controversy; what his thoughts were afterward, you shall hear anon.

But as Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. says, neither the Emperors Letters, nor the
Endeavors of Hosius, could compose the Dissension; the Emperor therefore
resolved to summon a General Council at Nice, in Bithinia, to which all the
Bishops of Europe, Africa, and Asia were called; and there met above 300
Bishops, besides Presbyters, Deacons, etc. many of whom were eminent for Wisdom
in Speaking, Holiness of Life, Patience in Suffering, Modesty and Meekness of
Manners; these being assembled, the Emperor appears, the Bishops having done
their Reverence, he sat not down himself, until he had beckned to them to sit
down; and he spoke first, exhorting them to Peace and Unity; and whereas they
had accused one another in several Libels the day before, he enjoined them to
burn those Libels, and to forgive each other, as they expected Christ should
forgive them: Then he gave them leave to propose the Differences that concerned
Religion, of which Eusebius in the Third Book of the Life of Constantine, gives
this Account, That many things being proposed by both Parties, the Emperor
attended with great patience and intention of mind, weighing what was offered
by both Parties, moderating and allaying their heats, and by his own arguments
convincing some, and persuading others, they were at last brought to an
agreement; which was committed to Writing. Some particulars whereof, says
Socrates, l. 1. c. 8. I will repeat, least any should condemn the Proceedings
of that Council, or as Sabinus did, account them ignorant and simple Men, as
particularly he did.

Eusebius, who subscribed not until he had strictly examined the Controversy;
however he commends the Emperor, as being very skilful in the Matters of
Faith. Socrates also commends Eusebius Pamphyli as a faithful Witness of what
was done in that Council.

The Faith then agreed on was drawn into the Form which is now in our Liturgy,
to which they added an Anathema against such as should affirm, That there was a
time when the Son of God was not; and that was made of things that were not, or
that he had some other Substance or Essence created, or subject to change. To
this 318 Bishops subscribed, five only refused, because of the word
Consubstantial, whereof Eusebius and Theognis afterward recanted, and were
reconciled; the rest kept in Banishment with Arius.

This Eusebius having after long deliberation assented to the Nicene Creed,
sends a Copy of it to his People of Caesarca, with a particular Account how it
was examined; and tells his People, That it was the same which he had received
from the Bishops his Predecessors, when he was first instructed by them, and
which they professed at their Baptism, and which he would defend with his Life;
he tells them, the Emperor confirmed it first, with the addition of the word
Consubstantial, to which they all agreed. And to remove the prejudices which
his People might have conceived against him, for standing out so long, till he
was sentenced to Banishment, and then conforming, he tells them, with how great
Judgment he considered both the Reasons of his Dissent, and of his Consent,
suspending his Assent from the first to the last; however, as long as he met
with any thing that offended him; but when after due examination he found the
sense of the words controverted to agree with that Faith which he at first
received, he embraced them. And what those were, he gives a particular Account,
viz.

1. These words were examined, Of the Substance of the Father: concerning which
there arose diverse Questions and Answers; and after Examination it was agreed,
That the words of the Substance signified, That the Son was of the Father, but
not as a part of the Father: to this I consented, as also to the word
Consubstantial, for the sake of Peace: and that I might not fall from the right
understanding of it, in like manner to the words, Begotten not made; because it
was urged, that the word made was common to the Creatures which were made by
the Son, to which he had no likeness, being of a more excellent Substance,
which the Scripture teach was of the Father, by a secret manner of Generation
not to be expressed; and this Consubstantiality was not to be in a corporeal
manner, as in mortal Creatures; for it was not by division of Substance, nor
Abscission, nor change of the Father's Substance and Power, because this was
different from all those; but it signifies that the Son had no likeness with
the Creatures that were made by him, but was in all things like to the Father,
by whom he was begotten, and of no other Substance; and to this we consented,
knowing that many ancient famous Bishops and learned Writers, speaking of the
Divinity of the Father and the Son, used the same word. The Emperor also
expressed the same sense of the word Consubstantial, which he said, Was not to
be understood, as if the Son were of the Father by Division, or any Section, as
in corporeal Substances, because an intellectual and immaterial Nature admits
not of the Affections of Bodies.

And that you may know something of the History of Arius, I shall give you this
brief Account.

Arius was a Priest of Alexandria in Egypt, a Man infinitely desirous of Glory
and Novelty, as Ruffinus who knew him, reports; one that corrupted many Virgins
who had professed Virginity; he and some others of that Church, whereof
Alexander was Bishop, a Learned and Orthodox Divine, who suspecting that the
Ancient Heresy which denied the Godhead of our Savior was crept into this
Church, as the Event shows it was, summoned his Clergy, and discoursing to them
concerning the Mystery of the Trinity, told them of the Unity in the Trinity:
Arius one of the Presbyters skilful in Logic, supposing the Bishop affected to
the Doctrine of Sabellius thus objects to his Bishop. If the Father begot the
Son, then he that was begotten had a beginning of his Existence; and so there
was a time when the Son was not; and if so, he had his Existence out of
nothing, Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. From these unheard of Assertions, he provoked many
to consider that Question, and from this Spark a great Fire was kindled, which
spread through all Egypt, Lybia, and the Upper Thebais, and many other
Provinces; for many others favored Arius, especially Eusebius of Nicomedia,
which much displeased Alexander, so that by a Council of Bishops he removed
Arius, and some others, and writes to the neighboring Bishops to this purpose:
That wicked M^n were risen up in his Diocese, teaching such a Defection as may
be rightly called, A Fore-running of Antichrist: I could wish, says he, this
mischief might have been confined among the Apostates; but seeing Eusebius of
Nicomedia undertakes their Patronage, and has written Letters to recommend
them and their Heresy, I could not forbear to forewarn you of these Apostates
and their Opinions, and that you attend not to the Writings of Eusebius.

The Names of those that have forsaken the Church, Arius, Achillas, Aithales,
Carpones, another Arius, Sarmates, Euzoius, Lucius, Julianus, Menas, Hellodius,
Gaius, and with these Secundus, and Theanas, who were formerly called Bishops.
That which they rashly publish is this:

God was not always a Father; the Word of God was not always, but had its
beginning of nothing; for God which is, created him that was not, out of that
which was not; and so the Son, they say, is a Creature, not like his Father in
Substance, nor the True Word of God, nor his True Wisdom; but one of his Works
and Creatures, but abusively so called, being made by the Word and Wisdom which
is in God, that made him and all things: That the Son knows not the Father, nor
can perfectly know him; nor does he know his own Substance what it is; but was
made as an Instrument by which God would create us; nor had he been made,
unless God would have made us by him. To them that ask, whether the Word of God
could be changed as the Devil was, they answer, Yea, that he is of a mutable
Nature, because he was created. Arius with great impudence affirming these
Things, We, together, with almost an hundred Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, did
anathematize him and his Adherents; but Eusebius has received them, that he
may join Impiety to Piety, Falsehood to Truth; but they shall not prevail, for
Truth will overcome: for whoever heretofore heard such things, or now hearing
them, does not stop his Ears, who hearing St. John say, In the beginning was
the Word, will not condemn these Men's sayings, There was a time when he was
not, etc.

These Letters had various effects on a great many, and not much to the
advantage of Alexander, for Arius and his Party were very diligent in writing
on the contrary behalf; Eusebius also Bishop of Nicomedia heartily espoused his
Cause, partly out of a private grudge between him and Bishop Alexander, and
partly through his own Opinion, which agreed with those of Arius, and the
Emperor being then at Nicomedia, with whom he was in favor, and by this
opportunity he had great influence on the neighboring Bishops, to whom he
wrote diverse Letters on the behalf of Arius; he wrote also to Alexander
himself, admonishing him to receive Arius again into his Communion; and by
these means the Divisions were so great, that not only the Bishops, but the
People also ran into Parties; and the Meletians also joined with Arius; so that
they wrote to Alexander to recall the Excommunication against him, pleading,
that his Opinions were right; for Arius did so palliate his Heresy, as that to
the unwary and more ignorant sort, both of Clergy and People, it seemed nothing
different from the Orthodox Doctrine.

The Emperor also wrote to a contrary purpose to the Church of Alexandria,
Socrates p 30. That all things concerning the Controversies that were moved,
had been acurately discussed and examined by the Council. But O! what great and
grievous Blasphemies some did declare against our Savior! and our Hope of
Eternal Life! producing things contrary to the Scripture inspired from above,
and to the Faith, yet professing their belief of them; whereas therefore more
than 300 Bishops, which were to be admired for their modesty and diligence,
conformed by their unanimous consent, that which according to the Rule of the
Divine Law is the only Faith, Arius only was found, who overcome by diabolical
fraud and design, did first sow this mischievous Evil among you and others; but
let us embrace the Opinion which Almighty God has delivered, and return to our
Brethren, from whose Fellowship that impudent Minister of the Devil has
separated them; for that which has been decreed by more than 300 Bishops, is
to be esteemed, as the Divine Sentence seeing that the Holy Ghost residing in
their Minds, has revealed his Divine Will unto them. He assured them also,
That the Definitions of the Council were not made without diligent examination.
Wherefore in another Epistle to the Bishops and People, mentioned by Socrates,
p. 32. of the Edition by Valesius, he says, That the Arians following evil and
malicious Men, deserved to suffer the same infamous punishment with them; and
as Porphyry who wrote against the Christian Religion had his Books destroyed,
and himself branded to Posterity; so it is my Command, That Arius and his
Followers shall be called Porphyrians; and that if any Book written by Arius be
found, that it be consumed by Fire, that no remembrance of him may remain, and
that such as conceal his Books shall suffer Death. These were the Emperor's
second thoughts.

It happened that Constantia the Emperor's Sister had entertained an Arian
Presbyter, who often talked of Arius, complaining to her, how much he was
wronged by the Council at Nice; but she durst not commend his Case to the
Emperor, till being sick, and often visited by the Emperor, she commended
this Presbyter to the Emperor, as a devout and faithful Person, who having got
into the Emperor's favor, he told him, as he had done his Sister, of the hard
measure Arius had from the Council, whom he affirmed to be of the same Judgment
with them; and that if he might be admitted to the Emperor's presence, he
would declare his consent to their Decrees. The Emperor wondered to hear this,
and said, That if Arius would subscribe those Decrees, he would not only admit
him to his presence, but send him home to Alexandria with Honor, and wrote to
him to that purpose. See the Letter, Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 25. wondering that
he had not declared sooner, seeing, as the Historian says, the Emperor had
often exhorted him to it; but being come to Constantinople, he with Euzoius,
and some others, presented the Emperor an Account of their Faith in Writing;
which was this, To believe in One God the Father Almighty, and in the Lord
Jesus Christ his Son, who was made by him before all Ages; God the Word by whom
all things in Heaven and Earth were made; who came down, and was incarnate, who
suffered and rose again, and ascended, and shall come to judge the Quick and
Dead; and in the Holy Ghost, the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the Life to
come; in One Catholic Church of God, from one end of the World to the other;
this we believe, as God shall judge us now, and in the World to come.

On this Confession the Emperor ordered his Return to Alexandria, whether he
went, and revived the Divisions among the People, framing new Accusations
against Alexander; the Emperor therefore recalled him to Constantinople, to
question him for those Tumults, which he had raised there: but the same
mischief followed him; for at Constantinople he found his Friend Eusebius of
Nicomedia, and Alexander his Adversary, whom Eusebius threatened, that he should
shortly be deprived of his Priesthood, if he admitted not Arius into Communion;
at which Alexander being greatly troubled, prays and fasts, shutting up himself
in the Church called Irene, and coming to the Altar, prostrates himself on the
Ground, under the holy Table, for many days and nights, asking of God (and he
received what he asked), That if the Opinion of Arius were right, he might not
live to the Day appointed for the Dispute; but if the Faith which he professed
were true, that Arius might suffer the punishment due to his impiety. The
Emperor in the mean time sent for Arius, and willing to be better assured of
the Faith which he professed, asked him, Whether he would consent to the
Decrees of the Council of Nice? he presently answered, He would; and did
subscribe them in the Emperor's presence; at which the Emperor wondered, and
(suspecting some fraud) urged him to swear to them; and this he did also. Now
the fraud which he used, (as I have been informed, says Socrates, c. 38.) was
this: Arius had written his own Opinions in a Paper, which he had hid in his
Bosom, and swore that he did in his Mind believe as he had written. Then the
Emperor commanded Alexander, who was then Bishop of Constantinople, to receive
him into Communion the day following: Arius being about to go into the Church
with his Companions, the Judgment of God seized on him, for going out of the
Emperor's Palace, he walked through the City magnificently guarded by a
company of Eusebians, drawing all eyes upon him; when he came to a place where
stood a Porphery Statue, a great terror, through the consciousness of his
wickedness, seized on him, and with it a great Looseness in his Bowels, and
enquiring where he might step aside to ease himself, he was directed to a place
near at hand, where being come, his Heart grew faint, and he voided his Bowels
with his Excrements, with much Blood, and his Liver and Spleen followed; the
place is yet to be seen, which all that pass by do point at, relating the
manner of Arius's death.

These Accidents did greatly confirm the Emperor in the Faith which was
decreed in the Nicene Council.

St. Ambrose compares his Death with that of Judas, That is, not a fortuitous
Death, (says he) where an Example of the like punishment on the like sin was
inflicted before, that both should suffer the same punishment, who had denied
and betrayed the same Lord; for Sozom. says, (as it is said of Judas) that he
burst asunder.

I shall only remark here, how much mischief one Arian Presbyter by his false
insinuations with Men in Authority, may occasion in a well-established Church;
which notwithstanding all his arts and industry, by God's good Providence,
tended at last to the confirmation of the Truth.

In p. 38. col. 1. he tells us of the Settlement of the Controversy by
Theodosius, though he could not be ignorant that Constantine had done it many
years before; but he conceals the manner of doing it, (viz.) How that he being
sick at Thessalonica, was baptized by Ascolius Bishop of that place (a Person
of great eminency, both for his Words and Works, and adorned with all the Gifts
of the Priestly Office); being recovered, he resolved to propagate that Faith
into which he was baptized, and which his Ancestors had professed, (viz.) that of
the Nicene Creed; and he greatly delighted in Ascolius, as being of the same
belief, as he did also in the Illirians, because none of them were infected
with the pest of Arian Doctrines: and asking concerning the other Provinces, he
was informed, that all the Churches as far as Macedonia, did all agree in the
same Faith, and did worship God, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, equally with the
Father: and being told of the other Provinces toward the East, that they were
tumultuous and divided into several Sects, especially at Constantinople; and
then thinking it better to declare unto his Subjects his Opinion of the Deity,
he sent his Rescript from Thessalonica, to the People of Constantinople, that
from thence, as from the Fort of the Empire, his Rescript might be speedily
issued to other Cities.

Now all this being in the same Chapter which the Doctor quotes, I wonder at
the Doctor's Exclamations: Behold now the ground on which one of our
Fundamental Articles of Faith is built! Behold the Justice of that Plea, which
from such a possession would prescribe to our belief: We have traced it, says
the Doctor, from the Spring, with no worse intent, than to appeal from the
Great Theodosius, who put it above dispute, to the Greater Constantine, who put
it below dispute.

Now seeing he appealed to Constantine, we have his Decision, which I find the
Doctor as faulty, as he judged Arius to be. In the mean time, I suppose from
his own Quotation, that the claim of possession of this great Article of our
Faith, is not either from the Great Theodosius, nor from the Greater
Constantine, nor the Council of Nice, but from the Scripture, of him that is
God over all, blessed for ever; and even Socinus himself agrees with us in
this, and differs from the Doctor, in his Third Epistle to Radecius, affirming,
That even from the first beginning of the Church, there were so many Men most
famous, as well for their Learning as their Piety, so many holy Martyrs of
Christ which cannot be numbered, who followed this otherwise most grievous
Error, That Christ is that One God that created all things, and that he was
begotten of his proper Substance. And may not the Church of England admire how
one of her true Sons is so much more a Socinian than Socinus himself, as to
deny all this, that her Son should suppress the Testimony which he knew to be
true, to serve an Error, which he knows to be false and damnable: Did the
Settlement of Christ's Deity begin with the Reign of Theodosius, and because he
found some Heretics that denied it, was he the first that founded it? Shall we
call the Doctor the Author of Socinianism, because he first published it in
Exeter-Colledge? We can show the Succession of those Apostles and Apostolic
Men that have derived the Consubstantiality home to our days in all the
Churches Greek and Latin; I suppose the Doctor will not glory in the Pedigree
of his Heresy, for so it has been accounted ever since St. John's Gospel was
written; or what temptation could a Man of his Education have, to number the
Athanasian Doctrine which he has so long professed, if he be not an arrant
Hypocrite; among the Roman, Theodosius indeed recommended it to his Subjects,
by a good Argument, viz. That it was the Faith which St. Peter delivered at the
beginning of the Plantation of the Gospel to the Church of Rome: Was St. Peter
Popish, or was his Confession, viz. Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God,
a Popish Confession? Were his Successors for Three hundred Years, who were
Confessors and Martyrs for the same Faith, Papal?

I am heartily sorry and ashamed to hear, how (to recommend the Socinian
Doctrine) he proclaims the Arian, as well as the Athanasian Doctrine equally
unworthy, not only of our Faith, but our Study; Is not this the Quintessence of
Socinianism? See p, 39. c. 1. A very bold assertion is that which follows,
That at the rise of the Controversy, most of the Bishops understood not its
meaning, and that the best Ages of the Church thought it not worth the knowing.
If by the first rise of this Doctrine he means the Council of Nice, as it is
evident he does, how they understood and valued it is beyond Controversy, and
how far it was tolerated by Bishop Alexander, whom he calls the first Author of
the Nicety, tolerated Arius, and his Confederates, by excommunicating and
persecuting him, until God by an extraordinary Judgment took him from troubling
that Church, which he had redeemed by his own Blood, is known in the
Ecclesiastical History of those times; if his Scholars can presume of God's
Pardon, or of Communion with his Church from that instance, it is a strong
presumption indeed; the best means is to do what he derides, that is, to herd
with the Primitive Christians and Martyrs, as he expresses it, which departed
the World before this unhappy Question was proposed; those I mean, who died in
the belief of their Savior's Deity; and I hope it is of them he says, (and not
of Cerinthus, Ebion, the Sabellians, and Samosatenians) that they are saved
without dispute.

Athanasius challenged the Arians to produce one Father of any repute in the
Church of God, that was of the same Judgment with them; which they always
studiously declined, as Socrates shows by the instance of Sisinnius, l. 5. c.
10. And how the World came to be so much Arian as St. Hierom reports, is
evident from St. Hilary, viz. Because their Teachers concealed their own
Opinions, and used such words in their Homelies to the People as the Catholics
did, whereby not only the People, but Bishops and Emperors were deceived by
them: they told them, Christ was God, the true God, and God by Nature, perfect
God before all Ages. And hence as St. Hilary notes, the People remained
Catholics under Arian Bishops; but as he observes, Contra Arium and Auxentium,
p. 215. They had their reserves, They give Christ the Name of God, (says he)
but as they give the same to Men; they confess him to be the Son of God, but as
others in the Sacrament of Baptism are made the Sons of God. They say he was
before all Ages, and so they say were the Angels and Devils; but that Christ is
the true God, that is, that the Deity of the Father and the Son is the same;
this they deny: and hence it is, says he, that under the Priests of Antichrist
the People of Christ are not corrupted, while they believe that to be the Faith
which they hear in their Teachers words: They hear that Christ is God, they
believe what they hear; they hear that he is the Son of God, they believe it to
be true; they hear in Dei nativitate inesse Dei veritatem, they hear that he
was before all Ages, they think he was Eternal: Sanctiores sunt aures Plebis
quam corda Sacerdotum, There is more Sanctity in the Ears of the People, than
in the Hearts of the Priests. Thus was Constantius deceived; the Arian Priest,
whom on the commendation of his dying Sister he took into favor, persuaded
him, that Arius did believe all the Decrees of the Nicene Council, and as an
ancient Writer says, Hereticos admisit Constantius Heresin non Amplexus.

If Constantius favored the Arians, it was not from any favor he had to their
Heresy; and it is observed by Theodoret, l. 3. c. 8. that though he disliked
the word Consubstantial, yet he owned the sense of it, That the Word was God,
that Christ was the true and natural Son of God, begotten of the Father before
all Ages, and condemned them that called him a Creature. And Greg. Nazianzen
had the same Opinion of him, for he termed him, The most Divine Emperor, and
greatest Lover of Christ; and he was never accounted a Flatterer. The Councils
also under him professed all the Articles of the Nicene Creed, the word
Consubstantial only omitted.

Elias Cretensis gives this reason for the Laws which he made on the behalf of
the Arians, That being deceived by wicked Men, he made Laws for their
Toleration, against them that were pious. But this trick was learned them by
one George, Bishop of Laodicea, who argued thus: Seeing that God made all
things, and all things were made of what was not, therefore the Son was made of
things that were not, yet was he the Son of God as made by him. Eusebius Bishop
of Nicomedia, and Theognis, who after great obstinacy subscribed to the Nicene
Decrees, but would not consent to the Condemnation of Arius, gave this reason
for it; because partly in the Letters which he wrote to them, and in the
Conference they had with him, they could not judge him guilty of the Opinions
charged on him. See Constantine's Letter in Socrates l. 1. c. 38. He used that
Maxim of Matchiavel, He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to
live: and therefore he complied with the Opinions of all of other Heretics,
but never could with the Orthodox, for which reason he was compared to the
Camelion, of which Creature it is said, it could conform itself to all Colors,
except the White.

P. 39. col. 2. The Doctor seems to accuse our Savior of a Rhetorical
Hyperbole, in appropriating to himself such great Titles: It is very frequent
for Rhetoric, says he, to exceed, but never to diminish the Grammatical
Character of a Person, whose Honor the Writer professes to advance, and on
this account they (i. e. the Socinians) think it more reasonable, that those
expressions which exalt our Savior's Person to an equality with the Father,
should stoop to those which speak him inferior; than that those which speak
him inferior, should be strained up to those which speak him equal: as if
ourself had exalted himself above his degree, who so humbled himself as to
become obedient to death, even the death of the Cross.

But this is an Argument for which he is beholding to Sandius the Arian, who p.
139. of his Appendix, speaking of the Omniscience of our Savior, pleads, That
such expressions are taken from the Flowers of Rhetoric, by which the things
treated of are sometimes exalted, and sometimes depressed, and in the present
Subject (says he) is often given in the Praises due to Christ, against the
Jews and Gentiles, thereby to aggrandize, not to depreciate him. Wherefore the
Doctor commends the Arians for a truer Method, who when one expression in
Scripture seems to contradict another, take such a course to reconcile them, as
the Laws and Customs of all the World direct, (i. e.) that those expressions
which exalt our Savior, should stoop to those that depress him; and this he
adds is the safer way, since it will lead us to such a belief as will suffice
for that end, for whose sake alone belief itself is required.

Chap. 10. Is entitled of the Word or Matter which is the Object of Faith: Here
the Doctor undertakes to give us a Catalogue of Fundamentals, and in one or two
general Aphorisms to discover why, and how far belief is necessary.

He rejects what Doctor Hammond wrote on that subject, as insufficient for
satisfaction, and says, It is like an Advertizement in a Gazett, which however
exact, cannot secure from a mistake, though we meet the Man described.

The reason of this Reflection on Dr. Hammond, of whom I shall only say, That
if in this or the former Age, there were any more learned, there was not one
more pious; or if there were any more pious, there was none more learned, is,
because he has so razed the very Foundations of Socinianism, that there needs
no more to be said against it, than what that admirable Man has written in
that excellent Tract which the Doctor has mentioned, as Bathsheba did Adonijah
to King Solomon, against the Life of his Darling, 1 Kings 2.23. for as no Man
has laid a better Foundation of Faith, it being the same which the Apostle
laid, 1 Cor. 3.11. so none has been more careful of the Superstructure of a
Holy Life; and to prevent the laying on of such combustible matter as Wood,
Hay, or Stubble, of which I shall give the Reader a brief Extract, that he may
see how invidiously the Doctor reflects on it, as insufficient for our
satisfaction, p. 40. c. 1.

I shall begin with p. 11. where Dr. Hammond acknowledges, that he took the
first hint of his Notion, from the words of that great Champion of the
Catholic Faith, set down in the Council of Nice, St. Athanasius, in Epist. ad
Epictetum, where speaking of the Catholic Faith set down by the Canons of that
Council, against the Arians, and other Heretics, he says, The Faith confessed
by the Bishops in that Synod, according to the Divine Scripture, is of itself
sufficient for the averting of all Impiety, and establishment of all Piety in
Christ, etc. Then p. 27. This one Cornerstone Jesus Christ, is a most
competent ample Foundation on which to superstruct the largest Pile of
Building, to erect a Church of pious Livers, and to bring all rational Men
within the compass of it: which he asserts, p. 28. against the Doctor's Natural
Religion; The Law written in Men's Hearts: Natural Judicatorium, and a Light
sealed upon us in our first composure, because the prescribed Duties wanted
their full stature, if compared with Christ's super-additions. 2. The
fortifications against Temptations were too slender, there being little
knowledge of the Soul's Immortality, and of Rewards and Punishments in another
Life; on which account St. Paul challenges the wise Men of the World, 1 Cor.
1.20. Where is the wise, etc.

Let all the Scribes or Doctors of the Law, the Searchers or profound
Interpreters of the Scripture, bring forth such Evidences of their efficacy in
reforming and purifying Men's Lives, as the Apostles had done, by these so
despicable means, the Gospel of the Cross of Christ, p. 32. Then p. 33. he
makes Mahomet (who, as our Doctor says, professed all the Articles of the
Christian Faith) to have laid the grounds of all impurity in his carnal,
sensual Paradise: and he concludes with a saying of Chalcidius in his Comment
on Plato's Timaeus, which Dr. H. thinks he had from the Gospel, and says it
contains the sum of it, That the Reason or Word of God, (no question, says Dr.
H. the (...) in St. John 's style) is God taking care of humane affairs, and is
the cause unto Men of their living well, and happily if they do not neglect
that Gift granted by the Supreme God. Dr. H. having said enough in this to
discover the Nakedness of our Doctor, and his Natural Religion, goes on to show
the Nakedness of his Gospel, p. 35. by showing, that Christ crucified, (i. e.)
as he is the Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, the (...), or means of
Expiation or Pardon, on our return and change, is absolutely necessary to found
our hope, as that hope is necessary to excite our endeavors. This strikes the
body of the Socinians to the heart; and then shows what is necessary to be
believed concerning the Person of Christ, from 1 Timothy 3.16. (viz.) That he was
God manifest in the flesh: and observes, That it is the great Mystery of Piety,
p. 42. (against the Doctor's deriding of Mysteries) of which he says, God was
so intent on bringing Sinners to Repentance, that he was pleased to assume and
manifest his will in, or by our flesh, and as God visible on Earth, to preach
Reformation to us: and hence he says, All the Devils countermines in the first
Ages of the Church, were designed purposely against this one Article, the Deity
or Godhead of Christ Incarnate, N. B. as if he were not what he often affirmed
himself to be the Messiah, (i. e.) the Eternal Son of God, and God blessed for
ever, which was so the known Title of the God of Israel, that whenever the God
of Israel was named in the Jewish Services, it was answered by all, by their
adding these words, God blessed for ever, p. 46.

Had it been only a Prophet, though never so great and extraordinarily furnished
with Signs and Wonders, he had been but a Servant of God, and there are many
Presidents of resisting such; but the personal descent of God himself, and his
assumption of our Flesh to his Divinity, was an enforcement beyond all the
Methods of Wisdom that were ever used in the World, p. 45. And the Doctrine of
Ancient and Modern Arians and Photinians, who so industriously lessen the
Divinity of Christ, in pretense of Zeal to God the Father, to whom they will
not permit him to be equal, extremely takes off from the Mystery of Piety, the
Foundation of a good Life, laid in the Eternal God's coming down to preach it
to us, and is a direct contradiction to those places where Christ is called
God, Acts 20.28. Tit. 2.13. And the modern Socinians have taken out this
principal Stone from the Foundation, God manifest in the Flesh.

P. 56. he says, That Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
is a Foundation on which they that administered it were commanded to superstruct
all the Duties of a Christian Life, Mat. 28.20. The Authority of all and each
the Persons of the Trinity, being purposely engaged in this one great Interest.

Dr. H. having treated of the Apostles Creed, comes in p. 84. to show, That
what is superadded, was apparently designed by the Compilers for some special
use, to fence the Catholic Faith from the Corruptions, Depravations,
Doubtings, and Contradictions of Heretics, as in the Nicene Creed, the Oneness
of our Lord Jesus Christ was added, when the Arians opposed the Apostolic
Tradition, and by corrupting detected the words of Scripture to their sense:
which Dr. H. shows more largely in his Note on 1 John 5.7. and of such
Additions he says, That when the Church has thought meet to erect an
additional Bulwark against Heretics, such as reject them may be deemed to side
with those Heretics, p. 86.

And this is the sum of what he says concerning the Athanasian Creed, the
Doctrine whereof he says, is (well nigh all) to assert the Unity of the Divine
Nature and Trinity of Persons, against those Heretics who had brought Novel
Propositions into the Church, of which Doctrinal part he says, that Athanasius
being only a Father of the Church, they were not necessary to be explicitly
acknowledged, nor absolutely imposed on any but such as were Members of some
Church, that had actually received Athanasius's Explication, or than it
appeared concordant with the more authentic universal Confessions, as every
Doctrinal Proposition of it will be found to do.

As for the Damnatory Sentences, Dr. Ham. supposes them to be interpreted in
opposition to those Heresies that had invaded the Church, not that it defined
it to be a damnable sin to fail in understanding or believing the full matter
of any of those Explications. Dr. Ham. having as a wise Master Builder, laid
this Foundation, shows how necessary it is for the end of building on it a holy
Life, and an uniform universal Obedience to the Commands of Christ, in
opposition to Idolatry, Formality, Hypocrisy, and to Sacrilege, Profaneness,
and Impiety; as also to improve the Virtues of Obedience to Superiors, Charity
to all Mankind, Purity of Flesh and Spirit, Contentedness and taking up the
Cross; and lastly, how useful it is to confute false Doctrines, 1. Of the
Romanists, as Penances, Indulgences, of Supererrogating Merits, of Attrition
improved into Contrition by the Priest's aid, without change of Life,
Dispensableness of Oaths, Arts of Equivocation, Purgatory, Cessation of
Allegiance, and especially of Infallibility. 2ly, Of the Solifidians and
Fiduciaries, the Predestinarians, and irrespective Decrees of Election and
Reprobation, of the Divine Prescience, against the Socinians, who deny that God
foresees all things, and though they grant his Omnipresence, and Omnipotence,
yet question the infinity of his Science, which is apparently false, as appears
by God's Predictions to the Prophets.

When I considered the Writings of both these Doctors, their Foundations and
Superstructures, it brought to my mind those two sorts of Builders and Building
mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 7. the one built on that approved Rock of St.
Peter 's Confession; the other on that Sand; whereon Arius, Socinus, and that
Man of an ominous Name, Sandius, pitched their Tabernacles, the one stands firm,
though for 1600 Years, the Rain descended, Floods came, and the Wind blew on it;
the other, though like the Walls of Jerusalem, it has been often attempted to be
fastened, has still been blown down; and may the Fall of it be still great.

P. 41. c. 2. Our Doctor says, If the Relation between the written Word, and
rational Consequence be so remote, as none but a skilful Herald can derive its
Pedigree, then is a good Christian no more obliged to believe such an
Inference, than is every good Subject to be a good Herald. As if the Ignorant
were no ways obliged to follow the Directions of the wise and good Men; or as
if Subjects were not bound to obey those Laws, whereof they cannot ken those
Reasons which the wise and consulting Legislators on good Reasons have
established for their Security.

What though the Papists do most absurdly infer from Christ's Command to St.
Peter, to feed his Lambs, that all those Popes which pretend to be his
Successors are thereby commissioned to Rule and Govern all Nations and Persons
in all Ages. Cannot so enquiring a Person as the Doctor, or one that is more,
or one that is less rational, from such Scriptural premises, as God was made
Flesh, Christ is God over all, equal and one with his Father, with undeniable
Reason infer, as the Catholic Church in all Ages has done, That he is the
Eternal Son of God? But such an Inference is so contrary to the Socinian's
Reason, that it is equally rejected with contempt and derision, as Popish
Impositions, and by the Doctor numbered among them. But Bernardus non videt
omnia:

He undertakes therefore to bless the World with such a description of them,
that it shall be as easy to know them, without pains or art, as it was for the
meanest Beggar in the street, to understand whom King Ahasuerus would Honor,
when he caused Mordecai in Royal Manner to be publicly honored, and by
Proclamation enjoined the People to bow the Knee, as he past by them.

The Qualifications for Matter of Faith, he says, must be these: 1. It must be
easy to be understood by the meanest capacity; and therefore he rejects any
thing that is called a Mystery, though God manifested in the Flesh be so called
by the Apostle; yea, though the same Mystery be implied in that very Scripture
which he quotes to prove his assertion, viz. Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, (i. e.) that Jesus is the Lord, which no man can
say, but by the Holy Ghost: (i. e.) not by a natural Faith, but by a
supernatural Revelation, such as our Savior says, Flesh and blood has not
revealed. And it is observable, that though in the Title of this Chapter, he
mentions the Word, as well as the Matter to be believed, yet he makes no
mention of the Word, by which the Person of our Savior is generally
understood; so that Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Foundation of our Faith
is excluded from being the Object of our belief; for he writes the WORD in a
larger Character, which might induce the Reader to believe, that he meant as
St. John 1.1. The Son of God; which is the adequate Object of Christian Faith,
but speaks nothing of him in all that Chapter.

2ly, He says, It must be an express Word of God: This no Protestant denies;
but they do generally urge it against the Papists, who teach as necessary
Articles of Faith the Commandments of Men: And may we not conclude by this
Position, that they who oppugn such a Fundamental, to which Eternal Life is
promised, may come short of Salvation.

Christ says, He that believes and is baptized; this is but one entire
proposition as our Author observes, that it is not only he that believes, but
he that believes and is baptized; and Salvation cannot belong to them that put
asunder what Christ has joined, as the Socinians do in the Case of Baptism,
which they call only a Rite and Ceremony.

3ly, He says, It must be expressly honored with the promise of Eternal Life to
the Believer: and therefore he says, p. 42. Col. 2. Whoever ascribes it to any
other Doctrine however true, however revealed, makes himself equal to Christ in
Authority, and superior in Faithfulness: If then that Scripture of our
Savior, This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, Joh. 20.31. And 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true,
even his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5.20.
St. Augustine reads the Text thus, To know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, to be the only true God: and so does St. Chrysostom. Now if I say,
Eternal Life be appropriate to this knowledge, that Christ is the true God,
then it is a fundamental Article of Faith.

P. 43. There can be no need of an Interpreter of Scripture, or Determiner of
Doubts concerning Matters of Faith, says the Doctor: How then comes it to
pass, that there are so many Controversies concerning Matters of Faith? and
that each Party denies Salvation to their Adversaries, that differ from them?
His appeal to natural Faith will never be able to determine the Controversies
that are yet undecided, concerning such Fundamental Doctrines as are necessary
to Salvation.

Socinus de Adoratione Christi, says, Bonas rations and rectas ex verbo dei
consecutiones in sacris disputationibus aspernare nec admittere velle, hominis
est suae causae parum fidentis. He says, 3. We need not, ought not to be
uncharitable to any who differ from us in other Doctrines, to the belief
whereof the Promise is not appropriate. But is Eternal Life any where promised
to those that believe that Jesus Christ was only a Creature, and a mere Man?
Can we hope for Salvation, without satisfaction to the Divine Justice? or can
we make satisfaction? Is it not good Divinity to say, there is no Salvation but
in the Name, and through the Merits of Jesus Christ, who died for our Sins, and
rose again for our Justification?

I have shown you how the Doctor would interpret this latter Scripture, Romans 4.
ult. Commodius interpretationis (as they call them) there; but if their little
Criticisms, and false Punctations should be admitted, the Scriptures would
indeed be made, as he says, A Nose of Wax; witness their interpretation of John
8.58. Before Abraham was, I am, (i. e.) say they, Before Abraham was made the
Father of the Faithful, and of many Nations that were converted by the
preaching of the Gospel, I am, viz. the Light of the World.

So Eniedinus renders the Confession of St. Thomas, as an Exclamation directed
to God the Father, O my Lord, and my God; as (says he) we are wont to do, when
we behold any strange sight. And Christ's words to the Thief, Luke 23.43. are
thus pointed, I say unto thee this day: Thou shall be with me in Paradise, viz.
When I shall come to Judgment.

Thus Francis David, on the words of St. Stephen, Act. 7.59. makes this
Comment, O God the Father who art the Lord of Jesus receive my Soul.

In this chapter p. 44. c. 2. the Doctor says, that the Remission which the
prophets promised, reached only to temporal punishments, but that by Christ to
eternal life: How then can a natural Faith secure us of Life eternal, when that
Faith, though greatly improved by the Prophets, could not do it.

Chapter 11. in this Chapter he revives and pleads for another Socinian Tenet; for
the Resurrection, not of the same, but another Body. He propounds the Question
thus, Whether any Promise does necessarily import a restitution of the same
numerical Matter; and undertakes to prove, That it is more honorable to God,
and more serviceable to the Design of the Gospel, to believe the contrary.

But First, This is contrary to the Grammatical Signification of the Word, and
to the Scripture by him quoted, viz. That God gives to every seed his own Body:
And Ruffinus mentions the word Hujus, the Resurrection of this Body, which
though it shall have a kind of Transfiguration, by substraction of the old
earthly Qualities, and the addition of such as are new and heavenly, yet the
subject shall continue the same; which St. Paul means, 1 Cor. 15.53. This
corruptible shall put on incorruption; that as we have born the image of the
earthly, we may bear the image of the heavenly; and as Job says, With these
eyes see God, Job 19.25. And the Justice of God requires this, that as the
Faithful have born the Marks of the Lord Jesus Christ in their Bodies, wherein
they were Partakers of the Sufferings of Christ, and were consecrated to him as
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, may partake of the Reward and Crown of Glory in
the same Bodies.

What he says of our being (...), proves as well, that we shall have no Bodies,
as that we shall not have the same. The change that shall be made in our vile
Bodies, does not alter the form of our Bodies, no more than it does the Body of
Christ, which though it be now a glorious Body, yet is still the same numerical
Body; and to call that a Load of Carrion, which the Apostle calls the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, is not becoming a Christian Doctor. As we believe therefore
that the same Body our Savior which suffered, is now glorified, and that the
same Bodies that remain to the last day, shall be taken up to meet the Lord in
the Air, shall be the same Bodies that shall be ever with the Lord. And as we
believe that Christ arose from the Grave in the same Body wherein he died, so
we believe that he carried the same into the heavenly Sanctuary, and shall come
at last in the same Body to judge both the Quick and Dead, that all Eyes may
look on their Crucified Savior; and unless it shall be the same Body, it
cannot properly be called a Resurrection: And no doubt but our Resurrection
shall be conform with that of Christ's, as the Apostle intimates, Romans 8.11. He
that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies. To
this purpose St. Augustine Epl. 57. That as Christ glorified his own Body, but
destroyed not its nature, so will he give Glory to our Bodies, but not take
away the nature of them. Nor indeed do other qualities any more alter the
nature of our Bodies than of our Souls, which for substance shall be the same.

But lastly, if this Enquiry be a matter of Curiosity, not of Faith, why does
he oppose the Doctrine so long received in the Church, to bring in a Socinian
Tenet?

And now p. 50. c. 1. he gives us the Socinian Scheme of the Naked Gospel, such
as Socinus, Crellius, Sclichtingius, Smalcius, and the whole Tribe have fancied
and published to the World before him: That its business was to reduce the Jews
from their Bondage under the Law of Moses; and the Gentiles from their worse
bondage under the Worship of Devils, to the Service of God by the free
Directions of their own Nature: That to this end he sent his only begotten Son
into the World teaching them, That the best service of God consists in being
like him, and for their encouragement therein, promising them upon their
Repentance pardon of Sins past, and everlasting Life. This, says he, is the
Sum of the Gospel, (i. e.) of his Naked Gospel.

Here is not a word of that Grace and Truth that came by Jesus, nor that God
was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, Making him to be sin for us who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Not a word
of that Redemption (which St. Peter speaks of made for us) by the precious
Blood of the Son of God, or that Christ redeemed the Church by his own Blood,
dying for our Sins, and rising again for our Justification, Revel. 1. washing
us in his own Blood from our Sins. Not a word of that which St. Paul made his
whole work to preach, Christ crucified, that others with him might know him,
and the power of his resurrection, that we may be found in him, not having our
own righteousness, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. Nor that without the
shedding of this Blood, there could be no Remission of Sins.

But though the Apostle counts this knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, so
excellent, that all things else are but loss and (...) dogs meat, in comparison
with it: Yet the Doctor prefers his Natural Faith, or his Carnal Reason above
all this; for there is not one word of all this to cover the Nakedness of his
Newborn Gospel, but as the Socinians say, God sent his only begotten Son into
the World, to teach them (not to die for them) how by the free Directions of
their own Nature without any grace or assistance of the Spirit of God, or any
Revelations of that Grace and Truth that came by him: That the best service of
God consists in being like him; to which end he supposes the free Dictates of
their own Nature are sufficient; Deus nil fecit.
promising them upon their Repentance, pardon of their Sins past, and
everlasting Life. Which John Baptist and other Prophets had done before him.

Not a word of Christ's giving Repentance, or that eternal Life is the gift of
God, which he grounds on that Repentance which flows from the free Directions
of their own Nature. What part Faith has in all this, is his next Enquiry,
which is to show that it has no part at all.

Enquiry II. He says is to show, What Changes or Additions later Ages have made
in Matter of Faith.

He tells us p. 50. c. 2. That our Lord honored it as the Great King did
Daniel, above all his Princes: That he came into the World to advance it: That
he promised it eternal Life; and both he and his Apostle make it half the
Gospel; we meet it in every page of the New Testament; and on sight of its
glory, we talk as St. Peter did when confounded at the brightness of our Lord,
we know not what.

But our Author has no sooner cried his Hosanna to Faith, as the Jews did to
Christ, but presently proclaims his Crucifigite, and casts this Daniel into a
Lion's Den, to be rent by such furious Beasts: he first casts her from the
Throne wherein Christ placed it, and what the Gospel makes the Mother-Grace, he
makes the Mother-Error; p. 51. c. 1. his words are, This is the Mother-Error,
that whereas Faith is no better than a Retainer to Holiness, we place it in the
Throne as an Absolute Prince, and think it our Duty to enlarge its Dominions as
far, and exalt its Prerogative as high as we can, as if it were some precious
Diamond, valuable for its Brightness, Hardness, or other irrespective Virtue of
its own.

Does this Author know what he says, or consider whereof he affirms these
things? If it be of that implicit Faith required in the Church of Rome, or
that naked Faith of the Gnostics, or Solifidians, viz. a bare profession of
Faith in Christ, separate from Obedience, he only beats the Air; but if of that
Faith required in the Gospel, and professed in the Church of England, the
nature whereof he cannot but know, then he striks at the very Life of Christian
Religion; for that is a Faith working by Love; a Faith in Christ's meritorious
Death, Passion, Resurrection, and Intercession; which the Socinians will not
admit of: A Faith that purifieth the Heart, that teaches us that Christ dying
for all, all were dead in Sins and Trespasses, and that he died for all; that
henceforth they should not live to themselves, but unto him that died for them,
and rose again: this is the true Christian Faith grounded on the Grace of God,
which brings salvation, and has appeared to all men, teaching them, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, they should live righteously, soberly
and godly in this present world.

This the end of manifesting the Gospel as St. Paul, Romans 16.26. This the
Obedience of Faith? This is the Faith which we preach in the Church of England,
and which the Doctor so opposes and vilifieth. It is evident that the Faith
which this Doctor would degrade, is that which has for its Object Christ
crucified, bearing our Sins, making an Atonement, bearing the Chastisement of
our Peace, reconciling us to God by the Sacrifice on the Cross.

All which he would resolve into a Natural Faith in the Veracity of God, and so
makes our Faith in Christ crucified (the chiefest Notion of a justifying Faith)
to be of none effect.

But let us hear the Reason he gives for his degrading of Faith, p. 50. c. 2.
We consider not, says he, that two of the reasons which induced our Lord to
call so importunately for it are expired. Those Reasons I suppose we had p. 19.
c. 2. 1. The Difficulties of believing. 2. The Danger of professing it. To
which there needs no other Answer, then what he himself has given, p. 50. c.
1. That Faith must necessarily be called for with importunity suitable both to
the Difficulties and Dangers which at that time encompassed it; and to the
serviceableness which at all times accompanies it: For is there not now also
need of Faith to strengthen us against the Temptations of the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil? Or is our Fight now only against Flesh and Blood? are there not
Spiritual Wickednesses also? Are there not such Lusts as are as dear as a right
Hand or Eye, that must be cut off? And what is it that gives us the Victory
over these, and a world of others, but our Faith?

Were not our Faith serviceable to these ends, he might have some excuse for
calling our Savior a humorsome and capricious Lord, as he does p. 51. c. 1.
and p. 57. c. 2. that without any other motive than his unaccountable will,
imposes a stupid belief of a multitude of impertinent and incredible
Propositions, without, yea, (some of them) against all Reason, without any
fruit but strife, contrary to the Simplicity wherein the Gospel glories, and
to that contempt which God himsef shows to acts of mee^ Understanding; which
opprobrious Terms he mentions also p. 51. c. 1.

Does not the Doctor fix these opprobrious Terms on our Blessed Savior, when
it is evident, that our Savior instituted the Sacrament of Baptism to be
administered in his Name, as well as in the Name of the Father and the Holy
Ghost; especially seeing the Doctor cannot deny Baptism to be a Fundamental of
the Christian Religion, as having an express Precept, and a Promise of Eternal
Life annexed to it? And to be baptized in the Name of the Father, etc. is to
devote ourselves to the Worship and Obedience of the Person, in whose Name we
are baptized; and by consequence being we are baptized equally into the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we acknowledge them to be of equal Dignity,
and are obliged to pay them equal Worship. This Precept of our Savior being no
part of the Doctor's Natural Religion, but a prime Fundamental of the
Christian, does irrefragably convince the Doctor to be guilty of gross Impiety,
when he in p. 57. c. 2. and p. 51. c. 1. discoursing of the Changes which later
Ages have made in Matters of Faith, under which, by the tendency of the whole
Book, that of the Doctrine of the Trinity is chiefly intended, he infers our
Savior to be a humorous and capricious Lord; and what means this passage p.
30. c. 1. That it must cast dishonor no less on his Wisdom than his Majesty,
etc. if we think he will grant Salvation on no other Terms, than a belief of
the whole truth concerning the Dignity of his Person; for this will imply that
he came and suffered on purpose to purchase to himself the honor of such a
Belief, etc.

P. 52. c. 2. The proper Dominions of Faith, he says, exceed not this one
proposition, That God cannot lie.

Ans. What difference then is there between the Faith of a Jew or a Turk, and
that of a Christian, they believe this as firmly as the Doctor does, and are
they as much Christians as he?

He allows it no value from its relation to the Person of Christ, though he
doubts not the Person of Christ to be infinitely valuable: The Turks grant he
was a just Man, and a true Prophet, but not an All-sufficient Savior. But who
are they that advance Faith above Holiness, yea, against it too? not only the
thorough paced Antinomians and Solifidians, but many who call themselves
Orthodox, who say, Faith is the hand whereby we apply Christ to ourselves; and
by this application Christ is made ours, and his Righteousness imputed to us,
as if it were our own, and it justifies not by its own worthiness, but by the
Merit of Christ, which it lies hold on, and applies.

I perceive the Doctor learnt this from Mr. Beedle's Preface to his Socinian
Catechism, where he rejects the same Tenets, because they are not to be found
in express terms in Scripture, (viz.) The apprehending and applying of Christ's
righteousness to ourselves by Faith; of Christ's righteousness imputed to us;
of Christ's dying to appease the wrath of God, and reconcile us to him; of
Christ's Merits, or his meritorious Obedience, both active and passive: of
which he says, That as these forms of speech are not owned by the Scripture, so
neither the things contained in them. I doubt not but the Doctor read that
Preface, and applies it to the same end.

And where in the name of Christ (says our Author) do we in all the Book of
God, or in Reason, (which he always equalleth with the Scripture) meet any
intimation of this fine Doctrine, Application of Christ to our selves; the hand
of Faith, imputed Righteousness, etc. What are they but Terms of Art, invented
by false Apostles?

But were the Compilers of our Liturgy false Apostles? Or do we not find the
matter, if not the words therein, when we pray God to deliver us by his Cross
and Passion? Or is there no Merit in them, when we are taught to pray, That by
the Merits and Death of Jesus Christ, and through Faith in his Blood, we and
the whole Church may obtain Remission of Sins, and all other benefits of his
Passion. See the Prayer after the Communion.

Do not they inform us of the In Warning the Communion.
meritorious Cross and Passion of our Savior, whereby alone we obtain
Remission of our Sins, and are made Partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven? Or was
he a false Apostle that teaches us, That Christ was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him?

But the Doctor will not recede a hairs breadth from his Socinian Principles
lest he should acknowledge, that Christ died for our Sins, and rose for our
Justification, which he says, the particle (...) will not bear, p. 14. c. 2.

The Doctor is much pleased with his Microscope, which discovers a multitude of
little Animals, where the best eye sees nothing but limpid Water: But had he a
spiritual Eye he might by the Mirror of the Gospel, discover many saving
Truths, which to a carnal Eye are not discernable.

Another Complaint against Faith is, p. 54. That it is exalted above and
against Charity: and he calls the Dispute (between the Arians and Catholics
concerning the Eternal Deity of Christ) the first and most uncharitable Dispute
that ever rent the Christian World. P. 55. c. 1.
But who began these Disputes but Ebion, Cerinthus, and the Arians, who used
the Gospel as the poor Man was used that fell among Theives, left it naked and
wounded, and opposed all that came to its relief; were we all united in the
Faith of the Gospel, which teaches us, that we have one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, viz. in the Holy Trinity; it would be a more effectual means to
enlarge Charity, than the new Heresies that deny the Lord that bought them; and
being uncharitable to their Lord, cannot be otherwise to his Servants; they
that thus wound the Head, the Deity of Christ, cannot but rent the Members, who
by that Faith are united to him: The old Serpent was permitted to bruise the
Heel of the Messiah, (i. e.) as Commentators say, his natural Body of flesh and
blood; but these Serpents attempt his Head, (i. e.) his Divinity; but in vain,
for he shall break their heads.

The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against our Faith, that Christ is the Son
of the Living God; upon which Christ has founded his Church.

The great Complaint against Faith is yet behind, That it is exalted above and
against Reason; for nothing is to be believed further than Reason proves it to
be true, p. 56. c. 1. That is, the Socinians Reason. But by the assistance of
Faith, the Christian may believe things above Reason, though to a carnal
Apprehension they seem contrary to Reason: Why else does our Savior pronounce
them blessed, that have not seen, and yet believed, (viz.) as St. Thomas did)
that Christ is their Lord and their God.

This is another great Fortress of the Socinians, from which they tell us, in
the Doctor's Language, That Articles of Faith above the apprehension of Reason,
are like the Ravings in Bedlam, p. 56. c. 1. A cast of Tertullian's Montanism,
Credo quia impossible; and that excess of Confidence (he means our Christian
Faith) in defect of Reason is a certain symptom of Madness. To this Fortress,
as their Frontier Garrison, all the Socinians resort; nothing can be believed
which cannot be understood and comprehended by Reason. So Schlinchtingius
against Meisner, It implies a Contradiction, that what exceeds the reach of
Reason should be made an Article of Faith: As if when the God of Heaven
revealing his Will does enjoin any Commandment, or requires the belief of any
Proposition upon his Authority, which the reason of his Creatures is not able
to comprehend, or demonstrate to itself, he did enjoin the belief of
Contradictions. As in our Author's instance, when Abraham believed against Hope
and against his Reason, he believed on the Authority of God that required him
to offer up his only Son Isaac; And why may we not as well believe that God
sent his Eternal Son to be Incarnate, and come down from Heaven for our
Redemption; though we cannot comprehend it, we ought to believe the thing, though
we cannot comprehend the manner.

Natural Faith relieth upon natural Reason, but Divine Faith upon Revelation,
which may be above, but not against Reason: If you require any other Testimony,
it is not Faith, Vides (says St. Augustine) non est fides; what thou assentest
to because thou see a reason for, it is not Faith, Faith is the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. That properly is Faith, which gives up its assent
to a Proposition on the Testimony of him that propounds it; and in this case we
say with the Doctor, Let God be true, and Humane Reason a Liar. Humane Reason
has the judgment of Discretion; the judgment of Decision belongs to the
Scriptures; to the Scriptures I say, not as understood by any private
Interpretation, but as interpreted by the Analogy of Faith, by the Harmony of
the Old and New Testament, and by the general Consent of the best Teachers in
all Ages; and to this we shall Appeal for the Decision of this great Truth,
That our Savior is the Eternal Son of God.

There are certainly more plain Contradictions in the Arian Doctrines in this,
viz. That there should be an Omnipotent and Omniscient God that created all
things, and knows the secrets of all hearts, and that this should be a created
God; for the Arians grant Christ to be the Creator of the World. That God
should be reconciled to Man, that by Transgression is his Enemy, hating, and
hateful to God, without any satisfaction to his Justice; this is to reconcile
Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell, or that a Finite Creature, as a Created
God must be, could satisfy an infinitely offended Justice.

Nor is there any Article of our Christian Faith that seems so contrary to
Reason, as is their measuring of an Infinite Essence by Finite Reason; that
which measures should be able to contain the thing that is measured.

Again, To give Divine Worship to a Creature, by what Name soever it be
dignified or distinguished, which is due only to the Almighty God, our Creator,
is contrary both to sound Reason and Scripture, which the Socinians (some of
them at least) do, and on their own Principles are guilty of Idolatry.

The Difference among the Socinians concerning giving Divine Worship to Christ,
will save us the labor of proving them to be Idolaters, if Christ be not the
Eternal Son of God.

Socinus would not hold him for a Christian, that would not worship Christ with
Divine Worship.

But Christianus Frankin, Francis David, and some others (who agreed with
Socinus, that Christ was but a Man) urge this Argument to prove Socinus and his
Followers to be Idolaters, because they worshipped him, whom they believed to
be but a Creature.

The Argument is thus formed: As great as is the distance between a Creator and
a Creature, so great ought the difference be of the Honor that is given to the
Creator from that which is given to the Creature: but the distance between the
Creator and Creature is the greatest distance, therefore there ought to be the
greatest difference in the Honor that is given to the Creator from that which
is given to a Creature. Hence they conclude Socinus and his Followers who
worshipped Christ with Divine Worship were Idolaters.

But to this they answer, That if it be the pleasure of God to have it so, so
it must be; and for this they quote St. John 5.23. That all men should honor
the Son as they honor the Father. To this Franken replys, That by Socinu 's
own Doctrine the Scripture he says must not be believed, because it is contrary
to Reason, and therefore there is some other hidden sense in that Scripture
which must be searched out. N. B. and Franken urges Deuteronomy. 6.13. repeated
Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. And it is farther urged, that Crellius says the word only in John 17.3.
where Christ says, This is life eternal to know thee the only true God; that by
it Christ excludes himself from being the true God. And by the same word, say
his Adversaries, Christ excludes himself from being the Object of Divine
Worship.

This Franken confirms farther against Socinus, from Isa. 42.8. My glory will I
not give to another: Isai. 48.11.
and observe who speaks, I am Jehovah, that is my name, and my glory, etc. What
Glory is that? Gloria Jehovitatis mea, as Calomus's Phrase is; that is, The
Glory of my Godhead. So in Jer. 3.18. That men may know that thou whose name
alone is Jehovah art the most High. Jehovah then is the Name of the most high
God, and his alone, so that it cannot be given to any other who is not the most
high God: but this name Jehovah is given to Christ in the Scripture, therefore
he is the most high God. This Argument shall be confirmed hereafter. In the
mean time we have gained this Point, viz. That if Christ be the Object of
Divine Worship, as the Socinians grant, then must he be the Eternal Son of God,
of the same Essence with his Father; and as St. Paul speaks, God over all,
blessed for ever.

Now if the word only in St. John exclude Christ from being the true God, then
the same word in Deuteronomy. and St. Matthew exclude him from Divine Worship;
wherefore if his being the true God, be against the Reason of Socinians, though
never so plain in Scripture, we must search out some other hidden sense, as
Socinus says; and what other or better sense can we find, than what the
Catholic Church always affirmed, viz. That Christ with his Father and the Holy
Ghost is the only true God. And thus St. Augustine, as has been said, renders
it, This is Life eternal to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, to
be the only true God, Cont. Arium. Tom. 6. n. 17.

P. 54. Against Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, he tells a Story of a
Land that was wasted with a raging Plague, to whom came a great Physician,
declaring he had a Nostrum which never failed to cure those that trusted it;
that it cost him dear, but he would freely communicate it to all that needed
and desired it, and exhorted all to come to him; which many did, and were
cured, but some said there needed no more but to trust to the Medicine: The
Physician was infinitely skilful in his Art, and faithful in his Promises,
wherefore by confidence in him, they should have all his health imputed to
them, and that should cure them as perfectly as if they received real health by
the use of his Prescriptions. This is a Fiction of his own, to serve his
Hypothesis, which I shall answer by a more probable Story out of the Midras
Tehillim, or the Exposition of the Psalms, where on those words, Kiss the Son,
we have this Parable, This is as when a certain King was displeased with the
Inhabitants of a great City, the Citizens went and made Supplication to the
King's Son, to appease his Father's displeasure: The Son went and effectually
prevailed with his Father to forgive them, and take them into his Favor; which
the King's Son having signified to the Citizens, they addressed their Thanks to
the King. The King bid them go and give Thanks to his Son, for had it not been
for his Mediation, their City had been destroyed. This is that which is said,
Kiss the Son; and it may be well for the Doctor if he would go and do likewise.

It is not good to make sport of holy Things, and droll on the Mysteries of our
Salvation, comparing them to Fables, and this in Scripture Phrase, ridiculing
the Peace of God, as passing all understanding; and the Meritorious Death of
our Savior to the Prescriptions or Juggles of a Quack, as if Faith in the
Power and Merits of our Savior, were as vain as the Opinions of the Mobile
concerning an Empyrick; yet we read of great Miracles wrought by Faith in the
Person of Christ.

P. 41. Thus the Leaper by his Faith, Lord if thou will thou can make me
clean. And the Centurian's Faith prevailed for his Servant, Matthew. 8. And as
many as touched the hem of his garment were healed by their faith in his
almighty power. There could not therefore be a more odious Comparison; he says
of the Mystery which the Apostle spoke of to the Ephesians, That though it were
hard to be believed, yet it was easy to be understood, for it signified only,
That the Gentiles were Fellow-Heirs with the Jews. But was not this a Mystery
hid from that Nation until Christ and his Apostles revealed it: wiser Men than
the Doctor do rightly admire some Secrets in Nature, which when their Causes
and Natures are discovered, very ignorant Men may apprehend: this the Doctor
says to show, That it is so far from being an honor, that it is rather a
defect: As if there were no difficulty in Matters of Faith, and the Mystery of
Godliness mentioned by St. Paul in Timothy, viz. God manifested in the flesh,
were no harder to be understood, than that Mystery which had been so clearly
revealed, The admission of the Gentiles to a fellowship with the Jews. This is
to serve another Hypothesis of his, That we are not bound to believe, what we
cannot understand by our Reason; and so to invalidate our belief of the Union
of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ: for says the Doctor, p. 32. col. 1.
If we will needs enquire into the Mysteries of Christ's Divinity and
Incarnation, we shall find our Understandings no less confounded by the
brightness of the Mystery, than our Eyes are by the Sun, and of this the Holy
Ghost warns us, not only by a careful silence concerning our Lord's Genealogy,
but by express Types and Prophesies, concerning its inscrutability: So that by
the Doctor's Propositions, neither our Knowledge, nor our Faith, have any thing
to do about the Divinity (he will not call it the Deity) of our Savior, or his
Incarnation, it matters not whether we know or believe any thing concerning
either.

I shall not charge the Dr. with any thing that he has not expressly said; and
therefore do acknowledge that what he speaks of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, falls not under our debate; but I know that the Socinians
say, that there is no firmer footing for the Doctrine of the Trinity in the
holy Scripture, than for Transubstantiation; and the Socinians at Alba Julia,
in a Treatise printed 1568. say thus, Whoever believes the Pope to be
Antichrist, does truly believe the Popish Trinity, Infant Baptism, and other
Popish Sacraments to be the Doctrines of Devils.

And when I consider that the Naked Gospel is bereaved of this Doctrine, and
intended not so much against the Doctrine and Sacraments retained in that
Church, as against what is maintained in the Church of England, I submit it to
the Judgment of others, whether these following expressions of the Authors, do
not reflect on the Doctrine of our Church, when he speaks of a pack of
impertinent Mysteries, p. 58. col. 2. And that Mahomet among all his Whimsies,
has nothing comparable to it, p. 59. col. 1. And that the Athanasian Doctrine
may be numbered with the Papal, and of the Contradictions which are in the one,
as well as in the other.

P. 41. c. 1. P. 21. c. 1.
P. 56. c. 2. The Doctor seems much offended at the word Mystery, tho he knows
thereis nothing reserved from the youngest Catecheumen in the Church of
England, who is diligently instructed in the Principles of Religion, by order
of the Church; yet he must grant, that there were many things in the Scripture,
which continued to be so, until they were revealed; such were those Mysteries
mentioned by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without question great is the mystery of
godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
angels, believed on in the world, received up into glory: And such were those
Parables which our Savior proposed to his Disciples, which exceeded their
apprehensions, until they were expounded to them by our Savior. And such was
that Mystery which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 1.10. and Ephesians. 3.6. which
was not made known to the Sons of Men in other Ages, as it was revealed to the
Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, (viz.) That the Gentiles should be Fellow
heirs, and of the same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ, by the
Gospel: But when the Gentiles were taken in to be Fellow heirs with the
believing Jews, then it ceased to be a Mystery; and surely there is another
Mystery in v. 9. of that 3d Chapter, which our Doctor cannot yet apprehend, tho
plainly revealed, (viz.) That God created all things by Jesus Christ; See
Crellius, Heb. 1. v. 10.
which though frequently asserted in the Scripture, as Col. 1. Heb. 1. etc. yet
the Socinians utterly deny; nor can they apprehend what is that Righteousness
which is by Faith, as opposed to that which is by the Law, or to our Doctor's
Natural Faith: but the Doctor tells us of another Mystery, little less than a
Contradiction, as p. 1. c. 2. viz. The Patriarchs knew only the Fathers: yet
Abraham had the knowledge of Christ; and our Savior says, that Moses spoke of
him, and the Doctor affirms the same. That Moses spoke of Christ, Deuteronomy. 30.12.
for the Doctor says, p. 41. c. 1. that the Apostle applied that place to
Christ: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thy heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

It was not so much in dislike of the Popish Mysteries, that the Doctor so
often rejects whatever is above human Reason, under that Notion, as in dislike
of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Eternal Generation of our Savior, of
which he speaking, p. 34. c. 1. says, If you understand not this, you must not
wonder, at least not gainsay it, for it is a Mystery which Reason cannot
fathom, and therefore must be rejected as one of the Packs of Impertinent
Mysteries, p. 58. c. 2.

The Doctor that writes so mystically himself, should not be so much
displeased, if he meet with some Mysteries in other Writings, especially in the
Scripture, wherein, as St. Peter observes of St. Paul's Epistles, There are
some things hard to be understood, and will not be fully explained till Elias
come. And indeed as Naked as his Gospel is, it is darkened with so many obscure
mists, and subtle insinuations, that it will appear to some of his most
diligent Readers, to be one continued Mystery of Iniquity.

It is a sorry shift, which Sandius, and others that write against the Trinity,
make to excuse themselves; for thus Sandius pleads, see his Appendix, p. 107.
That he wrote his Book on behalf of the Protestants, against the Papists to
convince them that the Scripture is the only Rule of Faith, because they could
not prove the chiefest Articles of their Faith, (viz.) the Trinity,
Consubstantiality and Coequality from the Tradition of the Fathers of the three
first Ages. In this our Doctor follows Sandius, and would persuade us to
renounce the Doctrine of the Trinity, because it is a Popish Doctrine. See more
of this in another Epistle of Sandius, p. 261. I have proved, says he, that
the whole World in the fourth Age was Arian, and the Arians enjoyed Temporal
Felicity, and wrought Miracles, to show against the Papists, that these are not
marks of the true Church: I reckoned diverse Councils of the Arians who
condemned the Catholic Faith, to show that we ought not to depend on their
Determinations in Matters of Faith, but on Scripture only: I have shown that
the Church of Rome has honored many Arians that were of very evil lives, as
Saints, to show you what manner of Saints the Papists do Invocate by the
Authority of the Infallible Church of Rome, etc. All this is right: but when
the whole design of his Book is to show that the Doctrine of Arius denying the
Godhead of Christ, and making him a Creature, is more consonant to Scripture
and Antiquity, than that of the Trinity in the Church of Rome, is to condemn
all other Churches that maintain the same Doctrine; for to this purpose tends
that which remains in the Third Enquiry, concerning the Papists, who do impose
new Articles of Faith, and set their Traditions and Decrees in an equal rank
with the Scriptures, and sometimes above them, with a Nonobstante to Christ's
own Institutions, as the Socinians do by their Reason: let them therefore
dispute the Case with each other, and let Baal plead for himself: He cannot
wound the Church of England through their sides, unless he can prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity to be a Popish Tradition; which he does more than
intimate, and herein he would do them more service than any of their Champions,
by proving Popery to be more ancient than the Council of Nice.

I am now come to the Conclusion of the Author, who shuts up his Naked Gospel
as generally the Socinians do, with a Plea for Toleration to all that confess
the Lord Jesus, and believe that God raised him from the Dead, though they
leave him as Naked a Lord as the Doctor has left the Gospel, robbing him of
his Eternity and Deity, and that Honor and Worship which on those
considerations are due to him, our Faith in his Name, Obedience to his
Commands, a devout use of his Holy Sacraments; and so turn Turks, Jews, o^ (as
some English Socinians have done) Quakers, and live above Ordinances,
satisfying themselves with a Christ within them, and a Natural or Naked Gospel,
as Mr. Pen in a Socinian Tract has done. This he calls giving Faith its due
Bounds, by imprisoning it and dismembring it, separating Obedience and Love,
which are inseparable from Evangelical Faith.

And as for Love, says he, we must give it its due boundlesness even to them
that love not, but deny and bid open defiance to the Godhead of Christ, to whom
the Apostle denounces Anathema. I wish heartily the Doctor had shown more
Charity to the Church of Christ in general, than to think and speak of them as
guilty of Idolatry in all Ages; for so are they that give Divine Worship to a
Creature, and that he who styles himself a Son of the Church of England, would
not defame her as tainted with Popish (because she holds the Athanasian)
Doctrine, (for he calls that and the Nicene their Creeds, and our Litany their
Litany) and so becoming a Papist to the Papists; and it is much better to be an
Athanasian Papist, than an Arian or Socinian Heretic.

The Doctor tells us in the Vindication, p. 7. of his intention to have
presented his Naked Gospel to the Convocation, that they might be induced to
enlarge their Charity, at a time when all the Christian World expected it from
them: And was all the Christian World once more become Arians, that they should
become Disciples to his Naked Gospel, I cannot conceive what compliance the
Doctor could presume of from that Convocation; he well knows their Prolocutor
was the same that agreed shortly after to the burning of it in the Convocation
at Oxford; and doubtless both he and the several Members would have had the
same Resentment of it at Westminster, as the Oxford Convocation had, When
therefore we see a Viper rising out of the Fires of Oxford, and hissing, p. 5.
That the Heresy lay not in the Book, but in the Conclusion; he deserves to be
shaken into the Fire again, for the impotent Creature does not only hiss at the
mistaken Author of Nolumus leges Angliae mutari, but on the whole Convocation,
for their stiffness to their Constitutions; whose very Authors (says he in the
Conclusion) were they now living, and true to their own reason, must be willing
to abolish them. This is the Doctor's enlarged Charity to the deceased
Compilers of our Liturgy, that they would have done as he desires, (i. e.)
removing the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds; the Litany, Doxology, and I know not
what Constitutions besides; the Institutions of our Savior, (to wit) the two
Sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist, the ends whereof this Doctor with the
Socinians does utterly destroy, and retains them only as Rites and Badges of an
outward Profession of a Naked Gospel.

But let us enquire wherein this enlarged Charity of the Doctor's does consist:
Charity is either the love of God, or of our Neighbors; Now first, our love to
God ought to bear proportion with the love he has bestowed on us; of which the
Apostle, Joh. 3.16. says, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And Ver. 17. That the world by him might be saved. The World
then without Christ was in a lost and perishing condition; God had for Sin shut
them up under a sentence of Condemnation; and it was his infinite Goodness and
Wisdom to contrive the Means of our Salvation, such as might reconcile us to
himself; to which end he thought this the fittest, to send his only begotten
Son into the World to dye for our sins, the just for the unjust, making him to
be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: of this
love the Apostle with admiration says, Behold, what manner of love the Father
has shown to us, etc. If God had only sent a Prophet, a Man of God, to make a
fuller Declaration of his Will, this had not been a reason of so great
Admiration; but when he sent his only begotten Son, that was one with the
Father, and laid help on him that was mighty, able to save us to the utmost,
being God and Man; this deserves the Sic So, and the Ecce Behold, and our
admiration, What manner of Love; had he been the Son of God only by a
miraculous Conception, which freed him from Original Corruption; had he only
lived a Holy Life, and left us a good Example; had he only died to confirm the
truth of his Doctrine, as the Socinians say, the Birth of St. John Baptist, his
austere Life and Death might come near to all this. The Gift therefore here
spoken of, must be such as became the Infinite Goodness of God; such as might
reconcile his Love to us, with his Love to his Justice; such as might be
sufficient to satisfy for the Sins of all that should believe in his Son, and
obey the Commands of God by him: Which now is the greater Obligation of our
Love to God, to believe (as I have said) the Socinians do, or as the
Catholics, That God sent his only Begotten, (i. e.) his Eternal Son, the
Wonderful the Mighty GOD, to satisfy for our Sins, to instruct us in all
things that concern the Glory of God, and our own Salvation; to hear our
Prayers, and relieve all our Necessities; to sanctify our Souls, and make us
Partakers of the Divine Nature, by the operation of the Spirit of Grace. This
is Love, and this the Gift that God bestowed on us through his Infinite Love;
and in some proportion we ought so to love God as he first loved us: And to
think of, and esteem of this Gift less than what the Scripture has valued it
at, is not rightly to apprehend his Love, or our infinite Obligations to make
suitable Returns.

2. As to our Love to Christ; if he were only a Man that taught us the Will of
God, so did the Apostles; if he died only to confirm his Doctrine, and give us
an Example of Constancy and Patience, so have many Martyrs done: But Romans 5.7,
8. God commended his love to us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us; and had he only died for us, and not been able to rise again, and to
take up his life as well as to lay it down; had he not destroyed all the
Enemies of our Salvation, and ascended to Heaven, having all Power committed to
him, we might argue as the Apostle does, If Christ be not risen; and if he be
not the Eternal Son of God, to make Intercession for us, and to send the Holy
Ghost to sanctify us, then is our Preaching vain, and our Faith is vain, and
we are yet in our Sins; but now we may sing ou^ Epinicion over all our Enemies,
The st^ng of Death is sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be to
God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57.

Then for his Love to the Holy Spirit of God; it is too well known that the
Socinians deny his Deity, and say, That the Holy Spirit is nothing separate
from the Word; so that we need not to Baptize in his Name, to praise him in our
Doxology, or to pray to him, Come Holy Ghost Eternal God, etc. Our natural
Reason and Faith in God, makes the assistance of any other Spirit needless; and
why then should we wait on the Spirit of God any longer, or believe that God
will give any other Spirit to them that ask it? Is there no other Spirit but
that which works in the Children of Disobedience? Are not some Souls an
Habitation of God through the Spirit? Read we not of the Spirit of the Son,
Gal. 4.6. that helps our Infirmities? Do we not read of the diverse Gifts of the
Spirit, and that it is Christ's Viceroy, as I may say, to preside over his
Church to the World's end? And is there no Love, no Obedience due to his
Spirit, but we must join with the Socinians to pluck the Holy Ghost from his
Throne.

2. As for his enlarged Charity to his Brethren, what love does he manifest to
the Church of God, that has been founded on this Rock of the Confession of St.
Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; when by his Principles they
are proclaimed to be Idolaters, as worshipping a Creature besides the Creator;
and giving him and the Holy Spirit, which by his Maxims are not God by nature,
the same Divine Honor which is due to God only.

And as to the Church of England particularly, it has been declared how
contrary his Opinions are to her avowed Doctrines, more especially his Charity
to the Convocation of the Clergy at Westminster, whom he condemns to be too
stiff to their Constitutions, when he says, All the World expected a
Condescension from them, is not very large. It was no very good Opinion that he
conceived of them, when he thought to present his Naked Gospel to them, as if
they would have fallen in love with its Nakedness. And the truth is, they saw so
many shameful and scandalous Pamphlets demanding Alterations in our
Constitutions and Doctrines, and a Toleration of Latitudinarian Principles,
that though they were willing to make some moderate Concessions, yet when they
perceived there would be no end of demanding such Alterations as they could not
consent to, they thought it fit to maintain their ground, and not give way to
unreasonable Propoposals; such as these which the Doctor now makes, for a
Toleration of the Socinian Heresy.

As for his Charity to the Oxford Convocations, the Reflections made on them in
his Vindication, which has been already considered, do discover that his
Charity begins and ends at home, and is confined only to Men of his own
Persuasion. I think I do not conjecture amiss, if I say, that he has the same
enlarged Charity for us as Smalcius had, who concludes his Book De Divinitate
Christi thus: I doubt not to affirm confidently, That none of those who believe
Jesus Christ to be God of himself, and to have Divine Power, can by any means
have certain hope of Eternal Life, by virtue of his Opinion concerning Christ.
And such is the Charity of this Author to all that profess Christ to be their
Savior, and say, Thou art the King of Gory, O Christ: Thou art the everlasting
Son of the Father.

If this were the Doctor's design in writing his Naked Gospel, I shall conform
to the Apostle who enjoins, That if an Angel from Heaven should teach what is
so opposite to the Gospel, which the Church in all Ages has received and
believed, he deserves an Anathema.

Thus at last we are like to see a thorough Reformation of the glorious Gospel
of our Lord and Savior, even such as we saw of the once Flourishing Church of
England, under the Government of the most Religious King and Martyr Charles the
First: It was reformed first by a Presbyterian Parliament, which took away her
Bishops and Liturgy; then by an Independent Army, that devoured her Lands and
Revenues; then by an Inspired General, which brought in a Toleration of all
sorts of Enthusiasts; and after sundry Revolutions, by a Naked Rump, which if
God alone had not prevented, it would have left us all in Confusion.

Thus the Gospel which spread so far and wide under the Ministry of our Savior
and his Apostles, was first reformed by a Juncture of Gnostics, Nicolaitans,
and Ebionites, who mixed the Jewish Opinions and Observations with the pure
Ordinances of the Gospel, and would equal Moses with Christ: then by the
Samosatenians and Arians, who robbed him of that which he thought no Robbery,
to assume to himself (i. e.) to be equal with God. Then by Mahomet, that great
Impostor, who preferred himself above our Savior, drawing all Sects into a
Body under himself. And now, after various Revolutions, by the Naked Gospel,
which proclaims our Savior a mere Man, as Moses and other Messengers of God
were: to whom therefore some already do, and the rest of the Socinians ought by
their Principles, to deny any Religious Worship; which by their own Confession
is due to God only, and to no Creature whatsoever. And who can foresee with
what Viperous Monsters the Naked Gospel is now pregnant! which begin to eat
through the Bowels of that Church wherein they have been nourished; and
proclaim Liberty to all sort of Heresies and Blasphemies, against the Son of
God, and the Spirit of Grace, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.28. Trampling
under foot the Son of God, and doing despite to the Spirit of Grace. When one
Pamphlet proclaims the Holy Ghost Dethroned, another, The Triple God Buried,
and the Doctrine of the Trinity is a Popish Antichristian Diabolical Doctrine;
these dreadful Alarms from the Bottomless Pit, should awaken all good
Christians, unanimously to Invoke the Ever Blessed Trinity to arise and plead
its own Cause, against such as daily Blaspheme them.

The loud Blasphemies of these Philistines against not only the Israel of God,
but the God of Israel, has called me forth to bid Defiance to this Goliath,
though armed only with a Stone and a Sling: not doubting but there are many
Worthies in our Israel, who will appear, and do wonderful things: All that I
intended was to discover where this Adversary lay hid, under the usual Disguise
of the Old Serpent, that mostly appears as an Angel of Light, that he may with
less suspicion effect his Works of Darkness: and I doubt not, but the Church of
Christ has still such good Angels ministering to her, before whom such Angels
of Satan shall flee, and fall as Lightning.

The Rabbis say, That on the Stone wherewith David slew Goliath, the Characters
of the Messiah were engraven. I shall sling a Stone or two in the Name of the
Messiah, our Blessed Savior, against those Philistines that have blasphemed
that Name, and commit the success of them to the All-disposing Providence of
God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

The first Argument that I shall urge, is the Harmony of the Old and New
Testament, which speaks of the Deity of the Messiah, and apply it to our
Savior.

The second is drawn from the Doctrine and Faith of such eminent Fathers and
Martyrs as suffered for that Faith.

The third from those Judgments of God executed on those who in their several
Ages openly opposed that Faith, which may serve as Examples to deter others
from tempting Christ, lest they be destroyed as those were, of whom the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 10.9. From which Premises we may rightly infer an Equality of
Nature and Power, in the Father and the Son, and conclude the same Honor and
Worship due to both. When Arcadius, an Arian Emperor, assumed his Son to a
Partnership in the Empire, the good Bishop (St. Ambrose, as I remember)
addressing himself to Arcadius, humbled himself with all due Obeisance, but
took no notice of his Son Honorius, at which the Emperor manifesting his
displeasure, the good Bishop took occasion to tell him, That if he were
offended at the disrespect shown to his Son, he might consider, that the God of
Heaven might be more justly displeased with them that neglected to honor his
Son; which I leave you to apply.

Some Socinians deny our Savior any Worship, and others grant him only a
(...), such an inferior Honor as the Papists do their Saints, not that Divine
Worship which properly belongs to the Deity.

It is generally agreed by the Socinians, to make the Holy Sripture Judge of
this great Controversy, concerning the Godhead of our Savior; but they would
have Reason to be Judge of the sense of the Scripture: and to this we would
appeal, if they would not seek little Evasions from Particles, and Criticisms
of their own inventions, against the plain Letter of the Scripture; for
Smaltsius, one of their best Champions, says, Ludum and jocum e Scripturis
facere pronunciant qui absque necessitate a (...) discedunt. They do but make
sport of the Scripture, Joh. 1. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.
that depart from the Letter of it; when therefore the Scriptures do declare
our Blessed Savior to be the Creator of all things visible and invisible.

Which must be understood not of the new Creation only, as the Socinians
affirm, to evade the Testimony of St. John, chapter 1. but of the whole Creation;
for the Angels which kept their purity and station, needed not a new Creation;
when he is declared to be God over all, blessed for ever; 1 John 5.20.
when he is called the true God; and Col. 2.9. In whom dwelt the fullness of the
Godhead bodily; that is, really and fully: That Christ says of himsef, Joh.
8.58. Joh. 17.5. 1 Timothy Acts 20.2^. 1 John 3.16.
Before Abraham was I am: That he speaks of the Glory which he had with the
Father before the World was; That God was manifested in the flesh. That God
purchased the Church with his own blood. And hereby we perceive the Love of
God, because he laid down his Life for us; and we are still looking for the
appearance of the great God, and our Savior, Jesus Christ: (And) being
exegetical the words (the Great God) showing his Essence, and that of our
Savior his Office, That all men should honor the Son as they honor the
Father. And to omit many others, he that Christ says of himself, I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last; which none but God could say.

What is it but to Play with the Scriptures, after all these express
significations of his Eternal Deity, to deny it? And because the best
Interpretation of the Scripture is to be found in the Harmony and Agreement, or
the Analogy of the Old and New Testament; the best Confutation of the Socinian,
and consequently the best Confirmation of the received Opinion of the Eternal
Deity of the Son of God, may be demonstrated from those places in the Old
Testament, which speaking of our Savior as the Messiah, and attributing to him
the very Essence, Names, and Properties of the Supreme God, are in the New
Testament appropriated to our Blessed Savior, who therefore in diverse places
appeals to the Prophesies that went before concerning him, in the Law of Moses,
in the Psalms and Prophets; to them we will appeal, and search the Scripture,
because they testify of him.

At the Transfiguration of our Savior, Matthew. 17. it is said, There appeared
together with Peter, James and John, Moses and Elias; Ut lex and Prophetae cum
Evangelio congruentes sempeternum Dei filium quem annunciaverant revelarent:
That the Law and the Prophets conspiring with Christ and his Evangelists, might
declare the Eternal Son of God whom they had foretold, and were to preach to
the World. See St. Ambrose ad Gratian. 59. and St. Aug. ad Catechum. c. 6.

This the Author of the Naked Gospel might have observed from his own Quotation
of Justin Martyr's words to Triphon the Jew, P. 31.
I shall not prove, says Just. Mar. that Christ is God, otherwise than by
proving that this is the Christ, and that it was foretold that he should be
such.

The same course does our Countryman Bradwardine take, speaking of the
Trinity, etc. p. 29. he confidently affirms, That there is not one substantial
Article of the Christian Faith, which God had not solemnly foretold and
revealed by his Prophets, and that in so plain a manner that if any
Philosopher, as a Lover and Enquirer after Truth, should duly consider what is
written in the Old Testament, he must become a Christian: As he observes many
of the Fathers who were such Philosophers, were persuaded to be.

Such were Justine Martyr, Clemens Alex. Tertull. Origin, and many others, who
from the Schools of Plato, and some Traditions which he had received from the
ancient Jews, were prepared, upon reading of the Old Testament, to embrace the
Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, because they agreed with the Gospel
preached by our Savior.

Hornbeck in his Sum of Controversies, tells us, That the Disciples of Mahomet
do confess, that if they believed St. Paul 's Epistles to be Canonical, (as we
do) they must believe the Divinity of Christ: Therefore in their Disputes with
Christians concerning the Deity of Christ, they decline the Authority of St.
Paul's Epistles, saying, They were adulterated by the Christians. That
Testimony which Pliny gives to Trajan concerning the Christians, that they did
carmen dicere Christo tanquam Deo; sing Praises to Christ as their God: coming
from an Heathen is the more firm, and it cannot be denied.

The Christians who suffered under the Heathen Persecutors, suffered for their
belief of the Eternal Deity of our Savior; for their demand of them was, Nega
Deum incende Testamentum; Deny your God, burn your Testaments: which implys,
that they believed that Christ was God, and that their Testaments bore witness
to the same. Yet their answer was, Christianus sum Christum verum Deum agnosco
and adoro; I am a Christian, I acknowledge and worship Christ as the true God.
See the Tripartite History of the Persecution by the Vandals.

And now I shall compare those Testimonies in the Old and New Testament which
do prove, that our Savior was the Eternal Son of God, and only premise, that
if any one of those Scriptures which speak of the Eternal God in the Old
Testament, be rightly applied to our Savior in the New, that then he is that
Eternal God: To this therefore I apply myself, desiring the Reader to bear in
mind, that whatever from the Old Testament is in the New Testament accommodated
to Christ by himself, or his Apostles, is as true, and to be believed as much
as any other part of the Gospel.

The first Scripture that I shall compare is that of Moses, Exodus 9.1. and
Exodus 20.1. with Heb. 11.25, 26. from which places it is thus argued:

He to whom the People of Israel were a peculiar People, whom by the hands of
Moses he brought out of Egypt; for whose sake Moses chose to suffer affliction
with them, rather than to enjoy the Crown of Pharaoh: He was the God of Israel,
but our Savior Christ was he whose peculiar People they were, therefore, etc.
This is applied to Christ, Heb. 11.24. By Faith Moses refused to be called the
Son of Pharoah's Daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season; esteeming the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt: Here the
affliction of the People of God is called the reproach of Christ, his therefore
was that People, and them he brought out of Egypt, and therefore he is that
God. The Apostle St. Jude, v. 5. speaks to this purpose, That the Lord, (...),
which in the vulgar Latin is rendered Jesus, having saved the people out of
Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. Compare Psalm. 45. v. 6, 7.
with Heb. 1.8. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the scepter of thy
kingdom is a right scepter: He whose Throne is for ever and ever is God; but
Christ's Throne is for ever and ever, therefore he is God. Both these
Propositions are express Scripture.

The next Scripture shall be that of Isai. 7.14. A Virgin shall conceive and
bring forth a son, and his name shall be called Emanuel; compared with Mat.
1.23. All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken (viz.)
Isai. 7.14.) by the Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring
forth a son, and thou shall call his name Emanuel.

There is an Objection cast in our way which must be removed, before we
proceed: Object. It is said, Matthew. 1.21. The Angel of the Lord which appeard
to Joseph, told him that he should call his name Jesus; How then was this of
the Prophet fulfilled, They shall call his name Emanuel?

Ans. That Names are of two sorts, some for distinction of Persons, as proper
Names, others serve for Description of the Nature or Offices of a Person; in
the first respect he is called Jesus, a Savior, there being no other Savior
but he; for there is no other name given to man, whereby he may be saved. The
other of Emanuel, describes his Nature, what he should be, viz. God with us,
God manifested in the flesh: So the same Prophet, Isai. 9.6. His name shall be
called Wonderful Counselor, etc. And Jer. 23.6. This is his name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. And Luke 1.35. That which is born
of thee shall be called the Son of God. And it is observed, that both the word
(...) in the Old Testament, and (...) in the New, do signify to be, as well as
to be called. Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and other Ancients, solved this
Objection made by the Jews, Venit Emanuel quia venit quod Emanuel significat;
The Emanuel is come, because he is come who was signified by that name, God
with us; not only to reconcile us to God, but to be God Incarnate.

The Argument then is this: Emanuel is (...), God in the Divine Essence; Christ
is Emanuel, therefore he is God in the Divine Essence. That the word God is to
be understood of the most High God, the Socinians grant: But Crellius objects,
that the word est should be added, and so the meaning is, God is with us. But
when St. Matthew expounds the name without that Addition, there is great Reason
to reject it: and if that had been the meaning of the Holy Ghost, in the name
as given by the Prophet, St. Matthew would not have omitted it, it being of
great concern to the Glory of God, and the Instruction of the Church. The
meaning of the Name therefore is not God is with us, (i. e.) as says Crellius,
to help and assist us: but Christ is God with us; for the name Emanuel being
put into English, and applied unto Christ, it will appear whether St. Matthew
or Crellius gives the best Interpretation: This is St. Matthew's sense, Christ
is God with us; (i. e.) God and Man. And this is Crellius his Nonsense, Christ
God with Man is. Is not this to add to, and alter the sense of the Scripture?

Malach. 3.1. compared with Matthew. 11.10. Behold, I send my Messenger, and he
shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come
to his temple: This is he says St. Matthew, of whom it is written, Behold I
send my Messenger before thy face, etc.

It is agreed that John the Baptist was this Messenger spoken of; and the
Argument is this: He before whom John Baptist was to be sent to prepare his
way, is the God of Israel, but Christ is he before whom John Baptist was to be
sent, etc. therefore Christ is the God of Israel.

The first Proposition is proved by Malachy, where he that speaks is called the
God of Israel, and Lord of Hosts: This Socinus grants. The second Proposition
is proved by St. Matthew, applying it to Christ, This is he of whom it is
written, etc.

The Sum of what is objected to this Argument is, That the Text in Malachy is
corrupted, and instead of reading, He shall prepare the way before me; it
should be read, He shall prepare the way before thee. But then how comes it to
pass, that no one Copy of that of Malachy, or this in St. Matthew reads
otherwise than we do? He will not say they are all corrupted; and we say none
are corrupted. But they ask, How is it that what Malachy reads in the first
Person, He shall prepare the way before me, Christ renders in the second
Person, He shall prepare the way before thee?

Ans. This Objection will improve our Argument; for when Malachy says, He shall
prepare the way before me; which is spoken of the God of Israel, and our
Savior renders it, He shall prepare the way before thee, and applys it to
himself, this proves that Christ was that God of Israel who spoke in Malachy;
and so proves the Identity of the Essence of God the Father and the Son.
Moreover, by comparing this place of Malachy with the Interpretation which our
Savior gives of it in St. Matthew, we infer from Malachy the Unity of the
Essence of the God of Israel and Christ; and from that in Matthew we learn a
distinction of Persons, which had not been so intelligible, if Christ had not
changed the first Person, or the word my, into the second Person, or the word
thy, in St. Matthew.

Deuteronomy. 6.13. compared with Matthew. 4.10. the words are the same, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The Argument is this:
He that is to be worshipped and served with Divine Worship is the God of
Israel: Christ is to be worshipped and served with Divine Worship, therefore
Christ is the God of Israel The first Proposition is express Scripture: the
second is granted by the Socinians; therefore the Conclusion is undeniable.

Crellius, when he would prove that Christ is not the true God, from Joh. 20.
This is life eternal to know thee only the ^rue God, says, That the word only
excludes all others from being the true God. Schichtingius is of another mind,
and says, That this particle only, when it is spoken of God, does not exclude
those that depend on God in the thing spoken of. Now if Crellius speaks the
truth, then Christ is not to be worshipped, because the word only excludes him:
If Schichtingius speaks the truth, then Christ may be the true God, because the
word only does not exclude him. Volkelius says, That seeing Christ is
subordinate to God, in worshipping of Christ we worship God who has given him
so great Power and Dignity.

Ans. This is against the Command that excludes all others, for if Christ be a
Man, wholly distinguished from the Father by nature, if he be a Creature,
though honored with the name of God, as others have been, this Precept forbids
us to worship him, as much as to worship any other Creature.

That which they farther object, That this Precept belongs to the Old
Testament, and was given before Christ had a being, is absurd; for if there be
any Moral Precepts of perpetual Obligation, this is one: besides, when Christ
used this Precept, he was then in being; and by a Voice from Heaven was
proclaimed to be the Son of God. So that the Socinians must wholly deny Divine
Worship to Christ, or else are guilty of Idolatry, in worshipping a Creature.

The like Argument we have Isa. 42.8. where God declares, That he will not give
his glory to another, (i. e.) the Praise, Adoration, and Worship which is due
to him alone, may not be given to any other Angels or Men. The Argument is
this: God will not give his Glory or Divine Worship to another; but he has
given it to Christ, therefore Christ is not another.

To this they say, That God intended by this Declaration to exclude Graven
Images, which are immediately expressed, Neither my praise to graven Images; he
does not say, He will not give it to any who have their dependence on him, and
are subordinate to him. As if the word another did exclude only Graven Images;
or as if all other things had not their dependence on him, which yet are all
excluded.

And it is observable, that in this Chapter mention is made of Christ; so v. 6.
I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and keep
thee, and give thee for a covenant to the people, a light to the Gentiles; this
is spoken of Christ, Luke 2.32. To open the blind Eyes, to bring out the
Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness out of the
Prisonhouse; see Luke 4.18. So after the Text, Behold I declare new things,
(viz.) by Christ the word. And v. 13. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man
-- he shall prevail against his enemies. All this the Gospel shows was
performed by Christ; now this Glory and Worship being given to Christ, it
follows, that he also is the Jehovah, the God of Israel.

Isa. 45.23. compared with Romans 14.10. Look unto me and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else -- Unto me every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall swear: this is applied to Christ. Romans 14.11. We
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ; for it is written, As I
live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess
to God: Which plainly infers that Christ is that God.

Psalm. 102.25, etc. compared with Heb. 1. The Apostle distinguishes between
holy Men that spoke and the Son of God; the Psalmist says, Thou have laid the
foundations of the earth: which the Apostle applys to Christ, therefore he is
that God. And to that Son it is that it is said, Thou Lord have laid the
foundations of the earth, etc. I have seen an ancient Saxon Manuscript, now in
Print, which read in the fourth Commandment, Jesus Christ made the Heavens and
the Earth.

Psalm. 97.7. compared with Heb. 1.6. The Psalmist's words are, Worship him all
ye God or Angels; so Elobim signifies. The Argument is: He whom all the Angels
are commanded to Worship in this Psalm, is the God of Israel; Christ is he whom
the Angels are there commanded to worship, therefore Christ is the God of
Israel.

The first Proposition is in the Psalm, which speaks of the Lord of the whole
Earth; so the God of Israel is often styled, Jos. 3.11. Zach. 4.14. Mich. 4.13.
The second Proposition is evident in Hebr. 1. where this Worship is applied to
Christ, Let all the Angels of God worship him: A Question here is raised,
Whether the words of the Psalmist, and the Author to the Hebrews, speak of the
same Person, or of another? If of the same, then is that Person Jehovah the
Supreme God; if of another, then it is a false Exposition, when that which is
spoken of one Person in the Psalm by the Holy Spirit, is applied to another by
Men. He therefore whom the Angels are to worship, is the only begotten Son of
God, and Jehovah the Lord of the whole Earth; for to this purpose is the
Psalmist quoted, to prove that Christ is to be worshipped by the very Angels:
which could not be to the purpose, if he were not the same that is spoken of in
that Psalm, (viz.) The most high God.

Psalm. 68.18. compared with Ephesians 4.8. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
captivity captive, and received gifts for men: Which the Psalmist speaks of
God, and the Apostle applys to Christ, therefore he is God.

Psalm. 24.1. compared with 1 Cor. 10.26. He whose is the earth and the fullness
thereof, is the great Jehovah: but of Christ it is said, His is the earth and
the fullness thereof; therefore he is the Lord Jehovah. The name Jehovah is in
the Text of the Psalmist, which proves the first Proposition: and in the
Apostle 1 Cor. 10. this is applied to Christ who is particularly denoted by the
name (...), throughout the New Testament; and by the Apostle 1 Cor. 8.6. and
Chap. 12.5. Ephesians. 4.5. And the Arians grant, that he was the Creator of all
things; and therefore the Earth and the Fullness thereof belongs to him; he
therefore is the Jehovah, or Supreme God.

Isa. 35.4. compared with Matthew. 11.5. The Prophet says, Your God shall come
and save you; then shall the eyes of the blind be opened: This Prophesy was
fulfilled by our Savior, Mat. 11.5. whence the Argument is thus formed: That
God who at his coming was to open the eyes of the Blind, etc. was the God of
Israel: Christ is that God who at his coming did open the eyes, etc. therefore
Christ is the God of Israel. Note, That by your God is meant the God promised
to Israel, the (...), for of him was the question, Art thou he that should
come? v. 3.

Isa. 8.13. compared with Romans 9.30. and 1 Pet. 2.3. The words are, Sanctify
the Lord God of Hosts himself, etc. The Argument is thus: He that should be a
Stone of Stumbling and a Rock of Offense, is the Supreme God; but Christ is
that Rock and Stone, etc.

Isa. 4.3.5.10. compared with Matthew. 3.3.5.14. and 1 Pet. 1.24. The words are,
The voice of one crying in the wilderness: This Crier was John Baptist, Matthew.
3.3. and he pointed to that Lord whose ways he was to prepare by preaching the
Doctrine of Repentance; and that Lord was Christ to whom St. John Baptist bore
witness, This is the Lamb of God. In Isa. 4. v. 5. The glory of the Lord shall
be revealed, and all flesh shall see it: This was fulfilled Joh. 1.14. The Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory. And John 2.11. He
manifested his glory, and his Disciples believed in him. And the Gospel is
called, The gospel of the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.4. That which is added in
the Prophet, v. 8. The word of our God endures for ever; that is, the word of
Christ, of which himself said, Matthew. 24.35. Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my word shall not pass away. It follows in the Prophet, v. 10. Behold your
God; to which that of St. John Baptist answers, Behold the Lamb of God. From
these Premises it follows, that Christ was that God foretold by the Prophet,
and pointed at by John Baptist. The like is Mal. 3.1. compared with Matthew.
11.10. of which before.

Isa. 6. compared with Joh. 12.41. I saw the Lord sitting on a high throne,
etc. To this St John refers, These things said Isaiah as when (...) saw his
Glory. The Argument is this: He whose glory Isaiah saw was the God of Israel;
but Jesus is he whose glory Isaiah saw, there, fore he is the God of Israel.
Both these Propositions are express Scripture.

Jer. 23.6. compared with 1 Cor. 1.30. The Argument is this: He whose name is,
The Lord our Righteousness, is the God of Israel; but the King Messiah the
branch of David, Christ is he whose name is, The Lord our Righteousness. The
major is granted, the minor appears from the consideration of that Deliverance
and Salvation there spoken of, which is spiritual; and Christ alone is the
Author of this Redemption or Salvation, Acts 4.10. Neither is there salvation
in any other; for (1 Cor. 1.30.) of God he is made to us wisdom and
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: He then that is the Lord our
Righteousness, is Jehovah.

Isa. 41.4. compared with Revel. 1.11, 17. and 2.8. and Chap. 22.13. The words
are, I am the first and the last; which are applied to our Savior, Revel.
1.11, 17. The Argument is this: He that is the first and the last, is the most
high God; Christ is the first and the last, therefore he is the most high God.
And doubtless our Savior would never have assumed this Title, so derogatory to
God, so dangerous to his Church, if he had been but a Creature, as the
Socinians say.

Psalm. 24. with 1 Cor. 2.8. The Messiah in the Psalmist is called the King of
Glory, Lift up your heads O Gates, and the King of Glory shall come in. This
King of Glory is called, The Lord strong and mighty, and the Lord of Hosts; (i.
e.) the most high God: And as this was Prophesied of Christ, so it is applied
unto Christ, whom the Apostle calls the Lord of Glory; and as our Church, Thou
art the King of Glory, O Christ; therefore Christ is that Lord, strong and
mighty, and the Lord of Hosts, the most high God.

Zach. 11.13. compared with Matthew. 27.9. The words are, The Lord said unto me,
Cast it unto the Potter, a goodly price that I was prized at of them, etc.
Matthew. 27.9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremiah,
saying, And they took the price, etc. The Argument is this: He that in
Zachariah was valued at thirty Pieces of Silver, etc. was the Lord God of
Israel; Christ was he that was thus valued, therefore he is the God of Israel.

Zach. 12.10. compared with Joh. 19.37. Revel. 1.7. The words are, They shall
look upon me whom they have peirced, etc. So St. John, and another Scripture
says, They shall look on him whom they have peirced. The Argument is this: He
whom the House of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, are said to look on, and
to have peirced, is the most high God; Christ is he whom they should look on,
and whom they had peirced, therefore Christ is the most high God. It is
evident, that he who spoke this in Zachariah, was Jehovah, that would pour out
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; which makes the first Proposition
undeniable, and the Apostle confirms the second; so both are undeniable.

Numb. 21.5, 6. compared with 1 Cor. 10.9. He for tempting of whom the
Israelites perished in the wilderness, was the God of Israel: For tempting of
Christ the Israelites perished in the Wilderness, therefore Christ is that God
of Israel.

Isa. 52.67. compared with Romans 10.15. The words are, Therefore my people shall
know my Name; therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he that does
speak, behold it is I. How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of him that
brings glad tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation; that says unto Sion, Thy God reigns. This
is a Prophecy of Christ, and a certain time is spoken of his appearance, In
that day they shall know that I am he; Ecce adsum, Behold it is I. The Argument
is this: He that says, Behold it is I, or Ecce adsum, is the God of Israel; but
it is Christ that says it in the Prophet, therefore he is that God of Israel.

Socinus grants this place concerns the time of Christ's coming, but would have
it to refer to the Deliverance from Babylon: But the words of the Apostle, Romans
10.15. O how beautiful are the feet, etc. plainly refer to the Apostles that
preached the Gospel, which contains the glad Tidings of Peace, which the
Prophet spoke of with great admiration, Behold, thy King reigns! And Socinus
grants, that the Deliverance from Babylon was but a Type of that by Christ; the
truth or true Deliverance intended, was that by Christ, the God of Israel.

Isa. 60.1. compared with Ephesians. 5.14. The words are, Arise, arise, for thy light
is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: The Apostle gives the
meaning of this Scripture, Ephesians. 5.14. Arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give thee light; which he thus prefaceth, wherefore he says, (i. e.) the Holy
Ghost in the Scripture; and that Christ is spoken of, appears from v. 3. And
the Gentiles shall come to thy sight; agreeable to, A light to lighten the
Gentiles. The Argument then is: He that was to enlighten the People of Israel,
and to be a Light to the Gentiles, was the God of Israel; but Christ was to be
a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of his people Israel,
therefore Christ is the God of Israel.

Isa. 54.5. compared with Matthew. 9.15. and 25.1. 1 John 3.29. 2 Cor. 11.12. The
words are, For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name. The
Argument is this: The Husband of the Church is the God of Israel; Christ is the
Husband of the Church, therefore Christ is the God of Israel. The Prophet
affirms the first Proposition, the second is proved by our Savior, Mat. 9.15.
where he calls himself the Bridegroom; and chap. 25.1. in the Parable of the
ten Virgins, He is the Bridegroom; Ephesians. 5. the Apostle speaks of Christ and his
Church as of Husband and Wife: This Union was prophesied of by Hosea, chap.
2.16. In that day thou shall call me Ishi, my Husband; for v. 19. I will
betroth thee to me for ever, etc.

1 Kings 8.39. and 2 Cron. 6.30. compared with Revel. 2.23. The words are, Thou
only know the hearts of the sons of men. All the Churches shall know that I
am he that searches the Hearts and Reins, to give to every Man according to
his works. The Argument is this: The God of Israel only knows the hearts of
Men; Christ knows the hearts of Men, therefore Christ is the God of Israel.
Both these Propositions are express Scriptures, therefore the Consequence is
undeniable.

Isa. 63.1. compared with Revel. 19.13, etc. The words are, Who is this that
comes from Edom, with dyed garments -- I that spoke in righteousness, mighty
to save. St. John speaking of Christ says, He was clothed with a vesture dipped
in blood, and his name is called the Word of God: Now the Prophet speaks of the
God of Israel, and St. John applys it to Christ, as by the Context in both does
appear, therefore Christ is the God of Israel.

These among many others may suffice concerning the Harmony of both Testaments;
to which I may add those express Testimonies concerning the whole Trinity in
the New Testament: The first that I shall mention is such, of which I may say,
as the Doctor does of his Fundamentals, p. 43. c. 1. That if all the rest of
the Scripture were lost, this alone would be sufficient to confute the
Socinians, (viz.) Mat. 28.19. Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; where we have
three distinct Persons of equal Dignity and Power, to whom under the same Name
we dedicate ourselves, and promise Worship and Obedience.

The Socinians are not ashamed to say, That this place is added by Athanasius,
or some of his Persuasion; though not only the practice of the Apostles and the
Primitive Fathers may evince the contrary; but it is read in all the Greek
Copies, the Syriack and Aethiopick; and Ignatius, Tertullian, and other Fathers
have quoted and expounded this Text: and the Socinians retain it in their
German Edition of that Gospel, An. 1630.

2ly, They object, That to be baptized in the Name of any, does not conclude
him to be God, seeing the Israelites were baptized into Moses, and some
Disciples into the Baptism of John, Acts 19.3.

Ans. To be baptized into Moses, was to be baptized by the Ministry or Hand of
Moses, as the Syriack Version reads: and hence St. Paul says, That none of the
Corinthians were baptized in his name, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15. lest any should infer,
that he expected Obedience from them: And it is one thing to be baptized in the
Name of John, and another to be baptized by the Administration of St. John's
Baptism; the import of Baptism is to believe as we have been baptized, and to
Worship as we believe, i. e. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

There are many other Scriptures that confirm the Doctrine of the Trinity, in
the Judgment of our Divines, as Joh. 15.26. When the Comforter is come, whom I
will send from the Father; where we have the Father from whom, the Son by whom,
and the Person of the Holy Ghost that is sent. So also 2 Cor. 13.13. in that
Benediction, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, we have a plain distinction of three Persons, the
Authors of the same Grace. So also 1 Cor. 12.5, 6. And there are diversities of
gifts, but the same spirit and diversities of administrations, but the same
Lord, and there are diversities of operations, but the same God; where we have
three Persons and but one God.

It is evident from these and many other Scriptures, that by Concession of the
Arians, our Savior had the Divine Attributes of Omnipotence and Omniscience
communicated to him; and if these were imparted to him by his Father, it is not
against reason that that other Attribute of Eternity might be also; for to be
Omnipotent and Omniscient, implies an Infinity as the properties of the Eternal
God; nor can our Savior be thought less than Infinite, when we believe that he
hears the Prayers, searches the Hearts, and knows the Thoughts of all Men, and
shall come to be the Judge of all, without which Attributes he could not judge
rightly. The Creation and Conservation of all things do prove the same; for he
that made all things is God: And so does his being the only Lawgiver, and the
only Judge, and to qualify him for these Offices he must be God; to bind our
Consciences to his Laws, and to judge righteous Judgment, And shall not the
Judge of all the Earth judge righteously? which none can do but the Omniscient
and Omnipotent God.

Estius, one of the best Schoolmen, asserts, That no Creature can be so highly
elevated, by a supernatural power, as to cooperate by way of a Physical
Instrument in the Creation, because it is a property that belongs to such an
Instrument to have something of its own, whereby to week dispositive for the
effecting of the Creation; Whence, he says, no Creature can be assumed to the
power of Creation, as a Physical Instrument, the nature of that Instrument
still remaining. And nothing can be the cause of Creation, which has not an
infinite Power, because by how much the Form to be produced is removed from the
Power of Production, by so much a greater power is required in the Agent; so
that for the production of something out of nothing, there is required an
infinite Power, because the distance between something and nothing is infinite:
so that our Savior being (as the Scripture affirms) the Creator of the World,
he is also God over all, blessed for ever.

Hence Origin against Celsus proves, That God neither did, nor could make the
World by any thing without himself, (as the Angels of which it was discoursed)
were, and hence he concludes, That Christ by whom the World was made was God.
See also Ireneus l. 2.55. and l. 4. c. 37.

St. Peter in Epistle 2.2.1. speaking of false Prophets that privily should
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, says, That
they should bring upon themselves swift destruction. And v. 3. Their judgment
lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not. It may therefore be a good
argument with many a person, not yet infected with such Heresies, to give a
short Account of the manifest Judgments of God upon the chief Founders and
Patrons of the Arian and Socinian Doctrines; for, for such Opinions of the
Doctrines of the Gnostics, Cerinthus, and Ebion, etc. which had infected the
Asian Churches, and for the wicked Lives of such as entertained those Heretical
Doctrines it was, that they had their Candle-stick removed, and were left in
Darkness, and under the Dominion of Mahomet to this day.

Olimpius, an ancient Arian Bishop, publicly blasphemed our Savior in a Bath,
and suddenly felt as it were three Darts thrown at him by an Angle, which put
him into a great Agony, whereof he died miserably.

Greg. Nazianzen reports the same of Julian the Apostate, who in his War
against the Persians, felt a Dart thrown at him by an unknown Hand; which he
plucked out and cast it into the Air, with a Vicisti Galilaei; Thou have
overcome me, O Galilean: Of which that Father, Orat. 3. says, of such as still
opposed the Deity of our Savior, Audite Angeli quorum Opera Julianus extinctus
est: Hear the Angels by whose Assistance Julian was slain. Platina in the Life
of Anastasius the Second.

Nestorius who, as Prateilus says, affirmed, That Christ was Dei ferus, not
Deus, and fancied two Natures in Christ; by the Council of Ephesus, Cyril of
Alexandria being President, and the Emperor banished him, in which Banishment
his Tongue rotted out of his Mouth, being eaten with Worms; and the Church
passed this Sentence on him, That he went from temporal Miseries to eternal
Torments, Socrates, l. 7. c. 33. Evagrius, l. 1. c. 7.

You have heard of the ignominious Death of Arius already, against whom Bishop
Alexander prayed, Si Arius cras in Synagoga introducetur nunc dimittas seruum
tuum sin Ecclesiae parias toll Arium. See Athanasius Epist. ad Serapion, l. 7.
c. 19.

Paulus Orosius, speaking of the Goths and Vandals who petitioned an Arian
Emperor to send them some Christian Preachers, he sent them such as were
infected with Arianism, and shortly after they made War against him, and slew
him.

Under the Persecution of Dioclesian, the Heretics that denied our Savior's
Deity, as the Sabellians and Samosatenians, with others had done, who were the
Fathers of Arius his Heresy, raised another Persecution against the Orthodox,
as cruel as that of the most cruel Persecutor; for Donatus having begun his
Schism, which disturbed all Africa, where also the Arian Heresy prevailed, got
many of that Opinion to join with him.

Optatus Milevitanus, speaking of those times, Hist. Collationis Carthag. says,
Credo nostros in refutandis Arianis totos fuisse, p. 606. That the Orthodox
were wholly employed in defending themselves against the Arians: We are assured
by good History, that Donatus himself wrote a Book de Spiritu Sancto, agreeable
to the Doctrine of Arius, as Optatus, and St. Heirom, and St. August. ad Quod
vult Deum, do relate: They altered the Doxology, and made it run thus: Glory be
to the Father, in the Son, and by the Holy Ghost; and taught, that the Son was
less than the Father, and the Holy Ghost less than the Son. So that by the
prevalence of the Donatists, who favored all Sects and Heresies, to strengthen
themselves against the Catholics, great Cruelties were practiced against them;
many banished, some cruelly tortured and murdered; the Jews, Arians,
Macedonians, Sabellians, etc. all uniting under the Donatists. Both the Holy
Sacraments grew into contempt, as they are now where the Socinians prevail:
some were so profane as to cast the consecrated Bread to their Dogs, which
after they had eaten grew mad, and sell upon their Masters. Theodoret tells us,
how they scoft at the consecrated Vessels, or rather at the Son of God, Ecce
quibus vasis sacrificatur Mariae filio, l. 3. c. 12. They were so numerous that
they despised all the Emperor's Edicts that were published against them, and
affronted his Officers. But God punished them by their own inventions, giving
them to a kind of Madness, which if ever appeared in the Circumcellians, that
in their rage slew whomever they met without distinction, not sparing each
other, and frequently destroyed themselves; no wonder therefore that they were
cruel to others, being unmerciful to their own Souls. Paulus Samosatenus was
banished by Aurelian, for the disturbance made in his Dominions, at the Request
of the Council that condemned him.

The Arians displaced Maximus Bishop of Neopolis, for not complying with their
Doctrine, and placed one Sozomus in his Bishopric; Maximus keeps to his
Office, until they cast him out by force; and then he denounced an Anathama
against the Intruder Sozomus, enters into his Office, and being to speak to the
People, his Tongue failed him, and grew too big for his Mouth, so that he left
the Church and People for that time; and being recovered, he assayed a second,
and so a third time, but still found the same Judgment attended him, so that he
was forced to forsake his usurped Dignity.

The famous St. George, whom the late Author of the Acts of the Great
Athanasius, p. 8. so highly commends, as that he makes him the most skilful of
all Mortals in those Questions, who was (he thinks) that Legendary Saint that
slew the Dragon and delivered a Virgin; the Moral whereof, he says, was, That
Athanasius was the Dragon, and the Church of Alexandria the Virgin, which by
his Learning and Piety he defended from the venomous breath of Athanasius: But
this was the Man that had been a Soldier, and in his latter days turned Arian;
and when none else could be found to enter on the Bishopric of Athanasius, St.
George having favor of the Arian Party, presumed to Sequester him, but to the
great dislike of the People, who after a short time fell on him, dragged him
through the Streets of Alexandria, and slew him; yet the Arians accounted him
for a Martyr, see Epiphanius Here Is. 76.

Sandius gives a large account of this George, and says, That the Turks
accounted him a Prophet, and call him Gerges, Sandius p. 246. says, He was
slain by a party of the Athanasians. But the Ancient Historians say it was done
by the barbarous Greeks, whose Temples he had destroyed. That infamous
Ecebolius who so often changed his outward Profession, lived and died an Arian,
Sand. Append. p. 32.

Lelius Socinus, Uncle to Faustus, was the first that revived the Heresy
against the Blessed Trinity, a person of good Learning, and of a good Family,
as Andreas Dudithius relates; he concealed his Opinions, only he was wont to
insinuate them by way of Discourse, as if he did it for his own Information,
but it was rather to seduce others, as Dudithius says, he attempted him. But
Socinus his Nephew observes, That having collected his Papers, and made them
ready to be published, he was praematura morte extinctus, (viz.) in the thirty
seventh Year of his Life.

Sandius, p. 230. says, That Leo, the first Bishop of Rome, in the days of St.
Hilary, was an Arian, opposing the Doctrine of the Trinity; for which Hilary l.
1. ad Constantium, reflects on him in these words, Leo saeviens circumit. He
came to a like end as Arius did, voiding his Entrails by a violent Dysentery,
and miserably expired; the like he says of Anastasius another Bishop of Rome,
p. 310.

The same Author p. 428. tells us of one Gregorius Pauli an Arian, who
preaching at Cracovia, against the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Church of St.
Mary, wherein he preached, was smote with Lightning: This Paul (says he) wrote
a Book, De Antichristi Deo Trino and Uno.

P. 419. He relates that famous Story of Uladislaus and Hunniades his General,
who having sworn to Articles of Peace with Amurath, they laying their hands on
the Evangelists, and he on the Alcoran; Pope Eugenius persuaded them to make
War against Amurath, notwithstanding their Oaths, from which he sent Cardinal
Julianus to Absolve them, pretending they had no power to conclude a Peace
without the Pope's approbation; whereupon they assaulted Amurath with a great
Army, who being surprised, and trusting to the Articles of Peace, had made no
great Provision for the War, was at first put to flight, but having gathered
more Forces, he bids them Battle, and seeing the Banner of the Cross in his
Enemy's Camp, he takes the Articles of Peace out of his Bosom, and says, O Jesu
Christ, this is the Peace which they who glory in thy Name, confirmed with me
by their Oaths, which they have perfidiously broken; if thou be a God, avenge
this Perfidy: and renewing the Fight, routeth Hunniades, and in the Flight
Uladislaus is slain; and the Cardinal having hid himself, was discovered and
slain; and seventy Ships destroyed in the Hellespont; which signal Providence
was enough to convince a Turk, that Christ was God.

Blandrata a Physician, was for his Skill in that Science entertained by Prince
Radzivil, who being a Protestant, Calvin wrote to him, advising him to beware
of Blandrata, as a Man infected with the Error of Servetus: On this Information
he was summoned to a Meeting at Pinkzove, and being accused, he fraudulently
subscribed his Belief of the Trinity, to keep up his Reputation with that
Prince; but finding himself suspected, he gets into Poland, and for his Skill
in Physic, was admitted as Physician to King Stephen; and having gotten
Liberty and Power, he declared himself an Anti-trinitarian, and wrote and acted
very much in defense of his Opinion; but was at length found dead in his Bed,
his neck being broken: Socinus, to prevent the Scandal that might be taken from
the unfortunate Death of a Patron of his Heresy, gave it out, That he was
strangled in his Bed by a Kinsman, who being made his Heir, strangled him, that
he might possess his Estate. We have only a Comment of his on St. John, chap.
1. which Junius de Trinitate and Zanch. de Tribus Elohim do recite and confute.

Lismaninus, another Anti-trinitarian, was accused for being an Arian, by a
Synod held at Morden, where getting off upon his false Protestations, he was
afterward convicted of it at Wodreslaw, and drowned himself in a Well, as Beza
in his 81st Epistle.

Paulus Alciatus, and Bernardinus Ochinus, who both wrote against the Trinity,
did both turn Turks. Beza reports, that Gentilis being asked what became of his
Friend and Companion Paulus Alciatus, answered, That he was turned Turk. So
Beza's Epistle 81.

Puccius, a Man of a Noble Family, but a wavering Judgment, for improving his
Knowledge, came and studied a while in Oxford, where finding few Men of his
mind, he went to Basil, and meeting with Socinus, after much Discourse with
him, professed they could agree in nothing concerning Religion, but that there
was a God. This was the Man that pleaded for a Natural Faith, (as our Doctor
does,) and other Wild Opinions; for which he was driven thence, and returned to
England, where he (his Opinions being made known) was cast into Prison, and on
his Release went into Holland, from whence he went to Cracovia, where he wrote
a Book called, The Bible Shut; denying all Ordinances, Ministry, and Preaching
till Elias should come and restore all things. His Reason was from the Apostasy
of the Church; and he fancied that he was this Elias, and expected a Call from
Heaven to Commissionate him. At length, God having in his just Judgment given
him up to such strong Delusions, he meets with too English Men who came to
Poland, who pretended to Revelations, and Converse with Angels; but one of them
was a Papist, that acted a Mountebanck, and the other a Magician; with these he
travels to Prague, where, the Papist having insinuated himself with Puccius,
persuaded him that he had a Revelation, that Puccius, must turn Papist; which
after a while he did, and was reconciled to the Church of Rome; but in a short
time died a desperate Magician.

Franciscus David having long studied the Socinian Tenets, was at length
convinced, That if Christ were a mere Man, he ought not to be Invocated and
Adored as God. This troubled Socinus, as foreseeing what a Scandal it would
bring on his Opinions, and therefore opposes him with all his Industry,
professing he could not account them Christians, that would not worship Christ,
which Worship he endeavored to prove due to him by the Scripture; but on his
Supposition that Christ was a mere Man, he could not evince, for Christianus
Franken took the part of Francis David, and confounded Socinus by his own
Arguments, for having denied the Deity of Christ, which was the Foundation of
Religious Worship, all his Arguments fell to the ground; Socinus impatient of
this Baffle, and fearing it would be the utter overthrow of his Party, draw, up
some Opinions of Franciscus David, which were indeed as Gross and Heretical, as
any that had been thought of, but such as were built on Socinian Principles;
one was this, Jesus of Nazareth, that is called Christ, was a Man that spoke
not by the Spirit of Prophecy, but by a Holy Spirit; and though he was sent of
God, yet we may not account that whatever he spoke came from the Mouth of God.
Hence it follows, that both his and the words of his Apostles, are to be
brought and tried by the Rule of the Law of Moses and the Prophets; and if any
thing in their Writings be found disagreeing from that Rule, it is to be
rejected, or at least to be interpreted so, as to agree with that Rule (is not
this the same as to equal a Natural Faith with the Evangelical) which is the
Standard of Faith and Manners. These Opinions, with an Antithesis to them,
Socinus presents to Barthoreus Prince of Transylvania, who had cast David into
Prison, on the Persecution of Socinus and Blandrata, (who would put it off on
the Samosatenians and other Sects, who thereupon accused one another of Craft,
Treachery, and Cruelty) and being imprisoned in June, died in November
following. During his Imprisonment he fell into great distraction through
anguish of Spirit (through the just Judgment of God upon him, says Socinus)
and in his distraction cried out, Behold, who do expect me to be their
Companion in my Journey; and in this dreadful condition he expired. But his
abominable Heresies died not with him, for one Martyne Seidelius was overrun
with this Leprosy, who gives this account of his Opinions: That the Doctrine
of the Messiah did not belong to him, for he was promised only to the Jews, as
the promise of the good things of Canaan had been; so neither Circumcision and
the Sacrifices and Ceremonies appointed by Moses do concern me, but the Jews
only on whom they were imposed; neither were they the Worship of God, but an
Introduction thereunto. The true Worship of God, which I call my Religion, is
the Decalogue which is the Eternal and Immutable Will of God, which I call
mine, because it is given me by God, not by a Voice from Heaven, but ingrafted
in my mind from the Creation; and because this Engraven Decalogue is much
obscured by the Corruption of Humane Nature and wicked Customs, I add a Vocal
Decalogue to illustrate it, which Vocal Decalogue does therefore belong to me
and to all Men, because it agrees with the Engraven Decalogue, and is the same
with it. This is my Opinion concerning the Messiah, or the King promised; and
this is the Religion which I ingenuously profess to you. Martyne Seidelius.
This is another Professor of Natural Religion.

Servetius was a Spaniard of Tarracon, where he professed Physic, and joining
the Study of Divinity, he fell into the Error of the Antitrinitarians; his
Blasphemous Writings and Discourses whereby he labored to seduce others,
caused him to leave his Country, from whence he, after he had wandered up and
down, came and settled at Geneva, and there published his Blasphemous Heresies:
Beza says, That he called the Trinity the Three Headed Cerberus, Epist. 1. And
in the seven Books which he wrote concerning the Errors of the Trinity,
speaking of the Eternal Generation of the Son, l. 1. he says, That then the
Father ought to have a Spiritual Wife, or was an Harmophrodite, both Father and
Mother; for the reason of the word permits not that any should be called a
Father without a Mother. His other Errors were, That the Substance of God was
mutable, and was a part of the Universe. He denied the Deity of the Son and the
Holy Ghost; he affirmed the Mortality of the Soul; and that Moses was a
ridiculous Impostor, and the Church of Israel a Heard of Swine. He mentioned,
says Calvin, the Trinity to be a Devilish Phantasm, and Satanical Illusion,
above and hundred times.

For these reasons he was imprisoned by the Magistrates of Geneva; and that
they might proceed judiciavily against him, they consulted with the Helvetian
Churches, who all approved of their intended Proceedings, and sentenced him to
be Burnt, which Sentence was accordingly executed on him in Geneva, 1553.
Bulling. Melach. and other great Divines approving of it, while he was in
Prison many Divines, besides Calvin and Farel, persuaded him to Recant his
Errors, which he obstinately refused; and after Sentence was past, he grew more
sullen, refusing Converse, and to join in Prayers with others: And when he was
to be executed, called on the People in the Spanish mode, Miserere; but not at
all on God or our Savior Christ; yet this Man as wicked as he was, is
accounted a Martyr. Both living and dead was in great repute and esteem among
the Socinians: Theophilus Nicolai calls him his Brother and Servant of the
Messiah; What did not Michael Servetus, that learned Man and stout Defender of
the Faith, suffer unjustly? Ostorodus made an Apology for him; so did
Voidovius. And Socinus himself says, That he thought much more highly of
Christ, than the Mahometans did, and in some things wrote against them. And
when he was brought to the Fire, he would not acknowledge the Eternal Son of
God, but the Son of the Eternal God; for which they esteemed him a Martyr.

This sort of Serpents have had their lurking Holes in this Nation, and have
attempted to poison the People, but hitherto have been prevented as soon as
they began to peep abroad; I know not what they might have done, had they found
a Man of such Learning and Confidence as our Author. In the Reign of Queen
Mary, to the great Grief and Scandal of the Protestant Martyrs, there were some
that suffered for denying the Godhead of Christ: in the Year 1579, one Hamant
was burnt in Norwich for denying the Deity of Christ: and in the Year 1588, one
Kett suffered for the same Blasphemy: In King James the First his Reign, one
Legate suffered for the same Heresy. Sandius observes, p. 430. that Queen
Elizabeth complained with grief, That such Monsters as the Arians were found in
her Kingdom; whereof he gives an account, that some were executed in the Reigns
of Queen Elizabeth and James the First.

In the Year 1579, there was printed at London an Arian Book, as Sandius, p.
430. called, The Articles of the Family of Love; and how deservedly that Family
was subverted for their debauched and extravagant Practices, is sufficiently
known.

In the late Troubles, when all Sects and Heresies were permitted, this
Gangreen began to spread; their attempts were on the weaker sort of People,
Anabaptists and Quakers, many of whom were seduced by some such Leaders as Mr.
Beedle and Pen: And how far the Infection spread, the Reader may see in Pagit's
Hiresiology, and in Edwards Gangrena; where there is so much Filth, as makes me
forbear to rake it up.

The Socinians have often boasted, that they could vie Authorities from the
Fathers of the First three hundred Years, who have said more (as they falsely
boast) against the Trinity and the Eternal Essence and Consubstantiality of the
Son, then those which have asserted it; but as yet they have not attempted it;
and Mr. Bull's Collection has wholly discouraged that Attempt: it is true,
that some of those Ancients spoke warily of those and other Mysteries, and
forbore to speak their own sense, or discover the nature of them; as it is
evident they did industriously conceal the manner of administering the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, from not only the Jews and Heathens, but the Catechumens
also; when therefore the public Prayers were ended, (...) M(...)a est.
the Deacon pronounced a Departure to such as were not the Fideles, who were
not admitted to the Participation of the Eucharist, which practice is generally
observed in the Churches of Christ to this day. This was called Disciplina
Arcani, and it was exercised in restraining all but the Fideles from
Participation of the Eucharist, and the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity also, as
some suppose. This Practice was grounded on the Words of our Savior, (who also
would not reveal his Deity to all sorts of Persons, nor some of the Mysteries
of the Gospel, which he proposed in dark Parables, only for a certain time, the
People being not able to bear them) the words are Matthew. 7.6. Give not that
which is holy to dogs, and cast not your pearls before swine; which many of the
Ancients understood of not exposing the more sacred Mysteries of the Gospel to
such as had not received the more common Doctrines, and were not admitted to
the number of the Faithful: to this purpose are quoted Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian, Athanasius, Gregory Nyssene, and Nazianzen, Basil, Heirom, Epiphanius,
both the Cirils, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Augustine.

I confess the Church of Rome would make advantage of this Discipline, but
learned Men have bard them: I only observe, that such a Practice was ancient,
and in some times reasonable.

Antonius Pagi, a Franciscan, in his Critical Notes upon Baronius ad Seculum
secundum, p. 21, etc. gives us several Quotations to this purpose.

St. Augustine on John, Tract. 96. says, That the Sacraments of the Faithful
are not exposed to the Catechumens; and the Catechumens do not know what the
Faithful do receive.

Chrysostom on Matthew. Hom. 27. Those only that are initiated do know what the
Faithful receive.

Origin in his first Book against Celsus, shows the Reason as well as the
Custom of concealing some Christian Rites; he tells him, That the Doctrine of
Christ's Incarnation, Crucifixion, Resurrection, and coming to Judgment, were
known to all; but the Jews derided them; and that was the cause that other
Mysteries were concealed, particularly that of the Holy Trinity.

And concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, St. Chrysostom Hom. 4. on 1 Cor.
professes that he durst not speak of the Form of Baptism, and of the Creed, in
which the Mystery of the Holy Trinity is explained, I dare not (says he)
because of those that are not yet initiated, who make the Exposition more
difficult, who compel us either not to speak openly, or to discover Secrets to
them; yet I will speak of them as far as I am permitted, under Figures.

St. Cyril of Jer. Catech. 6. speaking of the Mysteries contained in the Creed,
says, The Church lays open these Mysteries and Sacraments to those that are
initiated, but it is not their Custom to expose them to the Gentiles; we do not
declare to them the Mystery of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; nor do we
openly preach them to the Catechumens, but in such a secret manner, as they
that profess the things may understand it, and they who understand it not, may
not be prejudiced.

There is something to this purpose in Soz. l. 1. c. 20. I thought (says he)
to have set forth a Copy of the Creed, as necessary for the Demonstration of
our Faith, but when some of my Friends, pious Men, and well skilled in the
knowledge of these things, persuaded me that I should keep in silence such
things as are fit for Priests only to speak of, and for such as are already
initiated to hear; I approved of their Counsel, because it is very probable
that some who are not yet initiated, may read these Books; wherefore I have
hid, as much as I could, those Secrets which ought to be concealed, acquainting
the Reader with such Decrees of the Council, which they ought not to be wholly
ignorant of. And indeed we find that the Heathen, when they heard of the secret
Doctrines of the Trinity, Sacraments, and Prayers of the Primitive Christians,
did make sport of them, and ridiculed them on their Theaters, and public
Plays; whereof we have an instance in Lucian's Philopatris, or a Dialogue,
wherein he represents a Christian instructing an Ethnic, by whom he ought to
swear, Thou shall swear, says he, by the God that rules on high, the great
immortal and immutable God, by the Son of the Father, and by the Spirit
proceeding from the Father, one in three, and three in one; conceive this to be
Jupiter your God. To which the Ethnic answers, I cannot apprehend what you say
is one three, and three one. Thus also he scoffs at our Lord's Prayer, when the
Heathen bids his Catechumen go and say the Prayer, beginning Father, and end
with a Song of many Names; (i. e.) the Doxology. Socinus says in his Defense
against Eutropius, That he never read any thing more strong for the Opinion of
the Trinity, than this of Lucian, he wrote in the time of Trajan.

St. Hierom, speaking of the Translation of the Septuagint, says, That the
Translators did not reveal to Ptolomy the Incarnation of the Son of God, lest
the Heathen should think they had two Gods.

Proeme on Genesis Casaubone on Baronius, Exerat. 16. and Monsieur Morney mention
the same Discipline; which may be a great reason why so few of those ancient
Fathers mentioned the Trinity, and those who did, spoke in such dark Terms, as
our Author himself has observed, p. 56. c. 2. that the Fathers of the
Primitive Church did hide from the Catechumens the Rites of Sacraments. So that
considering this Discipline which restrained many Ancients from publishing the
whole Truth, and the diligence of the several Heretics, to alter and expunge
what was written against them, it is a wonderful Providence, that so many
Authentic Testimones are preserved. The following Collections are mostly from
Mr. Bull's Book, where the Reader may see them asserted.

The Epistle of Barnabas, written about the time of the Apostles, call Christ
the Son of God, Lord of the whole World; by whom and for whom all things were
made, (i. e.) by him as the Efficient, and for him as the Final Cause, which
agrees with the Apostle, Romans 11.36. and cannot be said of any but God without
Blasphemy, s. 1. c. 2. n. 2. and in c. 5. of that Epistle, he says, That he who
foreknew all things, foretold his People that he would take away the Heart of
Stone, and give them a Heart of Flesh, because he was to appear (or be made
manifest) in the Flesh, and to dwell in us; for our Hearts, says he, are the
holy Temple of the Lord.

Hermas, another Apostolical Writer, in his Book called, The Pastor, affirms,
That the Son of God was present with his Father before all Creatures, and calls
him his Counselor, and that the name of the Son of God is great and infinite,
that the whole World is sustained by him; and thus distinguishes between the
Son of God and the Creatures, Similitud. 9. And l. 3. Simil. 5. he says, The
Son of God is not put in a servile condition, but in great power; for to be put
in the form of a Servant, and to be a Creature, are of one signification. This
agrees with that distinction of the Apostle, Phil. 2. c. 6. between the Form of
a Servant and the Form of God. Of this Author Petavius says, That he was never
suspected to have any false Opinion of the Trinity.

Martialis, a Bishop and Martyr, and who is said to have been one of the
seventy Disciples, in his Epistle to the Burdegalenses, c. 2. says of our
Savior, That as a Man born of the Virgin he could die; but as the Son of God,
he was from the beginning, and as God he could not be held under the power of
Death. And Chap. 4. He being the true God, and true Man, shall judge all
Nations. Chap. 10. That the Spirit of God most glorious by Divine Equality, did
proceed from the Word, not begotten, not made nor created, but the Word was
begotten; therefore (says he) do ye not conceive any thing different in the
Deity of the Trinity, because to you there is one and the same God, the Father
that created all things, and one and the same Lord by whom all things were
made, his Son Jesus Christ, and one and the same God the Holy Spirit, in whom
all things subsist; and this Deity spoken of in three Persons, is one individed
God. And Chap. 11. When we are freed from this Body, we shall be in Heaven with
Christ, God and Man, whom we worshipped here on Earth.

Polycarp, an Apostolical Author, in his undoubted Epistle to the Philippians,
says, Thus God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal High
Priest and Son of God, Build you up in the Faith and Truth, etc. Such an
Invocation is proper only to God with whom the Son is joined. And again, We are
all in the sight of God and the Lord, and must all stand before the Tribunal of
Christ. And in another Fragment of Polycarp's, mentioned by Eusebius, l. 4. c.
15. we have these words, I bless thee in all things, and glorify thee by the
Eternal High-Prist Jesus Christ thy beloved Son, by whom to thee together with
him in the Holy Spirit be glory, now and for ever.

Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and a Martyr, was the Disciple of Polycarp, he
begins his Epistle to the Smyrnians thus, I glorify Jesus Christ God who has
made you so wise. And thus he salutes the Ephesians, In the good will of the
Father and Jesus Christ our God; there is one Omnipotent God who manifested
himself by Jesus Christ his Son, who is his substantial Word, and not by
pronunciation, but the begotten Essence of the Divine Power, Ad Magnes. 3. So
in the 5th to the Philip. The Lord commanded his Apostles to baptize in the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not in one that had three names only,
nor in three that were Incarnate, but in three of the same Dignity; for one of
them was made Man, neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost, but the Son only, who
was so not in opinion nor in Fantasy, but indeed, for the Word was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us -- How should not he be God, who raised the Dead,
made the Lame to walk, cleansed the Leapers, and gave sight to the Blind.

And to the Philadelphians, There is one God the Father unbegotten, one Son the
only begotten, God the Word and Man, one Paraclete the Spirit of Truth -- If
any one say there is one God, and confess Jesus Christ, but conceives him to be
a mere Man, and not the only Begotten, the Word and Wisdom of God, but thinks
him to consist only of a Body and a Soul, this Man is a Serpent, as Ebion was
who taught error and deceit, Epist. 6.

To those of Smyrna, Epist. 7. he calls Christ the God that bore flesh. And
Epist. 8. to Polycarp, He that was not passible as God, suffered for us as he
was Man. In the 9th to the Antiochians, He who acknowledges one only God, to
deny the Deity of Christ, he is a Devil, and Enemy of all Righteousness. And in
the Conclusion of that Epistle, He who only is unbegotten, preserve you both in
Body and Soul, by him who was born before Ages. Epistle 11. ad Ephesians. The Word
was made Flesh, the Incorporeal in a Body, the Impossible in a Body passible.
In his Epistle to the Romans, Suffer me to be an Imitator of the Passion of
Christ my God. And in another Epistle to the Ephesians. There is one Physician,
Carnal and Spiritual, made and not made, God in the Flesh, the true Life in
Death, of God and of Mary.

Clemens Romanus uses the same distinction of our Savior, according to the
Flesh, and attributing to him the Splendour of the Magnificence of God,
preferring him above the Angels: And his Expressions do so agree with those in
Heb. 1. that Junius, after St. Heirom and others, have supposed him to be the
Author of that Epistle; he exhorts the Corinthians to Humility, because, says
he, Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Scepter of the Magnificence of God, came not in
Pride -- Consider, says he, what an Example is set before us; if the Lord so
humbled himself, what should we do who live under the yoke of his grace. There
is a second Epistle of St. Clement mentioned by Eusebius, l. 3. c. 38. And in
the Apostolical Canons, which speaks thus: Brethren, we ought so to think of
Jesus Christ as of God, nor ought we to think meanly of our Salvation, for if
we think too meanly of him, we can hope but of little things from him.

St. Justin Martyr, who being a Philosopher, became a Christian, in his
Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, calls Christ King and God; he wrote an
Exposition of the Faith, and of the Trinity in the same Essence, There is one
God of all, (says he) who is known in the Father the Son and the Holy Spirit,
for since the Father begot the Son of his own Nature and Essence, and produced
the Holy Spirit from the same, therefore those which are of one and the same
Essence, are rightly esteemed to be of one and the same Dignity. And he calls
Christ God before all Ages. And in his Apology to the Senate, he says, That
Son of God who alone is properly called his Son, is the Word that was with him
before the World was made, as the Light is with the Sun.

Ireneus in his third Book against the Heresy of Valentinian, etc. c. 6.
says, Neither the Lord nor the Holy Spirit would have absolutely named him God
who was not God, unless he had been the true God: Thus the Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thy enemies thy footstool: For
the Father speaks it to the Son, to whom he had given the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and put all things under his feet: thus also it is said, Thy
throne O God is for ever, etc. Therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee;
where both he that anointeth, and he that is anointed, are both called God by
the Holy Spirit; and speaking of the Personal Union, c. 20. he says, The
merciful God in his love to Mankind, did unite God and Man together, and that
it behoved the Mediator of God and Man to partake of the Nature of both. This
Author blames those that deny the Father of the Universe to have a Son, who
being the Word, is the first Begotten, and so is God; and again in his Dialogue
with Tryphon the Jew, he reproves them who deny Christ to be God, being the Son
of the Ineffable and Singular God, and therefore calls him the Lord and God, as
being the Son of God. And p. 33. he calls him, The only Begotten of the Father
of the Universe, the Word and Power properly begotten by him, and afterward
made Man by the Virgin. And he tells Triphon, That the Son was begotten of his
Father, not by way of Abscission, as if the Substance of the Father was
divided, but as one Fire is kindled by another, without any diminution of the
first, which remains the same still; viz. the Fire kindling, and that which is
kindled are of the same nature still. Among many other, I shall mention only
that place of this Author in his second Apology, where he says, The Christians
are not Worshippers of many impure Gods, but they worship the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost in reason and in truth.

Athenagoras, a Philosopher and Christian, in his Apology for the Christians,
to Antoninus, says, Least any should think me ridiculous in saying, that God
has a Son, (as the Poets who speak of Gods which were (...) other than Men)
the Word or Reason of God is of the same Form and Efficacy with the Father,
for of him and by him all things were made, and the Father and the Son are one,
the Father being in the Son, and the Son in the Father; for the Word of the
Father is the Son of God, united together in Power, Virtue and Substance, but
distinguished in Subsistence and Personality.

Tatianus, a Disciple of Justin Martyr, in his Oration against the Greeks,
says, That Christ was begotten not by any abscission but by participation or
communication, because that which is cut off is separated from the Original,
but that which is communicated does not diminish that which does communicate,
as the light of one Torch is not diminished by communicating light to another;
so the Word going forth from the Power of the Father, did not leave the Father
destitute of the Word.

Clement, Bishop of Alexandria, the Disciple of Pantenus, a Martyr, and Master
of Origin, says, That the Word was and is the Divine Principle of all things,
which Word has now appeared unto Men, who alone is both God and Man. In his
Admonition to the Gentiles, speaking on Titus 2.13. of the Great God, he
applies it to Christ, who says, He teaches us to live well, that he may as
God bestow eternal Life on us hereafter: And then he persuades the Gentiles,
Believe, O Man, in him that was God and Man; believe him that suffered and is
worshipped, the living God; believe in him all ye Men who alone is the God of
all Men. And there he tells them, That he is most manifestly the true God,
equal with the God of the Universe; the Son in the Father, and the Father in
the Son: And in his Pedoag. l. 1. calls him, The Holy God Jesus.

Tertullian, in his Apology against the Gentiles, c. 21. speaking of Christ,
says, We affirmed him to be begotten of God, and therefore to be the Son of
God by unity of substance, for both are one Spirit; as when a Beam is extended
from the Sun, the Sun is in the Beam, because it is a Beam of the Sun, the
substance being not separated but extended; thus he is God of God, as is Light
of Light, for whatsoever thus proceeds from God is God. Prolatum a patre non
separatum dispositione alium non divisione, ( as Grotius on John 1. quotes him.)

In his Book against Praxeas, he says, That God alone was before all things,
but he was alone, because there was nothing without him, yet was he not alone,
because he had his (...), Reason with him. And Grotius on John 1. quotes
Tatianus speaking to the same sense, That Christ was (...). So Tertullian calls
him; God of God, and Light of Light, the Son not separate from the Father, of
one undivided Substance; le cont a Proxeam, c. 4. teneo unam substantium in
tribus coherentibus; That the whole Trinity is of one Dignity and Power: In c.
17. he ascribes all the Attributes of God the Father to the Son; and chap 2.
against Praxeas, he says, The name of the Father is the Almighty God, the most
High, the God of Israel; all these agree to the Son, and on Christ's words, I
and my Father are one; he shows that they are two, whom he makes equal, and
joins in one.

Theophilus Antiochenus, writing to Autolocus, l. 2. says, That which is
begotten of God is God; Which he speaks of the Word, always existing in the
heart of God.

Ireneus, l. 3. c. 6. says, That neither our Lord nor the Holy Spirit, nor the
Apostles, would so distinctly and absolutely have called Christ God, unless he
had been the true God; and if at any time it gives the name to them that are
not Gods, it is with some addition and signification to manifest that they are
not true Gods -- And from Christ's words to the Pharisees concerning the
Resurrection, I am the God of Abraham, etc. he concludes, That Christ with his
Father is the God of the Living, who spoke to Moses, and was manifested to the
Father. And he applies that of the Apostle to the Romans 9. v. 5. Whose were the
Father's, and of whom was Christ (according to the flesh) who is God over all,
blessed for ever; which Scripture is so expounded by most of the Fathers. He
proves also the Deity of Christ, he says, That Christ is the measure of the
Father, because he comprehends him. And this he appropriates to our Savior,
who only comprehends the Father, and he excludes the whole Creation from
knowing or apprehending the Father according to his Greatness. L. 2. c. 43. he
says, Thou, O Man, were created, and did not always exist with God, as does
his own Word. And l. 3. c. 8. he says, Nothing can be compared with the Word of
God, by whom all things were made.

Caius an ancient Presbyter, of whom Photius makes mention, in these words.
That he taught expressly of the Deity of Christ our God, and of his Ineffable
Generation by the Father.

Hyppolitus, a Martyr, about the Year 220, speaking of Christ, says, He was the
infinite God, and also a Man, that had perfectly the perfect substance of both;
and that his Divinity was the same after his Incarnation as before, infinite,
incomprehensible, impassible, unalterable, and in brief, a substantial
subsistence.

Origin, whose most mature and perfect Work being that of his Dispute with
Celsus, written when he was about sixty Years old, confirms the same Doctrine;
speaking of the wise Men that presented their Gifts to our Savior, says, That
they offered them to him that was God and Man; Gold as to a King, Mirrh as to a
Mortal Man, and Frankincense as to GOD. And that Christ had something that was
Divine under the Humane Nature, which was properly the Son of God, God the
Word, the Power and Wisdom of God; We do not separate, says he, the Son of God
from Jesus, for both the Soul and Body of Jesus were strictly united with the
Word of God; and of the Body of Christ he says, It was the Temple of God the
Word.

St. Cyprian, another Latin Father, a Bishop of Africa, and an eminent Martyr,
writing to Quirinus against the Jews, mentions diverse Scriptures to prove
Christ to be God, as Isa. 45. Psalm. 46. and proves, That Christ being God and
Man, became Mediator between us and his Father.

In his Epistle to Cecilian, speaking of Christ, says, He is the Power,
Reason, and Wisdom of God, he descended into the Virgin, and was God mixed with
Man, he is our God our Christ.

And to name no more, c. 11. speaking of the Divine and Humane Nature of
Christ, he says, That as Nature teaches, that he that is born of Man is Man,
so it teaches that he that is born of God is God.

Theognostus of Alexandria, as Athanasius quotes him, taught the same Doctrine,
That the Son was begotten of the Substance of the Father, as is Beams from the
Sun, and as the Sun is not lessened by the effusion of its Beams, so neither is
the Substance of the Father diminished by begetting the Son, the Image of
himself.

Dionisius Romanus wrote an Epistle against the Sabellians, wherein he says, It
is necessary that the Word of God be united to the God of all, and that the
holy Spirit remains in God, and so the holy Trinity does unite in One as in a
certain Head, viz. the Omnipotent God of the Universe. And he confutes those
who hold the Son of God to be made as other Creatures, as being contrary to the
Scripture.

Lastly, That the Trinity is not to be divided into three Gods, nor the Dignity
of it to be lessened by the name of a Creature, but we are to believe in God
the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his Son, and in the Holy Spirit. And
that the Son is united to the Father, he proves from the words of our Savior,
I and the Father are one; for thus the Divine Trinity, and the preaching of
that Holy Monarchy is preserved.

Dionisius of Alexandria, whom the Arians boasted to be of their Party, wrote
against them in his own defense an Epistle, which he calls a Resutation,
wherein he declares, That he never was of the Opinion of Arius; but that he
always thought our Lord to be the Word and Wisdom undivided from the Father: For
(says he) under the name of the Father, I imply that he has a Son; and when I
mention the Son, I understand also that he has a Father; and so I join them
together, for from whom should the Son come, but from the Father? But the
Arians will not understand that the Son cannot be separated from the Father,
the names implying a communion between them; and the Holy Ghost is in both, and
cannot be separated from him that sends him. How then can you suspect me who
use those Names, to have thought that they may be divided or separated;
wherefore you accuse me falsely, as if I had denied that Christ is
Consubstantial with God: Thus I said that the Plant proceeds from the Seed or
Root, and is another thing from that from whence it proceeds, yet is it of the
same nature with that whence it proceeds: the River which flows from the
Fountain has another name, for we do not call the River the Fountain, nor the
Fountain the River, yet both do exist, and the Fountain is as a Father, but the
River is Water flowing from the Fountain.

Greg. Thaumaturgus Bishop of Neocesaria, has left us this Confession of his
Faith, recorded by Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 28. There is one God, the
Father of the Living Word, the Subsisting Wisdom, the Eternal Power and
Character; the perfect Father of him that is perfect, the Father of the only
Begotten: There is one Lord alone from him that is alone God of God, the
Character and Image of the Deity, the efficacious Word, the Wisdom
comprehending the constitution of all things, and the effective Power of all
things, the true Son of the true Father, invisible of him that is invisible,
incorruptible from him that is incorruptible, immortal and eternal: And there
is one Holy Spirit that has its existence of God, who by the Son has appeared
unto Men, the perfect Image of the perfect Son, the Life and Cause of the
Living, the Holy Fountain, Sanctity, and Giver of Sanctification; in whom God
the Father is manifest, who is above all and in all, and God the Son which is
in all.

The perfect Trinity which is not divided nor separated in Glory, Eternity,
Kingdom, and Power; so that there is nothing in the Trinity that is created or
servile, nothing added, or superinducted, which was not before: The Son was
never wanting to the Father, nor the Spirit to the Son, but the Trinity always
remained the same, immutable and invariable.

In the Lifetime of this Greg. Thaumaturgus, a Synod of Bishops met at
Antioch, to Censure the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, who denied the Deity of
Christ. These Bishops denounced an Anathema against him, having first
admonished him of his Heresy; and in that Epistle they say, That they declare
the Faith which they received from the beginning, and always held in the
Catholic Church from the Apostles to that day, even from those that had seen
with their eyes, and were made Ministers of the Word, and which was preached in
the Law and Prophets, and in the New Testament. And the Faith concerning Christ
they say is this: That he is the Word the Wisdom and Power of God, that was
before all Ages, God the Son of God in substance and subsistence.

Pierius, a Presbyter of Alexandria, was of the same Opinion, as Photius
relates Cod. 119. That the Father and the Son were of one Substance and
Equality.

St. Lucian, a Presbyter of Antioch, published the same Faith, which is to be
seen in Socrates, l. 2. c. 10. We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker
of all things, and in one Lord Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, by whom all
things were made, begotten of the Father before all Ages, God of God, Whole of
Whole, Sole of Sole, Perfect of Perfect, King of King, Lord of Lord, the Living
Word, Wisdom, Life, the true Light, Way, and Truth, the Resurrection, Pastor,
and Gate, not obnoxious to Change or Alteration, every way the express Image of
the Father's Deity, Substance, Power, Counsel, and Glory, the first Begotten of
every Creature, who was with God in the beginning, God the Word as is said in
the Scripture, who in the last times came down from Heaven, and was born of a
Virgin, according to the Scripture: and in the Holy Ghost which is given to
Believers to comfort, sanctify and consummate them, as our Lord Christ
commanded his Disciples, go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who are three in Person, but agree in One.

Arnobius gives the like Testimony, That Christ without any Instrument, Help or
Rule, but by the power of his own Nature made all things, and as it was worthy
of God, nothing that was hurtful, but all beneficial, and this is the property
of the true God to deny his bounty to none.

Lastly, Lactantius, whom the Arians claim to be of their Opinion, says thus:
When we say God the Father, and God the Son, we do not speak of what is diverse
or separated, because neither the Father can be so called without the Son, nor
the Son be begotten without the Father, seeing therefore the Father makes the
Son, and the Son makes him a Father, there is in both one Mind, one Spirit, and
one Substance, the one as a Fountain, the other as a Stream flowing from him,
or as the Beams from the Sun, which are not separated.

These many and plain Evidences of the Belief of the Ancient Fathers, before
the Council of Nice, do evidently declare, what sure footing they had for their
Faith, (viz.) the unanimous Consent of Apostolical Men, Martyrs, and
Confessors, who maintained that the Son of God was of the same Divine Nature
and Substance with his Father, consonant to the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture;
and consequently they also show how rashly and inconsiderately the Doctor says,
p. 37. c. 1. That we have no firm ground to go upon, that this Doctrine was
first advanced by a Novice Emperor, upon implicit Faith in two Bishops. P. 38.
c. 2. That it has no foundation in Scripture, Antiquity, or Councils; and that
the Athanasian may be numbered among the Popish and Arian Doctrines, which we
know to be contradictory in the case of the Trinity. And if in the mouth of two
or three Witnesses, every truth should be established, how much more should
this Truth be received as unquestionable, being confirmed by the Harmony of the
Old and New Testament, by the Notions of the Apostolical Writers in the
Primitive Times, and by their Successors home to the Nicene Council, who all
delivered it not as their own Faith, but as the Faith of their Predecessors,
home to the Apostles days: And as for Councils, the Synods that were before the
Council of Nice, and all since, except a few under some Emperors, deluded by
the Sophistry of the Arians, and circumvented by their Hypocrisy and Falsehood,
have been constantly of the same Judgment with that of Nice.

Concerning the Eternal Generation of Christ, there is a plain sense of the
Anti-Nicene Fathers that will answer all the Objections made by the Arians
against that Eternal Generation of Christ, and their Opinions that he was only
the first begotten of the Creatures, being himself made in order to the making
of the World; for they assert, That the Word did always exist with his Father,
but there was a prolation, emission or application of the Son, ad exteriora,
the Father in order to the Creation; and this is by some metaphorically called
a Generation, not as if he then had a beginning; for God, as Athenagoras says,
who is an Eternal Mind, had in himself his Eternal Word from Eternity, though
the Energy or Operation of that Word appeard first in the Creation; in which
sense be calls the Word the first begotten, But such (says he) as was not made
but by whom all things were made. This one Distinction of the Word or Son of
God being Coeternal with the Father, and his Emission, (...) or Progression
for the manifestation of his Father and himself, (...), in the Creation of the
World, if duly considered, as delivered by the Fathers before the Nicene
Council, will confute all the Councils of the Arians and Socinians, against
those parallel places of Scripture, and particularly against such as speak of
the Primogeniture of our Savior, as if he were a Deus Factus, or a Creature.
Having showed the Authority of Scripture and the Fathers to be against the
Arian and Socinian Doctrines, there is no necessity of urging that of Councils,
which they peremptorily decline: so Sandius in his Preface to the Reader, Ask
for the old Paths, says he, not of Synods nor of Councils, nor the Books of
Creeds, which later Ages have set forth. He was conscious that these would be
generally against him, except a few that were manged by Arian Emperors; so that
we have their consent to let these be silent for fear of their Anathema's.

It is observed that in all Lands, where any venomous Creatures are bred, there
may be found some others that serve as an Antidote to that Venom, and
sometimes in that very Creature where the Poison is lodged there is a Medicine
to expel it, as in the Viper; the same Divine Providence has in all Ages so
ordered it, that whatever Heresies have been conceived by erroneous Persons,
have been stifled in their birth, by such as God has raised up for the
suppression of them: An instance whereof we have in this Heretical Treatise,
which as it was brought to light by a Rector of Exeter-Colledge, so by another
Rector of the same College, it was provided long before to condemn it to
perpetual Darkness; and I may truly say it was Damnata prius quam nata;
condemned to dye before it was born: And if the Antidote prepared by the One,
be duly applied, the Dose of Poison is not of so quick an operation, but by the
Blessing of God, the ill effects of it may be prevented: I have therefore for
the benefit of ignorant and wavering Persons, translated that Learned Lecture
of the Reverend Dr. Prideaux, the King's Professor of Divinity in Oxford, and
Rector of Exeter College, in the Year 1633. which begins p. 276. of his
Lectures in Folio; the Text which he chose to insist on is, Matthew. xvi. v. 16.
Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living GOD.



THis celebrated Testimony concerning our Savior, is recommended to us by
these four Particulars:

First, That it was not Sudden but Deliberate.

Secondly, It was not Private, but spoken in the Name of all the Apostles.

Thirdly, That it was not casually uttered, but after a double Demand of
Christ. To which add,

Fourthly, The Approbation of Christ, and the Reward of St. Peter that
published this Testimony.

Now the Scripture is not wont to propose trivial things with so great
solemnity; there is therefore something more in the matter than at first
appears in the words of this Answer, from whence both the Ancient and Moderns
with clear and often confirmed assent, have believed and asserted not only the
Humanity of Christ, which he took of the Seed of Abraham, but also the Divinity
of the Son of the Living God by ineffable Generation communicated to him by the
Father from Eternity.

But that which St. Peter foretold, That false Teachers shall be among you,
which will bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them; 1
Pet. 2.8. Romans 9.17. Romans 9.22.
to which they were before ordained, says St. Peter; raised up says St. Paul;
fitted and prepared, that same, the nauseousness of these times have vomited
into the bosom of the Church, Faction does cherish, Industry defends, Sagacity
promotes, Wit urges, Hypocrisy publishes under the Veil of Sincerity; So
that unless such as Timothy carefully take heed to themselves and their
depositum; and such as St. Jude contend for the Faith once delivered, there is
great danger lest the Unclean Spirit that was cast forth by the Reformation,
return to the House that is swept and cleansed with a more numerous Train, and
the last State of the Church become worse than the former.

2 S. Now among those Seven unclean Spirits that create trouble to the Church
swept and garnished, viz. 1. Papists. 2. False Lutherans. 3. Anabaptists. 4.
Disciplinarians. 5. Weigelians. 6. Remonstrants. 7. Socinians. The others being
either sufficiently vanquished or removed far from us, the Socinians in our time
do more secretly creep in, and more dangerously undermine; for these are not
content wholly to obliterate Original Sin and the Satisfaction of our Savior,
unless withal they wholly abolish the Eternity of the Son of the Living God, so
that he may be no longer called, God man, but a Man of God, and not the Eternal
Son of God, but the Son of the Eternal God; as dying Sermatus did blaspheme

It were to be wished that such Prodigies of Opinions had never touched our
Shoars; and it had been better that in their passage hither they had been sunk
in the bottom of the Sea, with a Millstone about their necks: But what must be
done when they daily rise up to the scandal of the Weak, and no small disgrace
to Religion, in foreign Parts; their wicked Attempts have been opposed by
Bellarmine, Scarga, Weike and Smiglicius, Jesuits; by Francisco Stegmannus,
Prolaeus, Meisner, Martinius, Hunnius, Winkelman, Gawerus, Gerrardus,
Brochmand, Himelius, Thralieus, among the Lutherans; and by Calvinists,
Lubertus, Lucier, Gasmannus, Jacobus a Porta, Jo. Junius, Maccovius,
Ravenspergerus, Wendeline, Zarnovicius and Covet, with many others; Calvin
against Servetus Zanchius in thirteen Books, De Tribus Elohim, dedicated to
Archbishop Grindal, and the Earl of Bedford; Zach. Ursme against the Cracovian
Catechism; Franciscus Junius against an Anonimus Arian, and others; these had
diligently trodden down those Tares for a time, which now spring up again with
pestilent increase, by the sowing of the wicked Enemy. Our Countrymen I
confess were flower in weeding out these Tares; whether it was as surprised at
the return of those Blasphemies from Hell, or whether they thought it more
advisable to let them dye in silence, than curiously to examine them to feed
Curiosity. But moderate Counsels cannot withstand importunate Attempts: their
petulancy compels me to speak as St. Hilary; to undertake Difficulties, and as
it were to speak things that ought to be kept secret; especially seeing our
Adversaries triumph at our silence, boasting that they have overcome, where no
opposition is made. Now there are three things wherein we place the main hopes
of our Salvation: I. The Knowledge of our Misery by Original Corruption. II.
The Knowledge of a Savior by his redeeming Satisfaction. III. A grateful
Return of faithful and due Obedience.


But those who deny Original Sin, and the Redemption of Christ, are not likely
to be truly Grateful. Of Original Sin and the Satisfaction of Christ, I have
already treated against these subtle Enemies, who neither acknowledge their
Misery, nor grant the Necessity of any Satisfaction; I now stand up by the
assistance of Christ, and your leave, for the Defense of the Deity of Christ;
especially seeing not long since Jo. Crellius, by the united Strength and Arts
of the whole Sect, has so boldly assaulted the chief Foundation of our
Salvation; therefore the Question to be now discust is, Whether Christ be
Eternal God Co-essential with the Father and Holy Spirit?

3 S. This Question that we may handle with due Reverence, and saving
Advantage, do Thou, O Son of the Living God, Illuminate me with the Rays of thy
Eternal Deity, and grant me a Mouth and Wisdom, which they that Gainsay, may
not be able to resist. Being thus prepared, that I may not stop at the
Threshold, it must be observed, That the Adversaries grant to the Father both
Eternity and Personality, to the Son a Personality but not Eternity, but to the
Holy Ghost an Eternity but not Personality. And in this they differ from the
ancient Arians, that these acknowledge the Son of the Living God to be the
first Born of the Creatures; but the Socinians, that he was born after his
Mother: For which reason Smiglerius does not well, imputing Arianism to them;
while with more labor than success he disputes against those New Monsters, as
he calls them; for the Socinians attribute less to our Savior than the Arians;
both affirm him to be a Creature, but the Arians a more noble Creature, as is
manifest by the Disputation held at Cracow, between Faustus, Socinus, and
Erasmus, a Minister of Transylvania; and therefore they affect to be called the
Reformers of Arius, rather than his Disciples, as it is in the Answers of
Moscorovius and Smalsius against Smiglesius.

2. It is to be observed, That the Papists give no small advantage to the Cause
which they oppose, while they tenaciously hold in their School Divinity, that
Christ merited for himself, and that he was our Mediator according to his
Humane Nature only; for hence the Adversaries infer, that that which he
performed was but due, and therefore it was to be to his own advantage only:
Whence therefore is that superabundant Merit by which he satisfied the Father
for us? And if his Humane Nature only were sufficient for the Work of our
Redemption, what need was there of his being God and Man? I know what the
Jesuits are wont to answer here; but in my opinion we ought not rashly to grant
any thing to such Sophisters as wrest all things to their own ends with great
Art.

3. This must not be omitted, that in Scripture he is called God, that is so by
Nature or Donation, and by gift either in regard of Sanctification, or Mission,
or Commission, or all these jointly.

4. Observe that a thing is counted Eternal as to Duration, Indetermination,
Continuation and Signification; to Duration because it wants beginning or end,
and so God alone is Eternal, or because it wants an end only, so Angels and
Humane Souls, which are called for distinction sake, Eviternal; as to
Indetermination, Aaron's Priesthood was called Eternal because no determinate
end was appointed to it; as to Continuation, that is called Eternal that flows
on without interruption; as to Signification, Circumcision is called Eternal,
not as to itself but its Antitype.

5. These words Essence, Existence, Subsistence, ought acurately to be
distinguished one from the other; so that Essence may be fitly applied to the
Nature, Subsistence to Persons, Existence to Notions; and for clearer
distinction, Nature answers to the question what, Person to the question who,
and Notion to the manner how: But we have no dependence on these Terms of the
Fathers and Schools, but use them not as if our Faith needed them, but because
the Perverseness of our Adversaries has forced the Orthodox to express
themselves after this manner, to defeat the Devices of those Men who seek to
hide themselves in the dark Labyrinths of Humane Reason, whence we affirm that
these ten words: Essence, Coessential, Subsistence, Substance, Person,
Propriety, Relation, Notion, Circumcission, Trinity, have been rightly (though
unwillingly) devised by the Fathers, retained by the Schoolmen, explicated by
Bellarmine, Zanchy, etc. to serve in this business as Prospective to discover
the Subtilties of the Adversaries, which otherwise might escape their sight,
not in prejudice of the Text, but for the help of reasoning from the Text.

First, It is agreed that there is a Trinity, and in this Trinity there is a
Priority of Origination acknowledged by all: So Smalsius, I deny not that there
is Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and that this may be called a Trinity. So the
Nicene Fathers say of the Son, that he is God of God, Light of Light, true God
of true God, which expressions imply at least a Prerogative of Order, though
not of Nature, in which respect Eusebius Caesar scarce deserves to be accused
of Arianism by the Papists, for affirming the Co-eternity of the Son with the
Father, against the Arians, only he is observed to hesitate at their
Co-equality, where if he only mean the Co-equality of Order, not of Nature, he
may pass for a good Catholic.

Secondly, It is agreed, that Christ is truly and properly called the Son of
the Living God, seeing he took his Original not after Humane manner, from
mortal Seed, but was conceived in the Virgin's Womb by the Holy Spirit
over-shaddowing her, and the Power of the most High coming upon her; and is
therefore called the Son of God, Luke. 1.35.

Thirdly, It is agreed, that Christ is expressly called God, in respect of his
Mission office and Dominion, and therefore is exalted above all Creatures, to
be adored with Divine Worship together with the Father, and to be invoked as
the Searcher of Hearts; and Omnipotent as Smalcius confesses in his Book of
the Divinity of Christ; and Socinus in his Defense against Christianus Franken.

The Question then may be reduced to these Terms, Whether Christ the Messiah,
the Redeemer and Savior of us all, be God, not by Donation only from the
Father, by Pre-eminence of Authority, or Dominion, but by Nature, not as to
Indetermination, Continuation or Signification, Eviternal but Eternal without
beginning or end, not of an inferior or another, but of the same Essence with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, not of alike but the same Nature, as the
Ancients speak, and as our second Article expresses it, Consubstantial; here
the Papists, Lutherans, the Greek, Asian and African Church affirm as we do:

The Transilvanians, some Polonians, and some Apostate Hollanders; as appears
by their Writings, which are in too many hands, do deny.

The principal Arguments for Confirmation of our part are these:

Here we shall not heap up all the Arguments, but choose such as time will
permit to handle: 1. From the Text, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
whence I argue, The Son is of the same Nature with the Father, so Man begets
Man, etc. but Christ is the Son of God, the first begotten, not the first
created, the only begotten, his proper Son, therefore he is of the same Essence
with the Father, and consequently as is expressed in the first Article, of the
same Power and Eternity. Crellius endeavors to avoid the edge of this Answer,
by this sorry Evasion, That the Son of God signifies no more than the Anointed
of God; so that he is called Son not by Nature but Unction; and therefore the
addition of, The living God, is omitted in St. Mark and Luke.

Ans. This is to find fault with the Text, rather than the Inference from it;
as if St. Matthew did intend to deceive, and not inform us, and were to be
corrected by St. Mark and St. Luke, as Crellius would have it.

2. It Is no contradiction to say less than had been said by another; now in St.
John we have the same Confession as herein Matthew. Joh. 6.69.


3. By Unction Kings and Priests are made, but Sons by Generation; and
therefore the Word Son expresses his Person, as the word Christ his Office;
Christ and the Son of God signifies the same Person, but not in the same
respect.

Socinus objects, That the same manner of expression is Isa. 1.10. where the
Israelites are called the Sons of the Living God, not that they were Sons
co-essential with God, but that they were Sons of the Living God as opposed to
Idols; whence it appears this Epithet of God, (viz.) Living, shows of what sort
of God Christ is Son, not what sort of Son he is.

To which we answer, That by the Adversary's confession, this Epithet Living,
declares what sort of God the Father is; therefore I infer that it shows also
what sort of Son the Son is; as the Maxim is, Qualis pater talis filius, (i.
e.) In living Beings, he that begets and he that is begotten is of the same
sort.

2. In Hosea Sons of the Living God are opposed to such as were not the People
of God, not as if they were natural Sons, but adopted, by calling not by being
begotten, as it is express, They shall be called, etc. Romans 9.26. So that here
is no relation to Idols, who neither beget nor are begotten.

3. The Text shows the Son of the Living God is opposed to the Son of a Mortal
Man, as being of a more excellent kind, for all saw him to be the Son of Man;
some said the Baptist, others that Elias or Jeremiah were revived. But this
inspired Confession of St. Peter signifies something more sublime; Q. P. we
profess that thou art not merely the Son of mortal Man, as the Baptist and
others of Humane Seed, but that thou art the Son of that Eternal God which
always lives: As therefore he was of the same Nature with his Mother, as the
Son of Man, so it is necessary that he be of the same Nature with the Father,
as the Son of the Living God.

Here Ostorodius objects, That begetting of a Son implys the Mortality of the
Parent; for to what purpose are Sons begotten, but to continue the succession
of those that are mortal?

Ans. This is very acute! as if there were no difference between natural and
temporal Generations, and this which is eternal and ineffable: Sons are adopted
to supply succession; and did the Ancient of days adopt the Son of Man for
succession's sake? See to what our Rationalists reduce the matter. Socinus more
distinctly explains the Mystery, It is not to be denied that the Power of God
did convey into, or create in the Virgin's womb some substance, out of which,
conjoined with that which was of the Virgin's substance, Christ became true
Man, who on that account had not only the Virgin for his Mother, but God also
for his Father, considered as Man.

Ans. Where does the Scripture speak of this Socinian Mass? Yes, say they, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the most High over-shaddow
thee. True, but does it follow hence, that he ^^eated any such Substance as
they feign; this is Logic above our apprehension. The Text speaks of a Virtue
and Power, not of any Substance; now a Son is product from the Substance of the
Father, and in likeness of Nature, whence he is called Son of the Virgin, not
of the Holy Ghost, who communicated a power of Conception to her: This
imaginary Substance was either Animate or Manimate, if Animate it constituted
an Embrio distinct from the Seed of the Virgin; if it was Inanimate and
received a Soul by Traduction from the Virgins as our Adversaries teach, then
he was the Son of the Virgin only, and in no way the Son of the Living God;
which destroys this Socinian Figment.

To this Confession of St. Peter we add that of St. Thomas, where having touched
Christ, he cries out, My Lord and my God; Joh. ^.^.
now these Titles conjunctly are never given to any but the Supreme God, as it
appears Deuteronomy. 6.3. Matthew. 4.10. and in many other places. Francis David, as the
Nestorians were wont to do, as appears by the fifth Synod, c. 12. says, That
this Exclamation was not of one admiring, or affirming, as if Thomas on the
evidence of the Resurrection, had thus said, O Lord my God, what is it that I
see? what is it that I feel with my hands? as if he spoke not to Christ but
God: But the Text confutes this, for our Savior bids him reach forth his
hands, and feel my hands; and Thomas answered and said: But to whom did he
answer and say, was it not to Christ who talked with him?

Socinus against Weike, says he acknowledged Christ to be his God, not the most
high God; but he owned him to be such a God whom he ought to worship and
believe in: Did Thomas feign to himself a peculiar and subordinate God, whom he
did not believe to be the God of Israel, and the most high God? without doubt
he now believed that which before on the relation of the Disciples he doubted
of as incredible; but he always believed the God of Israel to be his God,
therefore when he affirms this of Christ being revived, to whom he would not
have given such a Title, before he did attribute to Christ what was to be
attributed to the most high God; and hereby the Eternity of Christ's Divinity
is manifestly proved.

Which 3ly, the profession of our Savior himself does assert, I am Alpha and
Omega, says the Lord, which is, which was, and is to come, Revel. 1.8. The
Lord God which is, which was, and which is to come, as the Complutenses, the
Kings, Syriack, Arabic, and Vulgar Translations read; but he that is such must
necessarily be the most high God.

Engedinus and Volkelius answer, That these are not the words of Christ, but of
that God which in the first Verse is manifestly distinguished from Christ.
Ribera and A. Lapide agree in this, but contrarily he speaks here, who
professes himself to be the First and the Last, v. 17. and in chapter 2. v. 8. and
chapter 22. v. 13. But he affirms that he was dead, and now lives for ever. Chapter
1.18. and is to come to Judgment. Chapter the last, v. 13. therefore it must
necessarily be understood of Christ.

Thus the Ancients, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Ruffinus, Idacius, Clarus,
understood it; as also the Jesuits Althasar and Alapide, who forgot himself, or
on second thoughts corrected himself on the last chapter v. 13. where he adds this
out of St. Ambrose, That the ancient Christians, when Arianism prevailed, were
wont to ingrave A and O on their Tombs, to show their detestation of that
Heresy, and that they died in the Faith of him that professed himself to be
the A and O; that is, the true and eternal God as the Father is.

2ly, We argue from three Apostolical Testimonies; the first is that of St.
John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that
Word was God. What is more clear? All agree that the Word is Christ, who being
from the beginning with God, ( viz. the Father) before the Creation, it
necessarily follows, which is expressly affirmed, that that Word was God.
Which 2ly, is farther confirmed, All things were made by him, therefore the
Word was not made or created, as St. Augustine disputes. 3ly, The World in
which he was, and which knew him not, was made by him, therefore he was the
Creator of all things, visible and invisible, Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. Moreover,
the Word was made Flesh when he took the Seed of Abraham; And all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily dwelt in God manifested in the flesh, Col. 2.9. Therefore
the Word was before the Incarnation, and before the Seed which he assumed, and
therefore more ancient than his Mother, but not as a pre-existent Creature, as
the Arians confess against our Adversaries.

Therefore as he was the Eternal God, it is worth our time to consider, with
what wondrous Wrestings the Transilvanians do stretch these so plain and
evident Testimonies, expounded and set in the light by the Ancients, but
obscured by the Socinians, especially by Smalcius in ten Homelies on this Text,
the sum of which is this: That the word Beginning does not note the beginning
of the World, but of the Gospel; not the first Creation of all things, but only
the Reparation and Reformation by Christ. As if the Evangelist had only said,
according to Smalcius his Paraphrase, 1. In the beginning (i. e.) of publishing
the Gospel, 2. was the Word, (viz.) Christ; this is right. 3. And that Word was
with God, (i. e.) was hid, and known only to God, or obscurely known to some
that were near. 4. And God was the Word, or rather by force of the Article
pointing at the subject, the Word was God, (i. e.) Man, so instructed with
Divine Gifts and Virtue, that he was deservedly worshipped as God; for
afterward when he appeared publicly all things were made by him, not simply
all things, but such only as concerned the Ministry of the Gospel; these things
were made, that is, reformed, re-created, and entirely restored: And without
him was nothing made, (i. e.) without his Command, his Conduct and Authority;
and the Word was made Flesh, (that is) subjected himself to the Miseries and
Suffering of Flesh.

These things, if I am not deceived, will appear to wise Men not new only, but
vain and profane; and we may justly cry out to Socinus in the words of
Neimotevius to George Schomannus, I beseech thee in the name of God, (my
Brother George) that you would judge in the fear of God, how Humane Reason
plays the Wanton in things Divine; and how dangerous it is, to be over-wise,
and not to be wise according to Sobriety. For if this be the genuine sense of
this Text, and if this beloved Disciple of his Lord meant nothing else than
that his Lord in the beginning of publishing the Gospel, did lay hid for a time
unknown to the World, and permitted the Baptist to forerun and prepare his way,
and that he came afterward and restored and perfected all things necessary for
the Salvation of the Church, and subjected himself to the miseries of the
Flesh; if this be all that the last of the Evangelist and the Apocalipist's
has revealed from the bosom of his Lord, he might it seems have spared his
labor, without any great damage to the Truth, for all these things were
clearly and more at large treated of by the preceding three Evangelists: And I
would willingly learn from these quick-sighted Innovators, how it can agree
with the gravity, simplicity, and fidelity of an Apostle, to promise a History,
and propose Riddles, and so to involve and cloth the Matters proposed with
such mistical words, as might rather send away the Hearer with Astonishment
than Instruction, to invite to Secrets, when he only offers things obvious,
which cannot satisfy expectation, and which might better expedite the thing in
fewer words, as it was done by others.

Lastly, Let all wise Men judge, that are not partial, how well these Photinian
Glosses do clear the Text, which says, In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God. The Gloss says, Not in the beginning, but before the
beginning of publishing the Gospel, Christ was hid, known only in secret to
God. Which Fiction Martyn Cherovicius, a Confident of that Party, could not
digest. 2ly, It follows in the Text, And that Word was God. The Gloss says, He
was but a made God; he might have said a feigned God. 3ly, The Text says, All
things were made by him. The Gloss says, Not all things, but the things
concerning the Gospel only, were not made but reformed by him. The Text says,
The World was made by him. The Gloss says, Not the World which we see, but
which we expect. The Text says, The Word was made Flesh. The Gloss says, The
Word was not made Flesh, but only subjected to the Miseries of the Flesh. Do
not these seem to you that hear them, ingenious Glosses, which so limit the
Text as to eliminate them!

Let us now weigh the second place, Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of
whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for
ever. The Apostle does here distinguish of Christ, as considered according to
the Flesh, and so he descended from Jewish Ancestors, or as he is the Son of
God, and so he is God over all, blessed for ever: What need was there of this
restriction, (according to the Flesh) if Christ were only a mere Man? They
answer with Erasmus, that perhaps the word God was not in the Text, being
omitted by St. Cyprian and Hilary; but Erasmus notes that this might be omitted
by the Carelessness of the Transcribers: for Athanasius mentions it against the
Arians; Ambrose and Theophylact confirm it; and Pamelius testifies that it was
in the most ancient Manuscripts: the Socinians have it in their German
Translation, as it is reported, and Socinus himself does not deny, but if that
word were wanting, it is supplied by what follows, -- blessed over all.
Therefore 2ly, they fly to the pointing of the words, and read the words thus,
Of whom is Christ according to the flesh over all, here they make a Full-point,
and then as a Doxology they read thus, (adding the word sit) Let God be blessed
for ever. So that Christ is not here styled God, but God who sent Christ is
praised; and thus indeed the German Translation of the Socinians is pointed.
Ans. Matthias Glirius (as Socinus on Aristole's Elenchs relates) undertook to
prove from 1 John 2.22. that Jesus was not the Christ, but by what Artifice, to
wit, by thus wresting the Text, Who is a liar (says he) but he that denies?
here he places a note of Interrogation, then he proceeds, and reads
thetically, because Jesus is not Christ. But Socinus explodes him as a wicked
Man; let them therefore look to it who imitate him in the same Cause, how they
may avoid the same Condemnation.

The third place we urge from Philip. 2.6. Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal to God; but emptied himself, taking the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man. Here we have a manifest
difference between the form of God and the form of a Servant, and these most
certain Propositions, 1. That both these Forms were united in the Person of
Christ. 2. That by reason of the first he was equal to God, and by reason of
the later he was like unto Men. 3. That the first Form did assume the later by
emptying himself; so that his Divinity, Equality with his Father, Incarnation,
Hypostatical Union, and Theanthropy, which are severally spoken of in other
places, are here found joined.

The Transilvanians, with Maximinus the Arian in St. Augustine, answer, That
the words of the Apostle are to be read thus: Not thinking that rapine should
be made so as to equal himself with God, for so he should be injurious to God,
therefore that he might not do this, he emptied himself, (i. e.) he chose
rather to be a Servant than an Invador of undue Dignity.

Ans. It is a most filthy addition of the word made, the Text says only he
thought it no Robbery to be equal; or as Tertullian says, Pariari, or be
compared with God, where it is expressed what Christ did, not what he
deliberated to do.

Socinus replies, by retorting the Argument, Christ is equal to God, and has
the form of God; therefore he is not that God.

Ans. Yea, therefore he is that God, for to whom the form agrees the thing
formed agrees also; and nothing can be equal to God but God. But the word
Form, he says, does not here denote an essential but accidental Form only, nor
can it consist with God so to humble himself.

Ans. The Form of God here is to be taken in the same sense as the Form of a
Servant, because there is the same reason of things opposed; but this of a
Servant was true and essential, and why not the other? So that to be in the
form of God, is nothing less than to be the true God, who lost nothing by
humbling himself, but by assuming what he had not before, conferred many things
to the Nature which he assumed. And all the Authority and Majesty which was
added to the Son, was not added to him as God, but as he was the Son of Man,
John 5.27.

Our third Argument is drawn from the Harmony of the Old and New Testament, in
which those things which in the Old Testament are attributed to the only true
God of Israel, are in the New expounded of Christ. Out of eleven Instances that
have been mentioned, three only shall suffice, the first is Numb. 21.5. The
people spoke against God and against Moses. The Apostle in 1 Cor. 10.9.
expounds this of Christ, Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents.

Socinus objects, 1. That by Eloim in the Old Testament, God is not necessarily
understood, but frequently an Angel, and by Christ in that place our Savior is
not necessarily understood but Moses.

2. It may be said that the Israelites tempted Christ in the Wilderness, not in
his own Person which then was not, but in Moses his Type.

Ans. But Eloim which is here put absolutely in the six and seven Verses
following, is expressly called Jehovah, which agrees not with Angels. And let
Socinus show where ever Moses in the Old Testament is called Christ, or where
the name of Christ put absolutely, is attributed in the New Testament to any
other than to our Savior.

3ly. To tempt any one before he was is said gratis, but thus they fall into
temptation who attempt to deprive the Son of the Living God of his Deity and
Eternity.

The second Instance is out of the Psalms, where that which is proposed of the
glorious going of Jehovah, Psalm. 68.19. is expounded of Christ ascending on
high, and leading Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4.8.

2ly, That which is ascribed to Jehovah, Worship him all ye Angels, Psalm. 97.7.
is affirmed of Christ Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him.

3ly, That which is affirmed of the Creator of Heaven and Earth, Thou Lord in
the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the
Works of thy hands, Psalm. 102.26. is attributed to Christ in the self same
words, Heb. 1.10.

The Adversaries are diligent to decline this either by denying that these
things in the Old Testament are to be understood of the most high God, or to be
repeated in the New Testament concerning Christ, or by affirming that these
things may be accommodated to Christ, but not as God of the same Nature with
the Father, but because he did represent the Person of the most high God.

Ans. Not only the words but the scope of those Texts do exclude these
Evasions: That if in any manner our Savior represented the Person of his
Father in the Old Testament, it was then necessarily before he was born of the
Virgin; which wholly destroys the Cause of our Adversaries.

3ly, The same is proved out of the Prophets, for that Majesty of the most
High, which is so magnificently described Isa. 6.1. is applied unto Christ by
Name, These things spoke Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him, John
12.41. Many others of this sort may be produced.

Socinus objects, That these things are either spoken figuratively, or are
adapted to Christ only by way of accommodation, but conclude nothing of his
Eternal Deity.

Ans. Then those Apostles and Evangelists which urge and accommodate them to
that purpose, do deal with us sophistically, or unskilfully, and are to be
corrected and explained by Posterity, viz. the Socinians.

The fourth Argument is drawn from certain Attributes ascribed to Christ, which
clearly evince that he is of the same Nature and Excellency with the Father; of
very many I shall only name three, viz. Eternity in respect of Time,
Omnipresence in respect of Place, and Adoration in respect of Sovereign Majesty
and Dominion: Now his Eternity is asserted from these places; The Lord has
possessed me in the beginning of his ways, from the beginning before he made any
thing, Prove. 8.22. The Syriack read from Eternity; the Arabic, I have begot
thee before the Morning Star, Ps. 110. 2ly, His coming forth is from the days
of eternity; To which, 3ly, our Savior confirms the same of himself, Joh.
8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.

Here Socinus objects, That in the first place Wisdom signifies not the Son of
God, but the Wisdom of God; nor does this expression of the beginning of his
ways, signify Eternity but Antiquity.

But this Interpretation is excluded by the following Verse, I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning before the earth was. The Apostle confirms our
Argument, We preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.4.

To our second Argument, he cavils, That thence it would follow that Christ
from Everlasting came forth from Bethleam. This is a shift, for the Text of the
Prophet suggests a double going forth; a temporal concerning which it is said in
the Future Tense, He will go forth, the fulfilling of which Prediction the
Evangelists observes, Mat. 2.6. And an eternal, of which it is said in the
Preterperfect Tense, His going forth was from eternity.

To the third he trifles, that the Greek word (...) signifies not only to be,
but to become; and hence the Vulgar reads, Before he became, Abraham, (i. e.) a
Father of Nations, I am, (i. e.) I was sent to pluck down the partition wall,
to bring the Gentiles into the Church.

Ans. The Question was not concerning the calling of the Gentiles, but whether
Christ preceded Abraham so as he might see him; our Savior affirms that he
was, (viz.) by the glory which he had with the Father before the World began,
Joh. 17.5. which the Jews endeavored to refute with Stones, as now the
Socinians by Subterfuges.

Again, we assert his Omniprefence from Joh. 3.13. None has ascended into
heaven but he that came down from heaven, the Son of Man which is in heaven,
where he was before, John 6.62. Now this he spoke to Nicodemus while he was on
Earth, and yet he declared that he was then in Heaven; therefore at the same
time he was in Heaven and on Earth.

The Innovators do here betake themselves to an unheard of Comment, (viz.) That
as Moses was taken up into the Mount, and St. Paul into the third Heavens, that
they might be instructed of God, speaking to them as it were face to face; so
it was more convenient that the Son should be assumed into Heaven and
instructed by the Father. Which they think was done during those forty Days
which intervened between his Baptism and his Conflict with Satan: this though
they do not urge as an Article of Faith, yet Smalcius says, We are fully
persuaded of it, and greatly rejoice that this Mystery is revealed to us by God
in the Scripture. But this Mystery, nor the Revelation of it does please us,
for what need was there that he should be taken up into Heaven for a more
perfect Information, on whom the Holy Spirit did descend, and in whom the
Godhead dwelt Bodily, in whom the Father was always, and he in the Father. 2ly,
He was amongst the wild Beasts in the Wilderness for the space of those forty
Days, the Devil tempting him, and the Angels ministering unto him, as St. Mark
expressly says: Was the Desert Heaven, and were Satan and the Beasts admitted
into it? Nor does this Fiction satisfy the Argument, seeing we thus urge the
Text, That the Son of Man whom Nicodemus saw and spoke to, says expressly of
himself, that he was then in Heaven; which could not be as he was a Man,
therefore it must be as he was God Omnipresent. The more the Adversaries do
strive in this Point, the more they entangle themselves.

Lastly, We infer the Deity of Christ from the Adoration which was performed
unto him, for he was adored as God by Stephen the Proto-Martyr, calling on him,
Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Francis David answers, That that Jesus here is of the Genitive Case, and the
sense is this, O thou Lord who art the Father of Jesus; making the Father to be
the Object of Invocation, not the Son.

Christianus Franken presses the same Argument in his Disputation against
Socinus, concerning the Adoration of Christ, where be adds, that Jesus
signifies a Savior; but who can so save us as the Father. Socinus replys,
That the name Jesus here is the proper name of a Person, not an Appellative of
his Office, for then it should be read, O Lord of Jesus; which though they do
confute the trifling of Franken in the Interpretation of this place, yet they
do not answer it, by showing how Adoration may be given to Christ whom they
account to be a Creature; seeing that of Isa. 42.8. says expressly, I am
Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another. This Knot
Socinus could not untie with all his skill.

5ly, We might urge the Works of Christ: 1. The Creation, for by him all things
were made, Col. 1.16. 2. Conservation, He sustains all things by the word of
his power, Heb. 1.3. 3. He wrought Miracles in his Name and Authority. 4. He
forgave Sins, Mat. 9.5. He sent the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. Which things do exalt
him above the rank of Creatures; but because the Adversaries do refer all these
things to a delegated and derived Power, and not to an innate Power, which we
have already proved, this may suffice.

In the last place we shall show some Absurdities which will follow on this
Heterodoxy of our Adversaries; for if Christ being of the same Nature with the
Father, were not the Supreme God, it would follow, that the Scriptures do
exhibit to us great Uncertainties in the great business of Salvation. 2ly, That
the Churches, the Councils, the Fathers of all sorts, of all Ages, in all
places, have recommended to Posterity Heretical Creeds, and monstrous Comments.
3ly, That the Martyrs have sealed ridiculous things with their Blood. 4ly, That
we have given up our names in Baptism to a Creature as well as to a Creator,
and Worship and Invocate a Creature with the same Religious Worship: And seeing
it is acknowledged that Christ sent the Holy Ghost, which received from Christ
what he delivered, John 16.14. It would follow, 5ly, That a Creature did
contribute something to the Eternal Power, and made use of his Service. 6ly,
From hence it may be concluded that our Mediator was insufficient for so great
an Office, seeing all that he did perform was due Debt, every Creature being so
subject to the Creator that it can merit nothing from him. Whence it follows,
lastly, That the publication of the Law was in vain, and the punishment
threatened to Offenders frustrate, because it was impossible that a Finite
Creature could satisfy Infinite Justice.

Therefore if our Savior be not only the Son of Man, but also the Eternal Son
of the Living God; that Lord God the A and O, which is, which was, and is to
come, the Almighty; if he were in the beginning with God; if he is God over
all, blessed for ever; if he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, and
the essential Attributes of Jehova are everywhere attributed to him; if he did
by his own Power do such Works as no Creature could do, then those Blasphemies
which follow on the Opinions of the Adversaries are intolerable, and we may
truly and confidently conclude, Jesus Christ our Savior to be of the same
Essence and Power with the Father and Holy Spirit, which was to be demonstrated.

An Answer to the Objections of the Adversaries.
Jo. Crellius in his two Books of One God the Father, urges sixty two
Objections, which we will reduce to seven Heads, under which the rest will be
easily considered and confuted: First, He argues from exclusive Particles, that
the Father only is the Supreme God: So Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal to know
thee only the true God. There is one God the Father of all, who is above all,
Ephesians. 4.6. To us there is one God the Father of whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6.
And Romans 16.27. To God only wise, be glory. Hence he concludes that Christ is
not the Supreme God.

1. Answer in general: These Particles do exclude only the Creatures and Idols,
not the Persons of the Son or Holy Ghost; and the Particle only in S. John,
does not limit the word thee but God, and it may be referred to the word know,
as if it had been said, This is sufficient to eternal Life if they only know
him that did send and him that was sent; or as St. Chrysostom reads, This is
life eternal to know thee and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, to be the only
true God; otherwise nothing is to be known concerning Christ, but that he is
sent. To that in the Corinth. as it is attributed to the Father that he is the
One God, so Christ is called the One Lord; now if because the Father is called
the One God, the Son be excluded from the Deity, by the same reason, because
the Son is called the One Lord, the Father may be excluded from being our Lord.
The same Answer serves to that in Ephesians. 4. and Jude 4. as to that of Romans 16.
it expressly includes Christ the Wisdom of God, as the name God also includes
the Trinity, where there is not a distinct mention of Persons.

2ly, They urge our Saviors own Confession, Of that day and hour knows none,
neither the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, and as St. Mark adds, But the Father
only: Therefore the Son is not Omniscient, and by consequence he is not the
Supreme God.

Ans. No one knows, (i. e.) no Creature; for so Christ appeared and was
accounted by them that questioned with him: But this does not exclude Christ as
God, nor the Holy Spirit which searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
Thus when it is read, No man knows who the Father is but the Son; will you
therefore conclude that the Father knows not himself, or that the Holy Ghost
knows him not? Or when you read, that none knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. therefore the Son and the Father do not know the
things of God. Men of reason should be ashamed of such an Inference. The word
alone therefore does not exclude all simply, but such in a certain sort whom it
concerned not to know, and therefore ought to watch lest that day should come
on them sleeping and unprepared. 2ly, Others add that the word (knows) does
not denote simply to know a thing, but as in the Hebrew Conjugation Hephil, to
make others know; which they confirm from 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know
any thing among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; (i. e.) it is my
Office not to teach any other thing. But I think this not so applicable, for
then neither the Father nor the Holy Spirit did so know as to teach or make
others to know it: But Christ as the Son of Man did not know it simply, but as
the Son of God, the same God with the Father and the Holy Spirit.

3ly, They urge two Visions, the first from Dan. 7.13, 14. Where one like the
Son of Man came to the Ancient of Days, and received from him Glory, and Power,
and a Kingdom. The second from Rev. 5.7. Where the Lamb whom all confess to be
Christ, received a Book from him that sat on the Throne: Where the Giver and
the Receiver are really distinguished.

Ans. If the Son of Man in the first Vision does denote Christ, as we
acknowledge, then he did exist before he was born of the Virgin; which confutes
the Adversaries. In the second the Lamb had the same Honor given him from the
twenty four Elders, and from all the Creatures, as he that sat on the Throne;
which argues an Equality of Excellency; so that all these imply a distinction
of Persons, not a diversity of Nature.

4ly, They urge those places wherein Christ is said to receive all things from
the Father, as Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and earth, Joh.
5.26. The Father has given to the Son to have Life in himself, whence he is
said to be the Image, Brightness and Character only of his Father's Person,
Heb. 1.3. Now it is (say they) necessary that he who receives, be inferior to
him that gives, and the Image or Character to its Proto-type.

Ans. John 5.2. resolves all these Objections: That God gave him authority of
exercising Judgment as he is the Son of Man, not of God, for so he is God of
God, Light of Light, the essential Image and Character of the Person of his
Father, and inferior only in Order, not in Nature or Time. But these Men will
not distinguish with St. John, between Christ's Humane and his Divine Nature:
nor with St. Paul, between the Form of God and the Form of a Servant; but this
is their constant practice to confound the Essence and the Person.

5ly, They object, that Christ is numbered among the Creatures, being called the
first born of every Creature, Col. 1.15. and the beginning of the Creation,
Revel. 3.14. He that shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, and be
subject to him; therefore he cannot be of the same Nature and Excellency.

To this it is answered before, That he is called the first begotten, not the
first created, for he was begotten from Eternity, before all Creatures, which
were made by him, as it there follows; he was not created in Time as the
Creatures were: And if he had been so the first born, he had been before the
Angels and the Virgin Mary, which the Socinians do deny against the Arians. 2.
The Apocalipt calls him the beginning of the Creatures of God, as the Active
Principle from whom all the Creatures had their beginning, not the Passive, as
if he were the first of those things that were created. 3. The delivering of
the Kingdom into the hands of the Father, and his subjection thereupon, is not
the subjection of the Nature, but of the Economy, (after the finishing of the
Mediatorial Office) or (if I may so speak) the resignation or laying down of
that Office, that he might resume that Glory forever, which he affirms he had
with his Father before the World was, John 17.5.

6ly, They oppose this External Generation and Glory of the Son, by reasons,
for upon supposition of such Generation, Crellius says it would follow, 1.
That the Son would be the Son of himself. 2. There would be infinite Sons. 3.
That the Son would be from Eternity and not from Eternity. 4. That the Son was
yet to be generated and to be generated to Eternity; which are things
irrational, and not to be admitted.

Ans. Reason does not comprehend things Infinite, though Faith may apprehend
them; therefore it is unreasonable to measure by the Rule of Reason those
things which are peculiar to Faith only, and depend on Revelation only; and it
is sufficiently revealed to us in the Scripture, that there is One God, and
that in this Unity there are three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost: This we
believe because it is written, and do not doubt, though it appear not by Humane
reasoning how this can be; however, we deny that from the Arguings of the
Adversaries, or from Reason rightly informed, it would follow, First, That
according to our Opinion the Son should be the Son of himself, because one
Essence does not beget another, but one Person begets another as the Father the
Son, who of him becomes another Person, not another thing. 2. It is but his
Dream of infinite Sons, seeing that the only begotten is of infinite
Perfection, which is not divisible or multiplicable. 3. Nor is Eternity
repugnant to Generation; for Moscorovius against Smigletius, defends the
probability of it, the Materia Prima to be eternal and uncreate and so still to
remain; which yet the Leaders of this Opinion will not grant to be, and not to
be from Eternity; thus supposing the Sun to be eternal, its splendour (which all
would grant to have been to be, and to endure with it) must be eternal. 4.
Therefore when the Nicene Fathers do express this eternal Generation of the
Son, by the Emanation of Light from Light, they do not mean that which is
fleeting from that which is fixed, but do manifest as much as they could the
Equality and Co-eternity of Persons in their Order, affirming the Son to be
begotten Genitum non generandum.

7. Lastly, They load the Incarnation with so many Absurdities, as if from
thence it would follow, 1. That the Father and Holy Spirit were as much
incarnate as the Son. 2. That the Person of the Son did wholly cease. 3. That
things in themselves different did unite. Or, 4. or at least that as Nestorius
says, two Persons did yet subsist in the Son. But this Heap of Trifles has
been long since confuted by those of our Party.

Hierome Zanchy, whose words are worthy to be repeated, treating of this
Controversy, says, I affirm that I never read any thing in the Writings of
Lelius Socinus, Ochinus, Servetus, and the rest of that Bran, whose Dirt is
flung about by the Modern Socinians, that has any thing of that Accuracy which
many Books of the Ancient Heretics had, for they are all either the old Song
repeated an hundred times, or new Impertinencies condemned before they were
conceived. Thus that Strenuous Doctor, a Person of Primitive Discipline, and of
great Learning and Experience in these Controversies. To whom we may add the
Acurate Bisterfield.

The Sum of all is this: We do not say, that the Essence was Incarnate, but the
second Person in the Trinity. 2ly, That he did not by this cease to be a
Person, because he assumed the Humane Nature, not a Person. 3ly, Not that by
this Assumption the Divine Nature were any way perfected, but that he thereby
perfected the Humane. Whence 4ly, different Natures, as the Soul and Body in
Man, did unite in one Person by an ineffable but possible Union; not making two
Persons, as Nestorius dreamed, because they have but one Subsistence, which the
Humane Nature that was assumed brought not with itself, but the Divine Nature
assuming, did confer. And thus you have (as time gave leave) in one View, the
chief Points of this large and intricate Controversy.

To God the Father, to the Son God and Man, and to the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor, Praise, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

The CONCLUSION.
St. Hilary having vindicated the Doctrine of the Trinity, l. 6. n. 2. says,
Lord I believed thy words, if I am deceived, Moses, David, Solomon, and thy
Apostles have deceived me; if it be a Fault to believe these, pardon me,
Almighty God, for in this belief I can die; deny it I cannot: We have been
baptized in this Faith; we have offered up all our Prayers in this Faith, and
paid all our Thanksgivings to the Blessed Trinity; and therefore we cannot dye
comfortably in any other. And with much more confidence may the Devout
Trinitarian say, as St. Heirome expresses it, Ecce Crucifixus meus Deus;
Behold my God which was crucified for me! when he sees him coming in Judgment;
than the Arian or Socinian, who proudly deny his Godhead and Satisfaction, who
may too late complain in the words of St. Augustine in his Confession, l. 5. c.
9. I was going toward Hell, laden with all my Sins, while I believed not that
Christ had satisfied for them.

FINIS.
ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Naked Gospel. As now Published By ARTHVR BVRY, D. D.
THat this Book is now first published by the Doctor whose Name is prefixed,
cannot in Justice be denied by them that have read the former; for it is quite
another Book, and it may be true, though either one or the other, if not both
of the former Editions of the Naked Gospel were published by the same Author,
because they are not the same Books, yet the one which he having caused to be
printed and dispersed among his Friends in several parts of the Nation, and the
other wherein he made several Alterations, may be affirmed to be published by
the same hand, the truth whereof needs no farther enquiry, after the Oxford
Animadversions: That this present Copy is another Book, appears by its diverse
Alterations and Additions which are made; whether for the better or the worse,
will appear to every judicious Reader; and that there needs no other, or
severer Reflections on it, than what the Author himself has made: He seems so
to tumble in the Net which he has woven, as to be more entangled by striving
to get out. In his Preface to the Reader he confesses, He had not patience to
be silent at such a time, when the suppression of such Opinions as he has
published, would have been greatly advantageous both to Truth and Peace. And
whether it would not have been a great degree of sauciness by a point blanck
Address of such a Present as the Naked Gospel, to direct the Venerable Body of
the Convocation of the Clergy in what they had to do, is put beyond doubt by
the Oxford Convocation: I cannot find, as he says, that it was intended that
the Convocation of the Clergy was called to make Alterations in Matters of
Faith, nor that we are to weigh at the same Beam a Rite in the one, and a
Doctrine in the other Seal. The Convocation I believe would have given up all
their Rites and Ceremonies, rather than the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation, which the Doctor on pretense of Charity, would have them to
abandon.

He confesses, That his Book was penned with less caution than was necessary,
for what was to be exposed to every vulgar eye. But how could he imagine, that
so many learned and good Men would be pleased with his questioning or denying
the truth and belief of such Doctrines as they themselves believe to be
necessary to Salvation. He might therefore very well have spared his unbecoming
Reflections on that Body.

That the Doctor was suspected to disbelieve the Doctrine of the Trinity and
Incarnation, was not because he did not expressly declare his Opinion concerning
them, which a true Son of the Church of England, and one that had been long
before suspected as Heterodox, writing on that subject, was highly concerned to
do; but because he has slily and frequently insinuated diverse Arguments
against them; and his daubing with untempered Mortar in his two new Chapters of
the Trinity and Incarnation, will render the matter more obscure and defaced.

As for those words in the conclusion, which he conceives some are most
offended with, wherein he cannot submit to the least compliance: Let him enjoy
his own Sentiments; only I cannot persuade my self, that more than his, an
hundred years experience, calls on us to tack about, and steer a contrary
course to what our Pilots in the greatest part of that time have steered.

As the number of those Men who are as sick of King William, as they were
lately of King James, is so small, that they may be all written in a Ring: If
he intends (as the current of his Discourse would carry it) such as were in the
late Convocation, all which had testified by solemn Oaths, and diverse of them
by their learned Arguments and Exhortations, their cheerful Obedience to their
present Majesty's (whom God preserve as the most hopeful Defenders of our
established Religion); so I heartily pray there may not be one such
Prevaricator left among us, though even among the Twelve Disciples of our
Savior, there was a Judas; and I hope there is not one of a thousand among our
Clergy that is so ill as the Doctor would represent them; such I mean, as (he
says) would wish for the cruel French, to deliver them from the present
Government, or that is so unreasonably jealous, as to think that his present
Majesty designs to make this Church, not unlike to that in which himself was
educated: for which his vile suggestion, contrary to His Majesty's most
gracious Assurances, the Doctor is concerned to beg His Majesty's Pardon; and I
pray God to pardon him also: It is a most invidious and malicious Quere which
he adds, -- Which of the two are the truer Church of England-men, those who
dread the return of King James, with his Jesuits; or those who wish and labor
for it? Those who are so stiff as rather to hazard the whole, than to part with
the least circumstance? -- And cover their stiffness to their own humors and
interests with the specious pretense of zeal for the Church? To which I answer,
That as I do not know, so if I did know any person so ill affected, I should
abhor them as the Pests of the Nation.

To those of the Doctor I shall oppose these Queries, Which are the truer
Church of England men, those who dread the growth and success of the Arian and
Socinian Heresies; or those who adhere to the established Doctrine of the
Trinity and Incarnation of our blessed Savior? Those who would erect a Natural
Religion, a Jewish or Turkish Faith, on the Ruins of that which is truly
Christian, Ancient and Catholic? or those who live in the Communion of the
Church of England, where this Christian Religion is established? Every good
Protestant will readily answer these Queries. And notwithstanding the
Protestation of the Doctor in the close of his Epistle to the Reader, That he
is not conscious of having contradicted any of the Church's Articles in any one
word: The impartial Reader will perceive by what has been discovered, to be
the design of the Naked Gospel in the foregoing Exercitations, that it was
mainly intended against the most important of those Articles. I only recommend
to the Doctor's serious Consideration, that as it is an unaccountable Frenzy
for any that abhors Popery and Slavery, to grow weary of the present
Government, and to desire the return of the late King by a French Power, so it
is the highest degree of impiety, for a Person that has been long educated and
instructed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, which teaches to adore
the blessed Jesus, as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, not only to dethrone,
but debase him as a mere Creature, and esteem no otherwise of him, than as a
King de Facto, made and advanced by Imperial and Papal Edicts and Decrees, not
so ancient as Constantine, but by Theodosius and Damasus bishop of Rome. See p.
38. of the Edition in two Colums.

From what Point the Wind blew that has caused the Doctor to steer a course
contrary to what he intended at his first setting out, is not so intelligible,
as to guess at what Harbor he intends to lay up; he does seemingly at least
recant many of those Heretical Opinions which he had asserted in the first
Edition of the Naked Gospel, but so inconsistently, that the New Piece which he
has patcht on upon the Old Garment, will make the Rent worse. But this is no
other artifice than what has been practiced by the Arians and Socinians
heretofore, whose feigned Confessions and Recantations they on occasion
recanted again, and their later Deeds have been worse than the former.

Chap. 7. of the Holy Trinity.
The D.'s first care is to give us a right notion of the usual words (...) or
Substance, and (...) or Person, which he would translate beingness and
propriety. The word Substance he says, p. 45. is so much applied to matter,
that some with great confidence deride it as a contradiction to say, that a
Substance can be immaterial: of this Opinion were Vorstius and Hobs; and how
much the Doctor differs from them, that which follows may evidence. The more we
attend to our own Senses, (says the Doctor) or Aristotle's Predicaments, the
more strongly are our Minds possessed, that Substance must be material, etc.

As to the word Person, p. 46. he says, Could we be as sensible that the word
Person in its metaphysical height is no less improperly applied to the second
Distinction in the Trinity, than the word Begotten is in its Physical baseness,
and could we cast away that improper word, and use the warier word Subsistence
and Propriety, we should more easily satisfy our selves, and others: Wherefore
taking the word Substance for Subsistence, and Person for Propriety, he
proceeds to give us a new Notion of the Trinity, such as agrees with the
Doctrine of Paulus Samosatenus, and Sabellius, That the one high God is both
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. His Positions are these:

1. That God is a Being absolutely perfect. 2. That Mind is the most perfect
Being. The same with Plato's (...); the Original being derived from none, but
Author of all, and therefore properly styled the Father.

As Mind is the most perfect Being, so the most perfect Being must be a perfect
Mind, but an unthinking Mind cannot be a perfect one; God therefore was never
unthinking; and since thought is the first and proper Issue of a thinking Mind,
therefore may it most properly be styled, The first begotten Son and coeternal
with the Father; because the Father was never before him, p. 48. A thought is
no less than a word conceived, and a word is no more than a thought brought
forth. The Mind, or its Wisdom cannot be absolutely perfect, if they do not, or
cannot perform, or want Power to act, there must therefore be a third Person
which the Scripture calls the Holy Ghost, which is constantly described by
Power and Action. This is the Doctor's (...), by which he thinks he has
obliged all Mankind, displayed the Mystery of the Trinity, which has been the
trouble of all Ages, and in which he has not advanced one Proposition without
warrant from the Scripture, the Church of England, the Fathers of the Church,
and the best Champions for that Doctrine; and (that which is his greatest hope,
is) that the Unitarians will not dissent from one of them, if taken in that
sense which their terms freely offer, p. 51. And I fear it is to serve their
Hypothesis, that the Doctor has conceived and published this Notion.

It is not a little surprising, that the Doctrine which was so lately
ridiculed, under the term Mystery, and which must remain so still, a point of
Push-pin Divinity. The Athanasian Doctrine fit to be numbered with the Roman,
and would be fairly dealt with if left on the same level with the Arian,
equally unworthy not only of our Faith, but our Study, (see The Naked Gospel,
printed in two Columns, p. 38.) A long and mischievous Controversy; and,
Behold now the ground on which one of our Fundamental Articles is built; should
now deserve another Ecce to behold ( p. 49. of the Doctor's Edition) how the
very Light of Nature demonstrates St. John's Mystery, There are three that bear
witness in heaven, etc. And p. 53. How our Platonizing Doctor confutes the
Atheists who accuse this Mystery as contrary to Reason, which he now says
reason in Plato discovers; the Doctor having adapted a Natural Trinity for
his Natural Religion.

But the Doctor is conscious of another Error, viz. That he has Sabellionized
with Sabellius, for mentioning St. Augustine's Opinion concerning the Trinity,
p. 50. says, that it favors more of Sabellianism than his, as above explained.
As the Doctor's Opinion is by him explained, it may serve as the Center wherein
all the Opinions of the Ancient and Modern Heretics may meet and acquiesce;
Vm. Lirinensis asks, Quis ante sceleratum Sabellium Unitatis Trinitatem
consundere Ausus est? Whoever so confounded the Doctrine of the Trinity as the
impious Sabellius? Of whom Sandius says, Sabelliani tribuendo patri essentiam
filio scientiam sancto vitam videntur negasse subsistentiam filii and sancti,
Sandius p. 120. Consonant to this our Doctor says, The Mind is Beingness, or
the Father, the Son is Wisdom, the Holy Ghost is Power and Activity. Again
Sandius p. 111. Sabellius taught the one God in Essence and Substance to be the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which three he called three Virtues (or
Proprieties) three Names, three Persons; and for proof of this Opinion produced
these Scriptures: He that has seen me has seen the Father also; I and the
Father are one; And I in the Father, and the Father in me. Which Scripture were
commonly used by the Noetians and Samosatenians; Patris voluit esse substantiam
solidam propriam (...) and (...), filium autem and sanctum (...), (i. e.) as
our Doctor renders it, Wisdom and Power to act. Sandius goes on, Sabellius
compared the Father to the Hyposi asis of the Sun, the Son to the Light and
Rays, the Holy Ghost to its Calefaction; he so taught the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost to be one, that they were but one (...); Whence his Followers, as Sandius
observes, were called Patropassians, as teaching God the Father by the
assumption of Humane Nature to be called the Son, and in that Nature the Father
suffered, because one and the same God was Father, Son and Holy Ghost, without
distinction of Persons; which, as Lirinensis said, was to confound the Trinity;
and (as our Doctor does) make it to consist of one Substance and two
Proprieties or Energies, viz. to Think and to Act.

The Doctor says, that Thought is the first begotten Son of God, that Thought
is a Word brought forth, and is the same in substance with the Mind whence it
issues; but if it issues from the Mind, it becomes separate, and cannot be
any longer the same with the Mind. And this Opinion is the same which
Philastrius notes to be the Opinion of Paulus of Samosata, That the Word was
not the substantial Son of God, coeternal with the Father, but the Verbum
(...), the enunciative or prolative Word, only an aerie Sound, not a living and
sempeternal Person, coequal with the Father. An Opinion somewhat like that of
Mr. Hobbs concerning the Trinity, which he makes God the Father speaking by
Moses in the Old Testament, and by Christ in the New.

Sandius observes the like of Cosmas, who taught with Sabellius, That the Word
of God was naked and without any subsistence; which his Followers called Verbum
vocale and enunciativum, and sometime internal or mental, p. 117. And he tells
us, that though the Modern Socinians detest the Error of Sabellius, yet they
are ignorantly guilty of it, p. 120. Near of kin are the Doctor's new Notions
of the second Person in the Holy Trinity, to the old Heresies so often
condemned, making the second Person a Thought, the third a Power; and he might
have named as many more of the Divine Propriety, (viz.) Holiness, Love,
Justice, etc. as would have made a Denary of Persons.

The Doctor describes the third Person in the Trinity by Power and Action, and
this description he says is constantly used in the Holy Scripture. Though we
find the Attribute of Holy more frequently annexed to that of the Spirit, as
Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. and the Holy Ghost in almost
an hundred places.

We find also that of Power attributed to the second Person more eminently than
to the third, as 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ is called the power of God, and the wisdom
of God. Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and earth. Hebr. 1.3.
He upholds all things by the word of his power. Matthew. 9.6. The Son of Man has
power on earth to forgive sins. And he that made and upholds, and shall judge
all Men, may most properly be called the power of God. How vain then is that
boast of the Doctor's, p. 49. That this his way of tracing the Holy Trinity,
agrees to a syllable with the words of the Holy Scripture, and the Church of
England, and is more plain to be understood and proved, than that magisterial
way vulgarly used, wherein Reason is not permitted to speak, p. 50. This is
Platonis fastum Majore fastu; to oppose his private Reason against both the
Reason and Authority of that Church whereof he professes himself a Son, and
impose on it an old Heresy in a new Dress. Bellar. in Cronol. says, That Fr.
David held the Son and Holy Spirit to be Virtutes Dei non distinctas a Patre,
persona relatione vel essentiae.

Chap. 8. p. 53. Treats of the Incarnation: The Doctor entitled Chap. 7. of
the first Edition, thus: Of Belief with mere respect to the Person of Christ:
Inquisitiveness concerning his Incarnation censured, first, because Impertinent.

And he endeavors to prove it impertinent to our Lord's design, (viz.) That we
should enquire after the Dignity of his Person, that he was the Eternal Son of
God; this he calls Boys play, and Push-pin, and quotes the Judgment of
Constantine for it: When the Game (as he calls it) was first set on foot. Then
p. 29. of the first Edition, It was no more necessary to understand the Dignity
of the Person (of Christ) than for a Traveller to understand the Features of
the Sun. Now p. 55. of the new Edition, If we regard the Dignity of the Person,
it is plainly more honorable to believe him God the Creator, than a Creature
Deified. Then p. 30. (he says,) That part of Mankind which our Lord most
favors, are most unable to pay him such a belief. Now p. 54. If we consider
the thing it self, it appears much more credible that the Eternal Son of God
should descend to the Nature of Man, than that a Man should be made God, endued
with a new Omniscience to hear, and Omnipotence to grant the Prayers of all
Supplicants: Then it was fruitless to the Enquirer's satisfaction, p. 31. Now
p. 55. If we consider the fruits, our thankfulness must be greater, our love
more inflamed, our obedience more quickened, our hatred to sin more sharpened,
and all the good ends of Faith much more promoted: Then it was dangerous lest
we should blaspheme, p. 36. and because we have no firm ground to go upon. Now
p. 55. Upon all accounts were the Scriptures so doubtful as to leave us to our
choice, we ought rather to carry our biass toward our Lord's eternal Divinity,
than against it.

In this and what other Disputes may arise (for I have not leisure to enquire
what other Additions or Alterations are made) I doubt not but the Rector of
Exeter-Colledge will sufficiently answer the private Opinions of Dr. A. B.

In the mean time I am very glad to hear, and heartily congratulate the Doctor
for what he has declared, p. 53. That though there be in the Trinity a great
Mystery, yet now nothing is more plain than that of St. John, The word became
flesh, and dwelt among us: or those words of St. Paul, Great is the Mystery of
Godliness; God was manifested in the flesh: And that these and several other
words of Scripture, so plainly speak our Lord's Divinity, that whoever
otherwise interprets them, will no less rob the words of their meaning, than
Christ of his honor; And what is there in this wonderful Mystery that Reason
cannot comprehend, p. 54.

And I hope he will make his Notion more intelligible, how a Thought, which he
calls the first-begotten Son of God, may also be called the only begotten Son
of God? And how a Thought or Word mental or declared, could intimately,
vitally, and perfectly unite itself to a divinely begotten Child, which
whatever he says to the contrary, is much more obscure than what the Scripture,
and the Church of England have said.

When he says, p. 54. He can see no great reason why Socinus who contended for
the Worship of Christ, should also contend against his Eternity. I should think
he means he sees no reason for it at all: and seeing he has so much Charity
for those that altogether deny our Savior's Deity, and dare not worship or
invoke him at all, as not to deny them the Name of Christians, or hope of
Salvation, I beseech him to extend a more affectionate and real love and good
will to all such as heartily profess to believe the one, and sincerely devote
themselves to the practice of the other. But this seeming Reproof of Socinus
for his Opinion concerning the Divinity of Christ, is no more than that for
which David Franken, and others that agreed with Socinus to deny his eternal
Deity, did more severely reprimand him for, (viz.) for worshipping him whom he
affirmed to be but a Creature, contrary to the Scripture. To confute and
silence this new Notion of the Doctor, and to show how much more intelligible
and rational the Doctrine of the Eternal Generation of the Son of God, as
professed in the Church of England, is, I shall inform the Reader of that
demonstrative Explanation of it, which the learned Dr. Pearson, Bishop of
Chester has elaborated.

Dr. Pearson on the Creed, p. 267. Printed 1659. The third assertion to be
demonstrated is, That the Divine Essence which Christ had, as the Word, before
he was conceived by the Virgin Mary, he had not of himself, but by
communication from God the Father; for this can not be denied, That there can
be but one Essence properly Divine, and so but one God of infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Majesty, that there can be but one Person originally of himself
subsisting in that infinite Being, because a Plurality of more Persons so
subsisting would necessarily infer a multiplicity of Gods. -- Wherefore it
necessarily follows, that Jesus Christ, who is certainly not the Father,
cannot be a Person subsisting in the Divine Nature originally of himself, and
consequently being we have already proved that he is truly and properly the
Eternal God, he must be understood to have the Godhead communicated to him from
the Father. All things whatever the Father has are mine, says Christ, John
16.15. Because in him is the same fullness of the Godhead, and more than that
the Father cannot have, p. 269. Being the Divine Nature, as it is absolutely
immaterial and incorporeal, is also indivisible: Christ cannot have any part of
it only communicated to him, but the whole, by which he must be acknowledged
co-essential of the same Substance with the Father, as the Council of Nice
determined, and the Fathers before them taught. Hence Christ says, I and the
Father are one, Joh. 10.30. which raised a second motion in the Jews to stone
him; and though Christ says, The Father is in me, and I in him; yet withal he
says, I came out from the Father; by the former showing the Divinity of his
Essence, by the later the Origination of himself. We must not look on the
Divine Nature as sterile, but rather acknowledge and admire the secundity and
communicability of itself, upon which the Creation of the World depends, God
making all things by his Word, to whom he first communicated that Omnipotency
which is the cause of all things.

The fourth assertion follows, which is, That the communication of the Divine
Essence by the Father, is the Generation of the Son, and Christ who was
eternally God, not of himself, but from the Father, is the Eternal Son of God.
That God always had a Son appears by Agur's Question: Who has established all
the ends of the Earth? What is his Name? And what is his Son's Name, if thou
can tell? And it was the chief design of Mahomet to deny this truth, because
he knew it was not otherwise possible to prefer himself before our Savior,
wherefore he frequently inculcates that Blasphemy in his Alchoran, that God
has no such Son nor any equal with him, and his Disciples have corrupted the
Psalm of David, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; into, Thou art
my Prophet, I have educated thee. -- But by the consent of the ancient Jews,
and the interpretation of the blessed Apostles, we know these words belong to
Christ, and in the most proper sense to him alone. -- Now that the
communication of the Divine Essence by the Father, was the true and proper
Generation by which he has begotten the Son, will thus appear, because the
most proper Generation which we know, is nothing else but a vital production of
another in the same Nature, with a full representation of him from whom he is
produced: Thus Man begets a Son, that is, produces another Man of the same
humane Nature with himself, and this production as a perfect Generation,
becomes the foundation of the relation of Paternity in him that produces, and
of Filiation in him that is produced. This is the known Confession of all Men,
That a Son is nothing but another produced by his Father, in the same Nature
with him. -- The similitude in which the Propriety of Generation is preserved,
is that which consists in identity of Nature, and this communication of the
Divine Essence by the Father to the Word, is evidently a sufficient foundation
of such a similitude, from whence Christ is called, The Image of God; the
brightness of his Glory, the express Image of his Person.

Then he proceeds to show, That this communication of the Divine Essence is a
more proper Generation than any Generation of the Creatures, not only because
it is in a more perfect manner, but also because the identity of Nature is most
perfect. As in the Divine Essence we acknowledge all the Perfections of the
Creature, substracting all the Imperfections which adhere to them in things
below; so in communication we must look upon the reality without any kind of
defect, blemish, or impurity. In humane Generation the Son is begotten in the
same Nature with the Father, which is performed by derivation or decision of
part of the Substance of the Parent, but this decision includes imperfection,
because it supposes the Substance divisible, and consequently corporeal,
whereas the Essence of God is incorporeal, spiritual, and indivisible, and
therefore his Nature is really communicated not by derivation or decision, but
by a total and plenary communication.

In natural Generation the Father necessarily precedeth the Son, and begets one
younger than himself; for seeing Generation is for the perpetuity of the
Species, where the individuals successively fail, it is sufficient if the
Father can produce another to live after him, and continue the existence of his
Nature when his Person is dissolved; but this supposes the imperfection of
Mortality wholly to be removed, when we speak of Him who inhabiteth Eternity,
the Essence which God always had without beginning; without beginning he did
communicate, being always Father as always God. Animals when they come to
perfection of Nature then become prolifical; in God eternal Perfection shows
his eternal Fecundity: And that which is most remarkable, in Humane Generations
the Son is of the same nature with the Father, and yet is not the same Man,
because though he have an Essence of the same kind, yet he has not the same
Essence, the power of Generation depending on the first prolifical benediction;
increase and multiply it must be made by way of Multiplication, and thus every
Son becomes another Man: but the Divine Essence being by reason of its
simplicity not subject to division, and in respect of its infinity incapable of
multiplication, is so communicated as not to be multiplied, insomuch, that he
which proceeds by that communication, has not only the same Nature, but is
the same God, the Father God and the Word God; Abraham Man and Isaac Man, but
Abraham one Man Isaac another Man, not so the Father one God and the Son
another God, but the Father and the Word both the same God. Being then the
propriety of Generation is founded in the essential Similitude of the Son to
the Father by reason of the same Nature which he receives from him, being the
full perfect Nature of God is communicated to the Word, and that more
intimately, and with a greater Unity and Identity than can be found in Humane
Generations, it follows that this communication of the Divine Nature is the
proper Generation by which Christ is, and is called the true and proper Son of
God; this was the foundation of St. Peter's Confession, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God. This the ground of our Savior's distinction, I go to my
Father, and to your Father. Hence did St. John raise a Verity more than only a
Negation of Falsity, when he said, We are in the true Son, for we which are in
him are true not false sons, but such sons we are not as the true Son. Hence
did St. Paul draw an Argument of the infinite Love of God toward Man, in that
he spared not his own proper Son.

Multum distat inter dominationem and conditionem inter generationem and
adoptionem, inter substantiam and gratiam ideoque non hic permixte, nec passim
dicitur; ascendo ad patrem nostrum, aut deum nostrum, sed ad patrem meum, and
patrem vestrum, ad deum meum, and ad deum vestrum: Aliter enim deus illi pater
est aliter nobis illum, siquidem natura coaequat misericordia humiliat, nos
vero natura prosternat misericordia erigit. Capreolus Carthag. Epist.

Thus (says this Incomparable Author) we have sufficiently showed that the
eternal Communication of the Divine Essence by the Father to the Word, was the
proper Generation, by which Christ Jesus always was the true and proper Son of
God, which was our fourth Assertion.

And now I may hope that the Doctor will be as big as his word, not to rise up
any more against the Doctrine and Authority of the Church, (whereof he styles
himself a true Son) and in which he acknowledges a Power to impose Silence,
though not Faith. To the Readers p. 7.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 20. l. ult. read (...). p. 22. after ground of add denying. p. 27. r.
(...). p. 35. l. 16. for contra. r. colta. and l. 21. for nosce nosse. p. 38.
l. 15. for left r. best known. p. 49. l. add is to the word Religion. p. 56. l.
3. r. apposite, and l. 20. profecit. p. 57. l. 16. dele est, and l. ult. for
which r. what. p. 61. l. 16. Anomaeus (i. e.) p. 65. l. 11. for Eastern r.
Western. p. 66. l. 4. for Valence r. Valens. p. 69. l. 3. r. senti^e de fillo.
p. 70. l. 4. dele either Imperial or. p. 80. l. 6. r. prosecute. p. 84. l. 27.
r. deterted for detected. p. 87. l. 33. by commodious Interpretations. p. 95.
l. 13. after Doctrines add Than. p. 96. l. 20. Calonius. p. 106. l. penult. add
is before Christ. p. 119. l. 1. Prateolus. p. 13^. l. 14. add by before the
word Father. p. 154. l. 36. r. eternal for external.


