THE HISTORY OF JOSHUA Applied to the Case of King Charles II.

In a Thanksgiving SERMON Preached at St. Peter's, Exon.

On the 29th of May 1684.

By THO. LONG, one of the Prebendaries.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. C. for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and
Bible without Temple Bar. MDCLXXXIV.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Copplestone Bampfield Knight. and Bar. One of his
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants, And JUSTICE of the Peace for the County of Devon.
HONORED SIR,
THis small Present comes as a grateful Acknowledgement of the many Favors
received from your Worthy Family. Your Grandfather was my first Patron, and a
great Encourager of my Ministry. Your Father did me very considerable
Kindnesses in the late distracted times. Your Self have been my Generous
Landlord in the House where I had my Education from my Childhood; and on all
occasions you have expressed your real Affection (as to the Loyal Clergy in
general, so) particularly to my self, the meanest of them. Which Considerations
have obliged me to prefix your Name to this Thanksgiving-Sermon, and to
subscribe my self

Exon. May 30. 1684. Your most humble and obliged Servant, THO. LONG.

JOSHUA 3.7. The Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee
in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so I
will be with thee.


WHen Moses by the unsearchable judgment of God was denied an entrance to the
promised Land, and brought under a sentence of death, Numb. 27.12. that the
hopes and happiness of Israel might not die with him, he makes an earnest
Prayer to God for Joshua, whom God had appointed to be his Successor, v. 16,
17. That the congregation of the Lord might not be as sheep without a shepherd:
and v. 23. he gave him a charge and instruction how to go in and out before the
people to conduct them to Canaan, and commended him to the Prayers and Counsel
of Eleazar the Priest, who had been (after the death of Aaron) his own faithful
Counselor. And by these means God put the spirit of Moses, and some of his
honor upon Joshua, that all the congregation of Israel might be obedient, v.
20. And indeed, there was not any so qualified for the Government of that
people as Joshua was. The Succession to great Kingdoms and Governments (as old
Brithwold said of this of England) is Gods care; and he will provide for it:
and in his will and pleasure the people ought to acquiesce. But it was not so
with those with whom Joshua had to do, of whom Moses testified, Deuteronomy. 31.27. I
know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck: while I am yet alive with you this day,
ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and how much more after my death?
They had by their murmurings and provocations and the golden Calves which they
had set up, worried that good man to death.

And Joshua was to encounter not only with that stubborn people, but with many
Nations that were confederate against him, strong and fenced Cities, whereof
every one was made the seat of a King: Reges vocantur singularum fere Civitatum
Domini; which are reckoned in number thirty one. And the death of Moses in such
an extraordinary manner, had raised great prejudices in the hearts of the
people both against Moses and his Successor, who hated him the more for his
love and zeal for the true Worship of God; whereof they had such experience:
for Joshua being with Moses in the Mount when the Law was delivered, he first
discovered the murmurings of the people, Exodus 32.17. When Joshua heard the
noise of the people as they shouted, ( viz. at the setting up of their Calves)
he said unto Moses, There is a noise of War in the Camp. He saw also how
greatly the Lord was displeased at the Rebellion of Core, Dathan, and Abiram,
against Moses and Aaron; and when Eldad and Medad became Field-Chaplains, and
prophesied in the Camp, he persuaded Moses to forbid them, Numb. 11.28. And
that small Party which adhered unto Joshua, were tired out by their tedious
journeying through the Wilderness, and were now brought to the like straights
as they had been at the Red Sea: so that nothing but a Miracle could reclaim
the people, and preserve Joshua from being swallowed up by them. The River
Jordan, at whose brink they were brought, had at this time overslowed its
banks, as if it had conspired to meet and join with the madness of the people
to cut off Joshua. But this extremity the God of Israel made his opportunity to
deliver and exalt Joshua: The Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to
magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know, etc.

This day (i. e.) from this day forward, as the Syriack renders it, I will give
an (...).
Earnest and Assurance that I will exalt thee; not only draw thee out of all
that contempt and distress to which thou art reduced, but I will begin now, and
in due time perfect that Honor and Dignity which I have designed for thee,
both in the sight of all the Canaanites, whom I will cast out before thee, and
in the sight of all Israel, who have been so rebellious against thee; that they
may know, that as I was with Moses, and gave the people a passage through the
Red Sea; So I will be with thee, and cause thee to pass over this swelling
Jordan, and subdue not only thine own people, but all the Nations of Canaan
under thy feet: And, Sicut fuit verbum meum in adjutorium Mosis; as I conducted
Moses by my word and counsel, so I will guide thee.

Having thus considered the Text, it seemed to represent the form of a
Triumphant Arch consisting of two Pillars, like unto those of Solomon's Porch,
1 King. 7.21. Jachin and Boaz: This signifying, In him ( i. e. in God) is
strength; and the other, He will establish: I the Almighty God will establish
thee the distressed King of Israel; Honor and majesty will I lay on thee; thy
glory shall be great in my salvation, Psalm. 21.5.

I know it will be very acceptable to all good men, especially to such as are
so nearly concerned as our selves, to see the ancient Monuments of Gods
miraculous favors to Kings and Governors, and such as live in obedience to
them, preserved and revived. And they may serve as Pillars to support our weak
faith in Gods power, and our Loyalty to the King, when it begins to decline. I
therefore desire your patience while I read you, as well as my dull eyes will
permit, those Inscriptions of Gods great power, and the Prerogative of his
Magistrates, which are engraven on these two Pillars of the Text: the first of
which shows us what great things God did for Joshua; the second, what good
things Joshua did for God, or rather God wrought by Joshua, to magnify him,
etc. Over the first Pillar is written, Ego Deus tuus; on the second, Te Regum
meum: and the Key-stone that joins these in due construction, is a magnificabo;
and the date is hodie, this day, and not this day only, but this day I will
begin it. And let us begin our survey of this Arch where God himself began it,
at that foundation-stone of the first Pillar which God laid in the Waters of
Jordan, when he brought Joshua to his promised Inheritance through those
swelling streams; which is the proper work of this day: Hodie incipiam, this
day will I begin to magnify thee.

What surer testimony could the God of Heaven give an afflicted Prince, that
had a howling Wilderness behind him, and raging Floods before him, than to
divide and dry up those swelling Surges, and make those Floods that had lifted
their voices threatening destruction, to stand as a guard about him, while he
passed through as on dry land? For no sooner did Joshua appear, and set the
Priests bearing the Ark of God before the people (which formerly was obscured,
and even lost in the midst of the confused multitude;) but, as the Psalmist
records it, Psalm. 114.3. The waters saw thee, O God, and fled; Jordan was
driven back. A Miracle like that of our Jesus, Mat. 8.24. of whom Joshua was a
Type, who when his Disciples were covered with the waves of the Sea, and cried
out, Lord, save us, we perish; He arose and rebuked the waves and the sea, and
there was a great calm.

Thus at the presence of Joshua, the streams of Jordan that descended from the
Mountains, were stopped over against Jericho, and the waters beneath it flowed
into the Sea, and made a plain path for Joshua and his people to pass thorough.
There is no way inaccessible to the divine power: Thy way, O God, is in the
Sea, and thy path in the great waters: thy footsteps are not known, Psalm.
77.19. Pervia Virtuti est omnis via. Now Signs and Wonders are not wrought but
on special occasions; not only to confirm those that do believe, but to
convince unbelievers. They are Gods Broad Seals to confirm the Commission of
such persons as he sends into the world for extraordinary ends; and if their
authority be doubted of, this testimony of God is sufficient to evince their
authority to be derived from him: for by such evidences God confirmed all the
Rulers and Judges of Israel from Moses unto Saul; and all the Doctrine of his
Prophets and of Christ and his Apostles; and this was the first work of God, to
magnify Joshua in the sight of all his people. Now as a well-made Arch stands
the firmer when a great weight is laid on it, so when we have a promise and a
precept from God, and our obedience like the Key-stone unites these two, we
cannot lay more stress upon it than that will bear.

The second inscription on this Pillar is the Memorial of Joshua's taking the
great city Jericho, whose Walls seemed as inaccessable as the Waves of Jordan,
and the rage and madness of that people against Joshua more invincible than
either: yet in the taking of Jericho, Joshua was not assisted by any arm of
flesh, or humane polity; he appears before it only with the sound of such
Trumpets as were wont to begin the Jubilee, when every person was to be
restored to his Inheritance, all Captives and Prisoners to be released, all
Debts and Bonds to be cancelled; Et redit ad Dominum quod fuit ante suum: and
at such an approach of Joshua the Walls of Jericho fell to the ground, the
Gates fly open, and the hearts of his Enemies are in their heels, and scarce
enable them to flee before him. And so totally did God destroy the enmity that
was bred within those Walls against Joshua and his people, that he denounced a
Curse against any that should repair it; which Curse was inflicted on Hiel the
Bethelite, who laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up
the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the Lord
which he spoke by Joshua, 1 King. 16.34. Josh. 6.26.

This City, the strength and Metropolis of the Canaanites, being subdued, all
the little Cities run out at their gates, and leave them open to be possessed
by Joshua and his Subjects, chapter 12. 7. One and thirty Kings had cantoned out
the Land, and fixed themselves in walled Towns, where they had great strength,
and Chariots of iron, chapter 17. 18. But ( chapter 5. 1.) their blood and spirits
failed them, and were dried up as the waters of Jordan; they had neither
courage to fight, nor wit to flee, but were many of them taken, and hanged up,
Josh. 8.29. and 10.26. Yet was not the Land at rest, but the Canaanites,
Madianites and Jebusites were still in the land, chapter 15. 63. and they vexed
Joshua with their Wiles, and with their Confederacies and Associations: for
Adoni-Bezek a great Lord, or Lord of Thunder (as his name imports) the greatest
Tyrant in the Nation, who had dismembered threescore and ten other Lords, and
brought them to gather meat under his table (Judge. 1.7.) conspired with other
Lords of the Amorites to fight against Joshua at Gibeon, chapter 10. but here God
magnified Joshua by working another great Miracle, fighting against them with
Hailstones from Heaven, which slew more than the Sword of Joshua, though that
made a very great slaughter. And lest the day should fail him to complete his
Victory, we may read it engraven on this Triumphant Arch, how at the word of
Joshua, the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon,
chapter 10. 12. till the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. And many
a time did their enemies assault them, being mixed among all the Tribes of
Israel, as you may read, Judge. 1.18, etc. but Joshua made them tributary, and
God preserved him, and made him to prosper, following him wherever he went,
with Miracles of mercy and loving kindness all the days of his life At the top
of this Pillar you may see how Balaam also that false Prophet, who was hired to
curse the Israel of God, was taken and stain with the sword, chapter 13. 22. And
the land had rest from war, chapter 11. 23.

And thus we have briefly viewed the Inscriptions of the first Pillar of this
Triumphant Arch, showing you what God did for Joshua: to which I cannot add
the top-stone, and show how much these things contributed to the magnifying of
Joshua, till I have raised the other Pillar to some proportionable height, and
considered what Joshua did for God, and for his Worship and People, which
tended more to his honor than all the Miracles that God wrought for him.

The foundation of this Pillar is laid in Shiloh, where Joshua settled the Ark,
the Symbol of Gods presence, by virtue whereof he was enabled to do such
wonderful things against his enemies. Chapter 18. 1. The children of Israel
assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle of the congregation
there. Then he restored the Priests and Levites to their inheritance, chapter 18.
2. by the consent of the whole congregation of the children of Israel, who came
together at Shiloh, and set up the Tabernacle of the Congregation there: for
the Levites had no part among the people, but the Priesthood of the Lord was
their inheritance, chapter 18. 7. for the Lord had commanded by Moses to give them
cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof: And the children of Israel gave
to the Levites out of their inheritance at the commandment of the Lord, chapter 21.
2, 3. See Numb. 35.2. And all the cities which the Levites had were forty and
eight with their suburbs, chapter 21. 41.

And here, to the immortal renown of Joshua, we shall observe his and Gods
great displeasure against such as withheld any of those things that were
devoted to the Lord: for, chapter 6. 24. the silver and the gold, and other
ornaments, were to be put into the treasury of the house of the Lord. But Achan
a sacrilegious person, seeing among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and
two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, he
coveted them and took them, and hid them in his tent: but they proved to be as
so many coals from the Altar, which were by the wrath of God kindled into such
a flame, as consumed all that he had: for, all Israel stoned them with stones,
and burned them with fire, chapter 7. 25.

This sin of Achan was seconded by another sacrilegious sin of the Reubenites
and Gadites that dwelt on the other side of Jordan: for they raised another
Altar or place of meeting, besides that which Joshua erected at Shiloh; and
this is called a rebellion against the Lord, chapter 22. 16. for separation from
the true Worship of God, and setting up a diverse Altar, is the worst sort of
Sacrilege. Achan withheld only some Ornaments, these withdrew the Souls of
Gods people from his service. And in this case the children of Israel declared
themselves enemies to the Reubenites, whom they apprehended to separate from
the established Worship at Shiloh: for they had made not only a very great
Altar, but made it after the fashion of the Altar of the Lord, v. 28. and not
after the fashion of an Altar of memorial, chapter 22. 10. And the reasons of their
building of it were, lest their Land should be thought unclean, v. 19. and lest
the children of Israel should say to their children, Ye have no part in the
Lord. For which cause the children of Israel gathered themselves at Shiloh to
make war against them, chapter 22. 12. but they first sent Commissioners to treat
with them, chapter 22. 13. Phinees the son of Eleazar the Priest, and ten others
with him, who argued them out of their separation; and desisted not until the
Reubenites declared, That it was not intended as an Altar for sacrifice
distinct from that at Shiloh, but only as a memorial that the Lord was their
God: and therefore they called the name of it Ed, i. e. a Witness of Gods
wonderful works and mercies to them.

You see here what apprehensions the people of God had of the great sin and
mischief of separation. They accounted it first a Rebellion against God: for,
God being one, ought to have a uniform Worship: Multiplicity of forms in Gods
public Worship, would bring a contempt of all; and from many, the people would
relapse to none. Of which both Israel and England have had sad experience. And
this separation from the true, and toleration of false Worship, brought the
Israelites to downright Idolatry, against which Joshua so earnestly exhorted
the Israelites in the four last Chapters.

Secondly, Different Modes in Religious Worship, breed differences in
affection; and separation from the established Communion in the Church, is
followed with Sedition in the State, against the Governors by whom that
Worship is established: and therefore the Children of Israel declared, that the
setting up of another Altar by the Reubenites, was not only rebellion against
the Lord, but against them, v. 19. and a likely means to perpetuate division
and discord between their succeeding Generations: for their children would say
to one another, Ye have no part in the Lord. And by this Religious care for the
uniform Worship of God, God magnified Joshua in the sight of all the people.

But besides these Stirs on the other side of the Water, Joshua was perplexed
with the Strivings and Divisions of his People at home, who being mingled with
the heathen, learned their ways, and forsook the Worship of God at Shiloh.
There were some Princes of the Congregation who were surprised by the wiles and
fair pretenses of the Gibeonites, to enter into a Covenant with them, chapter 9. v.
18. for they had sent their Elders who pretended they came from far, their
Garments were old, their Bread moldy, and every thing about them smelt like a
Good Old Cause. They made Lies their refuge: for they came in zeal (as they
pretended) for the Name of the Lord God of Israel, v. 9. and v. 8. we are your
Majesty's Loyal Servants. But these men were still as great strangers to the
God of Israel, as great enemies to his people, as any of the Amorites or
Jebusites: and though they pretended to have come from far, yet upon enquiry it
was found that they were not three days journey distant from them; their place
and original discovered them to be Canaanites, and their Elders to be new
Impostors, who having by their subtilty and importunity obtained a Toleration,
were intolerably troublesome to the Government. And therefore the Princes of
Israel are blamed for their fond credulity and indulgence to such a people: for
they took of their Victuals, and perhaps some Presents, and rashly comprehend
them in a League. But as the Text notes, They asked not counsel at the mouth of
the Lord, v. 14 But Gods Oracle plainly commanded that such Separatists should
be rooted out. The Hypocrisy of these Elders being known to Joshua, though he
granted them their lives, which were forfeited to the Sword, yet he denied them
their liberty of Conscience, v. 15. and made them hewers of wood and drawers of
water for the service of the Altar of God, v. 27.

Next to these Gibeonites, there were Jebusites also, that had gotten such
strong holds in the Land, that they could not be cast out until the days of
David: for they had such confidence in their Telesms, the Spells and
Conjurations which they had made, the blind and the lame Images which they set
up on the walls of Sion, that they told David peremptorily, Except he took them
away (which they thought he could never do) he could not come in, 2 Samuel 5.6,
7. As if those Idols had been so many Guardian-Angels to protect them, though
they could neither see, hear, or move.

All these Parties were (as Joshua told the people, chapter 23. 13.) snares and
traps unto them, scourges to their sides, and thorns in their eyes, until they
had utterly demolished and thrown down their Altars. But all these difficulties
notwithstanding, God had begun and still went on to magnisie Joshua in the
sight of all the people: for God having given rest unto Joshua after many
victories and deliverances, he appoints a solemn Thanksgiving. And having built
an Altar to the Lord God of Israel, chapter 8. 30. he assembles all Israel, their
Elders and Officers, their Judges, with their women, little ones, and
strangers, and read unto them all the words of the Law, v. 34. the Blessings
that should be granted them on their obedience, and the Curses that would befall
them on their disobedience; together with those Forms of Thanksgiving: All
which Moses had written, and caused to be recorded as in a public Liturgy for
the use of the succeeding Generations, Deuteronomy. 31.27, etc. and they blessed God,
singing the Song of Moses, and sacrificing Peace Offerings with the Forms
prescribed by Moses: for there was not a word of all that Moses commanded,
which Joshua read not before all the Congregation of Israel, v. 35.

And particularly, Joshua's next care was to revive those two great Ordinances
of the Lord, Circumcision, and the Passover; the one being the Seal of the
Covenant which he made with Abraham, to be his God and the God of his seed, and
to own them for his people; the other as a Memorial of his wonderful
deliverances of them from their bondage under Pharaoh in Egypt. To which our
Sacraments of Baptism and the Holy Eucharist do succeed. These, by the long
omission and neglect of them while they were in the Wilderness, were fallen
into contempt: but by Gods special command to Joshua, were to be renewed, chapter
5. 2. And none of those that observed not these Ordinances were to have any
inheritance in the Land; as neither we, unless we duly partake of the
Sacraments of our Jesus, shall be admitted into Heaven, whereof Canaan was a
Type. When these Ordinances were duly administered, God appeared to Joshua, v.
9. and said, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt; and then also
God sent his Angel to go before them as Captains of the Host of the Lord, v.
14. to fight their Battles.

And to complete the magnificence of Joshua, he appoints Cities of refuge for
those who had been ignorantly and unawares betrayed to kill their brethren,
that they fell not by the revenging Sword, but might live quietly among their
Brethren.

Thus the Lord continued to magnify Joshua, casting out before him many
Nations greater and mightier than he; crowning him with Victories, Peace, and
Plenty; and having served God fully, and governed his people faithfully, being
an hundred and ten years old, he was gathered to his Fathers; having settled the
People, and established the true Worship of God in the Land of Canaan: And gave
the Israelites a land for which they did not labor, and cities which they
built not, vineyards and oliveyards which they planted not, Josh. 24.13. Thus
did God perfect that great work by which he begun this day to magnify Joshua
in the sight of all the People.

And now I doubt not but you will give me leave to lead you through this
Triumphant Arch, and by way of Application show you on the Reverse, the
Memorials of those wonderful works whereby God has begun to magnify our
Joshua in the sight of all his people. And that we may begin at the foundation
of this Fabric, let us first consider to what a low ebb the affairs of our
Joshua were reduced, and how the wrath and rage of his enemies overflowed all
bounds when he came to the brink of this Jordan.

After the never-enough-lamented death of the Royal Martyr, his Royal Majesty
had a great part of a howling Wilderness to pass through: he was hunted from
Mountain to Mountain, and from one Kingdom to another people; destitute of all
comforts, and forsaken of all but his God only; and in him, as David in the
like condition at Ziglag, he encouraged himself. For as long as he retained the
Ark of God, and resolved with Joshua, though all Israel should corrupt
themselves, yet he and his house would serve the Lord, he could not doubt but
God would restore him, and bless him, as he did Obed-edom and all his house:
the same promise being applied to all true Israelites which was made to Joshua,
Heb. 13.5. I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.

And indeed, there was no visible power sufficient to preserve and restore him,
like to that of his care for the Ark of God, the true Religion, and solemn
Worship which had been banished with him: He had not Treasure from the Pope,
and Conduct from the Emperor, the Courage and Constancy of some within the
walls, the united Strength and Counsels of others in the Field: he did not
trust in his Sword or Bow, in Chariots or Horsemen; all these were rather
combined against him: The Christianissimus was an enemy to him abroad, as well
as the Antichristianissimus at home; but he was still Defender of that Faith
which God promised to defend against all the gates of Hell: None except old
Caleb, whom God supported against otherwise-insupportable difficulties,
appeared for him. And God alone it was who sent such a Spirit of Giddiness and
Division among his enemies, and so exhausted and dried up their spirits and
courage, that the dividing the waters of Jordan, and drying up those mighty
streams, was not more wonderful. The Prophet David accounts it an argument of
greater power, to restrain the madness of the people, than the raging of the
Sea, Psalm. 65. And all this was done, at the approach of the Ark of God, by his
Majesty's gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs; which so
bowed the hearts of his people as the heart of one man, that they sent back
this Loyal Invitation, Return thou and all thy household.

I do not plead for Miracles as a ground of Faith and Obedience now; I leave
that to the Church of Rome, which if ever it wrought a true Miracle in these
later Ages, it is this, That they should so captivate the understandings of so
many, and some otherwise-wise men, as to make them believe their false ones,
after so many Impostures have been discovered.

When the Israelites were settled in Canaan, and did eat of the Corn growing in
the Country, the miraculous Manna ceased, Josh. 5.12. And we who live in a
Country where the Bread of Life is so plentifully dispensed unto us, which was
confirmed by so many undoubted Miracles, may not expect any new Miracles or
Revelations: we have a more sure word of prophecy, (2 Pet. 1.19.) whereon to
ground our Faith, and direct our Obedience: And if we believe not the Doctrines
and Promises of Christ and his Apostles, neither will we believe if one arose
from the dead, Luke 16.31.

Yet as God shows equal wisdom, power, and goodness, in upholding the Earth,
and in his daily governing of and providing for all his Creatures, as in the
first creation: so he does still manifest as much of his infinite wisdom,
power, and goodness, in overruling the perverse wills and contrary
dispositions of men, bringing Good out of Evil, and Peace and Order out of all
the Confusions which are intended and acted by them, as in any miraculous work.
And if any thing in this late Age comes near to the nature of a Miracle, that
Series and Succession of unparalled Wonders for twenty years together granted
to our King, may be so called.

If therefore it were a Wonder in Nature to see Jor and Dan forsake their
course and stand on an heap while Joshua passed over, it was no less to see
multitudes and streams of people in an about Thames and Isis forsake their
wonted Channel, and Amnisque cucurrit qua non pronus erat.
flow back to their Head and Fountain, from whom they had ran so long over so
many Precipices. To see those great men that thought themselves as immovable as
the Mountains, skipping like Rams, and the little hills like young sheep, at
the presence of Joshua and the Ark of God, Psalm. 114.4. To see that Prince who
had been so long and often near to be shipwrack'd on dry land, to be owned and
guarded as Sovereign Lord and Commander of the Seas; and those Ships which as
so many Tigers and Vultures roved up and down to make him a Prey, as so many
Doves flying to him as to their Ark, with Olive-branches in their mouths, to
assure him that the Deluge was over, was very strange: but much more wonderful
it was, that those slouds of people that had lift up their voice, threatening
present death at his first approach, and that if he passed the Seas he should
wade through a Sea of Blood; should in an instant of time change their note,
and welcome him, as with the voice of many waters, clapping their hands,
shouting for joy, and crying, Hallelujah; so as nothing else could be heard but
God save the King: This is the lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes:
This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice in it. For
from this day did God begin to magnify our Joshua in the sight of all his
people.

And now our Joshua stands on his own terra firma, and might truly say as
Caesar did, Veni, vidi, vici; wherever he came, and whatsoever he saw, he
overcame: for with no other preparation than that of the joyful sound of
Trumpets, he approached the Royal City, the Fortress and Metropolis of the
Nation; or rather, the great City came forth to meet him. That City which had
sent forth many Messages after him with a Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not
have this man to reign over us; and had spent vast Treasures, and hazarded the
lives and souls of many thousands to take away his life, now cast themselves at
his feet, imploring his Pardon, offering their Lives and Estates in defense of
his; and set open their hearts wider than their gates to entertain him. And
those who with Shimei had cursed their King most bitterly, were some of the
first that came with Acclamations to welcome him home. The Example of this City
(as it usually had done) influenced all the lesser Cities, which like those of
Canaan, spued out those independent Arbitrary Tyrants that held them in
subjection, to make room for his peaceable Officers, who under God restored
their Judges as at the first, and their Counselors as at the beginning.

And now (his Majesty's own house being not yet settled) he makes it his first
care to fix the Ark of God among us, restoring the Priests and Levites to their
Offices and Inheritance; and to recover the Spoils of the Church and
consecrated things from those sacrilegious Achans that had purloined them, and
hid them in their own Tents. And though he destroyed not the sacrilegious
persons, yet he has wellnigh destroyed Sacrilege it self. And this is another
act whereby God magnified our Joshua: for, by giving unto God the things that
are Gods, God has given unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

The next memorable act engraven on our side of this Royal Arch, is the
banishing of those false Prophets, and depriving them of those wages of
Iniquity which were given them as a reward for cursing the King, and deceiving
the People; among whom there being none like to our English Balaam, the very
Blunderbuss of that Age, that had less Religion and as little Reason as the Ass
he rode on, was deservedly executed by the Sword of Justice.

With these there fell in a great measure those several Sects, Parties, and
Factions of Jebusites and Madianites, Hittites, and Perisites which they had
raised, who though they were irreconcilably divided from each other, yet they
unanimously conspired against the Israel of God. Only it will stand recorded
as a defect not so much in the Government of Joshua, as on the inconstancy and
importunity of some of the Elders and Princes of the Congregation, that the
Land was not wholly cleansed from them in his days; but by their wiles and
subtilties, their clothing of new Errors in the habit of old Traditions, and
their decking of old Errors and Heresies in new forms of Godliness, they
extorted an Indulgence and Toleration, to the insnaring of such as were
unstable, and the grieving of those that were steadfast; to whom they were as so
many Briers and Thorns, to vex and disquiet them. The Acts of Oblivion and all
Indulgences, under which, as in the Cities of refuge, even bloud-guilty men
might have lived securely, have been so far from suppressing their enmity, and
causing them to live peaceably with their Brethren, that they have rather taken
encouragement from them, as to turn the grace of God into wantonness, so to
return the Kings Clemency into new Affronts and Confederacies against him.

But these mischiefs notwithstanding, those two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Supper of our Lord, by which we have an entrance into, and an inheritance in
the Kingdom of Heaven assigned to us, are duly administered to all that will
rightly receive them. And as by the Law of Moses, the uncircumcised and such as
partook not of the Paschal Lamb, had no inheritance among their Brethren in the
Kingdom of Israel; so we are taught that they can have no inheritance in the
Kingdom of Heaven, who will have no Communion with the Church of God in the use
of these Sacraments.

There was a time when the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and the violent
took it by force; but now, when the Kingdom of Heaven seems to offer violence,
and to take us into it by force; though our Jesus has by his own blood
provided for us a Laver of Regeneration, and in great love prepared a Feast of
fat things, even his own flesh and blood, to preserve our Bodies and Souls to
eternal life; the Doctrine of Resistance to the Commands and Institutions of
the King of Heaven, is as boldly put in practice, as that of resisting the
Supreme Power on Earth is preached in our Conventicles. For what a scandal and
contradiction is it, that they should pass for true Protestants among us, that
were never Christians! and boast themselves the chiefest Ministers of Christ
the Head, that cut themselves off from all Communion with the Body of Christ
his Church, and make their Children pass through the fire to Moloch, rather
than through the Baptismal water to Christ! That would rather confederate in a
Covenant for Blood with some Sons of Belial, than partake of the Blood of that
Covenant of Peace which the Son of God invites us to! Certainly the Blood both
of their King and of their Savior, must seem very vile to those that can thus
trample them under their feet. And notwithstanding the Cry of Persecution, I
think it our bounden duty, and an act of Christian Charity, to practice our
Saviors Prescript upon these distracted people, and compel them to come in to
his House, and to his great Supper; that, as St. John Baptist says, they may be
preserved from the wrath to come, Mat. 3.7. for otherwise God can as well raise
up Children to Abraham out of those stones (as St. John says, pointing, as some
learned men think, at those very stones which Joshua set up in the midst of
Jordan) as make them Children of his Kingdom, which nothing can do but a
Miracle of Mercy; whereof they can have little hope, that despise the easy and
ordinary means of their Salvation.

And now, to convince these men, behold another Wonder, That notwithstanding
all these impotent Commotions, those two great Luminaries and Ordinances of
Heaven, the light of the Gospel, and the comfortable influences of Government,
do stand still over our Land, as the Sun did over Gibeon, and the Moon in the
Valley of Ajalon: neither the blustering of the Northern Winds, nor the
interposition of infernal Mists consisting of gross darkness and new lights
together, have been able to hinder the dispensation of those heavenly
blessings, to the comfort of all humble and faithful Souls, and as well to the
admiration as to the regret and confusion of our enemies. And may they ever so
stand, till all the enemies of the established Religion and Government be so
destroyed, that there be not one of them left. And now I dare for once to
appeal to the people, as Joshua did, chapter 23. 14. Ye know in all your hearts,
and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things
which the Lord our God promised to his Church in these later days. The Sun of
Righteousness was promised ( Malachy 4.2.) to arise, with healing in his wings:
and it was foretold, Isai. 49.23. that God would send Kings to be nursing
fathers to his Church; and nothing has failed of all the good things which the
Lord our God promised us: he has in a good measure healed our Divisions,
removed our Prejudices and Enmities, and established the Uniformity of his
Worship among us, and rolled away the Reproach that lay upon us.

But if with Jessurun we shall grow wanton, and kick against God, and bite and
devour one another, he has threatened to bring upon us all the evil that is
written in his Law, till he have destroyed us from off the good land which he
has given us, Josh. 23.15. He can (as he has done once already) turn the Sun,
i. e. the Gospel, into darkness; and the Moon, i. e. our Government, into
blood: he can remove the Ark of his presence and Worship, and roll back the
reproach of Egypt upon us, and write Ichabod upon the whole Land.

Wherefore, as we have heard and seen the great works of God for the magnifying
of our King; so let us consider the duties which we owe to God and the King,
that we may rightly celebrate the joyful Solemnity of this day. And first, let
us sing our Te Deum; let us ascribe unto the Lord the praises due unto his Name
for all those Acts of Grace whereby he has magnified the King: for with his
own right hand, and with his holy arm, has he gotten himself the victory; and
therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the honor and
glory of all those great things which thou have done for our King, and for us
whom thou have committed to his charge. It is he that gives victory unto
Kings, and has delivered David his servant from the peril of the sword: Let us
therefore that are all partakers of his mercies, join together in singing our
Magnificat with one heart and one mouth; My soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: for he has regarded the low estate of
his servants; he that is mighty has magnified us, and holy is his Name: He
has showed strength with his arm, and has scattered the proud in the
imaginations of their hearts: he has put down the mighty from their seat, and
has exalted the humble and meek: he has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he has sent empty away. He remembering his mercy, has helped his
servant Israel, as he promised to our forefathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

Secondly, Let us beware how we do so much as in our thoughts despise or
undervalue, much less seek to cast him down whom God has so wonderfully
exalted. It is hard fighting against God; and our murmurings against so good a
Governor, are not against him only, but against the Lord. Haman being asked
what should be done to the man whom the King delighted to honor, Hest. 6.6.
answered, Let the royal apparel be brought which the King uses to wear, and
the horse which the King rides upon, and the Crown royal be set upon his head.
But what shall be done to the King whom God delights to honor! that King
whom God prevented with blessings of goodness, and gave him his hearts desire;
that King on whose head he has set a Crown of pure Gold, and crowned that
Crown with inestimable mercies and loving kindnesses; that King that trusts
in the Lord, that has been born upon Eagles wings, and fixed on the Rock that
is higher than himself; against whom though the people did rage, and their
Rulers took counsel together, yet with a Non Obstante he has set his King upon
his holy hill of Sion: He has laughed his enemies to scorn, and vexed them in
his sore displeasure: What shall be done to such a King! What? why there are
some (who are of a far worse mind than Haman was) that would deal with him as
the Jews did with Christ their King; they have platted a Crown of Thorns, and
would set it on his head, and put a Reed in his hands instead of the Royal
Scepter; and instead of the Royal Robe, clothe him with Curses, railings, and
mockings, as with a Garment, and nail him to the Cross, and pierce his royal
sides with their Tongues, sharper than swords or spears; that thirst for his
heart-bloud, and cry as they did, His blood be upon us and our children: not
considering how heavy such Royal Blood has lain on them and their children
already, and still cries aloud for more vengeance; which would certainly fall
on them, did not the blood of Christ speak better things than the blood of Abel.

I know it is a hard thing to persuade some men that there has been a Plot and
Confederacy to take away the life of the King: and it is the interest of some
infidels not to believe it till they see it executed, as in the case of the
Royal Martyr. And to others that have Christian and charitable principles, it
is so great a wonder that there should be any such Ruffians and Desperado's
among us, that should seek to take away his life in whom all their lives are
bound up, that it is no wonder if they could not believe it. But their own
tongues have testified it against them, and made them to fall; and the hand of
God has so fully discovered and defeated them, that all the world (except
those whom the God of this world has blinded) do see it, and are ashamed. And
all these endeavors to destroy the King, God has in great mercy converted to
the magnifying of him.

When Joshua had passed over Jordan, the use of that Miracle was to endear him
to the people, and to assure the people that the living God was with him, Josh.
3.10. and that all the people of the earth might see, the mighty hand of God,
chapter 4. 24. But though the mighty hand of the living God has lifted up the
King; though God appeared unto him not once or twice, as unto Solomon, giving
him great wisdom, and lasting prosperity: yet, as Isaiah complains, chapter 26. 11.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, how wonderfully God has
ordained peace for us, and wrought all our works in us: But they shall see, and
be ashamed of their envy to the people.

We have seen all the things that God did for Joshua, but we have not yet seen
all the great things that God will do for our King. How God has begun to
magnify him we have seen, by many signs and wonders: He honored him with a
sign in the Heavens, a Star appearing at noon when he was baptized: He
honored him with many wonderful deliverances at home and abroad when he was in
his low condition: He honored him with many Graces, preserving him in the true
Faith and fear of his Name, against the manifold temptations to which he was
exposed in his banishment: He honored him with many special endowments that
qualified him for Government, above all his neighboring Princes: He honored
him by turning the hearts and affections of his People, which had been long
alienated from him: He honored him by the wonderful restoration of him to his
Fathers Throne without the least opposition: He honored him by discovering and
defeating the many secret Conspiracies of implacable and bloodthirsty men; and
doubtless as he has defeated these which are discovered, so he has many more
which are not yet discovered: He has honored him, by making him beloved at
home, and feared abroad, and putting the Balance of Christendom into his hands:
He has honored him by giving us, for more than twenty years together, the
blessings of Peace and Plenty, when the Nations round about us wallow in Blood
and Confusion; yea, Mercy and Truth are met together, and Righteousness and
Peace do kiss each other: He has honored him with the Gift of Healing that
loathsome Disease of the Kings Evil, which otherwise would have destroyed the
bodies of many thousands of his Subjects, and in a good measure healing by a
touch of his righteous and merciful government, the Souls of many more of the
like Evils in their hearts, which might have destroyed Souls and Bodies
eternally.

And it does not yet appear how much farther God will go on to perfect that
great work by which he has begun to magnify him: but what has been already
done may serve to raise the confidence of all his Subjects in their Loyalty
toward him, and to strike a terror into the hearts of all that hate him; and
are otherwise to mind them of the dishonorable end of Haman, that would not
honor him whom the God of Heaven has delighted to honor.

Joshua himself was never so magnified as our King has been. Miracles were
common in his days; he and his people did eat, and drink, and were clothed by
Miracles: but such Wonders as we have seen, cannot be paralleled in any Age for
a thousand years together. They were so many, and done in such an extraordinary
and unexpected manner, by the immediate hand of God, that all that see it will
say, This has God done: for they may perceive that it is his work. Joshua had
a particular promise, and immediate assistances from God; our King only a
general promise and providence to depend upon: Only he was very courageous, to
believe and to do all that God required of him; and many a time against hope he
hoped in him, and was helped. Joshua was to take the land of other Nations into
possession; our King regained his own Inheritance. Joshua conquered by the
Sword, and ruled with a Rod of iron; Charles, by the Grace of God. Joshua shed
much blood; King Charles dried that bloody Issue which had so long defiled and
exhausted the Nation.

Let not our Adversaries boast any more of their Successes as arguments that
God owned their Good old Cause; which was conceived by Perjury and Hypocrisy,
and nourished with Blood and Cruelty, Rapine and Sacrilege, for many years;
but was destroyed by the hand of God in one day, this Joyful day which we now
celebrate. And now I see nothing wanting but quiet and peaceable hearts,
Thankfulness, and Obedience to the Law of God and the King, to make us a happy
people: Only the guilt and just fears of some men, haunt and provoke them
still to act over all those Tragical Scenes which for almost twenty years
together made the three Nations so many Stages of Blood and Confusion.

As for us, let us now added to our Praises for the Mercies past, and for the
perpetuating of the Joys of this day, our hearty Prayers to God, that as he
has already equalled the Blessings and Successes of our King, to those of
Joshua; so he would renew them to him every day; that he may arrive to the age
of Joshua; and his care to magnify God, and establish his Worship, and
perpetuate it to succeeding Generations, may increase with his years; and that
in his own due time God would exchange the Crown and Glories which he enjoys
here, for those which are prepared and reserved for him in Heaven hereafter.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately published by the same AUTHOR.
THe Unreasonableness of Separation: the Second Part. Or, a further Impartial
Account of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the
Communion of the Church of England. Begun by Edw. Stillingfleet D.D. Dean of
St. Paul's. Continued from 1640. to 1681. With special Remarks on the Life and
Actions of Mr. Richard Baxter.

No Protestant, but the Dissenters Plot Discovered and Defeated: Being an
Answer to the late Writings of several Eminent Dissenters. Wherein their
Designs against the Established Church of England, and the unreasonableness of
Separation are more fully manifested.

Both printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan
and Bible without Temple Bar.

A Vindication of the Primitive Christians, in point of Obedience to their
Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book entitled The Life of Julian, written
by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also the Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared, in
defense of Dr. Hicks. Together with an Appendix: being a more full and distinct
Answer to Mr. Tho. Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is added the
Life of Julian enlarged.

Printed by J.C. and Freeman Collins, and sold by Robert Kettlewell, at the
Hand and Scepter over against St. Dunstan's Church.

King David's Danger and Deliverance: or, the Conspiracy of Absolon and
Achitophel defeated. In a Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Exon, on
the Ninth of September, 1683. Being the day of Thanksgiving appointed for the
Discovery of the Late Fanatical Plot.

Printed by J.C. and Freeman Collins, for Fincham Gardener at the White-horse
in Ludgate Street.

A Compendious History of all the Popish and Fanatical Plots and Conspiracies
against the Established Government in Church and State, in England, Scotland,
and Ireland: from the first year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, to this present
year 1684. With Seasonable Remarks.

Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar; and
Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street.


