TWO DISCOURSES Concerning the DIVINITY OF OUR SAVIOR.

Whereunto are added some Articles subscribed by all the French Divines in or
about London, in Opposition to the SOCINIANS. Translated out of French.

IMPRIMATUR,

March 22. 1692/3. Guil. Lancaster.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1693.

To His Grace, the Duke of Sconberg, Marquess of Harwich, Earl of Brantford,
Baron of Tays, Count of the Holy Empire, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's
Army, and Colonel of the First Regiment of the English Guards.
My Lord,
DID the Fate of Books depend upon the Quality of the Persons to whom they are
Dedicated, I should be very secure, that the two following Discourses would be
kindly received, because I have presumed to put 'em under the Protection of one
of the Greatest Persons that can be made choice of. It is very well known, My
Lord, that Your Illustrious Family has a long Succession of Ancestors, whose
Blood has been mixed with that of diverse Princes; and it is not long ago since
we lost the Duke your Father, in whose Air we saw all the Traces of so August a
Pedigree. He maintained the Glory of His Birth, by all the Merit necessary to
make a Hero. So prudent in his Conduct, that he never took a false Measure;
Indefatigably Vigilant, Valiant, and Courageous in Action; these Great
Qualities being joined to a Goodness, that made Access to him always easy; and
a Piety that gave Example to our whole Church, could not but render him the
Object of our Admiration. I know, My Lord, there is no need of looking farther
than Your own Grandeur, to find Matter for Your Praises: So the Liberty I have
taken to speak of the Duke Your Father, was only to gain an opportunity of
drawing Your Picture without offense to Your Modesty. I am not ignorant, that
how great soever my Patron may be; yet the Public, which judges of things as
they are in themselves, will not receive these Discourses more favorably upon
that account. But I have no farther design in the Choice, than to manifest the
Obligations I have to Your Grace for Your Bounty, in affording me the Honor of
Your Protection, and to assure You that I am with a profound respect,

My Lord, Your Graces Most Humble and Obedient Servant and Chaplain, C. G.
Lamothe.

To the READER.
I Doubt not but some People will think it strange, that I should venture to
Print any thing concerning the Divinity of our Savior, when such Excellent
Sermons have been lately Published upon the same Subject. This seems to be so
ill timed, that I find my self obliged to say something in justification of my
own Conduct. When I saw this Truth defended by the best Pens in the Church of
England, I thought it the Duty of the French Ministers, who are Refugees there,
to give some written proofs of the Constancy of their Faith in so important an
Article. And this Declaration of theirs cannot but carry some weight along with
it; whether we reflect upon their great number; or consider, that Religion was
the Cause why they were Banished from their own Country, It is indeed their
Duty, as far as in them lies, to Edify a Nation that has received them with a
Charity becoming the Primitive Ages of the Church; and some proofs of their
Constancy are likewise due to the Honor of their own Ministry. Several
Ill-designing People have endeavored to cast a Blemish upon them: Some have
done it in France, with a design to make their Flocks, which now are gone
astray, conceive an Aversion to their Ancient Pastors; and others have thought
by this means to gain Reputation to a Cause, which they themselves are too much
inclined to. When I saw that the French Ministers in the clearing themselves of
this Reproach, were content to instruct their Auditors in the True Faith by
their Sermons only, whose Effects could not reach the Nation in which they have
the Happiness to live; I thought it my Duty to go farther, and that I should
not do a thing ungrateful to the Public in Printing Two Discourses upon this
Subject; after having took Care that they should be Examined by my Brethren, to
the end it might appear, That the Doctrine I Teach, is that of our whole Body.

We whose Names are underwritten, being Appointed by the other French
Ministers in England, have Read these Two Discourses, and have found them
entirely Conformable to the Word of God, and the constant Doctrine of the
French Protestants. Satur, Minister of the Savoy. Graveral, Minister of the New
French Church.

The 8th. of March.
The First Discourse.
PHILIP. II. 6, 7. Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God: But made himfelf of no Reputation.


IT is a very Judicious Observation which some Divines have made upon the
Variety that appears throughout the whole Dispensation of the Gospel. They have
observed, that Glory and Meanness were so mixed in it, that it seemed as if
Providence had designed thereby to point out to us the two Natures of our Great
Redeemer.

From his very Conception we are entertained with the view of a God-Man; he was
formed in the Womb of the poor Virgin Mary; this speaks him Man: But the Holy
Ghost presides at his Conception; this shows him to be more than Man. His Birth
is proclaimed by Shepherds, but the Angels also bear a part in it. His Infancy
is persecuted by one King, but adored by three others. We find also, according
to Origen's Observation, that amongst the Presents which these Kings, or
Wisemen offered to the Child Jesus, there was Mirth for the Mortal Man, and
Incense for the Immortal God.

The whole Life of our Savior represents to us a like mixture: He undergoes a
Temptation of Forty Days, but he has Angels to minister unto him; he is
hungry, but he curses the Fig Tree; he falls asleep in the Ship, but he
commands the Storm to a Calm: He weeps for his Friend Lazarus, but calls him
out of his Grave to life; he dies, but Nature seems to feel the Pangs of Death
with him, and the Third Day he rises from the Dead. You see there runs a
continued Parallel between the Humiliation of Man, and the Majesty of God, in
most of the Circumstances of our Savior's Life, that we may be assured of the
Right which each of the two Natures has to our belief of it.

This Observation is still more evident, from the Opposition St. Paul purposely
makes between these two Natures, in several places. At the beginning of the
Epistle to the Romans, he speaks of the Gospel of God concerning his Son; here
is the Divinity of Jesus Christ: but then, Who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh; there is his Humanity. In the 9th Chapter of the same
Epistle he says, That Christ came of the Father, according to the Flesh; but
that he is over all, God blessed for ever. In the Epistle to the Galatians it
is said, that God sent his Son, made of a woman: Here we have the Son of God,
and the Son of a Woman; and in the Epistle to Timothy, God was manifest in the
Flesh. But there is no Passage where this Opposition is more distinctly set
forth, than that which we have made choice of, on a day set aside by the
Church, for a Memorial of our Savior's Humiliation; Who being in the Form of
God, says St. Paul, though it no Robbery to be equal with God: But made
himself of no reputation; or Emptied himself, as the word in the Original
signifies.

The design of these words was to oblige the Philippians to Humility and
Charity. There could be nothing of greater force to engage them to the practice
of these two Virtues, than the Example of Jesus Christ. They knew what passed
when our Savior washed his Disciple's Feet: Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye
say well, for so I am. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye
also ought to wash one another feet: For I have given you an example, that ye
should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is
not greater than his Lord, etc. This Principle being incontestably admitted by
the Philippians, St. Paul could not allege a more pressing Motive to establish
amongst them a Spirit of Humility and Charity, than was that of the Example of
our dear Lord, where both these Virtues appear with so much luster. Let
therefore, says the Apostle, this mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: yet he emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of men.

These words furnish us with two great Subjects for our Meditation, the Glory
of the Eternal Divinity of Jesus Christ, and his Emptying of himself in his
Incarnation.

In order to a thorough Explication of the words which concern the Divinity of
our Savior, we must first consider the Literal Sense, and then search as far
as the weakness of our Understanding will permit, into the Doctrine therein
contained. The Literal sense of these words presents us with three
Propositions: The First is, That Jesus Christ was, before that he was made man.
The Second, That he was in the form of God, before ever he was in the form of
man. The Third, That he thought it no robbery to be equal to his heavenly
Father. These are the Three Propositions St. Paul expresses here very clearly.

The First is, That Jesus Christ was, before that he became Man: Who, says St.
Paul, being, or as it is in the Original (...) in the form of God, did empty
himself, or was made man. That which is not, cannot abase it self, or become
Man. A Truth which is proved at the very Proposal of it.

It would be hard to guess wherein the Soundness of St. Paul's Reasoning did
consist, if Jesus Christ had not existed before he was born of the Virgin Mary.
This way of arguing can have no Foundation but this; That Christ passed from
one Condition to another; from a State of Glory, to a State of Abasement, and
in so doing has set an Example, wherein a mixture of Humility and Charity
invite, or rather force Christians to an Imitation. A Doctrine truly worthy of
St. Paul. But what sense shall we make of it, if it be not true that our
Savior before his Birth of the Blessed Virgin, was not in a more Glorious
State than was that which he entered upon by his Nativity? Should we allow our
selves to suppose, that Jesus Christ began to exist by his Conception in the
Womb of the Blessed Virgin? could we in this case be able to say, That he
humble himself to that degree, as to be willing to be born after the manner of
Men? Humility consists in stepping down lower. Now that which is not, cannot
descend, nor consequently humble it self. He was therefore, before that he
emptied himself by his Temporal Nativity.

This is a Truth so clearly asserted in Scripture, that the opposite Error
cannot be entertained by any, but those who either openly or secretly reject
the Authority of that Divine Book. I will not go about to quote all the
Passages we find there, to prove the Pre-existence of our Blessed Savior; the
number of them is so great, that it would take up too much of our time.
Nevertheless, for confirmation of the Proposition we are about, we shall put
you in mind, that Jesus Christ himself declares, that he was come down from
Heaven, and that he was in Heaven before ever he ascended thither. This
Pre-existence will appear very evidently, by a Set of gradual Proofs drawn from
the Scriptures concerning it.

Our Blessed Savior was before John the Baptist, tho he, as his Forerunner,
was born before him. Hear we the Deposition of this Illustrious Witness; John
1.30.
This is he of whom I said, After me comes a man who is preferred before me,
for he was before me.

Nay, what is more, our Savior was in Moses his time, who was so many Ages
before John the Baptist; for is it not said, That the Isralites, contemporary
with that great Law giver, did tempt Christ? Neither let us tempt Christ, says
our Apostle, as some of them also tempted, 1 Cor. 10.9, 10.
and were destroyed of Serpents. When Moses refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and forsook the Court of Egypt to follow the Divine Call,
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews informs us, Heb. 11.26.
that in so doing, he preferred the reproach of Christ before the treasures of
Egypt.

Let us go further still, and we shall find, that our Blessed Lord was before
Abraham; John 8.58.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. This was a very
emphatical Testimony to the Jews, who looked upon this Patriarch as the first
Stock of their Nation.

Let us go back as far as Noah, and we shall find, that our Savior was at that
time also, according to the Testimony of St. Peter; who tells us, That Jesus
Christ preached to the spirits that were disobedient in the time of Noah: ^
Pet. 3.19.
So long since, Jesus Christ took care of Sinners.

Neither must we stop here; for if we look back to the beginning of the World,
John 1.1. Col. 1.17.
we shall find our Savior assisting there. In the beginning was the word. He
is before all things.

Indeed, how could it be otherwise, but that he must have been at the beginning
of the world, since the world ows its Creation to him? Without him was not any
thing made, that was made. I was brought forth when yet there were no depths,
John 1.3 Prove. 8.24, 25:
nor fountains abounding with water. Before the Mountains were settled, before
the hills, was I brought forth. As the Wise King introduces our Savior
speaking in the 8th Chapter of the Proverbs.

Neither must we conclude from all these Expressions, that the Existence of our
Savior did only precede the Creation of the World for a little time: for to be
before the World, before the settling of the Mountains; to be in the Beginning,
to be the Alpha of all things, are Expressions the Scripture makes use of to
signify Eternity.

The Ground of this manner of speaking is very solid; for the Holy Spirit in
his Applications to men, makes use of such Expressions as they understand. Now
when the Question is about time, it is necessary that they who would be
understood, should represent to our Imagination some created Object, to measure
its Duration by. Our Imagination cannot frame any thing to it self before the
Creation of the World: Whatsoever is beyond, that is a duration that swallows
up and confounds our Apprehension. Eternity is an Abyss to our Finite Capacity:
Wherefore the Holy Ghost being willing to represent to our Minds the Duration
of that which is without beginning, contents himself simply to declare, That it
was before the beginning of the World. It is not in favor of the Eternity of
our Blessed Savior that we speak thus, because we know that the Eternity of
the Divine Nature has in some sort been limited by a like Phrase. Does not the
Psalmist express himself thus; Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever
thou had formed the earth, and the world, even from everlasting, to
everlasting, Psalm. 19.2.
thou art God. To take the Sense of the Scriptures, let us say, That our
Blessed Savior has ever been. This is the First Proposition; Our Savior was,
before he was man.

The Second Proposition is; That our Savior was in the Form of God, before
ever he was in the Form of a Servant; before that he was Man, he was in the
Form of God. It was not therefore by his miraculous Conception; it was not by
the power he had to do Miracles; it was not by his Glorious Resurrection; it
was not by his Elevation to that Supereminent Dignity he possesses in the
Church, that he was made the Son of God, as the Enemies of his Glory would
persuade us: No, he was God before that any of these things came to pass; he
was in the Form of God before ever he stooped to take upon him the Form of a
Man. You speak to us of a Glory, whereof the Humanity of our Blessed Lord was,
as it were, the Foundation and Rise: whereas St. Paul here entertains us with
the Glory he was possessed of before his becoming Man: he was like to God
before ever he was made like to Men. Let us keep close to the Phrase of the
Apostle; Who being in the form of God, emptied himself.

This Second Propostion supports and confirms the Frst, evidently proving, that
our Lord was, before his being Man; yea, and that he was from all Eternity; for
without this he could not have been in the Form of God. That which is born in
time, bears no Resemblance with that which is Eternal; Finite and Infinite are
opposite to one another. If Jesus Christ had began to be from his Conception in
the Womb of the Blessed Virgin: let us go farther; if his Beginning had only
been contemporary with that of the World, it could not have been said of him,
That he was in the Form of God; his Duration, at the most, would but have been
of Six Thousand Years; and what is that to all Eternity? A Point bears more
proportion to the Universe, and one Drop of Water to the Ocean. Was there a
Being that had existed a Million of Years before the World, that Being would
still be at an infinite distance from Eternity; neither should we be able to
say, though we should suppose nothing to be wanting in it but Time, that it was
like the Deity. In a word, had not our Savior been Eternal, he could not be
said to be in the likeness of him that was confessedly so.

True it is, that we do not depart from the Style of the Scripture, when we
say, That Man, bounded and limited as he is, bears the Image of God; since God
himself expresses himself so at the Creation, Genesis 1.26:
Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness: and in the New Creation this
Image is new drawn in Righteousness and true Holiness. It cannot be denied but
that the Beams God communicates to man, do form a little Image of some of his
Attributes: but besides that, it was never said of any man, that he was in the
Form of God, before that he was man: St. Paul delivers himself in such a
manner, as makes it manifest, that the Divine Form he attributes to Jesus
Christ, was not an Image derived from the Original, as is that which God
communicates to men: We need only sum all the Apostle's Words together, if we
would fully comprehend his meaning: Who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God; but emptied himself, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

Blessed be God, we live in a time, wherein there is no need at all to prove
that our Savior was really Man. Though this Truth be unquestionable, yet St.
Paul makes no difficulty to assert, that Jesus Christ took upon him the Form of
a Servant, and that he was made in the likeness of men. At present we would not
give the hearing to men, who by some trifling Niceties should go about to renew
an old Error, and prove that our Lord only clothed himself with some
appearances of our Nature, because forsooth, our Apostle says, That he took
upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the Likeness of men; that is,
had a Human Resemblance only. But we are all convinced, that this Form, and
this Likeness, were upheld by the Reality of our Nature; that is to say, That
our Savior was truly man.

This is an excellent Commentary on the words of St. Paul: we enquire what his
meaning is, when he assures us, that Jesus Christ was in the Form of God. He
himself acquaints us what was his meaning, by saying of Jesus Christ, who was
true Man, That he took upon him the Form of a Servant, and the Likeness of Man.
Make we use therefore of the Key he affords us, and we shall find, that to be
in the Form of God, is to be really and truly God. The Opposition that is here
evidently intended, would by no means be just, if in the one part Figure only
was meant, and in the other Reality. Reality must be opposed to Reality: In the
latter Member of this Opposition, mention is made of the Reality of the Human
Nature of Jesus Christ; wherefore it is necessary, that in the former part the
Reality of the Divine Nature of our Savior should be intended too. Being in
the Form of God, he took upon him the Form of a Servant, and the Likeness of
Man. St. Paul does not say, Having taken upon him the Form of God, because our
Savior was invested with it from Eternity. This Expression does not comport
with an Eternal Divinity. But of the Human Nature he faith, That Jesus Christ
took it upon him, that being a thing which was done in Time; saving this only,
the Opposition is exact: Our Blessed Savior is as truly God, as he is Man.

The Word Form; in this place, includes the Nature whose Form it is. (...) is
the Term St. Paul uses here; whence is derived the Name of the
Anthroponorphites of old. They were so called, because they attributed a Human
Form to God. The Form, say we, not mere Appearances only. They believed that
God really had a Body, Eyes, Ears, Hands and Passions; and in a word, that he
was the Original of our Nature. So true it is that the Word Form does not
always imply mere Appearances: But that which must determine the Sgnification
of it, is, as we have already observed, the sense St. Paul put upon it in the
Sequel.

If you demand why he makes use of this word, instead of saying simply, Being
God; for would not this have been much more explicit, than to say, Being in
the Form of God? I might answer, that it would be an unjust piece of Criticism
to desire a precise knowledge, why a Sacred Author makes use of one word rather
than another. But without being reduced to this Answer, we have one more exact
to the Question. We can inform you why St. Paul says of Jesus Christ, That he
was in the Form of God, rather than that he was God.

1ly. Because indeed he was God by way of Image; he is the Image of the
Invisible God, says St. Paul; he is the Brightness of his Glory, the Express
Image of the Person of God his Father. The Father, as you see, possesses his
Godhead by way of Principle, Source, and Original; whereas the Son has his
Divinity by way of Emanation, Derivation, and by way of Image. He is a perfect
and a living Image of the Living God. Were it permitted me to express my self
in any other Language but that of the Scripture, I would say with Tertullian,
God of God, Light of Light; or with St. Gregory, Bishop of Neocaesarea,
surnamed Thaumaturgas, The true Son of a True Father; Invisible from the
Invisible; Incorruptible of the Incorruptible; Immortal of the Immortal;
Eternal of the Eternal. These Famous Doctors lived before the Nicene Council;
so that we cannot accuse these Expressions for being the Fruit of the Violence
or Superstition of the following Centuries. We have alleged these Fragments of
pure Antiquity, only to show by these, what kind of Image the Word of God is.
Now forasmuch as he is God in this manner, it was very proper and natural for
St. Paul to say, Who being in the form of God.

The Second Reason why the Apostle expresses himself thus, is, Because by the
Form of God, which he attributes to our Savior Jesus Christ, he insinuates
somewhat more than the mere Divine Nature; for this Word denotes the Majesty,
and if I may so speak, the Pomp and Glory of the Divine Nature.

We shall be convinced of this Truth, if we will make use of the Light which
the other Member of the opposition affords us. To be in the Form of a Servant,
and in the Likeness of Man, implies not only to be possessed of the Human
Nature, but to be clothed with those Infirmities which constitute the External
Form, as it were, thereof.

So that we see that St. Paul when he says that our Savior was in the Form of
God, he would thereby not only intimate to us that Christ was God, but that he
had the Appearance and the Majesty of a God; surrounded with Glory, worshipped
by the Angels, disposing of the Creatures; being in this state he was willing
to be made Man, and to expose himself to our Infirmities. The word Form made
use of in both the Members of the oppositions, serves only to make it the more
Express and Emphatical.

The third Proposition is, That Jesus Christ did not think is Robbery to be
equal with God. This Proposition has two parts; the first is, He did not think
it Robbery; that is, he did not judge it to be any Usurpation; and as we
conceive, that there is a Figure called Diminution, in these words, when God
says in the Third Commandment, that he will not hold him Guiltless, (instead
of saying, that he will hold him guilty in a high degree,) that takes his Name
in vain. In like manner we say, that St. Paul when he says that our Savior
did not think it Robbery, says in effect, that he looked upon it as a most just
thing to make himself equal with God. The second part of the Proposition is, To
make himself equal with God. Jesus Christ stands upon equal ground with his
Father; it is in the Original (...), things equal with God, which may be was
not expressed thus in the plural number without a particular design, even to
teach us that Jesus Christ is Essentially equal in all things with God: For
tho, to speak properly, there are no different things in God, and that his
Essence is most perfectly one, and simple; yet our way of conceiving of it does
multiply it. We commonly imagine that the Attributes of God are very different
things. St. Paul intending to teach us, that our Savior was perfectly equal
with God, says, that he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God; that is,
not only in Holiness in Power, in Goodness, in Glory, but in whatsoever else is
the Root and Bottom of the Divine Nature; Col. 2.9.
In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The plural number
therefore seems very Emphatical in this place. Join we now both these Members
of the Proposition together again: And then considering it thus whole and
entire, it imports thus much, That our Lord, who was fully acquainted with his
own Rights, made no difficulty to equalize himself with God; He thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God; which is the most Natural and Literal Explication
of the words of St. Paul.

On what occasion did our Savior thus express himself concerning the Glory of
his Divine Nature? Some very Orthodox Interpreters make St. Paul say, That
Jesus Christ would not have thought it Robbery to be equal with God; which
affords a meaning somewhat different from that of the ordinary Version, which
says, That Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Both these
meanings, the one as well as the other, suppose the Divinity of Jesus Christ.
But we see no necessity to depart from our Version; and so much the less,
because it changes nothing in the Original. The sense it offers us, and which
we have pursued, engages us to show on what occasion our Lord Jesus Christ
attributes to himself an Equality with God.

To reduce our selves to some compass, we will confine our Discourse to the one
half of a Chapter of the Gospel. In which little compass we shall meet with
sufficient Evidence of the Glory of Jesus Christ. The fifth Chapter of the
Gospel of St. John is that which we have pitched upon for this purpose. Where
at first it is manifest that the day of this Glory was a Solemn Feast amongst
the Jews, whom Devotion had brought together; our Savior takes this occasion
to have the more Witnesses of his Glory. In the following Verses mention is
made of an Angel, who troubling the Waters of the Pool of Bethesda, made it a
Sovereign Bath for the Curing of the first Sick Person that was cast into it. A
poor Wretch that had been Thirty eight Years troubled with the Palsy, had this
superadded to his Affliction, that he could not partake of the Blessing of this
Miracle, because when the Water was troubled, he having no Body to put him in,
another still stepped in before him. He whom the Angels worship, presents himself
to this poor Paralytick for his Comfort, and says to him, Rise, take up thy
bed, and walk. And immediately the Man was made whole, and took up his Bed and
walked. See here the voice of God, and not of Man. Our Savior speaks with
Authority, as being the Lord and Master of Nature; Rise, go out, hold thy
Peace, be thou healed, etc. He commanded the Winds, and the Sea, Devils,
Diseases, etc. The Ministers who received the Gift of Miracles from him, did
not express themselves with the same Authority; it does not belong to any one,
but him who is equal with God, to speak as God.

The Evangelist observes, that our Savior afterward met with this Person he
had healed, in the Temple, and said to him, Behold thou art made whole, sin no
more, lest a worse thing befall thee. This Man had obtained the health of his
Soul, the Remission of his Sins, as well as the Health of his Body; our Savior
commonly granting them both together. This gives us occasion to take notice
with what Authority he forgave Sins. On a certain time having seen another Man
sick of the Palsy, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Whereupon immediately the Scribes and Pharisees begin to reason with
themselves, saying, Who is this that speaks Blasphemy? Who is it that can
forgive Sins, but God alone? The Principle they went upon was good and sound;
none but God alone, to speak properly, can forgive Sin; for when Men absolve,
they do no more but simply declare that such Sins are pardoned; he must be
equal to God that pardons Sins Authoritatively and Principally. Our Lord
according to his Omniscience having discovered these Thoughts of the Scribes
and Pharisees, says unto them, Why do you reason in your hearts? for which is
easier to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or, rise up and walk? but that ye
may know that the Son of Man has authority upon earth to forgive sin; I say
unto thee, Rise, take up thy bed and walk. The Question was not, Whether our
Savior had the power of declaring, as the Ministers of the Gospel do, that
such and such Sins are pardoned. No, he is accused here of having Blasphemed,
and of having usurpt the Rights of God himself, that is to say, that he had
pronounced Absolution Magisterially and Independently. Do we find Jesus Christ
putting by this as a Calumny? Not in the least; he leaves the Jews in the
Opinion wherein they were, of his having spoke like God; and adds, that he had
right so to do: But that you may know that the Son of Man has power upon earth
to forgive sin, he says to the Man sick of the Palsy, what? not, thy Sins are
pardoned; but rise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house; to the end these
Zealots may know by this Miracle who I am. It was thus that the Sins of the Man
sick of the Palsy had been forgiven in the fifth Chapter of St. John.

This Man goes and publishes the Cure that was wrought upon him, amongst the
Jews, who were offended at it, because it had been done on the Sabbath Day.
What does our Lord to take off this Scandal? He answers, by making himself
equal with God, My Father works hitherto, and I work also; that is as much as
to say, There is no more Sabbath to me, than to my Father; the Law of Times and
Feasts does not reach us. The Jews enraged to hear this answer from our
Savior, sought to kill him, not only, says the Evangelist, because he had
broken the Sabbath, but said also, that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God. If it had not been so, our Lord would not have failed to detest
the Blasphemy: But instead of this, he proves that he had reason to make
himself equal with God, and carries this equality to the very highest pitch of
Glory: For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, says he,
even so the Son quickneth whom he will; that all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father; verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he
given to the Son to have life in himself. It Is impossible for any one to equal
himself more positively with God, than our Savior here does in these words:
They do not in the least stand in need of a Commentary to allow us to say with
St. Paul, That our Blessed Savior thought it no Robbery to be equal with God
his Father.

This Literal Sense we have hitherto explained, may be further illustrated by
several Oppositions. Can we make any question, but that St. Paul in proposing
this great Truth to the Philippians, had an Eye to the false Apotheosis of
Paganism. Amongst those gods that the World worshipped, there were some that
never had been, others that were no more; and a third sort that were yet in
being, but were nothing less than gods. The gods that never had been owed their
Original to Poesy and Fable: The gods that had been M^n, but were dead, had
been honored this way, either out of Thankfulness, or out of Policy; the gods
that were yet in being, but that were nothing less than gods, were Men yet
alive, to whom base Flattery erected Altars. All was full of Robbery, nothing
was seen but Sacrilege, and Usurpations of the Divinity. St. Paul in
opposition to all these False gods, says, that our Lord and Savior was in the
Form of God, before ever he was known by Men; they were not Men therefore that
put him in the Form of God. Their Divinities were made such by the Adoration
that was paid them by Men; which made Tertullian say, That to speak properly,
it was indeed Man that was propitious to God, because he could not become God,
till after it had pleased Man to declare him such. But the difference is
glorious on our Savior's side, he was God before that ever Men knew him, or
worshipped him; yea, even before Men were. Poetical Fiction, Reason of State,
Gratitude, Flattery, or Superstition, had no part here. From everlasting to
everlasting thou art God. The Men that were worshipped, whilst yet alive,
easily perceived that they were no gods; they were very sensible that the
Divine Honors rendered unto them, were no better than Robbery. But, says St.
Paul. Jesus Christ thought it no Robbery to be equal with God; in which words
there is a tacit opposition to that Subordination which Paganism had
established amongst their gods. They said, that Jupiter was the Master and Lord
Paramount of their gods, there being none on equal ground with him. St. Paul
here insinuates, that Jesus Christ is really greater than all the Pagan gods
were, even in the Conceit of those that were their Worshippers. He is equal to
God, to that Great God who is the Sovereign Master and Lord of the Universe.

Besides these oppositions which the Apostle had an eye to in the words we are
explaining, it seems probable, that he had a more particular regard to a matter
wherein the Philippians were more particularly concerned. They conceived it no
small part of their Glory, that their Country had produced Alexander the
Great. This Conqueror conceived it was both his Glory and Interest, to be
worshipped as a god. He would needs be thought the Son of Jupiter; and not
being content to have pillaged the Earth, was desirous to carry his Usurpations
to Heaven. He knew well enough that the Quality he Arrogated to himself of
being the Son of Jupiter, was a true piece of Robbery. The power of Truth
obliged this False god to say, during the pains he suffered by the Wound he had
received from an Arrow. That they would make him the Son of Jupiter, but that
he self well enough that he was but a Man. The Philippians were fully
acquainted with this Story; St. Paul knew it, and we may aver, that he thought
of it in presenting to the Philippians a Savior who was really and truly God,
the true Son of the true God; who being in the Form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. All these oppositions are of great use to
illustrate the Literal Sense we have explained.

It is time now to search into the Doctrine it contains, which we shall do by
considering it first in a Relative, and then in an Absolute Sense. In a
Relative Sense it will be to purpose to know the Characters, first of him who
is here spoken of; secondly of him who speaks; and thirdly of those to whom it
is spoken.

He concerning whom here is spoken, was on the one hand the Pattern of an
Absolute Humility, and on the other a great Zealot for the Glory of God. If we
have cast our Eyes never so little upon the Gospel, we shall find this to be a
Truth altogether incontestable. Our Lord Jesus himself has given us a great
and signal instance of the Humility which he recommends; he washes his
Disciples Feet, he suffers Injuries patiently, he flees Honors. On the other
hand, How nice and tender do we find him, in cases where his Father's Glory was
concerned? Does he perceive that the Laws of God are made to truckle to the
Traditions of Men? With what force do we see him exaggerate this Affront? If he
sees Men profane the House of God, by changing it to a Marketplace, he does
not think words sufficient to repress this Insolence, he makes a Whip of Cords
to lash these Profane Wretches out of the Temple. With this double Character,
which might be made out by many more passages of Scripture; at what a rate
think you would our Savior have delivered himself, if ever he had met with one
that made himself a god? This was a time wherein the Jews were not guilty of
gross Idolatry, and wherein Jerusalem had banished the Idols of other Nations:
so that our Lord had no occasion to declare against Idols; but had he met with
any, what would not he have said? Had he taken notice of any Man that arrogated
to himself Divine Honors, with what Zeal and Vehemence would he have
confounded the Pride of that Usurper? We know enough of the Spirit of our Lord
on other occasions, to justify what we suppose of him? What then ought we to
conclude from this, that he who was so Humble and so Zealous, yet made himself
equal with God? Nothing can be said here that is consistent with Reason, but to
confess, that he was really that, for which he would that Men should take him.
Had not he been God, and consequently equal to God his Father, he would have
been so far from affecting this Equality, that he would have abhorred the least
tendency that way. Instead of speaking Magisterially, he would always have
expressed himself in the most humble style imaginable, to disabuse the People,
who by the Fame of his Miracles would have been tempted to take him for a God.
But we find his Conduct quite opposite to this; he does not think it any
Robbery to be equal with God: But how can this be, if he be not God indeed?
What is become of his Humility? What of his Zeal? What of his Sincerity? These
three Virtues are the Sureties and Pledges for our Faith of the Godhead of
Jesus Christ.

Who is it that writes this? It Is St. Paul, that is to say in one word,
whatsoever can be conceived of Zeal against attributing the Divine Glory to a
Creature. This Apostle met with several occasions to make himself known under
this Character. He strongly declares himself against Idolatry in several
places. In the Acts of the Apostles we find what a Reception he gave to those
Divine Honors, which the Lycaonians would needs force upon him; he rents his
Clothes, runs in amongst them, Crying out, and saying, Acts 14.15.
Sirs, why do you these things? We are also men of like passions with you, and
preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God.
In the Seventeenth Chapter of the same Book we find that the Spirit of St. Paul
was stirred in him at the sight of the Idols they worshipped at Athens. Acts
17.16.
In the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, we find him thundering
against Idolaters, saying, that they changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, Rom 1.23, 25.
into an image made like to corruptible man, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. This is enough to give
us a taste of St. Paul's Spirit in this matter, and to show that he had the
greatest horror for Idolatry. Besides this, he made it always his business to
humble and abase the Creature, that thereby the greater Glory might redound to
the Creator, and to remove all those things that might in the least serve to
color the Religious Worship of the Creature. Yet for all this, he speaks
always most magnificently of Jesus Christ; he makes him equal with the
Sovereign God, who has created Heaven and Earth. What therefore can St. Paul's
Thoughts be in speaking thus? Must we not look upon him to be the most
imprudent of all Men, in making our Savior so great, in case he be not God? At
this rate we must not leave to our Apostle not so much as common Sense. We are
agreed that he abhors the Religious Worship of the Creature, and at the same
time own that he sets the Creature upon the Altar. This therefore engages us
to declare, either that St. Paul was a Madman, or that Jesus Christ was indeed
God blessed for ever. Neither will the Enemies of his Divinity be ever able to
justify the Apostle's Wisdom, by saying, that the Man whom he makes so great,
was not an ordinary Man: Let him be an Angel, let him be more than the Angels,
if he be a Creature, he is infinitely below God. Let us conceive a Creature as
glorious as it is possible for any Creature to be, there will still be an
infinite difference between it and the Creator. We cannot without the greatest
imprudence say of it, that it is equal to the Creator; it would be utterly
absurd to make a God of this Creature, however advanced or dignified. This is
the Honor put upon St. Paul, by those who affirm, that this Jesus, whose Glory
he exalts so extremely, was no more than a mere Creature.

And whom does this St. Paul speak to? To the Philippians, that is, to
Christians that had been either Jews or Heathens; how untowardly did our
Apostle go about to confirm them in their Vocation, if Jesus Christ had not
been God? He has to do with People who were apt enough to take offense at this
Truth. These Christians that before had been Jews, were persuaded from their
Infancy, that it was a Crime of the highest Nature for any man to make himself
equal with God. They had been Instructed, that for a like piece of Insolence
the chief of the Angels had lost himself, together with his whole Faction. This
was the very Creature that of all others was nearest to God, and yet because he
aspired to a greater nearness, he was cast headlong into the Bottomless Pit.
They knew that the First Man fell into disfavour with his Creator, for having
affected to be as God. They had been conversant in the Writing of the Prophets,
where they had been informed that God detests nothing more than Pride, which
made Man forget the meanness and lowness of his Nature. Amongst other passages,
they had not forgot the Description the Prophet Isaiah makes of the King of
Babylon; Isa. 14.12.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! etc. For thou
have said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God, etc. I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I
will be like the most high; yet shall thou be brought down to hell. The
Exhortations of the Prophets against Idolatry had made such an Impression on
the Spirit of the Jews at the time that St. Paul writ this Epistle, that there
was no Sin which they did more abhor and detest than this. We know what
happened when Pilate undertook to put some Shields into the Temple of
Jerusalem; they were sain to take them away from thence, because the People
were offended to see the Faces of the Roman Caesar's upon them. Herod also
having Erected Trophies in that Holy Place, could not appease the Tumult, but
by showing them, that no Human Figure was found in them. It is notorious also
what happened when Herod had the Boldness to place an Eagle over the Gate of
the Temple. History is full of the Effects of the Tenderness of the Jews with
respect to Idolatry at the Time of the Birth of Christianism. We must here
distinguish the Times; for it is certain, that in the time of the Prophets the
Jews, as by a Spirit of Contradiction, run mad after Idols: Neither did they
begin to be wise in this Point, till after the ceasing of the Prophets.

It is no less incontestable, that the most of the Christians of Philippi had
in their Education been made very sensible of any thing that approacht to the
Worship of the Creature. What therefore could be St. Paul's meaning in
proposing to them a Jesus, who makes himself equal with God, if indeed Jesus
had not been God? This was a Capital Error, and would have been the ready way
to make the Christians to return to the Synagogue whence they were come forth.
If we will but allow our Apostle to have had any tolerable remainder of Sense
and Understanding, we must own that the Fear of incensing them to the utmost,
would have made him suppress what he says of our Savior, if so be he had not
been God; if he had not really been that which the King of Babylon pretended to
be. We add this word, because it is very probable that St. Paul in our Text,
made an Allusion to this Description, wherein Isaiah represents a King, whom he
calls by way of derision, Star of the Morning; and who after having made
himself like to the most High, is sorely against his Will hurled down to the
Grave. It was a piece of manifest Robbery for this proud Monarch to take so
soaring a flight. I will show you, says St. Paul, who is the true
Morning Star, truly equal with God, and the very true God, and who
notwithstanding all these Transcendent Advantages, humbled and emptied himself,
and that voluntarily: It is no other than Jesus Christ, who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

Return we now to the second Order of Christians to whom St. Paul writes; these
were the Converted Heathens, who had renounced the multitude of their Gods.
They had been made ashamed of a Plurality, injurious to the Supreme Lord of the
Universe; and they had suffered themselves to be persuaded, that this God all
alone was possessed of the whole Glory of the Deity. Themselves are become the
Adversaries of the Religion they had forsaken; they are astonished to think how
formerly they could believe a plurality of gods; they deride the Error that
communicates the Divinity to many Beings, and those foolish Genealogies that
furnish Saturn and Jupiter with Children. Let somebody tell us now, what is
become of St. Paul's Wisdom, to speak to a People of this Temper, of a Son of
God, of a Jesus equal with God? Would not they have stopped his Mouth with some
such return as this? You plunge us into the same Errors, whence you your self
have so lately retrieved us. You have made us Christians by persuading us that
there is but One God; we have believed it; and now you come and violate this
inculcated Unity. I appeal to any Rational man, whether any thing less than the
invincible strength of Truth, could have allowed St. Paul to deliver any thing
like the Divinity of Jesus Christ? He formerly asserts it, though indeed if he
had only spoken of it in such a manner as to leave the matter in doubt, we must
own, that even this would have been a great Imprudence in St. Paul to advance
so far as this; forasmuch as by this means he would have ruined the work of his
Ministry. This is a convincing Argument to any one, never so little acquainted
with the great Prudence of St. Paul, how well he was persuaded of the Divinity
of Jesus Christ.

Consider we in the second place, Christ's humbling and emptying of himself:
But made himself of no reputation, as our English Translation renders, what in
the Original is, He emptied himself. I make no question but it has appeared
strange to some, that I have so long insisted on the Glory of our Savior on a
Day solemnized in memory of his Humiliation. But they will be satisfied, by
considering the Mystery they have heard explained; It is the Mystery by way of
Eminence; it is the Mystery that sets off all all other Mysteries; it is the
Mystery without which the Christian Religion would contain no Mystery at all:
For if we consider it independently from the Divinity of Jesus Christ, we shall
find our Religion to contain nothing that is Great or Sublime. The whole of it
will only amount to this, That a Teacher comes to instruct men by exact
Morality, and by a perfect example, with regard to those Virtues we ought to
practice in our lives; but against whom there are some things to be objected
with respect to those Virtues that are of use at the point of death. What a
mean Idea would they fain give us of Christ and his Religion? St. Paul in this
case would have been quite besides the matter in saying, Without controversy
great is the mystery of godliness. We know that our Apostle uttered himself
thus by way of opposition to other Mysteries; particularly to the Mysteries of
Paganism, and by a more special manner in opposition to the Mysteries of the
Great Diana, Goddess of the Ephesians, where Timothy made his abode: In this
City the ordinary Cry was, Great, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: In
opposition to which, the Cry of St. Paul is, Great, great is the mystery of
godliness: yea, without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness. What
reason was there for all this a do? For all these positive Assertions, if Jesus
Christ be no more than a mere man? But I very well apprehend St. Paul, when I
consider, that Christianity presents us a God manifested in Flesh; for without
all controversy, this is a great Mystery, the greatest that ever was heard of
by men. This is that which ennobles the Christian Religion, and it is from this
Spring she derives all her Glory. There is nothing in our Holy Religion which
does not become precious and admirable, by the general influence of this great
Mystery. Can any one therefore justly accuse us for having too long insisted on
the Glory of our Lord, seeing it is also the entire Glory of our Religion?

But that which altogether justifies our Method herein, is, That this day is
properly Consecrated to the Thankfulness we owe to God, for his infinite Love
in sending his Son into the World, and in delivering him up to Death, after
having clothed him with our Nature. To this purpose it is of absolute necessity
for us to know the price and value of this Present. The greater it is, the
greater must be our Thankfulness. If Jesus Christ be no more than a man, I dare
boldly say, that his sending of him, is not the greatest favor God has
bestowed upon us. This supposed, we see little reason why the Gospel should
insist so strongly and emphatically upon this Divine Charity: Why does it tell
us of the riches of grace, of the exceeding excellent riches of grace in Jesus
Christ? Why does it tell us, that God so loved the world, as to send his only
begotten Son? That God recommends his love unto us, in that when we were yet
sinners Christ died for us. Surely if Jesus Christ be no more than a mere Man;
yea, if he were no more than an Angel, the Point would never bear these
Expressions; put but the name of Man where Christ is spoken of, and you will be
fain to own, that these passages have no sense at all: God has so loved men,
that he sent a man to hinder them from perishing. What, is it such an
unparalled instance of Charity for God to send one Man, to save so many
Millions of Men? This would have been no more than if he had given a straw for
to save them; surely there is no such transcendent Love in all this. God has
to that degree recommended his Love to us, that he has sent a Man to Dye for
us. Where is the wonder in all this; where shall we look for this high
recommendation of the Divine Love? If instead of a Man, it were an Angel, or
some other Creature far more Glorious; yet would it not have bulk enough to
fill up all these Passages. It Is no such great matter to form a Creature on
purpose to show so many Millions of men the way to Life. And yet the Scripture
prompts us to conceive of the Love of God, as of a thing that merits the
Admiration of Men and Angels. Except therefore we take it for granted, that our
Redeemer is God, we are at a loss how to make any sense at all of these Texts
of Scripture. But no sooner have we admitted this Mystery, but we find that
nothing indeed can be conceived so great, as is this Love of God: We find that
the sending of Jesus Christ, is the grace by way of excellence; we perceive
that the Scripture has not said too much of it; and we confess, in a word,
that it is impossible for us to make any answerable return for this infinite
Mercy of God, by any other way than by an infinite Acknowledgment, were we
capable of it.

We have therefore spoke things suitable to the Day, by confirming you in your
persuasion of the Divinity of our Savior; for by this means we have powerfully
excited your grateful Acknowledgment. Yea, we may say, that we have handled the
Second Point, in treating of the First; so that there remains nothing in a
manner for us to say upon these Words of St. Paul, yet he humbled, or emptied
himself. We had proposed to our selves to make you sensible of the Greatness of
our Savior's Love, in Emptying himself for us: To compass this our intent, we
have been obliged to measure both ends of this Mystery; we have drawn our Line
from that end which was farthest from us, the least sensible, and most unknown;
I mean, we have begun with the Eternal Glory of Jesus Christ; from which we
must now pass to the other end, or extremity; and consider what Jesus Christ is
become; he became man; he humbled himself to the Death. There is no need of
insisting long upon this second Extremity, it is a thing known to us, we know
what it is to be a Man; there is no need of any great Reasoning, nor strength
of Faith to contemplate this part of our Mystery. We need only to consider our
selves a little, and to sum up all the infirmities of our Nature, Hunger,
Thirst, Weariness, Pain, Sorrow; for all these our Savior took upon him: Yet
is not this all, he was willing to taste Death also; which is, as it were, the
Center to which all our infirmities tend; and for an increase of the Bitterness
of this Cup, he was willing to die a violent Death, a Death accompanied with
the most exquisite Pains, and the utmost Shame: Yet he humbled himself, he
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. In a Word, we see what
this Humiliation of our Savior is; he is become what we are; and as if the
common infirmities of our Nature had not been sufficient for him, he borrowed
those which human Justice inflicts upon the very worst of Criminals;
Nevertheless he emptied himself. O the vast distance there is betwixt the one
of these ends and the other! O the immense interval there is betwixt the
Abasement of Jesus Christ, and the Glory of his Eternal Deity! St. Paul passes
from one Abyss to the other; from the Abyss of Glory, to an Abyss of Misery:
Who, says he, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God; nevertheless he emptied himself.

What a Beauty there appears in this opposition! This, in my mind, is one of
those Eloquent strains in Scripture, that we ought to dwell upon with
admiration. I speak of an Eloquence truly great and sublime, which naturally
rises from the greatness of the things themselves, and not from a pleasing
cadence of picked words. Nothing can be imagined to have more of this character
in it, than these words, Nevertheless he emptied himself. What is admirable in
this expression, would be lost and spoiled, should we go about to extend it by
a more ample Explication. St. Paul understood the sublime Character much better
than our modern Preachers; when they have got hold of a Mystery, they endeavor
to raise it, and set it forth by the abundance of their words, and bring in
Rhetoric to the assistance of their Divinity. Their Master did not do so, I
mean St. Paul, who ought to be the Master of all Preachers. He utters the
greatest things conceivable, almost without speaking, and in one word lays open
the deepest Mystery. To count words, we speak much more than this our Apostle;
but to weigh things, we speak much less. We deceive our selves if we think we
are able by the help of words, to give a greater Idea of the Mystery we purpose
to explain; in doing so, we only take pains to fill the Ear, without reaching
the heart, which requires but few words, as reserving to her self the right of
enlargeing upon her subject, by Meditations and Reflections. Let us give credit
herein to the Searcher of hearts, who often utter things by halves; and the
Holy men Inspired by him, do sometimes only touch upon their subjects, and
leave the rest for the Heart to supply. St. Paul in saying nothing of what he
had seen and heard in the Third Heaven, says more than if he had made a long
description of the Glory of the Blessed. These are things, says he, which it
is not lawful for a man to utter. See here, Believer, matter indeed to employ
thy Meditation, until thou thy self arrive to that Place of never-failing
Bliss. Our Holy Apostle observes much the same measures, when he delivers
himself on the Mysteries of Revelation, and leaves a Mystery, if I may say so,
in those Mysteries. Not as if he would withhold ought of the Counsel of God
from us, for what he does not say in one place, he does in another. This is a
kind of reservedness which honors the Mystery, and gives a greater Idea of it.
What Exclamations, what Figures would not an Orator of the World have made use
of, upon that which St. Paul delivers in the 11th. Chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans, concerning the Rejection of the Jews, and the Calling of the
Gentiles? Whereas the Man of God wraps all up in these few words; O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! He leaves the Believer, in a deep
contemplation, on the brink of this Abyss. This is Eloquence indeed!

We may perceive a Ray of this Divine Eloquence, in the Expression of St. Paul,
now before us; Nevertheless he emptied himself. We will not go about to explain
these Words, for fear of lessening their force; let them enter without
attendance into your Hearts; consider them in their genuine and natural Import.
I require nothing else of you, save only that you would often say to your
selves, Nevertheless, he emptied himself: Christ is God, Nevertheless, he
emptied himself: This alone is enough to excite your admiration. We have reason
to question, whether a Soul, were it left to its choice, would be willing to
become incarnate in a Body, subject to all our Infirmities. Some Wise Men have
frankly declared themselves, That they would not become young again if it were
in their power. Probably the most part of men would not be of this Opinion,
especially those who have led a pleasant Life: but if one should propose to
them a Life of Thirty Four Years, full of Miseries, and to end at last by the
Death of the Cross, think you they would accept of a Life on these Terms? A
Soul would never consent to such an Incarnation; and an Angel much less. Return
we to our Text; Christ is God, it was not an Human Soul; it was not an Angel;
He is God; he was God; Nevertheless, he emptied himself. Creatures would be
very unwilling to enter into Partnership with a Nature laden with Infirmities;
and yet Jesus Christ, the Creator, was willing to empty himself. An Abyss as
impenetrable to Angels, as it is to us! Ye Angels, ye are astonished to see
that he has done that, which ye would not have been willing to do! you cannot
found the bottom of this Mystery; you are as well as we, on the brink of this
Abyss; you say as we do; Oh Riches! Oh Depth! Christ is God; Nevertheless he
emptied himself!

He who was in the Beginning, was willing to be made of a Woman, in the fullness
of time. He who was rich, became poor; He who is Immortal, has shed his own
Blood. We make use of the express Terms of Scripture, that we may not give the
mind of Man the Liberty of making Oppositions now, that might prove injurious
to the Majesty of our Savior. He was made Man, but he always continued to be
God. The Deity is unchangeable, and was always Glorious, even after that it had
emptied it self; but uniting personally with the Man Jesus, it appropriated to
it self all the Infirmities of this Second Nature; and it is true to say, That
God emptied himself, that he was made man, that he shed his Blood. It would be
matter of trouble to us, should you believe, that the Divinity of Jesus Christ
passed through all these Degrees of Abasement; No, this is impossible; it is of
the Essence of God always to continue God. Jesus Christ is in this respect, the
same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. He has therefore only emptied
himself, by entering into Union with an Infirm and Mortal Man, in such a manner,
as that the two Natures constitute only one Person, much after the same manner
as the Soul and Body, united by the Bonds of Life, make only one Person. This
Explication, which we have thought necessary, does not hinder, but that there
remain still many Wonders in the Mystery of the Incarnation. It is always true,
that the Word has emptied it self; It is always true, that our great God and
Savior Jesus Christ, has found the Secret to be made Man, and to humble
himself for us.

We have in this Mystery two great Motives to Gratitude, the Birth and Death of
Jesus Christ. The Child is born to us, the Son is given to us; we celebrate in
one and the same Day, two great Festivals, Christmas and Easter. It is our duty
to solemnize them by a redoubling of our Zeal; one only of these Mysteries
claims all our Thankfulness. What shall we do for a God who was willing for our
sakes, to live after the manner of men? The Eternal Word, which had no need of
us, has emptied himself for to make us happy. O Adorable Word! Thou had not
the same concern for the Angels that have left their Station: Thou have not
clothed thy self with their Nature, though more excellent than ours, but have
honored our Earth in taking it upon thee. Our merciful Redeemer was willing to
pass through the Womb of a Virgin, there to take upon him Flesh like ours. What
shall we render to God for so great a Favor! Let us take the Cup of Blessing,
and glorify God in the Language of Angels, Glory be to God on high. Let us
glorify him as much as is possible for us. Could we speak to the Angels, as
they spoke to the Shepherds, we would repeat to those Blessed Spirits, the
Words which they themselves have taught us; This day a Child is born to us;
Glory be to God in the highest. We cannot sufficiently glorify him here on
Earth, do ye therefore help us to glorify him. If we be not able to render
unto our Savior all the Glory that is due unto him for his Birth, what shall
we say with respect to his Death, which we have this Morning celebrated? It was
much in him to be born for us; but it is much more to die for us. What! have
our hearts nothing to say on occasion of this Death? Sure had they been dumb,
or insensible as to the Mystery of the Incarnation, shall not the Death of
Christ put life into them? What can have any power over you, if this Death can
make no Impression upon you? Pray what will be able to move you? What will be
able to engage you to serve God, if this do not? But I don't consider that I am
speaking to those, who for the most part have been entertained at the Lord's
Table: If all that Funeral Furniture, wherewith he appears in the Eucharist; if
these Sacred Symbols, which convey, as it were, the Death of Jesus Christ into
your very Bowels, have not been able to move your Hearts, no Sermon will be of
force enough to stir them. In this case your heart must be altogether
insensible, so that Words can have no effect upon it.

We may suppose therefore, that before your entering into this place, you have
filled your Souls with that double Solemnity, to which this Day invites you;
and that after having seriously meditated the Birth and Death of our Savior,
you have put your selves into a State of Repentance, you have put on your
Wedding Garments to go to meet your Bridegroom. We must also suppose that you
have renewed your Repentance, in approaching to this Holy Table. It is a hard
thing, so nearly to behold what our Blessed Lord has done for us, without
being pierced and penetrated thereby. At this happy meeting of your Heart, with
the Mercy of God, you have bewailed your Sins, and have promised a more holy
Conversation for time to come. We cannot believe that since that happy Moment
you have changed your thoughts, you are still the same, and your Piety still
preserves all its heat; for otherwise what would be comparable to your
Inconstancy? what! in two hours time to change your most solemn Vows and
Promises into Perjuries! this is scarce possible. We suppose therefore, that
you are still in that good state, even in that state of Repentance, wherein you
were when you communicated.

The only thing that still remains for us to do, is to exhort you to persevere
in these holy Motions. We do not expect that you will always feel the same
Unction, or that you will be always in the same Recollection; such a state is
not consistent with our Frame, nor with those different kinds of life to which
Providence has tied us. But nothing can hinder you from performing your
Promises; you may live, and live like Christians. Were you engaged in ways of
living, that were inconsistent with the Spirit of our Holy Religion, I would
conjure you presently to quit those Professions, wherein you could not be
saved. We must live, it is true, but it is more necessary we should be saved.
What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, if at the same time he
loses his own soul? I cannot think that amongst those that hear me, there is
any person, whose Profession is directly contrary to Salvation; but yet it is
but too too visible, that most Professions have their Rocks, and their Dangers:
Snares rain down upon all the Children of Men, as the Holy Spirit speaks. All
of you, as many as are here, apprehend well enough what I would say, to morrow
or the next day, for I dare not say this day, will meet with these dangers, the
occasions in which you have been formerly worsted, will present themselves
again: Then be sure to call to mind your Promises to God this Day: Represent
this Holy Table to your Spirit; recall the Solemnity of this Day; be faithful
to the Lord, and pay your Vows to the most High.

We will not here run over the several Virtues, to which his Service engages
you; but we can do no less than specify those to which St. Paul exhorts the
Philippians, upon occasion of our Lord's Example; who, when he was God, did
notwithstanding, so abase himself as to be made Man; yea, to that degree, as to
die the Death of the Cross. The two Virtues that are most dazzling in this
Example, are Humility and Charity. O how happy would this Day prove, might it
see these two Virtues reigning in your Souls! We are naturally proud, and I
don't know from whence that hardness and insensibility comes, that we have for
our Neighbor; for even Nature inspires us with more Charity, than appears in
our Lives. Proud Souls, come and humble your selves in the presence of the
Child Jesus; he who is God, was made Man, that ye, who are but mortal men,
might be persuaded to become like God. Resemble him in his Humility, not in his
Glory; He has condescended to put himself in a Condition, wherein he might be
imitated. It was the Crime of our First Parents, That they would be as God. Be
satisfied, ye Posterity of Adam, at present, it is a Virtue to be willing to
resemble God. Humble your selves as he humbled himself; who being God, was made
Man: He has, as you see, run through infinite spaces, to put himself within
reach of us: From Glory he has stepped down into Nothing. You need not travel
far to arrive at Annihilation, you have no more than a step to take; your
Nature has placed you almost on the same Level with Nothing: You need only
well to view and contemplate your selves, and precisely keep your selves to the
Idea of what you are, and you will acknowledge, that you want little of being
Nothing. Retire into your own Bosom, set aside the Usurpations of Self-love,
and then tell us what you find over and above. It may be your heart will bear
you up against all this, by repeating to you some advantages you possess; as of
Birth, Wit, Goods, Employments; but all this does not much remove you from
Nothing. My design is not in the least to offend the Distinction which
Providence it self has established, by the Variety of its Administration; I
have a consideration for Births, Wit, Merit, and Employs. But it were to be
wished, that those who have these Advantages, did not glory in them, and might
be thoroughly persuaded, that their Elevation does not raise them much above
Nothing. Come hither and take a view of him, who is infinitely above you: he
was God, and yet was willing to become Man; for this purpose he took his Birth
from the Womb of a poor and humble Virgin. Be not ashamed to enter into the
Stable where he was born; go thither to learn Humility: For if you don't become
like this little Blessed Child, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.

If the example of the Birth of our Savior be not sufficient to humble you,
follow him to Golgotha, where you will see an example of the most Transcendent
Humility conceivable. When we think of a Crucified Jesus, we cannot imagine how
so much Pride should be amongst Christians: For shame let them no longer call
themselves the Disciples of a Crucified God. Should we judge of the Character
of their Master, by the Quality of their Manners, we would take him to have
been some Proud and Self-conceited Philosopher; whereas indeed he was a
Crucified God. Do you ever seriously consider this, O ye Christians? You are
top-full of Pride, and yet believe that there is no Salvation for you, but by
imitating a Master, who humbled himself to the Death of the Cross.

O let us remember for whose sake our Lord has thus Humbled himself, and we
shall see what a model of Charity we have to imitate. It Is for men that our
Savior was made Man; it is for the Redemption of men, that this God-man died.
And pray what are these men? Why Dust and Ashes, miserable Sinners. O
surpassing Charity! O Depth of Riches! The Lord God Merciful and Gracious,
abundant in Goodness! What shall we say? No words are able to reach such a Love
as this: And indeed God requires actions rather than words, Love for Love; Let
us Love God, as he has Loved us, We cannot do that for him, which he has done
for us; let us Love him, at least with all our strength, as he has Loved us,
according to the unbounded largeness of his great Compassion. Let us Love those
whom God has recommended to our Charity; what can we say against them, that
hinders us to exercise this Virtue toward them? They have offended us; And
what then? Had they done us nothing but Good, it would not be Charity to Love
them. Charity consists in this, That we Love our Enemies, as God has Loved us;
us I say, that were his Enemies. Let us Forgive, as God Forgives us; exercise
also your Charity in distributing to the Poor according to your Ability. God
who was Sovereignly Rich, made himself Poor for our sakes. Let us have
compassion on those Poor which our Lord has left with us, to prove the Love we
bear to him. O the happy Christmas this will prove to us, in case we can but
resolve to practice Humility and Charity! For after that we shall have been
made conformable to our Blessed Lord by the practice of these two Virtues, we
shall have a share in his Glory, which is the Crown of them. Amen.

The Second Discourse.
PHILIP. II. 6. Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal
with God.


WE know that the Scripture often speaks of God as of man; but it never speaks
of man as of God: the reason whereof is very evident; for the Divine Nature
being wholly Spiritual, it was but necessary that the Holy Spirit should clothe
it with some sensible Representations, to the end that entering our Souls by the
assistance of these Colors, it might make a deeper impression upon them. This
is done without any danger, forasmuch as the Scripture does elsewhere unfold
these Metaphors: Or if there be any danger in it with regard to the simpler
sort of People, it is only this, of falling into an Error which has no
influence upon Divine Worship. Hence it is that Scripture makes no difficulty
at all to speak of God as of a man; but never does it speak of man as of God.
For indeed to what purpose should this be? So forced a Metaphor would be of no
use at all, and would darken the Style of the Holy Ghost, instead of making it
more Intelligible. Neither is this the worst that is in it; for by this means
we should be in danger of taking man for God, which is the most dangerous of
all other mistakes whatsoever. God is too Jealous of his own Glory, to set a
Creature on equal ground with Himself; and he is too much concerned for our
Salvation, to put us to the Hazard of such a Mistake.

We find also, that the Scripture only bestows very plain encomiums upon the
very greatest of men. Moses is an emphatical Instance of this; After the Death
of that glorious Lawgiver and Commander, all the Panegyric God bestows upon
him is comprised in these words, Moses my servant is dead; This was enough for
a man. Josh. 1.2.
God took care to hide the Body of this Great Lawgiver, for fear they should
make a Relick of it. It was thought needful also to veil his Glory with an
humbling expression, that none might take him for God, but for a Servant of
God. From which principle we may without hesitation conclude, That if there be
any Being which the Scripture equals with God, that the same must needs be God.
This will be a demonstrative proof of the Divinity of Christ, after we have
showed you, that the Scripture does all along make him equal with God.

In our foregoing Discourse we have considered this Equality with reference to
the Words of the Text only. Our design now is to show, that it consists in all
those Names, those Attributes, and that Worship which belong to the Divine
Nature alone, and yet are Communicated to our Savior. He is so called, as his
Father is; and thus is he equal with God in his Names: He is True God, as his
Father; this is his equality in Attributes: He is honored as his Father; and
this is his equality as to Worship. Follow me in these Three Points with your
Attention.

Begin we with the Names; Christ, as well as his Father, is called God; John
1.1.
The word was God: Neither was it in time that our Savior received this Name;
from the Beginning this Word was God. Let no body tell us here, that the
Scripture has allowed this name to Creatures, as to Moses, and to Magistrates:
These instances are of no force to elude the dint of our Argument from the Name
of God Attributed to our Savior. For is there any thing of parity between
examples wherein a glorious Creature is once called God, by way of Comparison
only; and the Language of the New Testament, which so often calls Christ God by
way of perfect Equality? But let us take a nearer view of these Examples.

It is said in Exodus, that Moses entering upon his Call, made difficulty to
accept of it. God, to determine him to accept of the Commission, told him, I
know that Aaron thy Brother can speak well; he shall be thy spokesman unto the
People, Exodus 4.14, 16.
and he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shall be to him instead
of God. That is to say, that as God inspires the Prophets, to inform them what
they are to say in his Name; in like manner Moses was to communicate his
thoughts, or rather those of God to Aaron, that so Aaron might propose them to
the People. Moses did that with regard to Aaron, what God did with respect to
the Prophets; so that Moses was in stead of God to Aaron. It is not simply
said, That Moses was God, or that he was the God of the Israelites, no nor the
God of Aaron: far from it; it is only said, that he was in stead of a God to
Aaron, and on this occasion only. Has this any the least resemblance with
those places where our Savior is called God?

And the same may be said of that Text, where it is said, See, I have made thee
a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. Exodus 7.1.
These words are but the sequel of the words before explained; for if Moses
with reference to Aaron, discharged the place of God, in communicating to him
the Oracles of Heaven; it is evident, that Moses discharged the same Function
with respect to Pharaoh, to whom a part of these Oracles were sent. We know,
that in the Publication of Oracles, three sorts of Persons act their part: God,
from whom they originally proceed; the Prophet, whom God commissionates
therewith; and the Person to whom they are addressed. Whence it appears, that God
at the same time is the God of the Prophet, by inspiring him; and the God of
the party to whom he causes his will to be declared. Moses could not be God
with regard to Aaron, but he must at the same time be so likewise with regard
to Pharaoh, because Aaron carried the word of Moses to Pharaoh. The proof of
this Interpretation may be found in that very place, where it is said, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh; for it immediately follows, and Aaron shall be thy
prophet; Exodus 7.1, 2.
thou shall speak all that I command thee, and Aaron thy brother shall speak
unto Pharaoh. And is it therefore said, That Moses is God simply and
absolutely? Not in the least, for this is distinctly limited: I have made thee
a God for this, that is to say, for this only; this is plainly limited. But our
Lord is called God without the least determination of his Godhead by any
Limitations whatsoever; The word was God.

The Example of Magistrates is not a whit more to the purpose, than that of
Moses. True it is, that in the 82d Psalm they are called gods; I have said, ye
are gods. Psalm 82
This has nothing common with that way of speaking, wherewith this Name is
given to our Savior. It is not said of any Magistrate in particular, that he
is God; no not so much as once throughout all the Scripture. It is only said
concerning the Magistrates; Ye are Gods: That is to say, that as Magistrates,
they are an Image of the Sovereign Judge. So that you see, that this also is
limited, it is not said of any Man, nor of any Angel in particular, and by way
of absolute speaking, that he is God. And yet it is thus that Christ is called
God. This Word was God. God has redeemed his Church with his own blood; God
manifested in the flesh. Nay, what is more; Christ is not only called God, 1
John 5.20.
but he is called the True God; This is the true God, and eternal life, says
the Beloved Disciple. Neither is he only called the True God, but the Great
God; for so St. Paul styles him; Tet. 2.13.
Looking for the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

We cannot but take notice here, that in that short Epistle which St. Paul
wrote to Titus, our Savior is called God at least four or five times. How
comes it to pass that St. Paul in so short an Epistle, affects to call our Lord
so often by the Name of God and Savior? For it is certain, that as the
heavenly Father is God by way of Principle, so it is he whom the Scripture
commonly calls God; how is it then, I say, that St. Paul in this short Epistle
bestows this Name three or four times upon our Savior? Without question there
was some particular Reason for it; for any thing I know, it was this, Because
the Ministry of Titus was limited to the Isle of Crete. Now we know this Island
had a singular Veneration for Jupiter: Jupiter, that is to say in the Style of
Paganism, The great God, and the Savior of Men. Many of these Christians, the
care of whose Souls were committed to Titus, had been converted from this Idol
to our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, to a living and true God. St. Paul therefore
in opposition to the erroneous Ideas of their Education, bestows upon Jesus
christ these very same Names in Writing to Titus. And this is as much as if he
had said to the Christians of that Island; Jupiter was a Usurper; he, in whom
you have believed, is the only Savior, and the true God.

If we had nothing else to say concerning the Name of God, attributed to our
Savior in the Scripture, we should believe our Argument already very strong,
to prove the Divinity of Christ. Nothing is called God, as he is, but that
which is really so. He is called God simply and absolutely; and if I may make
use of an Expression popular indeed, but intelligible, I say he is called God
in plain terms, and without ifs, or ands. I make bold to use this Expression,
that the most simple may conceive my Meaning, and make the Application
themselves, as they read the Scripture.

To add more strength to this Argument, we need only to observe, that the Name
of Jehovah it self, is given to Jesus Christ in the Scripture. This great Name,
this Incommunicable Name, which the Jews dare not so much as pronounce, so
worthy do they esteem it of all respect and veneration, is notwithstanding
given to Christ; Ye shall not tempt Jehovah your God, Deuteronomy. 6.16.
as ye tempted him in Massah. These are the Words of Moses. If we will believe
St. Paul, our Lord is this Jehovah whom the Israelites tempted; Neither let us
tempt Christ, says he, as some of them also tempted. 1 Cor. 10.9. Isa. 40.3.
The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of Jehovah.
They are the Words of Isaiah. Let us consult the Evangelists, to know the
meaning of them; and they will tell us, That John the Baptist is the Voice
crying in the Wilderness; Matt. 3.3. Mark. 1.3. Isa. 54.5.
and that Jesus Christ is that Jehovah, whose way is prepared; For thy Maker is
thine Husband, Jehovah of Hosts is his name; and thy redeemer the holy one of
Israel; the God of the whole earth shall he be called. Who is the Bridegroom
and Husband of the Church? St. Paul will inform us: 2 Cor. 11.2.
I am jealous over you, says he to the Corinthians, with a jealousy of God:
observe that Expression, for it was for Christ that St. Paul was jealous; For I
have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin to
Christ. I will save them by Jehovah their God; they are the words of God by the
mouth of the Prophet Hosea. Hos. 1.7.
By whom is it that the Church is saved? Who is it that is our Savior and
Redeemer? We know that the New Testament most exprestly assures us in very many
places, that it is our Lord Jesus Christ.

It would be an easy matter to allege several other Passages out of the Old
Testament, where the True God is most expressly spoken of, which by the Writers
of the New Testament are applied to Christ. What think we can be the Design of
these Holy Men herein, if Jesus Christ be not indeed that True God? In this
case I make no difficulty to assert, that they have deceived us most
shamefully, and that their Writings are no better than continual Blasphemies.
Pray what is Blasphemy if this be not, to apply to a Creature what is due to
the Creator only; and to appropriate to a mere Man, or even to an Angel, those
Oracles which the Holy Ghost has dictated for the Honor of God alone. What a
monstrous Opinion is this, the Consequences whereof turn the Holy Apostles into
Blasphemers? As for our part, as long as we shall believe that they were not
destitute of Common Sense, nor of the Fear of God; as long as we shall be
persuaded over and above this, That their Pens were guided by an Infallible
Spirit, we must be convinced that our Blessed Lord, whom they call God, either
expressly, or by application of the Prophetical Passages of the Old Testament,
was God indeed.

The Second Rank of our Proofs respects the Equality of Attributes, and
furnishes us with a new Demonstration in favor of the Godhead of our Savior.
Indeed if we find that the Scripture attributes to our Lord, the very same
things it appropriates to the Divine Essence, will it not be manifest that
Christ is God? What is it to be God, if it be not to have the Nature of God?
Now there is nothing that can be more easily proved, than that our Lord has
the Properties of the Divine Nature, and that in such a manner as belongs to
God only. I shall make choice of Six of the Divine Attributes, to verify my
Argument: Eternity, Immensity, Holiness, Knowledge, Power, and Mercy. The two
first of these Attributes never were, or can be attributed to any created
Substance; I mean Eternity and Immensity.

Having already in a former Discourse, spoken of the Eternity of Jesus Christ,
it would be useless to insist any more upon it, were it a Point of less
consequence than it is. Upon that account we esteem it our Duty to enliven your
Faith, by quoting the Sacred Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. In the first
Chapter he presents them with a strong Motive of perseverance, by the
Description he gives them of the Majesty of our Lord, whom he raises high
above the Angels, and to whom he ascribes Eternity, by applying a Passage out
of the 102 Psalm to him; Psalm. 102.26, 27.
They (the Heavens) shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall
wax old like a garment; as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. To understand
the true sense of this Oracle, we must search for it at the Fountainhead, I
mean, in the Psalm if self; where we shall find it plainly signifies the
Eternity of the Divine Nature; not only Eternity to come, but also that which
is past. We do not find that the Sacred Author has added the least restriction
to the words of the Text, but attributes them in their whole and entire
strength to Jesus Christ. Our Savior therefore is Eternal, with regard to both
sides of Eternity.

In running over this Epistle, we cannot silently pass over an Argument the
Author insists upon in the Third Chapter, to confirm Christians in their
Perseverance, by the Advantages which raise Christ far above Moses: For this
person was counted worthy of more glory than Moses; in as much as he who has
built the house, Heb. 3.3.
has more honor than the house. This way of reasoning amounts to nothing, if
it do not suppose our Savior to be the Builder of the House. But, says the
Author in the Verse following, He that built all things, is God; Jesus Christ
therefore is God: Nevertheless it appears, that the Father also is the Builder
of the House; for it is said, that Christ, as Son, is over the House of God.
But this is easily reconciled; for the Father and the Son possessing one and
the same Nature, the one is supposed to have done what the other did.

Proceed we to the seventh Chapter, where we meet with an Emphatical Proof of
the Eternity of Christ. The Apostle there teaches us, that Melchisedec is the
true Portraiture of our Lord; in this Type I find a King of righteousness, and
of Peace; and so far the Resemblance is exact: for we know that Righteousness
and Peace kiss and embrace each other in the Original. But consider we those
other Lineaments that compose the Type; He was without Father, without Mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life. This,
according to the Letter, cannot be said of any Man: if Melchisedec was a Man,
he had Father, Mother, Descent, beginning of Days, and end of Life; but nothing
of all this is found in the Scripture, where not the least mention is made of
the Family, nor of the Birth, nor of the Death of Melchisedec, which is very
strange; forasmuch as the Holy Ghost has given us the Genealogy of many
Persons much less considerable, how comes it to pass that it has neglected to
give us these particulars concerning the great Melchisedec? Why the reason is
plain; his Design was to represent to us a Portraiture that might resemble our
Lord; Being made like the Son of God, says our Author. The Holy Ghost on
purpose suppresseth the Birth and Death of Melchisedec, to the end that this
Illustrious, Unknown, might the better represent the Eternity of the Son of
God, who is without beginning of days, as he is without end of life.

In the 9th Chapter we find a new Proof of the Eternity of our Savior. Heb.
9.14.
It is said, that Christ through the eternal spirit, offered himself to God;
What is this Eternal Spirit here mentioned? It is not the Soul of our Lord that
is now here called the Eternal Spirit. Besides, the Soul of our Lord was a part
of the Sacrifice it self; whereas the words speak of the Nature that offers,
and not of that which is offered. Neither is it the Holy Ghost, the Third
Person in the Sacred Trinity; he did not offer up our Savior, but he offered
up himself; it must therefore have been an other Nature, which our Savior here
calls the Eternal Spirit. The Godhead of Christ performed the Priest's Office
here upon the Manhood, predestined to be the Victim for Mankind.

I refer also to this, That Argument which the same Author draws from the
Eternity of Jesus Christ, to engage the Christians to persevere in his
Doctrine; Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. The
Apostle by these words renews the Notion he had given them in the beginning of
this Epistle; where we have seen, that he asserts the Eternity of Jesus Christ
from a Text of the Old Testamnnt. Indeed we find the Author had this Eternity
in his eye, throughout, to the very end of the Epistle; and it is with reference
to this, that we must explain this Elogy of our Savior, which comprehends all
distinction of Time past, present, and to come: He is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever: which answers to the Explication St. John gives us of the
Eternity of the Father: Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and
which was, Rev. 1.4.
and which is to come. And the very same Expression is attributed to Christ by
St. John; or rather our Savior attributes it to himself, in St. John's
Revelation: Rev. 1.8.
I am Alpha avd Omega, the Beginning and the End, says the Lord, which is,
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. Who is it that speaks thus? He
of whom it is said in the verse foregoing, Behold he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him: is the same, who in the following Verse says, I am
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: For St. John having turned himself to
see who it was whose Voice he heard, saw Jesus Christ. Our Lord therefore is
Eternal.

Immensity is the Second Attribute, by which our Savior is present in all
places at the same time. If it were not so, how could he make good the Promise
made to his Disciples: For where two or three are gathered together in my name,
Matt. 18.20.
there am I in the midst of them. It is very observable, that this is the
Language of God under the Old Law, where we see, that in several passages he
promises to dwell amidst his People. Think we that any one but the Son drust
have spoke like the Father? Besides, I will take the boldness to say, that as
Grace displays it self in the Gospel, the Son by promising his presence in all
places, says yet more than the Father. The Father assures his People that he
will dwell amongst them, and sometimes does even restrain this his Habitation
to the compass of the Tabernacle. They shall make me a Sanctuary, says he, in
Exodus, and I will dwell in the midst of them. But our Savior extends his
Promise to a much greater compass, even to a wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. As if he had
said, That place wheresoever it be, shall be to me a Jerusalem, a Tabernacle, a
Sanctuary. What can this import less than Immensity, at a time when Grace
overflows the whole Universe, without any distinction of People? In all parts
of the World our Lord is present in the midst of the least Assemblies, where
his Name is called upon. He is in all places at the same time, he sees what is
done there, he hears all that is said there, he blesses those whom he will
bless: In a word, he is in all places where he is called upon, as God was in
the Sanctuary of old. It is well enough known, that when our Savior promises
his presence, he means a presence of his Virtue and Influences. Immensity is
not the proper subject of a Promise. That which of its own Nature is present in
all places, is there, whether he promise it or not; but because our Lord does
promise a presence of Virtue in all places, we have good reason to conclude
that he is in all places. This Conclusion is evident, our Savior could not act
in all places, if he were not in all places.

Nowadays it is maintained, that we cannot conceive the Existence of God in
any place, but by some Divine Operations. God is every where, say they, because
he operates every where. Say we the same of our Savior, he is every where,
because he acts every where: For where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them. We need no more than common sense to
convince us, that if our Blessed Lord had no other Amplitude but that of his
Human Nature, he could never fulfill this great Promise. But still to open a
further Light to his Immensity, we need only call to mind his Discourse with
Nicodemus in the third of St. John's Gospel; No man has ascended up to heaven,
but hothat came down from heaven, Joh. 3.13.
even the Son of Man which is in heaven. He is discoursing with Nicodemus here
on Earth, and at the same time tells him he is in Heaven. This can admit of no
tolerable explication, but by means of that Immensity whereby he fills heaven
and earth.

These are the two Divine Attributes that are absolutely incommunicable to
Creatures. Let us next run over the other Attributes, that are by some way of
Analogy communicable to them, but are possessed by God in the highest degree of
Absoluteness and Perfection. I shall not say that our Savior is Holy, that he
is Intelligent, that he is Powerful and Merciful; which are the four Attributes
that remain to be examined. Should we say no more than so, all this may be
attributed to Creatures. We find amongst them Holiness, Knowledge, Power and
Mercy. No body can doubt, but that if we make it evident that our Lord
possesses all these four Perfections as God does, you will be furnished with
as many Demonstrations to evince the Divinity of our Savior.

Our Savior then is Holy, but so as God is, which we prove from a plain Text
of Scripture. The Prophet Isaiah tells us in his sixth Chapter, that he saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne, amidst the Acclamations of the Seraphims, who cried
one to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts. Would you
know who this Lord, or rather Jehovah, is, to whom they give the threefold
Compellation of Holy? St. John the Evangelist will resolve you; who tells us in
the twelfth Chapter of his Gospel, that Isaiah spoke of our Savior. Joh. 12,
41.
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him. Some have
been of Opinion, that Isaiah was condemned to Death, because he had presumed to
say, That he had seen him who was invisible. This seemed to be a mere piece of
Blasphemy; but what can be imagined more abominable, than that which St. John
tells us here, if our Blessed Lord be not indeed the King, the Lord of Hosts,
the Holy One of Israel? Let us make no scruple to believe the Beloved Disciple,
who reposed himself on the Breast of the Son of God: Trust we the piercing
sight of this Eagle, who took so near a view of this glorious Son? Rely we upon
the Testimony of an Evangelist, whose end in writing his Gospel, was to prove
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. It is he assures us, that he whom the
Seraphims with so much Humility adore, crying to one another, and saying, Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, was no other than our Blessed Lord.

We say further, That he has Knowledge also, but as God. He knows all that God
knows: Remember always that we speak of the Son of God. We know that the Son of
Man had a Knowledge which increased by degrees, and what is more, that he did
not know all things: No man knows that hour, says he, no not the Son of Man.
This is true of the Son of Man, or of the Human Nature of our Savior; but the
Son of God, the Divine Nature in our Savior, knew that which the Son of Man
knew not. The Son of God knows all that God knows, that is all things: St.
Peter tells us as much; Lord, says he, thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee. This Knowledge is Universal; and to take a view of it that
way, where with one cast of the Eye, you may discover it to be the Knowledge of
God; we need only to observe, that the Eyes of our Lord pierce to the very
bottom of Man's Heart. Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.
St. Peter's Heart was not the only Heart that was known to Christ: All things
were naked and open before him; Lord, thou know all things. The Proposition
is general. The Scribes and Pharisees, those Hypocritical Professors, could not
hide their most secret Thoughts from him; this Truth appears from many passages
of the Gospel. To Cite only one place, which by reason of its generality,
comprehends all the rest; we need only take notice of what St. John says
toward the end of the Second Chapter of his Gospel: But Jesus did not commit
himself unto them, says he, Joh. 2.24, 25.
because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man; for
he knew what was in man. The Case here mentioned is not that of a Prophet, to
whom God discovers the Heart of some particular Man. The Knowledge which the
Gospel ascribes to our Savior is Universal, no Heart escapes him. He knew what
was in man. A Knowledge that God in a most peculiar manner appropriates to
himself in several places of the Old Testament. I know, my God, 1 Chronicles. 29.17.
Jerem. 17.10.
that thou triest the heart, said David toward the latter end of his Life. I
the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, says he himself by the Mouth of
the Prophet Jeremy. Let us read to the end of the Verse; Even, continues he, to
give to every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings. It Is God that speaks here, and he speaks as God; he speaks like
himself. Never did any Prophet speak thus. And yet this is the very passage our
Lord ascribes to himself in the Revelation, speaking to the Angel of the Church
of Thyatira; Rev. 2.23.
And all the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the reins and
hearts; and I will give unto every one of you according to your works. Words
that make it evident, that our Savior declares expressly, that it was himself
that spoke in Jeremy, and that the Knowledge of the Heart of Man belongs to him
in chief.

The Fifth Attribute whereby we learn to know the Divine Nature of Christ, is
his Power, He is powerful, but so as to be powerful as God; he is the Almighty.
In Virtue of this power, the Son does all that the Father does. Joh. 5.19.
What things soever the Father does, these also does the Son likewise. Does the
Father raise the Dead! So does the Son also, he quickneth whom he will. Does
the Father create the World? The Son does so likewise. Which two instances show
us the extent of the Father's Power: Indeed we cannot conceive any greater,
than that of restoring Life to the Dead, and that of creating such a World as
this is, and yet both these belong to our Savior.

In the first place, he has raised the Dead; but have not others done the same
Miracle? Elijah and Elisha in the Old Testament; and the Disciples of our Lord
in the New, have not they also raised some that were Dead, who for all that,
never pretended to be equal with God. True it is, that Elijah and Elisha each
of them raised a Child to Life, but with what pains do they work these
Miracles? God makes them sweat for it, that it might appear that these Saints
were but Men. Elijah stretches himself upon the child three several times, and
cries to the Lord. Elisha not being able to do any thing by the Ministry of his
Servant, comes himself into the room where the Child was. The Prophet lies upon
the Child, and puts his Mouth to the Child's Mouth, and his Eyes upon the Child's
Eyes, and his Hands upon the Child's Hands, trying to restore Life and Heat to
the Child; but for all this the desired Effect does not follow; he goes up and
comes down, and after having several times stretched himself upon the Child, at
last by the Blessing of God, the Child begins to show some signs of Life. Was
this the way our Savior took to raise the Dead? Being touched with Compassion
for the Widow of Naim, whose only Son was carried forth to be buried, our
Savior says to the Dead, Mar. 5.41.
Young Man arise; and that word did the thing without any more ado; neither
said he more in raising to Life the Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, but
Damsel arise; and Lazarus was raised with this word, Lazarus come forth.

There is no need to insist upon the Resurrections wrought by the Disciples of
our Lord, for they being performed in his Name, were to be attributed only to
the Efficacy of his Virtue. Besides these particular Resurrections which prove
the Omnipotence of our Lord, we ought also to consider that he attributes to
himself the Resurrection of all Believers. All he did here upon Earth was but a
Scantling of what he shall do one day, by commanding Death to give up her dead,
after that their dissipated Dust has been carried by the Wind to the utmost
Corners of the Universe. He that believes in me, says he, has eternal life,
and I will raise him at the last day. Is this the Style of a Creature? Pursuant
to this Promise, several times repeated in the Gospel, St. Paul says to the
Philippians, as if he would prove to them, that Christ is equal to God his
Father, that Jesus Christ shall change our vile Bodies, and make them conform
also to his glorious Body, by that power whereby he is able, even to subdue all
things to himself. Phil. 3.21.
See here the Omnipotence of our Savior expressed with the greatest plainness
that may be.

In the second place, I asserted that Christ had created the World. He has
created all that we see, and all that we do not see, for he is the Creator both
of Angels and Men, the Creator of all things; without him nothing was made that
was made. Let us make use of St. Paul's Expressions; For by him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, Col. 1.16.
visible and invisible; whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him. These
words are so full and strong, and are alone sufficient to prove that our Lord
is equal in power with his Father.

The last Attribute wherewith we evince the equality which St. Paul attributes
to our Savior, or rather which our Savior attributes to himself, is that of
Mercy. We can no sooner have any little knowledge of the Mystery of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, but we must acknowledge that our Redeemer is
merciful, in a manner that does not belong to any but God. Was it not he
himself, think we, to whom Moses said, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and
gracious. Exodus 33. and 34.
This great Lawgiver had a desire to see God; I beseech thee, said Moses, show
me thy glory; and God's answer was, I will make all my goodness pass before
thee; where by the way we may observe to our great comfort, that the Lord
intimates to us, that his Goodness is his great Glory. And afterward he
informs Moses, that no Man can look God in the Face: Thou shall see my back
parts, says he, but my face shall not be seen. What may be the meaning of this
Expression? The Interpreters are generally agreed, that this signifies, that
God cannot be seen but by and in his Works; and that the Mysterious Reasons of
his Conduct are not discerned. Thus far this Explication is plausible enough;
but yet this is not enough, except they comprehend in these his Works, the
Works of Grace. Indeed those are chiefly here intended; I will make all my
goodness pass before thee. Wherein, I pray, consists all the goodness of God?
Why, it is all concentred in the Mystery of the Death of Christ. When Moses had
a glimpse of this Infinite Goodness, when the Crucified Jesus was portrayed
before the Eyes of Moses, then it was that he cried out, saying, The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth. And indeed, who would not do as much, at the view, (tho a distant one)
of the Mercy of the Son of God, who being in the Form of God, nevertheless
emptied himself. Christ's Mercy alone is sufficient to demonstrate him to be
the true God.

God only is good in that manner, because he who said to our Lord, Good master
what shall I do to have eternal life; did not comprehend this Truth. Our Lord
says to him, Why call thou me good? There is none good but God; thou who
do not know that I am God, why do thou call me good? Yet our Lord, who very
well knew his own Rights, gives himself that Title, I am the good shepherd,
says he in the Tenth Chapter of St. John; according to the Principle of our
Savior himself, it might have been told him, Why do thou call thy self good,
there is none good but God; but knowing very well what he was, he made himself
equal with God in goodness.

The whole Gospel is full of the Traces of that Mercy, which our Savior has
exercised in chief. You have already seen this, in that he pardons sins, not as
Ministers do, by way of Declaration, but as God, by an absolute and independent
Authority. The manner of St. Paul's wishing Grace, is also an evident proof of
this Truth: Grace be unto you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. This is the common Seal of St. Paul's Epistles, by which he
renders an Authentic Witness to our Savior's Divinity. The Christians who had
been Educated in the Jewish Religion, and thereby accustomed to hear nothing
more frequently spoken of than the Blessing, the Peace, and the Grace of God,
could not understand it otherwise. An Apostle would have been better advised
than to wish them Grace proceeding elsewhere than from God. This Grace alone is
sufficient for us. The Scripture never tell us of the Grace of Angels, or of
Men. Where is there any mention made in form of wishing the Grace of Abraham,
or that of Moses, or St. Peter, or St. Paul? The Church lives only by the Grace
of God; insomuch that this Salutation, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you, is an excellent proof of the Divinity of our Great Redeemer. He is
therefore, as you see, equal to his Father in Eternity, in Immensity, in
Holiness, in Power, and in Mercy. And what is the result of this Equality but
this, that our Lord possesses the Attributes of the Divine Essence, and enjoys
the Honor that is incontestably due to that Essence? This is the third Head
whereby we prove, that Jesus Christ is equal with his Father.

That which at first put us upon the Meditation of this Article, is that
Honorable Rank our Savior holds in the Scriptures. In that Sacred Book where
every thing is in its proper place, and where nothing that is created, is made
to go hand in hand with God; and yet there we ever see the Son always joined
with his Heavenly Father; Teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. There are three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. John 5.7.
These are Texts where we see these three Adorable Persons ranked in one Line.
St. Paul blesses the Corinthians from the Son, even as from the Father. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

A remarkable passage indeed, where we find the Son even named before the
Father, which yet we find also in many other passages. But why is the order
here inverted? To make it appear, Gal. 1.1, 2. 2 These. 2.16.
say the Fathers, that the order of names does not import a Subordination of
different Natures. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are only one Divine Nature;
and therefore it is that the Scripture sometimes places the Son above the
Father. Can we imagine that that Sacred Record would ever have committed such
an absurdity, if the Son had been no more than a Creature? I appeal to any Man,
who has in the least degree savored the Spirit of Scripture. What think we of
such a speech as this, The Grace of Moses, and the Love of God be with you all?
Or of this, Joshua, called to be a Leader of Israel, not of Men, nor by Man,
but by Moses, Gal. 1.1.
and by God; or of this, Now Moses and God comfort your Hearts. I appeal to any
one, whether it be not profane to talk at this rate; and yet do but put the
Name of Jesus Christ instead of Moses, and we shall find all these passages
word for word in the New Testament. This is an observation raised from the
Son's being sometimes named before the Father; but tho the Son had been
continually placed in the second rank, as indeed commonly he is, yet the
Argument for all that continues in its full force. The Son would never have
been joined with the Father in the Scripture, if the Son had been a Creature,
because he would have been infinitely inferior to him; neither would the
Scripture ever have suppressed this distance, by ranging the Father and the Son
together in one Line, and placing them on one and the same Throne. Is not this
to tell us plainly and openly, that both of them possess the same undivided
Nature? This is the Honor the Holy Ghost has given to the Son of God in the
Scriptures. See we now what Honor we Men ought to render to this Son, who is
our Master and Savior.

Worship is as it were the shadow of the Godhead, let us thereby take the
height and elevation of the Lord we are to worship. To this purpose let us lay
this down for a Principle, That the Glory of Adoration belongs to none but God
alone. Should I go about to prove this Truth from the Old Testament, I should
be fain to take in the Testimony of all the Prophets. They have all of them in
the most smart and lively terms expressed the Jealousy of God, for any Divine
Honors exhibited to Creatures. We need but cast our Eyes upon the Old
Testament to be fully convinced thereof. It being indeed no other than a
perpetual Commentary upon the First Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me. There never was any the least variation or contest in this point.
Never did the Prophets patiently endure to see Men worship any other gods, save
him alone who has created Heaven and Earth. These Holy Men unanimously
declare, that to him alone belongs the Glory of Adoration. No Creature at all
is to be worshipped, neither Stars, nor Plants, nor living Creatures, nor Men,
nor Angels. Men indeed have sometimes been called gods, as we have already
taken notice. Moses was instead of God to Aaron; and Judges are called gods; we
also find this name given to Angels in some places; but this name given by way
of Metaphor does not import Adoration; Aaron did not adore Moses; neither did
Israel adore their Judges, or the Angels; for this is the glory of God only,
and he has sworn he will not give his glory to another.

Neither has this point of Divinity been altered under the New Testament. It
is none of those Mosaic Rites, that were to cease as soon as the fullness of
time was come. God is always God; and if we may so say, he never was more God,
than he is at present; or to soften the Expression, he never more appeared God
than in the Manifestation of Grace. Herein he has made all his Goodness to
pass before us, and consequently he never more deserved to be only worshipped.
Shall we suppose then, that under a Dispensation, where by a new Effusion of
Grace he has deserved an accession to his former glory of Adoration, that he
is become unconcerned for that glory, whereof formerly he was so Jealous? And
to that degree, as to set a Creature at his Right Hand? A Creature placed on
God's side, is something that is contradictory: Let us set every thing in its
proper place. God always abides alone in the Throne, and the Creature at the
foot of it.

But without having recourse to Reasoning, which inform us that the glory of
God, is an unalienable Right and Possession; the Holy Scripture assures us,
that under the Gospel, as well as under the Law, the glory of Religious worship
belongs to God only. We know the answer our Lord returned to a Creature that
would fain have been adored; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him alone
shall thou serve. This answer is good at all times. The Apostles use the same
Language as their Master; they say in more places than one, 1 Timothy 1.17. Romans
16.27. Acts 14.15.
To the only wise God be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. When St.
Paul sees Men about to worship the Creature, he points them straight to the
Living God; We preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities to the
living God. It Is to him alone that your Homage of right is due. When the
Apostle represents to the Galatians the excess of that Corruption wherewith
they were infected before their Conversion; Gal. 4.8.
he tells them they served those things which by nature were no gods. It is
then, according to St. Paul's Judgment, a great Sin to serve that which is not
God by Nature. If therefore I find, that St. Paul obliges me to worship any
Being; I may have good reason, according to the Opinion we have of him, to
conclude, That this Adorable Being is God, and God too by his Nature. For it is
not lawful for us to worship any Being, save God alone. Let us learn this from
the Revelations; that Book wherewith the Holy Ghost has been pleased, as it
were, to seal up the New Testament. He that preaches this Doctrine, is an
Angel; one of those Spirits that are well informed how things are carried in
Heaven; I say it is an Angel that teaches us, that God alone is to be
worshipped. Rev. 22.9.
St. John falls down to worship before the feet of the Angel, See thou do it
not, says he: And why not? for, adds he, I am thy fellow servant. Conclude we
then; That whatsoever is bound to worship God, cannot be an Object of
Adoration. Who then is it that we are to adore? Worship God, says the Angel.
God only deserves the honor of Adoration under the New Testament, as well as
under the Old.

There is no solid Reasoning in the world, if after having established this
Principle, I may not conclude thence, that our Blessed Savior is God, with
respect to one of his Natures, seeing the Gospel makes it our Duty to worship
him. Will it be necessary to prove that this Adoration is a Worship practiced
and prescribed by the Apostles? Why we need but open the Books of the New
Testament, and we shall meet with the Proof of it; You will see the Apostles
themselves, and many other Believers, worshipping the Lord, without the least
check from him, or saying to them, See thou do it not. Let none wrangle here
about the Word Adoration. They take Jesus Christ for the Son of God, and they
adore him under that Notion. He has never rejected, or disowned this Worship,
but has received it as a Tribute due unto him.

We meet with a Character in the Style of Sacred Authors, which puts the Divine
Adoration we owe to our Savior, out of the reach of any manner of
Contradiction. They are wont to interrupt their Style by Doxologies to the
Honor of God. And the same they do to our Savior, and in the same Terms, and
that in several places. 1 Pet. 4.11. Rev. 1.5, 6.
That God in all things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. They are the words of St. Peter:
Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has
made us kings and priests unto God, even his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen: As St. John expresses himself in the
beginning of his Revelation. What are we to conclude from hence, that the
Apostles make use of these kind of Doxologies to the honor of Jesus, but this,
That he is truly equal with his Father, and that they honor him after one and
the same manner? Pursue we this Point a little farther, and examine more
particularly wherein this Adoration does consist, that so we may be the better
informed what the Eminency of his Divine Nature is.

In the Chapter that has furnished us with our Text, we see that our Lord has
a Name above every Name, Phil. 2.9, 10.
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. Thus it is that the Scripture
Language expresses the whole Universe of things: All things must bend the Knee
to Jesus, which yet is not to be understood of those five Letters, as if that
Name did merit a more singular veneration, than the other Names of our Savior.
The Custom which has been introduced of bowing themselves at the pronunciation
of the Name of Jesus, is not founded upon these words of St. Paul, but only
because the Christians thought it necessary to make this Mark of Respect, the
Test of their Belief in his Divinity. So that indeed it is to his person that
we owe the honor of Genuflexion. Every thing must bow before our Lord; He has
received a Name above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should
bow.

We have an excellent Explication of those words in those Passages of
Scripture, where we see that in our Christian Religion all things must be done
in the Name of Jesus. Nothing can be imagined greater than this Honor:
Christians are baptized in this Name; they believe in this Name; they work
Miracles in this Name; they are justified in this Name; they meet together in
this Name; they pronounce their Deliberations in this Name; they preach in this
Name; they suffer for this Name; they pray in this Name; they return Thanks in
this Name; and in one word, to make use of the words of St. Paul, Whatsoever
they do in word or deed, they do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus. I demand
therefore, Whether ever any Creature was thus glorified in Israel? Is it not
notorious that the Name of God only, was named amongst that People? no other
Name was heard of amongst them in their Church, but the Name of God only: They
did not swear, but by the Name of God; they did not bless, but in the Name of
God; they heard of no Deliverances, but in the Name of God; they glorified no
other Name but that of God only. What therefore must we conclude him to be,
whose Name must be celebrated under the New Covenant; that is, throughout all
the Earth, as the Name of God was under the Old Covenant; that is to say, in a
very small Corner of the World? The Father allows the Son to be glorified more
than he himself has been; as it were to make an amends to the Son for his
Subordination, under which he appears with regard to the Father. Whatever it
be, the Name of the Son holds a Sovereigh Rank, and not that of a Prophet or
Ambassador. These Deputies do all things in the Name of the Sovereign who has
deputed them, not in their own. Wherefore, since the Name of Christ is made use
of every where, it is an uncontestable Mark that he is Master, that he is King,
that he is Sovereign; yea, that he is God blessed for ever. Let no body reply
here, That all this was done in time. I am not afraid to assert, God can
constitute no Sovereign in his Church, because in doing so, he must renounce
the unalienable Right of his Nature, which admits no Peer, neither in Heaven,
nor on Earth: But the Name of Jesus Christ has been thus elevated, because
according to one of his Natures he is the Son. This is a Mystery he himself
opens to us; when after having said in the 11th Chapter of St. Matthew, Matt.
11.27.
All things are delivered unto me of my Father; he adds, to show that he had
received this Power because he was the Eternal Son of God, And no man knows
the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the Father save the Son. We
shall have occasion once more to speak of this matter. But we proceed now to a
more particular enquiry, wherein the Worship we owe to Jesus Christ our Lord
does consist.

There is no question but that Genuflexion, and bowing of the Body, are
comprehended in the sense of these words; but they extend yet further; they
signify all the Worship we owe to the Godhead. This is the Signification they
have in the Prophets whence they are taken; I have sworn by my self, that unto
me every knee shall bow, Isa. 45.23.
says God by the Prophet Isaiah. All the kinds of Adoration are expressed in
this manner of speaking; Prostration of the Body, humiliation of Soul, and even
the total Annihilation of Man: All this is due to our Lord. I will not insist
upon the Bowing, or Prostration of the Body, because that is the least part of
Worship, and to speak properly, is no more than a sign, and a variable one too,
of the true Adoration; for we may adore without kneeling. The Church of old
prayed standing for some time. So that we shall add no more concerning the
Adoration of the Body, save only this, that we owe our Body to Jesus Christ, as
to that God who has created it.

As for the Soul, which is the true Principle of Worship, let us conceive all
the ways whereby it is capable of adoring God, all these she owes to our
Savior Jesus Christ. This is that we must prove by Scripture, that we may not
assert any thing with relation to this Mystery, without the information of this
Infallible Guide. Sacrifice, and Trust or Confidence, honor God as Sovereign.
In Sacrifice we offer all to God; in Trust and Confidence we expect all from
him. Under the Old Law God reserved this double Honor to himself; there was no
Sacrificing, but to him, no trusting or confiding, but in him. All this is
transferred to our Savior. As to Sacrifice, we cannot now look for any other
than that of Prayer, since the time of Bloody Sacrifices is ceased. The
Sacrifice of Prayer is much more worthy of God, than the Blood of the Ancient
Sacrifices. This new Sacrifice we owe to our Lord. St. Stephen dies, after
having offered up this Sacrifice to our Savior; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit,
cried that first Martyr. It was with this Sacrifice that St. Paul began his
Christian Race: For Ananias in declaring to him what he was to do, in order to
obey him who had stopped him on his way to Damascus, says, Acts 11.16.
Why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, by calling
on the name of the Lord. The entrance of the Proselites into the Jewish Church
was by Circumcision, by Baptism, and by Sacrifice. Circumcision was now ceased;
so that there remained nothing necessary for St. Paul's admittance, but Baptism
and Sacrifice; and accordingly he is baptized, and for his Sacrifice he calls
upon the Name of the Lord. This piece of Worship is so essential to
Christianity, that the Christians are described in several places, by those
that call upon the Name of the Lord. The time is come, that whosoever calls on
the name of the Lord, shall be saved: Acts 2.21. Joel 2.31. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Words quoted from the Prophet Joel, and applied to our Savior. In Joel they
plainly belong to God: And what did St. Peter and St. Paul think of, when they
applied them to our Lord, if he be not God? St. Peter upon occasion of the
Pentecostal Miracle, says, that that was a fulfilling of the words of Joel:
And St. Paul, to show the necessity of the preaching of the Gospel, grounds his
Discourse upon these words: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord,
shall be saved. Romans 10.13, 14.
How then, says he, shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall
they hear without a Preacher? This therefore shows at the same time, that we
are to call upon Jesus Christ, and to call upon him as God.

Confidence or Trust is the Second Branch of Divine Worship. God, and God
alone, was the Hope of Israel, the Hope of David, the Hope of all the Saints
under the Old Law. Not because God at that time did not make use of any means
to deliver his People; for it is plain there were Temporal Deliverers; there
were Moses's, Gideon's, David's; but forasmuch as these were only Instruments
in the hand of God, they lifted up their eyes to the first Cause of their
Deliverances; and therefore said to God, Thou alone art my Trust, and my Rock.
If our Lord Jesus had only been a second Cause in the Work of our Redemption,
had he been no more than a Creature sent to save us, we need not make any
difficulty to say, There would have been no more ado about him, than about
those Deliverers of old; neither would the Name of our Savior appear every
where with that Divine Magnificence, as it does in the Gospel. Why, how is it
that the Gospel Honors Christ neither more nor less than God was honored
under the Old Law? Christ is the Hope of the New Israel. See what the Apostle
says in the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 15.12.
There shall be a root of Jesse, etc. and in him shall the Gentiles trust. He
is therefore the Hope and Confidence of the Gentiles, he is the Hope of all
Christians. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 Timothy
1.1.
says St. Paul, we are of all men most miserable. Christ is called our Hope.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Savior, and of
the Lord Jesus Christ, our Hope: So St. Paul begins his Epistle to Timothy.
Elsewhere Christ is called the hope of Glory, or the glorious Hope. Let us add
to this, Col. 1.27.
all those passages which enjoin us to place our Faith in Jesus Christ, and all
those that forbid us to put our confidence in the Creature, and we shall have a
demonstration capable to convince us, That our Lord and Savior is God Blessed
for ever.

Why is all this honor put upon him? Why, because he is God; we have no other
reason, there can be no other reason for it. We Sacrifice to him because he is
God; we put our confidence in him because he is God. This reason is contained
in the words of St. Paul, Wherefore God has given him a name above every name.
That is as much as to say, Phil. 2.9.
because Jesus Christ is God, and because he has emptied himself for this
complicated Cause, a name above every name has been given unto him. We must
refer these words, wherefore, or for this Cause, to all that went before:
Christ being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
nevertheless he emptied himself: Wherefore etc. That is to say, because he was
equal with God, and because in his Incarnation he was willing to make himself
equal with man; for this double Cause a Name has been given him above every
Name. Let us take heed of believing, that all the Glory of Christ is the fruit
of his Humiliation; before ever he was made Man he had his Glory; Now, Joh.
17.5.
O Father, glorisie me with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was. Christ was God from the Beginning; In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God. John 1.1.
He was God, therefore, before ever he emptied himself, and as such, John 1.14.
he had his Glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father.

True it is, there is a Glory which he began first fully to enjoy after his
emptying of himself; this is the Glory of the Mediator; a Glory which he entered
upon at the time of his Incarnation, and which shall end on that Solemn day,
when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father. This Transient Glory is
owing to Jesus Christ's emptying of himself, considered as the Abasement of
Godman. The Glory of this Mediator is too great to be derived to any mere
Creature. He was God, and he became Man; for this double Cause a Name is given
him above every name. It is not only because he is God, nor only because he was
Man: Join them both together, it is because being God, he was made Man, that he
is thus highly Elevated. The Godhead is the spring of this Merit, the Humanity
is the way of it. If he had not been God, he would not have been great enough
to be our Mediator with God; and had he not been Man, he would not have been
low enough to be a Mediator with regard to men: Had he been nothing but God, he
would not have been known, he would have had no Name; this is the Reason: He
being the Second Person in the Trinity, the Father, who had reserved to himself
the Government of the world, would have enjoyed the Worship of men, and the
Word would have been Adored only in a hidden and implicit manner. It was agreed
therefore between the Father and the Son, that the Son should come down to
Redeem men, and that in consideration thereof, he should openly enjoy their
Worship. This was executed accordingly, Christ united to himself a Victim,
which he has given up for us unto Death. He must therefore in virtue of this
Treaty, receive a Name, and together with that Name, the Adorations of Mankind.
Refer we therefore this Worship radically to the Divine Nature, which alone
deserves Adoration; and by way of instrument, to the Victim, which the Word
has honored by his Incarnation. Wherefore he has also given to our Lord a
name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow.

St. Paul in these words, alludes to that passage of the Prophet Isaiah, Isai.
45.23.
where God says, Unto me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear.
It is observable also, that St. Paul makes use of these same words in the
Epistle to the Romans, to prove that we must all appear before the Tribunal of
Christ: For it is written, says he, Romans 14.11.
as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God. Christ therefore is that Lord, who in the Old Testament Swears
that all shall humble themselves before him. This is the conclusion, that every
man will infer from hence, who believes that St. Paul understood the Prophet
Isaiah. It is time to draw to a Conclusion after having showed very clearly,
That seeing Christ bears the Names of God; seeing he possesses the Essence, or
the Attributes of God, and that he enjoys the Worship that is due to none but
God, he could not think it any Robbery to make himself Equal with God.

I shall conclude this Discourse with Four Reflections, the importance whereof
is such as may well challenge a moment more of your attention: The first
Reflection is, That by denying the Truth we have been here confirming, we make
of the Bible the strangest Book in the world. We believe, and we have great
reason to believe, that never was any thing so excellent seen by men. It is a
work by which all Parties maintain themselves, and throughout the whole of
which we see nothing else but traces of the most profound Wisdom. Both the
Testaments correspond with the most exactest Symmetry; the Old is made for the
New, and the New for the Old. All the designs of the Holy Ghost agree together,
neither is any thing of contradiction to be found in them. But we shall not
find this to be so in the case of the Hypothesis we here oppose. For that
supposed, this Sacred Book appears a quite other thing. The Old Testament has
scarcely the least correspondence with the New: We find nothing but thwartings
and contradictions between them, and it cannot in the least seem strange to me,
that those who embrace this Notion are so near neighbors to Irreligion. The
Old Testament commands us in express terms to Worship nothing but God, that we
must put our confidence in none but God, that we are not to Hope but in God.
Let us not cavil about words, I mean the Sovereign God who has Created Heaven
and Earth: The New Testament, if Jesus Christ be not God, overturns all this.
This supposed, it is evident that our Savior came not to fulfill the Law and the
Prophets, but utterly to confound and destroy them.

Let us speak only of the New Testament. Bless me! what a Book shall we have of
it, if Jesus Christ be not God? 'Twill be nothing else but a medly of
Contradictions, Snares and Blasphemies. On one hand we find in it many Passages
wherein Idolatry is condemned, and elsewhere as many where it is commanded:
These are the contradictions. We meet with Passages every where that invite us
to Adore the Lord Jesus, these are the Snares, and terrible ones too. Divine
Providence took care to hide the Body of Moses, lest it should have been made
an object of Worship. But the Providence of the New Testament will be very
different, it makes us every moment to meet with Christ under strong
appearances that solicit our Adorations, without ever cautioning us with a see
thou do it not, worship God. Rev. 22 9.
The New Testament is full of Ancient Oracles pronounced to the honor of the
Living God; it is clear as the Sun at Noonday, that the Applications the
Apostles make of them, are mere childish Triflings and Blasphemies, if our
Savior by one of his Natures be not that Living God whom the Prophets
worshipped. But then grant but the Divinity of our Lord, and all those fogs and
dark clouds are dissipated; and you will meet throughout the whole New
Testament neither contradiction, nor Snare, nor Blasphemy. The Holy Ghost is
always firm and unalterable in the execution of his designs; he proposes Jesus
as the Object of Human Worship, because he is God; this solves the
Contradictions, this turns the pretended Snares into Arguments of Piety; this
changes the Blasphemies into just and due applications of the Ancient
Prophetical passages.

Were it not so, the Holy Ghost would have taken a quite different method to
instruct us; it would have been so far from leading us on the brinks of the
Precipice, it would have kept us at the farthest distance from it; in a
thousand passages it would have said to us, Take heed of taking Jesus Christ to
be God. But why, say they, should not the Holy Ghost speak magnificently of
that Redeemer, to whom we are so vastly obliged, and whom Providence has
raised to such an extraordinary degree of Glory? For that very reason, say I,
the Holy Ghost ought to speak with more reservedness of the Glory of Christ.
The greater he is, the more danger of his being taken for a God. His very
greatness makes us stand the more in need of Preservatives. The Blessed Virgin
is without doubt the most Glorious of all Women. What has the Holy Ghost done,
to prevent others from adoring her? He has to this end scarcely mentioned her
in the Gospel. Set but aside the History of the Birth of our Savior, where
this glorious Virgin makes a necessary Personage, we meet with her no more,
except it be on some few occasions, where commonly she appears with some
Circumstance or other, proper to check the desire any one might have to worship
her. In the rest of the Scriptures, there is not a word of the Blessed Virgin.
The Acts of the Apostles, except what is said in the Chapter, and the Epistles,
make no mention of her at all. The reason of this silence is apparent; It was
necessary for to draw a Vail, as it were, over the Blessed Virgin, lest the
Christians might be tempted to worship her. The more glorious she is, the more
need there is to take care to hide her. The case would have been the same with
our Divine Redeemer, if he had not been God; the excess of our Obligations to
him, and the Glory of his Exaltation, obliged the Holy Ghost not to speak of
him; or at least, seeing it was not possible to Preach his Doctrine without
speaking of his Person, to make use of such Expressions, as might make it
evident, that he is not God. It was necessary in most express terms, and on
several occasions, to tell men, This Jesus whom you worship, is not God for all
that. I say, it was of absolute necessity to declare this with the greatest
clearness and plainess of Expression imaginable. But instead thereof, the Holy
Ghost proposes him to us as God, without the least Caution or Preservative; we
believe we have proved this to you by most clear and self-evident places of
Scripture, which tho they were doubtful, would for all that be of great force,
because whosoever acknowledges the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, easily perceives
that he would never have delivered any thing like it concerning the Godhead of
our Savior, if he had not been God indeed. The Equivocal Expressions that had
a favorable sense, and a sense contrary to his Divinity, would have been too
dangerous in this Case. The Wisdom of the Holy Ghost would never have thought
fit to have made a Representation so proper to delude us; what shall we say
then of so many places, where without any the least Equivocation, we see the
Divine Glory of Christ shining forth to us? it is not one Text of Scripture
fetched out of a Corner that we insist upon, but there are a thousand such
Passages scattered up and down the Bible, which both in the letter and the
sense of them, assert the Divinity of our Savior. Neither can any thing be
said in this Case, but this, that the Holy Ghost was willing to deceive us; and
if he has deceived us, it is an innocent Error, and for which we shall not be
responsible at the last day. Yea, the very Enemies of the Godhead of Christ
leave Heaven-gate open to those that believe the same. It cannot be denied, say
they, but that there may be Salvation for those that worship the Man-god. On
the one hand it appears, that they adore nothing but what is adorable; for the
very Enemies of Jesus Christ profess to adore him. And on the other hand, they
are sensible that the Doctrine of his Divinity is sufficiently confirmed in
Scripture at least, to justify the belief of the Orthodox. So that upon this
account they do not doubt of their Salvation; why then should any condemn them?
If they adore nothing but what is indeed adorable, their Error will only be in
Speculation. If they believe nothing but what the Holy Ghost makes them to
believe by his way of speaking concerning Christ, conclude we this Reflection,
The Holy Ghost neither can deceive, nor can be deceived; it will be our Glory
to follow him always, for he cannot guide us but in the way of Truth.

The second Reflection upon the Difficulties that are made about this Mystery,
we have explained to you. There are three sorts of Difficulties raised against
this Doctrine of the Eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ: Heart-difficulties,
Wit-difficulties, and Scripture-difficulties. By Heart-difficulties, I
understand that repugnance we find in our selves to receive revealed Truths
with a ready and teachable frame of Heart; this is that Temper the heart of Man
has received from the impressions of Sin; whatsoever comes from Heaven is
suspected, tho indeed there be no other reason to suspect it, save only this,
because it comes from Heaven. The Experience of all Ages is but too notorious a
proof of this sad Truth. The most certain Revelation has been disputed,
neither is there any thing so clear in Revelation that has not been
contradicted. To prove this, I will not expose to your view the profane
Persons, and Heretics of the Ages past; this scandalous Procession would only
serve to afflict you. Heaven, says it; and this is sufficient for man to
contradict it, to doubt it, to deny it. It may be that considering the matter
with more attention, we shall find that men put themselves in an ill Humor
against Revelation, because they find in it those Moral Precepts that do not at
all comport with the corruption of their heart. They criticize the Doctrine,
that they may have a pretense to shake off the Yoke of its commands; they
control the Precept to justify their Libertinism. I make no question at all,
but that a part of those Clouds some Men meet with in the Mystery of the
Divinity of Christ, do proceed from the Vapors of a corrupt Heart. They
question the Glory of that God, whom they have no mind to obey. I have nothing
to say against this first sort of Difficulties, neither need I; since no body
dares put them in form, why should I take up time to refute them? I shall only
say by way of Allusion, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

The Difficulties of the second Order, are the Difficulties of Wit; they attack
the Divinity of our Savior, because they do not comprehend it; their bounded
understanding measures all Truths according to the extent of its own
Conceptions, and subjects to this Rule things that Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor ever came into the heart of Man. This Earth-worm will needs measure
the Third Heaven; what extravagance can be greater? He cannot conceive how the
Father, the Son and Holy Ghost are God, without making three Gods of them;
therefore there is no such thing. Would not one think, hearing a Man talk at
this rate, that he had an infinite understanding, and that he comprehended all
things in the Infinity of his Conception? And yet we shall find that this
presuming Wit, does not understand any thing perfectly, no not so much as the
Nature of the most common things. He does not understand himself; and tho every
thing be a Mystery to him, yet he cannot away with the Mysteries of Religion.

Yet this Enemy of the Mysteries of our Religion professes a Mystery, which is
at least as inconceivable as any is in our Religion. For he will make us
believe, That a Creature has been invested with infinite Attributes; that a
Creature has been made God in Knowledge, Power, and Glory. Pray tell me what
is a Mystery, if this be not, and an inconceivable one too? The Creature turned
God, and the Finite turned Infinite; the most incredible and contradictory
thing in the World. Our Mystery indeed asserts, That God humbled himself; but
that this was by uniting himself personally with a Creature, which he took to
himself amongst Men; and yet this very Man that makes so many Difficulties
against the Incarnation, tells us of a Man that is become God by a strange kind
of Metamorphosis. Thus they reject the Truth, and instead thereof fill their
Heads with Chimaera's.

The triumphant Raillery of the Profane, is, That one is one, and one is
three; and then making a show of their being fully persuaded of the Unity of
God, they suppose the Divinity of our Savior sufficiently overthrown. Who
doubts that one is one, and that one is not three; this is true, even in our
Divine Arithmetic; there are Three Persons, three manners of Subsisting, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. We do not say, That these Three Persons
are but One Person, that would be contradictory; but we say, That these Three
Persons are in One Divine Essence; Three are not One, neither is One Three, in
the same respect; there is a Trinity of Persons, but an Unity of Nature. But
you cannot conceive how Three Persons can possess at the same time, the same
individual Nature; what then? I conceive it no more than you do; but is it such
a strange thing, that God should be otherwise than we are, otherwise than all
the things we see, otherwise than all that we can conceive? He has assured me,
That his Nature consists in Three Persons; I believe it with Submission. This
ought to be the Temper and Behavior of our Understanding in the Difficulties
it meets with on this Mystery.

The Difficulties of the Third Order, are the Difficulties of Scripture. Men
are ashamed to propose their Heart-difficulties, for in so doing, they would
expose their own Corruption; and nothing but a Spirit of Libertinism dares
openly oppose its own Light to that of Divine Revelation. They rather search
for a plausible pretense in the Revelation it self; several places of Scripture
are heaped to-together to compose a Cloud that may hinder the Glory of the
Gospel from shining forth in its full Luster.

At first those Texts are hunted for, that prove Christ to be Man. But pray
what is this to the Question? These Texts prove that he is Man; we say so too;
yea, cursed be he that says, that Jesus Christ is not Man. We believe that by
one of his Natures he was Man, as we are; but this does not hinder him from
being God by his other Nature. Man consists of Body and Soul; can we prove from
the Functions of his Body, that he has no Soul? He Eats, he Drinks, he Sleeps,
therefore he has nothing else but a Body. This way of arguing is ridiculous;
consider this Man well, and you will soon find by the operations of his
Understanding, that he has a Soul as well as a Body. This we might prove by
the Example of all compounds. This is enough; we believe that our Lord Jesus is
a Person composed of two Natures, viz. of a Divine and Humane Nature, he is
Flesh and Blood; he has suffered, tasted Death, this shows him to be Man. He
prayed, he worshipped, he was ignorant of several things; this shows he was
Man. But he formed the World, he created the Angels, he makes himself equal
with his Heavenly Father, this proves him to be God. We readily admit the
Passages of Scripture that rank him amongst Men, neither dare we suppress those
where he is called God. To make our Doctrine to agree with the Scripture, we
must hold him to be God-man.

Our Adversaries prove from several Texts of Scripture, that there is but one
God; all this is time spent in vain, we are all fully persuaded that there is
but one God: Cursed be he that admits more than one God. But say they, you
teach that the Father is God, and that the Son is God; we do so, and in doing
so, we follow the Scripture; but you don't hear us say, That they are Two Gods;
they are Two Persons in one and the same God, but not Two Gods.

But you say, That Jesus Christ is equal with God; the Father and Son
therefore, according to you, are two Beings equal in Dignity; does not this
imply a plurality of Gods, since two equal Gods cannot be the same God? This
difficulty only proceeds from hence, that they pretend to be ignorant of what
we say upon the Mystery of the Trinity; for supposing that the Father and the
Son are only Two Persons, or two manners of Subsisting in one and the same
Being, there is no room left for this Objection. The Father and the Son, these
Two Persons, are necessarily equal, by such an Equality, as does not thwart
their Unity, because they indivisiby possess the same Nature.

They insist further, that the Father is called the only true God; This is life
eternal, that they know thee, the only true God, John 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: What would they infer from hence? What,
that Jesus Christ is a God, but that he is a false God. A Christian ear cannot
with patience hear such Blasphemy; and yet they must come to this, before they
can make those words to be of any service against the Divinity of Christ. It is
clear that these Words contain an opposition; the opposite to true, is false.
If the Father be called the only true God, in opposition to the Son, we easily
see what follows. It is true, that there is an opposition in this place; not
between the Father and the Son; but between the Father and whatsoever is falsely
called God in the World. And in this sense, as it is said of the Father, That
he is the only true God; we may also say of the Son, that he is the only true
God, and so of the Holy Ghost; because the Divine Nature, which is indivisibly
possessed by these three Persons, is indeed the only true God.

What remains now that can give us the least trouble? what can be reasonably
alleged against the Divinity of our Lord? shall we object, that he himself
sometimes speaks of it with great reservedness. It is very true that our
Savior, with a great deal of caution and reservedness, declared those Truths
that were capable of setting the Jews against him. The calling of the Gentiles
may be one Instance for all. Sometimes he wraps this Doctrine under the Vail of
Parables; sometimes he makes an Allusion to Histories; wherein it seems that
Grace was not shut up in the compass of one only People. Truth can have no
entrance into Souls full of darkness, which as the Light of the Day, comes
after the Night is gone. What would this Truth of the Calling of the Gentiles
have produced, if our Lord had preached it without any caution? It would not
have been believed, and our Lord would have been put to death before his work
had been done. I speak as a Man. We may say the same thing of our Savior's
Godhead, which being such, that the Jews could not bear the glory of it, he
discovers it by little and little to them; he tries their hearts: after that he
had found by the manner of their reception of these Words, I and my Father are
one, that it was not seasonable yet to declare this Doctrine, he stops there,
and leads out the Thoughts of his Auditors to the Magistrates, whom the
Scripture calls Gods. If we mind it, our Lord does not fully justify thereby,
what he had said in these words, I and my Father are one. For never did any of
the Magistrates speak at this rate: what is more, they never made themselves
Gods, nor equal with God: The Scripture indeed calls them Gods, but they never
said they were equal with God. Christ made himself God; and for the
justification of himself, is contented to allege the Example of the
Magistrates. The Case is plain; our Savior intends not to retract what he had
said; his Design only is, to moderate the fury of the Jews. Neither indeed were
they fully satisfied with it; they endeavor to lay hold on him, but he escaped
out of their hands. Do we find him in this place saying, That he is not God?
Not in the least; he never said any thing that came near it. Whereas indeed he
ought to have said it positively, and often, to make his Doctrine of more
efficacy to the Jews. He very well knew, that nothing was so offensive to them
as Blasphemy, and that he quite lost himself in their esteem, by making himself
God. And yet for all this, he always returns to it, and frequently offers them
the same occasion of offense. Pray what may be the meaning of this? has he no
desire that his Doctrine should be received? no body dare say so. Why is it
then that he so often touches the same Mystery? It is plain as the Meridian
Sun, that nothing but the force of Truth engages him to make himself equal
with his heavenly Father. He is not willing always to speak openly, by a too
free and open declaration of himself: for in this case he would either have
convinced all his Auditors, or not. If we suppose the first, they would never
have put him to death, which would have been equally contrary to the Prophecies
of old, and to the Happiness of Mankind, which stood in need of his Death: If
the latter, they would have put him to death too soon; he did need three or
four years time, wherein to accomplish his Work. These Considerations oblige
him to speak sparingly of, and in part to conceal the glory of his Divinity. On
some occasions we find that he wholly restrains himself; as in the 10th Chapter
of St. John; in others again he utters himself with great liberty, as in the
5th Chapter of the same Gospel. When there is nothing more for him to do, but
to die, he frankly declares himself to be the Son of God. I think we may say,
that he was the first Martyr for his own Divinity: for it is upon this
Declaration of his, that the Jews unanimously cried out, He is guilty of Death.
According to their Judgment he had uttered a horrid Blasphemy, and by the Law
deserved that Sentence should be pronounced against him. How does he justify
himself of this Charge? Does he allege that of the Magistrates, or the Angels,
on this occasion? does he say, That hels the Son of God, because he was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, or because he had received the power of doing
Miracles, and of declaring the Truth? Thus understood, there was no Blasphemy
in the Case; and he ought, if he had not been God, to have set the Jews right,
by justifying himself in this manner. But on the contrary, he maintains to the
last moments of his Life, himself to be the Son of God, in a sense which the
Jews judged Blasphemy; that is to say, The Eternal Son of God; for otherwise
taken, it could not be Blasphemy.

I shall only propound the two other Reflections, tho indeed they be no less
important than the former. My Third Reflection is, That the Doctrine I have
here asserted and proved, is the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. This is so
incontestably true, that Socinus himself owns, That from the first beginning of
the Church, Socin. Epist. 3. ad Radec. Ab ipso ferme nascentis Ecclesiae
initio, tot Viros non minus Pietate quam Doctrina clarissim^^, tot Christi
Sanctissimos Martyrs, ad eout nullus sit numerus, eum alioqui grovissimum
errorem secuto^ fursse, quod Christus sit unus ille Deus qui omnia creavit, aut
certe exillius substantia propria genitus.
there have been a great number of Learned Men, Saints and Martyrs, who
believed that Jesus Christ was that God who created all things; or that he was
begotten of his own Substance. This express Acknowledgment from an Adversary,
whose great interest it was to rid himself of the weight Antiquity would bear
against him, may very well pass for a strong Argument, on an occasion where it
does not seem so proper to enter upon the Historical proof of it. It has
already been showed, that the Primitive Church did believe the Eternal Divinity
of our Savior, at a time when the Church was yet in an Age of Innocence; or to
make use of an Expression of one of the Ancients, When she was yet a Virgin; in
a time when the Saints confirmed their Preaching by Miracles; in a time when
Truth was ratified by the Seal of Martyrdom; in a time when the Voice of the
Apostles had but newly ceased from sounding in the Ears of the Members of it.
What therefore we take from a time so happily circumstanced, must needs be of
good alloy: And may my Soul, say I, be with those Saints and those Martyrs who
taught what they had but newly received from the Mouths of the Apostles
themselves.

Is it possible that a sincere Christian heart should find any relish in the
opposite Error, which has the concurring Testimony of the First Centuries
against it, and which never got into any Credit, till after the Primitive Zeal
being grown cold, and Miracles ceased, men began to be left to themselves. I
confess I have but an ill Opinion of a Doctrine which is supported by no other
Foundation. There we may find glittering Notions, and ingenious Explications of
the Scripture, which may be apt to take with Minds that affect Novelties. But
when we consider that the Christian Religion is a Revelation transmitted by the
Ministry of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we shall make no
Difficulty to take their sense from an Age that we cannot suspect; and we shall
have very mean thoughts of those Innovators that have confidence enough to say,
as one of them does, The First Chapter of the Gospel of St. John was never well
explained till I undertook it.

My last Reflection is concerning the small concern these Innovators have for
the Peace of the Church. They would fain have us believe them to be the
Disciples of Charity; and to hear them talk, it should seem that this Virtue is
no where to be found but amongst them. I will not now enter into an enquiry,
whether under this plausible appearance they do not design more surely to
introduce their Errors; and whether after having made them ride Triumphant in
the world, they would not become, instead of the innocent Lambs they seem now
to be, the most furious Persecutors of the Church. To know what Judgment we
ought to pass in this case, we need only to call to mind the Cruelty of Arius
his disciples. But l' stop short here, and am willing to believe that our
Innovators that talk so much of Charity and Concord, cherish nothing of this
Spirit of Persecution. However they must confess, that they are none of the
best practisers of Charity; they know very well that they cannot endeavor the
Propagation of their Opinions, without troubling the Peace of men's Consciences,
and without setting Christians together by the Ears. There is no need of any
deeep consideration, to persuade our selves that these are the natural
consequences of the endeavors that would be employed to deprive the Christians
of a Doctrine they have been possessed of above these Sixteen Centuries. Why
therefore should the Enemies of this Doctrine set themselves to be the cause of
so much disorder? There is but one only thing that could Authorize this their
pretended Charity, viz. If the Doctrine which we Teach and Believe were
inconsistent with Salvation. I must own that when we see a great multitude of
Christians in danger of incurring Damnation, we have good reason to say, That
it is much better to expose them to Temporal Dangers, by propounding the Truth
to them, than to suffer so many Souls to perish by a Criminal Silence. What
them, is it this consideration that animates and pusheth on our Innovators? Not
in the least; they dare not say they are in fear for our Salvation, whilst at
the same time they set Heaven Gates wide open to all sorts of Heretics, to
Mahometans and Heathens: They, I say, who hide themselves in the Society of
other Christians, and desire nothing so earnestly as to be admitted to their
Communion: They own us to be in a state of Salvation, and declare that we have
retained all the Fundamental and Saving Points of Christianity. Where is
therefore the Charity of these rash Persons in undertaking to shake a Doctrine,
which cannot be attacked with any success, without filling the Consciences of
men with Trouble, and without shedding whole torrents of Christian Blood? such
a design as this, cannot be the effect of any thing but Pride. In a word; Men
have a mind to distinguish themselves by the novelty of their Opinions, and to
raise their own Glory by abasing that of Jesus Christ. These who destroy the
Temple of God, God will destroy. I tell you, that more than the Temple is here.
Entreat we our dear Lord Jesus, that it may please him to enlighten his
Enemies, and confirm us more and more in the belief of his Divinity. To him,
even as to the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Humor and Glory for ever. Amen.

A Declaration of the Opinion of the French Ministers who are now Refugees in
England, about some Points of Religion, in Opposition to the Socinians.
WE under written, the Refugees, French Ministers in England, having understood
by a Letter which my Lord the Bishop of London, who at present is in Holland,
has writ to Monsieur le Coq Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, and an
Illustrious Confessor of the Truth, the strange Reports that have been spread,
as if we were not sound in the Faith, and particularly with relation to the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and Grace, and the need there is to dissipate the
same; and being moreover persuaded that by this Explication of our Belief, we
shall perform a thing that will serve for the Edification and Consolation of
our Brethren, and will have its fruit, if the Lord please, especially in the
Land of our Nativity, after some Amicable and Brotherly Conferences we have had
upon this matter, in the presence of Monsieur le Coq; we have all of us agreed
to declare, as we do in the Sincerity of our Hearts:

I. That we Believe the whole Scripture Divinely Inspired, so that all Men are
obliged to receive every thing therein Revealed, with an entire Submission of
Faith. II. That we receive with Reverence and Submission whatsoever the
Scripture teaches concerning the Nature of God, and his Attributes, of his
Spirituality, Infiniteness, Incomprehensibility, Prescience even of Future
Contingencies, and of all others the said Scripture attributes to him. III.
That we Believe also what it delivers concerning the Trinity of Persons in one
only Divine Essence, and concerning the Incarnation of the Son, according as
the said Articles are set down in the VI. XIV. and XV. of the Confession of
Faith of the Reformed Churches of France. IV. That we hold also as an Article
of our Faith, That Jesus Christ by dying on the Cross, has not only left us an
Example that we should follow his Footsteps; but moreover, that his Principal
Design therein, was to satisfy the Divine Justice for us, in bearing the
Punishment of our Sins, as he actually did. V. That we detest the Opinions of
Socinus, and of all others that are contrary to the forementioned Truths; not
considering them as Innocent Opinions, or Tolerable Errors, but as Heresies
which absolutely overturn the Foundations of the Christian Faith; and that
consequently we can have no Religious Communion with those that follow them, or
teach them. VI. That we do also condemn their Opinion, who deny the inward and
immediate Operation of the Holy Ghost in the Conversion of Man to God; and who
pretend that the Holy Ghost does not so open the Hearts, as to make Men believe
the Word, incline them to love God, and to obey his Commandments.
And that for the rest, we heartily Subscribe to the Confession of Faith of the
Reformed Churches of France, which those of us who have been admitted to the
Holy Ministry in that Kingdom, have already Subscribed, without pretending to
meddle with matters of Discipline.

We trust that God will give us his Grace to preserve this Doctrine pure and
entire to our last Breath, and to evidence it as well in our public Sermons,
as our private Conversations.

London the 30th. of March 1691.
T. Satur, formerly Minister of Montauban, Moderator. A. Piozet, formerly
Minister of Man's, Joint-Moderator. C. G. La Mothe, formerly Minister of Rouan,
Secretary. Du Bourdieu, formerly Minister of Montpelier. Le Chenevix, formerly
Minister at Mante. P. Charles, formerly Minister at Mauvesin. L. Rival,
formerly Minister at Salies. O. Champion, formerly Minister at Mougon. Bejamin
de Daillon, formerly Pastor of the Church of Rochefoucault. Sers, formerly
Minister in the Church of Montredon. La Caux, formerly Minister at Castres. De
Guilhem, formerly Minister at Brebyeres in Peregord. J. Lovis Malide, formerly
Minister at Casteljaloux. De Primerose, Minister of the French Church of
London. Mitault, formerly Minister at Chef Boutonne. Samuel Metayer, Minister
of St. Quentin. De Joux, formerly Pastor of the Reformed Church of Lion. P.
Testas, formerly Minister of the Reformed Church of Milhan in Guienne. Marc
Vernoux, formerly Minister of the Church of Mazemet in Languedoc. Fauleon,
formerly Minister at Fecamp in Normandy. Betoule, formerly Minister of Duras.
J. Campredon, formerly Minister of Pont de Larn. Pierry Fleury, formerly
Minister of the Church of St. Aignan upon the Maine in France. Jean Farcy,
Minister of the Church of Mouchamp in Low Poictou. Jacques Severin, formerly
Minister at Chery les Rosois in Ferache. F. Testas, formerly Minister at
Poitiers. Jacques Tirel, formerly Minister at St. Vaast. Canolle, Minister of
Gontauld. Pont, formerly Minister of Mazeres. Jean Gommare, Minister of
Muffidan in the Duchy of La Force. Baignoux, formerly Minister at Poitiers.
David Grimaudet, formerly Minister of the Church of Desaigns. Jacques Doules,
formerly Minister at Angles. Pierre Fontaine, formerly Minister of Royan.
Daniel du Tens, formerly Minister of the Reformed Church of Angers. J.
Solinhac, formerly Minister at Realville. Pierre Souchet, formerly Minister at
Rochouard. Jacob de Rouffignac, formerly Minister at Puycasque. J. Bardon,
formerly Minister of Bruniquel. Jean Baron, formerly Minister of Mazemet. Jean
Molles, formerly Minister of Cardalhac. Daniel Chais la Place, formerly
Minister of (...) S^ave in Dauphine. Le Sauvage, formerly Minister at Alenson.
Jean Cabibel, formerly Minister of Brassac. Etienne Molener, formerly Minister
de Lisle in Jordain^. Philippa la Lo, formerly Minister at. Orbec. Jean
Couyer, formerly Pastor of Linieres in Angoumors. Jacob Asselin, formerly
Minister at Dieppe. Jean Forent, formerly Minister of the Church of Syon in
Bretagne. C. Pegorier, formerly Minister of Havre. Charles Bertheau, formerly
Minister of Paris. P. Roussillion, formerly Minister of the Baronny of
Montreden in the Lower Languedoe. P. Peze Degalimere, formerly Minister at
Man's. Barthelemy Balaguier, formerly of the Church of Aiguefonde in the High
Languedoc. Paul Gravisset, formerly Minister at Ardenay in the Country of
Maine. Jean Boudet, formerly Minister at Genebrieres. Joseph de la Mothe,
formerly Minister of the Reformed Church of Puymirol. Jouneau, formerly
Minister at Barbesieux. J. Lions, formerly Minister at Montelimart. Gabriel
Barbier, Minister at Greenwich. Pierre Blanc, Minister. Rival, Minister. J.
Lombard, formerly Minister at Angers. J. Majou, formerly Minister at Cire.
Durand Raoux, formerly Minister of St. Private. J. Graveral, formerly Minister
at Lions. Jacques Laborie, Minister. Barthelemy Basset, Minister. J. M.
Verchiere, Minister. Abraham Gilbert, formerly Minister at Melle. Jean
Charpentier, Minister. Charles Contet, Minister. Antoine Review, Minister. H.
de Rocheblave, Minister. Jean le Febvre, Minister. A. Lombard, Minister. Jean
Bernard, Minister. Elisee Ge^auld, Minister. Brocus de Hande^^^ens, formerly
Minister of Casteljaloux. Mote, formerly Minister of the Place de Bar in
Cevenes. Jacques Misson, formerly Minister at Niort. Pierre Bossatran, formerly
Minister at Niort in Poitou. Michel David, formerly Minister of my Lady
Duchess de la Force. Pierre Ticier, formerly Minister of Mauvesin. Jean la
Motthe, Minister of the Church of la Bastide Rouairouse. Michel Cordier,
formerly Minister of Fieux. Bertheau the Elder, Minister of the Church of
Montpelier. La Riviere, formerly Minister at Toulouse. Brevet, formerly
Minister of the Church of Dompierre and Bourneuf. A. Fornes, Minister. A.
Richard, formerly Minister of Esperausses in Languedoc. P. Astruc, Minister of
the Church of la Gazelle in Auvergne. Jean Chabbert, Minister. La Port,
formerly Minister of the Church of Again in Low Guienne. J. Dejoux Junior,
Chaplain in Their Majesty's Ship the Northumberland. A. de St. Denis, formerly
Minister at Sancourt in Normandy.
FINIS.

