The Lords and Commons Reasons and Justifications for the Deprivation and
Deposal of JAMES II. From the Imperial Throne of England. Being in full
satisfaction to all the Princes of Europe, and in Answer to all Objections,
Domestic and Foraign.
Allowed to be Printed.

WHen the greatest Changes in States, such as the Mutations of Imperial
Princes, are made; the greatest Reasons and most potent Arguments ought to be
furnished for such important Counsels and Decrees, but as the Reasoning part of
Mankind are so different and opposite in their Judgments and Determinations
given in so weighty a Cause; the grounds of such irreconcilable Dissent in
their Opinions, arise only from their various Fixation of the Original of
Government. For whilst some are combating for Jure Divino, and others for the
Humane Constitution of Monarchy, those nicer and remoter Speculations lead 'em
so high, to such different Fountain-Heads of Regal Power, till they cease to be
matter of Argument, and terminate in mere Matter of Faith. And when it comes up
thither, and Men, as generally, in the tenderest points of Faith, believe only,
because through the Impulse of some unaccountable Conviction, they cannot but
believe, Reasoning is then str ck Mute; and all beyond is taken up only upon
Trust.

Where Argumentation therefore, as in this Case, will be altogether vain,
because unconvincing, the greatest and strongest, (publicly visible,) support,
and Authority we must repair to, must be that last Refuge both of Law and
Equity PRECEDENT. What has been done upon Mature Deliberation, and the Consent
of whole Kingdoms, in the like Case before, stands for a Pattern, what may be
done now. For Examples of which kind,

There has been very well urged already, the Case of Sigismond the III. King of
Sweden, Deposed by the States of Sweden, in so many Respects so wonderfully the
Parallel to the Late Male Administration in England.

But as Precedents are least Satisfactory, or least confronting to obstinate
Opposers; where they make only for one Party: A Popish Sigismond deposed for
Maladministration in a Protestant Kingdom may not perhaps be allowed to carry
its sufficient Justification with the Romanists; and therefore the Tables ought
to be turned, and the Balance made by Parallels of their own side; the most
prudent way of combating, and securing a Victory in this Matter, being to lay
the Scene of War in the Enemies Country.

To confute therefore, and silence all the Romish Pretentions of Disgust and
Murmr, against the Injustice of such a Deprivation, from Examples of Popish
Deposals of Male administering Protestants; we'll begin with Henry of Navarre,
afterward Henry the Fourth of France.

The Famous Holy League entered into by the Pope himself, and so many potent
Allies; together, with all the Romish Subjects of France, against that
undoubted Heir of the Crown of France, and at that time by Succession their
Rightful King, is so notoriously known to the World, that all the tedious
particulars of the History, would be impertinent.

Let it suffice, here was a Prince, the unquestioned Inheritour of the Crown of
France, actually by all Open and Hostile means (and all such Hostility avowed
and abetted, and his very Birthright fore-closed by the Pope himself) opposed
and denied his Accession to the Throne, for no other unqualifications, but
being a Hugonot; that is, of a persuasion contrary to the Established, and
Regnant Romish Religion in France; being in all other respects acknowledged a
most excellent Prince: Insomuch, that after all other ineffectual endeavors of
recovering his Birthright; he had no means left to repeal his Exclusion and
Debarrment from the Throne, but by his Abjuration of the Reformed Religion, and
return to the Romish Worship.

This Case of Henry the IV. in stead of a Parallel to Ours, does not come up to
half the Justification of the present Measures of England. For here (...)


