THE HISTORY OF THE Donatists.

By THOMAS LONG, B. D. and Prebendary of St. Peter's EXON.

-- Mutato Nomine de te,
Anglia, narratur.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1677.

To the Reverend GEORGE CARRY, D. D. AND DEAN of EXETER.
Reverend Sir,
ALthough I am no Conjurer, yet I suspect I have done enough to raise the
spirits of the Donatists, which are wont to be very troublesome, and that it
may exceed my skill to allay them: And therefore I have thus seasonably (I
hope) taken Sanctuary under Your Name; for I have observed that some
consecrated Persons, as well as Places, are not haunted with such Specter. And
though such Apparitions have been very affrighting and vexatious to Men of weak
judgments and wavering minds, yet some Persons who have armed themselves with
constant integrity to God, and resolved Loyalty to the King, have been least
obnoxious to their power and malice; as good Soldiers that keep their ranks
are not so much exposed to the hazards of War, as they whose fears make them
sneak from Place to Place. And this, through God's good providence, was Your
security in the late Times of Confusion, wherein notwithstanding the busy
Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness, you did not only shine as a bright
Example of Christian resolution, sound Doctrine, and a holy Life, but did
really influence a great part of your neighboring Clergy, the sense whereof
has obliged me to this public acknowledgment; by which I cannot hope to add
to your reputation, but to provide for my own quiet, against such unjust and
unsavory reflections, as guilty persons are prone to make, from whom I appeal
to your more righteous judgment, whether I have done them wrong, or no. Sure I
am I intended them none, for I only present them with a Glass, wherein if they
see their own defects, they have no reason to be displeased with the Glass, but
with those Vices which cause the reflection. Socrates, l. 2. c. 15. of the
Tripartite History, tells us, that Constantine to shame the Arians, provided by
an Edict, that they should be called Porphyrians, Ut quorum mores imitati sunt,
eorum nomine perfruantur, that they might be known by his Name, whose manners
they did imitate: And a greater than Constantine did the like by the Jews, John
8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and his lusts ye will do. Every Man's
public profession and practices are the plainest characters to teach us what
party he is of. They who through pride and discontent raise and propagate new
Opinions, that they may head a Faction, and take pet at the preferment of
better Men, vexing their Governors, despising their Authority, persecuting
their innocent Brethren, and fomenting Divisions in a well established Church,
are as manifestly acted and animated by the spirit of Donatus, as if there were
a transmigration of Souls -- Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora gerebat.
As old Donatus did, so do his Race,
Cast up their Eyes and Hands with down-cast Face.


In vain therefore do such pretend, (as with great confidence they do) that
they are the offspring of those Primitive Christians, who suffered under the
Heathen Emperors, for they in the worst times obeyed their lawful Governors in
all things wherein they might not disobey God, and constantly adhered to their
Bibles, their Bishops, and their Brethren, accounting all such Traditores,
(i.e.) Trayt^rs, as forsook either. Such pretenses therefore do make odious
representations of the Primitive Christians, as if they were in their
Generation as factious and seditious, as the late Donatists in ours; And as ill
reflections do they cast on their Christian Governors, as if they were very
Persecutors. But, by their fruits ye shall know them: for, if it be considered
how exactly every Scene of that horrid Tragedy, which was first acted in the
Churches of Africa, has been acted over, and (if I may so speak) over-acted in
the Church of England, it cannot be denied, that they who destroyed the Church
of England, and its Defender, were the most natural offspring of those
Donatists, who so perpetually vexed the good Constantine, and made Havoc of
the Churches of Africa; or that the present Sectaries, who so tenaciously
adhere to the principles, and follow the practices of them that brought such
confusion on the Land in the former Age, are their proper Successors.

However, it is advisedly done by their Apologists, to make their Pamphlets
swell with the frequent mention of the Indulgence of some of the Emperors to
peaceable Christians, but pass by the many strict Edicts of the most Christian
and pious Emperors, against such as withdrew from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, some of which I have transcribed for their better information
at the end of this History, and shall only acquaint them here with that success
which Sozomen, l. 3. c. 11. of the Tripartite History, observed to follow on
the due execution of them. Who speaking of the Laws of Constantine, against
such as denied communion with the Church in his days, The Emperor (says my
Author) strictly commanded that their Meeting-places should be taken from them,
and they not permitted to assemble in private Houses, or Churches; by reason of
which Law (I suppose, says Sozomen) the Memorial of Heresy was utterly
destroyed, for after this Law, they could meet neither publicly in the
Churches, nor secretly, being observed, and forbidden by the Bishops and
Clergy. Doubtless those Bishops and Clergymen were no Persecutors, they did
what was their duty, and by a seasonable restraint of Men of corrupt
principles, preserved the true Christians in peace. And certainly the present
Bishops would be defective in a special duty of their Function, which is to
preserve the Flock of Christ in Peace and Unity, if they should tolerate such,
as seek to scatter and make a Prey of them. St. Hierome, who is thought by some
to have been no Friend to that Office, does yet affirm, that it was ever since
the Apostles days the best Remedy against Schism. I shall entreat your
patience, while I mention a passage or two of that Father, which have been
tortured to speak against Episcopacy, but do so far commend its usefulness, and
assert its antiquity, and authority, as may suffice to silence all its
adversaries. In his Comment on 1 Titus he says, Antequam Diaboli instinctu,
etc. Before such time, as by the instigation of the Devil, Factions were made
in Religion, and the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I
of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common Council of Presbyters: but
afterward, when every one accounted those, whom he had baptized, to be his own,
and not Christ's; it was decreed in the whole (Christian) World, that one,
chosen out of the Presbyters, should be set over the rest, unto whom the care
of the Church should belong, that the seeds of schism might be taken away.
Would you know when this was done, and by whom, Panormitan will tell you, Li.
Decret. de consuetud. c. 4. Immediately after Christ's death, all the
Presbyters ruled in common -- but after a while the Apostles caused, that
Bishops should be created for the appeasing of Schisms. If any shall not agree
that this is St. Hierome's sense, let him compare that passage in his Epistle
to Evagrius, (85) Quod autem postea, That after this, ( i.) in the Apostles
age, (as appears both by what goes before, and by what follows concerning St.
Mark) one was chosen and set over the rest, was done for a Remedy against
Schism, lest every one drawing a part of the Church to himself, should destroy
the whole: for in the Church of Alexandria, from the days of St. Mark the
Evangelist, unto Heraclas, and Dionysius, Bishops there, the Presbyters
choosing one of their number, and setting him in a Higher degree, called him
Bishop: and in his Dialogue, ad Luciferianos, Ecclesiae salus in summi
sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors, and ab omnibus eminens detur
potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes. So then St.
Hierome's testimony is express for the Antiquity of Bishops, (for as to the
original institution, I shall not now discourse) that they were in the Apostles
days, particularly in the Church of Alexandria, in St. Mark's days, and in the
Church of Corinth, ever since the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, for the ending of which controversy, one was preferred above the rest;
and the Scholiast tells us, on Titus 1. that Apollo was the Man, (...), the
first Bishop of Corinth: and the same was decreed in all the Christian World;
That the care of the Church was committed to them, and the welfare of the
Church depended on their dignity, to whom if there were not an eminent and
peerless power given by all, there would be as many schisms in the Church, as
there were Priests; and lastly, that it was a principal duty of theirs, (though
it be now accounted their crime) to prevent the growth of schisms in their
several Churches.

And this is that which I have (according to my mean capacity) endeavored in
these Papers, wherein I have only applied that gentle Remedy, which has been
approved by Ancient and Modern Divines, who agree, that, The means to confute
schism, is to reduce it to its first Original: for howsoever it comes to pass,
that factious persons are in love with their own, they cannot but abhor the
actions of their Progenitors.

And now, Reverend Sir, If I have said any thing unworthy of your Name, I know,
that as your judgment will discern it, so your candor will pardon it, since
nothing has moved me to this attempt, but my duty to the Church, and my
particular esteem of your great Merits, who are a chief Ornament of the same;
for though you have been placed in an eminent station, yet that you have rather
honored that dignity, than been dignified by it, is the judgment of all that
know you, and not only the private opinion of

Your Humble Servant, THO. LONG.
Exon, Febr. 1. 1676/7.
THE PREFACE.
IT has been sometime known, that when diverse learned Physicians, after all
their regular methods of Physic, have given over their Patients as desperate,
a mean Empirick, by an easy and gentle application, has effected the Cure.
And (having often considered with my self, how fruitless and ineffectual the
many excellent Discourses, and unanswerable Arguments of such as have opposed
the Separation from our Church, have been; and that the contumacious humor
still spreads it self, to the infection and ruin of many precious Souls) I
thought it might be expedient to apply another remedy, (viz.) A true
representation of the Opinions and practices of such Schismatics, as have been
condemned in the Primitive times of the Church: whereby, as in a Glass, such as
are guilty of the present Separation, may reflect on their own deformities, and
the evil consequence of their dividing practices. Some Women, who have been too
well conceited of their beauty, when they have unawares beheld in a clear
Glass, the deforming and destructive effects of a loathsome Disease, have been
so surprised with the change, that is visibly made on their Faces, that they
have immediately fallen sick and dyed. And who knows, but when those fanciful
persons, who are so highly conceited of their purity, and tenderness of their
Consciences, shall be convinced, (as by a serious reflection on this History of
the Donatists they may be) what unclean spots, and visible defects the Souls
and Consciences of such as live in Separation from a well established Church,
have contracted, they may immediately grow sick of their Sins, and apply
themselves to the mortification of them, that their Souls may be saved? It is
the Opinion of some learned Men, that the Cardinal Baronius has raised more
Prejudices against the Reformed Churches, by his Annals, than Cardinal
Bellarmine by all his Arguments: And indeed, upon supposition, that the
Relation which he gives of the Primitive Doctrine and Discipline is true, (the
contrary whereof has been sufficiently evinced by Bishop Jewel, and many
others) he has done more to prove our Churches guilty, both of Heresy and
Schism, than all the Polemical Divines of the Church of Rome. Accordingly, when
it shall appear by the Authentic Records of the Church of God, that those
Persons, who held the same Opinions, and followed the same practices, as some
in this present Age do, were frequently condemned by the best Christian
Emperors, and Catholic Councils, as schismatical and dangerous, and upon what
small and inconsiderable grounds they have run themselves into such great
confusions, as have overturned all things Sacred, and well settled in Church and
State; it may be rationally hoped, that, though the most cogent arguments have
not persuaded them, ^et such horrible Specter may affright them from their
sullen and unchristian apartment, and make them choose to live rather with
peaceable and humble Christians, in a conformity to the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Primitive and present Church, than among such turbulent spirits, as
revive the Opinions and practices of the most dangerous and condemned
Schismatics. And it is both a more civil, and facile way of insinuating
instructions and reproofs to the minds and consciences of such, as are averse
from plain dealing, to teach them by pertinent instances and examples, by
Historical allusions, and wise Apologues; such as the Parable of Trees used by
Jotham, and of the Ewe-Lamb, by the Prophet Nathan: and this method was
familiarly used by our Savior, especially when he would convince the
Pharisees; as he does in the Parable of the unthankful Husbandmen, Luke 21.33.
and diverse others, wherein he proves them to be worse than those, who
persecuted the Prophets, by their malice against the Son of God, and v. 45. it
is said, They perceived that he spoke of them. In the days of the late
Usurpation, The History of Andronicus, the unfortunate Politician, of
Massonello, and the Munster Anabaptists, had their good effect. Most Men are
severe censurers of the same sins in others, which they do indulge and allow in
themselves. There is scarce a Separatist among us, who, when he shall
impartially consider the grievous and continued troubles of the African
Churches, occasioned by the Schism of the Donatists, who upon false or
frivolous pretenses, first forsook the Communion of the Catholic Church, and
then raised Parties to oppose it, falsely accusing, condemning, persecuting and
murdering their Fathers and Brethren, affronting the Magistrates, despising
their Laws, raising Tumults and Armies, and pronouncing them Martyrs that dyed
in Rebellion; I say, there is not any, but will readily condemn these, though
he have been seduced to join with such, as have practiced the same, or worse
things. The Ancients resembled a wise Man to the Image of Janus, which looked
both forward and backward; and it would certainly be a point of Prudence in us,
to look back, upon the transactions and counsels of former Ages, and to observe
what Opinions and practices have been condemned by wise and good Men, and
carefully avoid such. As also to look forward, and to consider, to what dangers
and precipices our present Opinions may betray us, what outrages and cruelties
our ambition may lead us to, though for the present we think it impossible,
that ever our lusts, or any temptations, or advantages, should be able to
transform us into such ravenous beasts, as afterward we may appear to be. Had
Cromwell been foretold, as Hazael was, what horrid Massacres and Regicide he
should commit, he would have thought it a slander, though from the mouth of a
Prophet, 2 Kings 8.12. And if such as have given themselves up to dividing
principles, did but consider, how easily they may be taught to act over the
same Tragical Scenes of Sacrilege, Rapine and Blood, when their Masters shall
get power, and opportunities agreeable to their malice, which both ancient and
modern Sectaries have done before them; they may find just cause to grow
jealous of themselves, though they have yet the sheeps clothing on them, and to
suspect their Teachers, though transformed into Angels of light, for the
Ministers of Satan, whose design it is to attempt the ruin of the Church, by
the abused zeal of her seduced Children, which he could not effect by the
cruelty of her professed Enemies. To undeceive such Persons, and render Schism
and Faction, as odious and pernicious, as the Scripture does describe them, and
both the History of former Ages, and the sad experience of our own, do
demonstrate them to have been, and that all who profess the Name of Christ may
agree in the truth of his Holy Word, and live in Unity with their Brethren, and
in due Obedience to their lawful Governors, both in Church and State, is the
only Design, and hearty Prayer of Si sapitis, been, and recte; si non sapitis,
vestri curam gessisse non poenitebit, quia, etsi cor vestrum ad pacem non
convertitur, pax nostra ad cor nostrum convertetur, August. ad Petil. l. 3.

IMPRIMATUR,

G. Jame R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.

THE HISTORY OF THE DONATISTS.
WHen Dioclesian, as a Romish Wolf, had worried and scattered the Flock of
Christ, and exhausted Rivers of that precious Blood, he perceived that he could
neither diminish their Numbers, nor abate any thing of that primitive Spirit,
which, like a Rock, did not only stand firm, but broke in pieces the (Fluctus
Decumanos) most impetuous Waves of the greatest persecution. Ann. 300,
The Tyrant thought therefore of a more probable way to extinguish that Spirit,
which was, to withdraw the word of life; and accordingly, in the Nineteenth
Year of his Empire, like another Antiochus Epiphanes, who did Mosaicis libris
bellum indicere, he publishes his Edict. That the Christian Churches should be
levelled with the ground, the Ornaments seized to his use, the Holy Scriptures
consumed in the Fire, and all that professed Christianity, be deprived of all
Liberties, Offices, and Dignities, unless they would offer Sacrifice to the
Heathen Gods. Immediately upon publishing this Edict, his Officers do generally
become Inquisitors, and strictly require all the Christians to deliver up the
Utensils of their Churches, and the Testament of their Lord, to be consumed in
the Fire, which, if any refused, they themselves were condemned to the Flames.

Among other Confessors, Felix Deacon of Autramitum, was summoned by the
Inquisitors, Optarus p. 40.
to deliver up the Ornaments of his Church, and the Evangelical Books, which
were in his custody; whereupon he hid himself with Mensurius, Bishop of
Carthage* whereof the Officers being informed, they require Mensurius to
deliver him up, or to appear on a set Day at the Emperors Court, to answer the
contempt. Where it is observable, that (Episcoporum domus ne in persecutionibus
fas erat violare) the Bishops Houses, even in times of Persecution, were
accounted as a Sanctuary by the very Heathen. Mensurius was too much a
Christian to betray his Brother, and therefore he chose rather to submit
himself to the Emperors sentence, and to appear at the appointed time: but in
the interim, he is careful to secure the Goods belonging to his Church: And in
those Days, as the Christians had Churches called Basilicas, so those Churches
had their Ornaments. St. August. contr. Cresconium, says that the Church of
Cirta, in the time of Dioclesian had two Chalices of Gold, six Cups of Silver,
and a Silver Candlestick. Yet the Treasuries of those Churches were much
exhausted in those days, it being the frequent practice of those Primitive
Christians, to sell their Plate and Ornaments, to redeem the lives, or to
relieve the necessities of their persecuted Brethren. Mensurius therefore
causes an Inventory of the Treasury of the Church of Carthage to be made, and
committing the Treasury it self to the custody of the Elders, (as Optatus
says) he leaves the Inventory with an ancient Woman, p. 41.
whom he had always found faithful, charging her to preserve it, for his
Successors, if it should please God to account him worthy of Martyrdom. Erant
in illa Ecclesia quamplurima Ornamenta Auri and Argenti.
St. Augustine says, there were in that Church very many Ornaments of Gold and
Silver. Concerning the Death of Mensurius, we have no certain account in
Ecclesiastical History, only we find the Bishopric of Carthage to be void
shortly after, and Dioclesian languishing under a surfeit of Christian blood,
resigned his Empire to Maxentius, who was overthrown sometime after by
Constantine, as also Maximinus another Tyrant by Licinius, and thereupon
Constantius the Father of Constantine, though he were then in England, was
proclaimed Emperor, but he dyed in York, and so the whole Empire was devolved
on Constantine, who by his Mother Helena had been from his Childhood instructed
in the Principles of the Christian Religion. Which Baronius observes to be
true, notwithstanding the opinion of some ancient Writers to the contrary; for
this is related by Paulinus a Man of great Learning and holiness, Baronius ad
Ann. 315.
as well as of a noble Family, and therefore to be believed above Eusebius,
[saith the Cardinal] And yet as we shall observe hereafter, when Constantine
accepted of an Appeal from the Donatists to the derogation of the power of the
Pope, then they plead that he was a Novice, and rudis fide, lately instructed
in the Christian Faith, and unacquainted with the Customs of the Church. The
flames that were kindled by Heathen Persecutors, were scarcely extinguished,
when the new lights and heats raised by contentious and ambitious Persons,
begun another conflagration; for the Bishopric of Carthage being void, Botrus
and Celesius two Presbyters become Competitors for it, against Cecilian, who
being a Person of known integrity, was by the general suffrage of that whole
Church chosen Bishop, and was ordained by Felix Bishop of Aptung. And now, the
good Woman, according to the trust reposed in her, brings the Inventory of the
Church-Treasury to Cecilian, whereupon he summoneth those Elders, to whom the
Treasury was committed, to make restitution, but whether they had sold, or
shared it among themselves, they refused to deliver it: and Cecilian, as his
duty was, proceeds against them to obtain satisfaction. On this occasion, those
sacrilegious Elders deny to hold farther communion with Cecilian their Bishop,
and join themselves to Botrus and Celesius, Optat. p. 41
those two Presbyters that were discontented at the preferment of Cecilian. To
these Lucilla, a Woman descended from a Noble Family of Spain, whom St.
Augustine calls, S. August. cont. Parm. l. 1.
Factiosissimam and pecuniosissimam foeminam quam pro corripiendo Ecclesiae
Disciplinam Cecilianus laeserat. A rich and factious Woman, who conceiving that
Cecilian being Archdeacon had injured her, by a too sharp reproof for some
superstitious practice, p. 40.
contrary to the Discipline of the Church (which was to kiss the Relics of
some supposed Martyrs, before her communicating at the Lord's Supper) joins her
self, to strengthen the Faction; and by her Money, incourageth Secundus Primate
of Numidia, and Donatus of Casa nigra, with some others, to oppose Cecilian.
Secundus and the rest of his Party, being partly terrified by their own guilt
(many of them having in the time of Persecution, betrayed their Brethren, or
their Bibles to the flames, for which they were called Traditors, and by the
Discipline of the Catholic Church, were to be deprived of Communion, until
they had satisfied the Church by Penance and Reformation) and partly, hired by
the gifts and promises of Lucilla, first meet together at Cirta, a City which
was afterward new built by Constantine, and called after his Name Constantina.
And that they might carry on their design against Cecilian with the less
suspicion, like self-denying Persons, they begin first to purge and absolve
themselves of that guilt, which by their fear and cowardice they had contracted
in the times of Persecution. The number of the Bishops met at this time (they
say) was above Seventy. The Names of the Chief St. Augustine acquaints us with,
(viz.) Secundus the Primate, Donatus Masculitanus, Victor, Marinus, Purpurius,
and Donatus a Casa Nigra, Opt. p. 39.
the Head of the Faction. Secundus acquaints his Brethren that they were met to
ordain a Bishop in the place of Cecilian, who was thought unfit for the Chair
of Carthage, as being a Traditor; but it behooves us first to clear our selves
from that crime, before we condemn another.

First therefore, he questioneth Donatus Masculitanus what he could say, to
free himself from the accusation of being a Traditor, which lay against him?
Donatus answered, that it was well known, how violently Florus did prosecute
him, to make him offer sacrifice, but God delivered me out of his hands, and
God having preserved me, my hope is, that you will continue me in the service
of God. Secundus replied, what shall we say then of he Martyrs, that chose to
endure the flames themselves, rather than to offer a grain of Incense to the
Heathen Gods? Donatus answered, I pray you to leave me to God, to whom I shall
give an account. Secundus bids him to go on the other side: Then he declares,
that Victor was accused to have delivered the Four Evangelists to be consumed
in the Fire. Victor answered, that Valentianus being Curator compelled him to
cast them into the Fire, and that the Books were so blotted and defaced, that
they were almost useless, and if you pardon me for this, I hope God will do the
like. Secundus bids him go on the other side. Then was Marinus accused for
delivering up his Books, he answered, I gave some Books to Pollus, but the
chiefest of them are safe: Secundus bids him go on the other side. The next
that was questioned was Purpurius, for destroying his Sisters two Sons, with
whom Secundus dealing more severely than with the rest; Do you think, says
Purpurius, to affright me, as you have done others? Consider what you your self
did, when you were urged by the Curator to deliver up your Books; how got you
your liberty, but by delivering all that was in your power? I confess, I did
slay them, and I will slay all such as seek my destruction, therefore provoke
me not lest I discover more. Upon this discourse Secundus the younger spoke
thus to his Uncle, Sir, You hear what a charge is brought in against your self,
and these whom you have accused are all resolved to leave your Communion, and
join in a Faction against you; do not inquire too strictly, what others have
done, leave them to give an account to God. Hereupon Secundus consulting with
his Brethren, what was fit to be done in this case, they all advised, to leave
the Judgment to God's Tribunal; and accordingly, Secundus said, You all know,
and God knows what each of you have done, and he will judge you: and so he
grants them honorem consessus, bidding them sit down in their places, and they
all sat down and said, Thanks be to God. S. Aug. Ep. 162.
(This was the Form of Absolution.) After this they proceed to choose Sylvanus,
who also was a Traditor, to be Bishop of Cirta, whose Election Cecilian
opposing, drew the whole Faction against himself. And during the Session of
this Assembly, they held many private Consultations against Cecilian, and sent
threatening Messages to him, so that his Friends advised him of the great danger
that he was in, his Enemies having strengthened their Party by great Numbers,
and taken to themselves the Authority of a Council. They resolve therefore to
adjourn their Session to Carthage, and Summon Cecilian to appear before them,
Botrus and Celesius intending to accuse him there for a Traditor. Cecilian not
owning their Authority, refuses to appear, and thereupon they proceed to
condemn him as guilty, with as much facility as they had absolved one another;
and pronouncing his See void, they proceed to prefer Majorinus, who was
Domestic Chaplain to Lucilla, and had been Deacon to Cecilian, to be Bishop of
Carthage. By this you may perceive, how many sins, and lusts, were in
conjunction, when this Monster of Schism was first produced; The defeated
Ambition of some, the sacrilegious covetousness of others, the restless guilt
and feminine malice of others; and therefore it is rightly numbered among the
works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Jude 19.
and the Authors condemned for sensual Persons. It is generally true of all
Schism, what is particularly observed of this, Iracundia peperit, Ambitio
nutrivit, Avaritia roboravit: Discontent is the Mother, Opt. p. 41.
Ambition the Nurse, and Covetousness a Champion to defend it. To which agrees
another ancient Observation. Quicunque pacem ecclesiae perturbant, aut
Superbiae tumore furiosi, aut invidentiae Livore vesani, aut Seculari
commoditate corrupti, aut cannali concupiscentia perversi. Aug. contr. Parm. l.
3.

The Faction being by these Arts propagated, and become numerous, begins to
remonstrate against Cecilian, not sparing Mensurius his Predecessor, nor Felix
who ordained him, but charged them all to have been Traditors, and
particularly, that Cecilian, while he was a Deacon under Mensurius, did forbid
and hinder all relief from those that were imprisoned, and ready to suffer
Martyrdom in the days of Dioclesian: And (which is usual with such Persons) by
how much the more guilty of such practices they themselves were, so much the
more vehemently do they accuse others, that their pretended zeal against those
sins, falsely imputed to others, may serve as a cloak to cover the real guilt
which defiled themselves, Vt crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vitam infamant
alienam. And now they begin to persuade the People, that Cecilian is no
Minister of Christ, nor the People that adhered to him Members of the true
Church; that they had no true Sacraments, nor saving Ordinances, Opt. p. 42.
but all were corrupted by Idolatry, and Superstition. And thus they generally
called the Catholics, Pagans and Idolaters, Adhuc Paganus es. They would tell
those whom they intended to seduce, that they were very Pagans.

Donatus de Casa nigra, is the first that sets up Private Meetings, L. 1.
as Optatus observes: Nolebat cum allis sacrificare sed in domibus secreto: He
withdraws from the Communion of Cecilian, and the Bishops that adhered to him,
(though they had Communicatory Letters from the chiefest Churches of the World)
and gathering the People into Coventicles, (for so both Optatus and St.
Augustine call those Meetings) they Preach against the Corruption of Cecilian,
and other Catholic Bishops, and the Idolatrous and Superstitious practices
that had defiled the whole Church of Carthage, into whose Communion (they say)
lapsed Persons, and profane Traditors were promiscuously admitted, to the
defiling of all that joined with them; seeing the Church of Christ is to
consist only of such as were holy, and without spot and wrinkle; and such (said
Donatus) were to be found only in his separated Congregations, where were
better Ministers, and purer Ordinances. Having laid this Foundation, no
Pharisees were ever so industrious, in gaining Proselytes, as Donatus and his
Party, to seduce the People of Carthage, from the Church under Cecilian, to
their own Conventicles: for they run from House to House, and from Village to
Village, and pick up one of a Family, and two, or three of a Village, by foul
and false accusations of others, and fair pretenses in behalf of themselves,
pitying the People, and persuading them, that they lived among Idolaters, and
were defiled by their communion with them. Their manner of seducing the People,
is recorded both by Optatus and St. Augustine. Caius Seius, or Caia Seia, adhuc
Paganus es, consule animae tuae, esto Christianus. p. 75.
Bonus Homo, si non esses Traditor. (i. e.)

Good Man, or good Woman, you are yet a rank Idolater, be advised by me for the
Salvation of thy Soul, come out of that Babylon, and be made a Christian, thou
have good affections, if they were sanctified, and placed aright, thou may
become an eminent Saint.

Against this Un-christian practice, St. Augustine most passionately declaimes.
O improbam rabiem cum Christiano dicitur esto Christianus, hoc est dicere nega
Christum. O accursed madness to persuade them that were true Christians
already, to renounce their Christianity, under a pretense, that they should be
admitted to a higher form! What is this (says he) but to deny Christ? which to
prevent, the Servants of Christ have been always ready to lay down their Lives,
Opt. p. 75.
and resist even to Blood. Vnus consensus and manus tuae porrectio and pauca
verba, Christianum faciunt de Christiano: As if the being admitted into their
Congregations did contribute more to their Christianity than their Baptism. By
these insinuations, they skrued themselves into the affections of the younger
and weaker sort, Opt. l. 3. p. 73.
Aut exivit Vxor, and resedit Maritus, etc. Either the Wife separated, and the
Husband remained in the Catholic Communion, or the Children and Servants were
seduced from their obedience to their earthly, as well as heavenly Parents and
Masters, until they had rent the Church of God into pieces, and of one Church
made many Synagogues of Satan. Persuasionibus vestris divisa sunt corpora and
nomina pietatis. The Church and the City, the Towns and Families, Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children were divided, and were no longer known by the Name
of Christians, but one was a Majorite, another a Donatist, a third a
Maximianist, and all of them professed Enemies to the Communion of the
Catholic Church: And whereas they pretended to greater purity than other
Congregations, yet such as joined with them, were Persons of least honesty and
charity; Ille vobis Christianus erit qui quod vultis fecerit, non quem fides
adduxerit: He shall be a choice Christian among you (says Optatus) whom a
blind obedience to you, and not faith in Christ, has, p. 75.
brought over. Tertullian commended the Christian Religion in his days, because
it did so alter the dispositions of Men, as to make those who were fierce and
cruel, as Bears, or Tigers, to be meek, and innocent as Lambs, or Doves; but
the spirit of Donatisme, did Hominem de homine tollere, Optat. p. 79
rob Men of their Humanity, and made them that were formerly harmless and
peaceable, to be unnatural, and implacable; and yet as bad as they were, they
promised forgiveness of sins, and a Crown of Martyrdom too, to such, as not
only shed the blood of their Brethren, but desperately cast away their own
Lives: Of which I shall give too many instances in the ensuing History.

The Faction being increased by such arts, they begin to leave their private
Houses, and build Basilicas non necessarias, Optat. p. 61
unnecessary Churches, when those of the Orthodox were sufficient; and having
first departed from Cecilian, they departed also from the Catholic Church,
affirming, that they only, and the Congregations that joined with them, were
the true Churches of Christ, and all the rest were Apostates. Gaudentius one of
their Faction, undertook to maintain, That the Article of the Catholic Church,
was Figmentum humanum, an Invention of Man, and not agreeable to the Ordinance
of Christ. And Donatus, who gave the Name to the Faction, used all diligence to
gain the face and reputation of a Church, to the separated Brethren: to which
end, he teaches it to be necessary, that they who were admitted to their
Communion, should make a Public confession of their Errors, and submitting
themselves to the Discipline of their new pastors, should be rebaptized; for by
these means, he knew, he should secure as many as came to his communion,
without any fear of their return to the Catholic Church. And to the Sacrament
of Baptism they added Exorcisme (which is still retained in the Church of
Rome,) in this form of words, Maledicte exi for as, Come forth thou wicked
Spirit, whereby (as Optatus observes) they did blaspheme the blessed Trinity,
in whose Name they had been formerly baptized. The Catholic Bishops are not
remiss in the Vindication of Cecilian, but prevailed with Zenophilus, a Man of
Consular dignity, to take cognizance of the difference between Cecilian, and
Majorinus, and in the inquiry to the merits of the cause, it was affirmed by
one Nundinarius, a Deacon, who was sometime privy to the transactions of that
Party, that most of those who opposed Cecilian, were Traditors, and
particularly, that Sylvanus, whom they made Bishop of Cirta, had betrayed the
Holy Scriptures, and some Ornaments of his Church, and sacrilegiously withheld
what was devoted to the use of the Poor. For the truth whereof, he appealed to
the Bishops and Presbyters of his own Party, who knew the certainty of the
particulars, and of a great Sum of Money [ Quadringinta folles, Baronius Vol.
3. P. 352.
each Follis weighing three Pound and half of Silver] sent by Lucilla, and
divided among the chief of that Party, to condemn Cecilian, and to advance
Majorinus into his Chair: And that Victor, who had been by Occupation a ^uller,
gave Twenty Folles to be ordained a Priest; and all this Nundinarius affirmed
to be true, as in the presence of Christ and his holy Angels. And thus the
Schism is begun, by erecting, Altar contra Altar, a Presbyter or
Mock-bishop, against Cecilian, the lawful Bishop of Carthage. But the first
Invader of this Holy Office was short-lived, for about the Year 306. Majorinus
the Mock-bishop dyed, and none is thought so fit to succeed him, as Donatus,
who henceforth gives the Denomination to the Schism, which was no longer,
Pars Majorini, but Pars Donati: for, as much as in him lay, he did not only
re-baptize particular Persons, but the whole Church, which was no longer known
by the appellation of Christian, or Catholic, but Donatist; and now he takes
on him a power to silence and depose the Catholic Bishops and Presbyters, or
to impose such Penance on them, as he thought fit, and to prevent any
prejudice, that might arise to his Party, by the restimony pf Nundinarius,
which was by Zenophilus certified to the Emperor, he is resolved to complain
first, and to cast the Odium of the Schism, and all the sad consequences
thereof upon Cecilian, whom he accuses to be a Traditor, and contrary to the
custom of the Church, desires transmarine Bishops to be appointed Judges in
the case. The Petition was to this effect: Rogamus te O Constantine, we entreat
thee O Constantine, most gracious Emperor, whose Father never exercised
Persecution, that your Piety would appoint us Judges from France, because that
Country is free from this dissension. This Petition was subscribed by Lucianus,
Dignus, Nassutius, Capito, Fidentius, and the other Bishops of the Party of
Donatus. The good Emperor was much grieved to hear of these differences, which
he had rather might have been determined among themselves, than be brought to
his Court, (where were many Heathen, that would rejoice at them,) or to trouble
Foreign Churches with them; However he grants their desire, and appoints
Marinus, Maternus and Rheticius, three Bishops of France, to whom he adjoyneth
the Bishop of Rome, to determine the cause: And sends his Epistle to
Meltiades Bishop of Rome, which is recorded by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 5. The
Epistle is as follows, Whereas I have received from Anilinus, Lieutenant of
Africa, many Letters, signifying, that Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, is accused
by diverse of his Colleagues; It being grievous to me, that there should be
dissension among the Bishops, before the People, who are so prone to evil; It
seems good to me, that Cecilian himself with Ten of his Accusers, and Ten
others, whom he shall choose on his behalf, do Sail to Rome, where I have
appointed Meltiades Bishop of Rome, together with Rheticius, Marinus and
Maternus Bishops of France, to hear and judge of the differences in question.
You cannot be ignorant, that I would have you suffer no Schism, in any part of
the Church. The Great God preserve you. These Bishops met at Rome, in the House
of Fausta in the Laterane. Meltiades took to his Assistance Fifteen Italian
Bishops to assist for the expedition of the cause. These with great
deliberation, heard all that was objected against Cecilian, Donatus himself
being present. The Bishops also agreed to take public Notaries, for the more
orderly and speedy dispatch, that the examinations and proofs in this cause,
might be reduced into public Acts. The first thing that was inquired, was, who
were the Accusers, and what Witnesses were present to give Evidence against
Cecilian? To which, the Party of Donatus answered, that their Accusation was
contained in the Libels, which they had presented to the Emperor, and by him
were transmitted to them, which they desired might be read. One of the Libels
was superscribed thus: Libellus Ecclesiae Catholicae, etc. A Libel of the
Catholic Church: (so they called their Faction) containing the Crimes whereof
Cecilian is accused. What was contained in the Libel, is not particularly
mentioned by any Author, nor are Ecclesiastical Writers agreed, concerning the
charge then in question. Those, who in this last Century, have defended the
Authority of the Pope, say, that nothing came in question, besides the grounds
of the Schism, on pretense, that Cecilian himself was a Traditor. And hereby
they hope to avoid the Appeal, which was made from the sentence of the Pope, to
the Emperor, because (say they) the questions discussed afterward in the
Council of Arles, were of a diverse nature from those at Rome; but of this
hereafter.

It is very probable that the Donatists had stuffed their Libel with more than
a single accusation, some particulars whereof, I shall give an account. The
Libel being read, it was demanded, who were Cecilian's Accusers? They answered,
the People of Carthage. It was replied, that the Voice of the People assembled
in a tumultuary manner, was not a sufficient ground to condemn any, and
therefore the Bishops ordered them to produce some competent Witnesses, to
attest the accusation. Whereupon Donatus produced some Persons whom he brought
with him from Carthage, to depose against Cecilian. The Charge against him was
high: (viz.) That while Cecilian was a Deacon under Mensurius, he was set by
Mensurius near the Prison Doors, where many Catholics lay, who were appointed
to suffer Martyrdom, and did by force ( Loris and flagris and Armatorum
multitudine) withstand such Friends, as came to comfort and relieve them. To
this the Witnesses for Donatus, being examined, could say nothing on their
Personal knowledge, but only from the report of the People: This Optatus urged
against Parmenian, p. 36. Nullis certis personis aut nominibus Traditores
accusastis. The second Article insisted on, was, That Cecilian was condemned by
a Synod of 70. Bishops at Cirta, who being all of them Neighbors to Carthage,
could not be ignorant of the matters of fact whereof they judged; and that they
judged that both Cecilian, and Mensurius his Predecessor, and Felix who
ordained Cecilian, were Traditors. To which Cecilian replied, that he was
condemned in that Assembly, being absent and unheard: That he could not without
great hazard of his life, appear among them, who being his professed Enemies,
made themselves his Judges: That many of them were corrupted by the Money of
Lucilla to Vote against him, and that generally they were such as had confessed
themselves to have been Traditors, but had absolved one another: And also, that
he had received many threatening Messages from some of them, especially from
Purpurius Bishop of Limatia. Lastly, That they had long before, held private
Conferences among themselves, how to destroy him, as well as to depose him, of
which things he was advised by several Catholic People, who were ready to
attest the same, and by their advice he did forbear to appear. The next Article
was, that Felix who ordained Cecilian was a Traditor, and so his Ordination was
null. But this the Bishops thought not fit to inquire into, Felix not being
present, nor having been at any time convicted by any Ecclesiastical censure,
and so long he had a lawful Power of Ordination. And as in the case of
Baptism, the Cathol^cks did not rebaptize such as had been baptized by the
Donatists: So they resolved in this case, Canon. 13.
That Crimen Ordinantis non transiret in Ordinatum. After this, Donatus
promised to produce other Witnesses against Cecilian, which he never did, for
diverse that came with him deserted him, and returned to Carthage. The Bishops
therefore acquitted Cecilian, in the Sentence recorded by Optatus, Cum
constiterit Cecilianum ab iis qui cum Donato venerunt, juxta professionem suam
non accusari, nec a Donato convictum esse, suae Ecclesiasticae Communioni,
integro statu retinendum, merito esse censeo. Then Cecilian accused Donatus for
rebaptizing those that came to his Party from the Catholic Church, and for
abusing the Bishops; and it appeared by proof, and by Donatus his own
confession, that he had not only rebaptized many, whom he seduced from the
Catholic Church, but also degraded the Bishops and Priests, which Optatus
expresses by occidere Honores; but also by a certain Ceremony of laying his
Hands on their Heads, and shaking them, enjoined them to do severe Penance,
contrary to the privileges and custom of the Church. Hereupon they condemned
Donatus, and acquitting Cecilian received him into their Communion. Of these
proceedings Meltiades certifieth the Emperor: but Donatus instead of
acquiescing in the Sentence of these Bishops, works secretly with Fuliminus, a
Proconsul, to Mediate with the Emperor, on a pretense of preserving peace,
(Bono pacis) that Cecilian might be confined a while at Brixia. p. 44.
Which being granted on that pretense, Donatus hastneth to Africa, and there
boasts of a Victory against Cecilian, and gives out that he was imprisoned at
Brixia. Which as soon as Cecilian understood, he gets leave to return to
Carthage to undeceive the People, and shortly after the Emperor sends two
Bishops thither, Eunomius and Olympius, ^o assist in the establishing of one
Bishop, where the People were as yet divided by two. These having tarried at
Carthage Fifty Days, and diligently inquired into the causes and grounds of the
Schism, and finding that Donatus did Schismatically defend Altar contra
Altar, (i. e.) Bishop against Bishop; they join in communion with Cecilian,
condemning Donatus and his Party. But that hardy Man being not daunted by all
these Sentences against him, his Faction, as well as his Spirit, growing the
greater for this opposition, addresseth himself in another supplication to the
Emperor, complaining that Meltiades and his Colleagues at Rome, being but a
few, and very partial, (for he reported that Meltiades himself was a Traditor)
did precipitate the Sentence, not inquiring into the grounds of the difference,
and therefore he desired a more full Council might be called for a final
determination of that controversie^ Constantine is pleased of his clemency to
appoint a more frequent Council at Arles, An^^ 314. Of which before I speak, it
may be material to inquire,

Whether the Donatists did Appeal from the Sentence of Meltiades and his
Colleagues to the Emperor.

For, if Meltiades was called to the determination of this Controversy, by a
delegated Power, it will necessarily follow, (says Albaspinaeus, in the fourth
Observation on Optatus) that the Popes in those days were not Universal
Pastors, nor had the Supreme Authority of determining Ecclesiastical matters.
And the reason of the consequence is evident, for he that submits to the
command of another, does ipso facto, confess that he is not Supreme, nor will
the Supreme Judge suffer his determinations to be rescinded by another Power.
Now it is not denied, 1. That Meltiades did sit together with the other Bishops
at the Emperor's command: 2. And that Silvester his Successor did afterward
send his Delegates into France, by the same command. 3. That the Emperor did
appoint other Bishops to sit with Meltiades: and Meltiades did join with them
as coordinate, which he would not have done, if the Supreme Power had been his
own. 4. The Donatists did Appeal (thinking themselves aggrieved) from the
Sentence of Meltiades and his Colleagues to the Emperor. Optatus is so plain
herein, that Valesius [de Schismate Donatistarum] could find no other evasion,
but to say, Optat. p. 44.
that Optatus is corrupted in that place; the words are, Donatus appellandum
esse ab Episcopis credidit: but he says less against the second Appeal, from
the Council of Arles to the Emperor, where the Pope's Delegates being sent, (
Silvester the present Pope being himself not able to be present) did
acknowledge, that they were Voluntate Imperatoris adducti: and Valesius grants,
that the Gallican Bishops did take place of the Delegates, as appears by their
Subscriptions.

5. That the Emperor did understand it as an Appeal, and acted accordingly; for
he did not only appoint such Judges as were desired, but at last determined the
case in his own Person; and tells the World, that he thought it his duty so to
do: for writing to Ablavius, he says: If he should neglect to put an end to
those Divisions, the Supreme Deity might justly be displeased with Mankind, but
especially with him, to whose care, by the Heavenly command, the moderation of
all earthly things was committed. The like he says in an Epistle to Celsus,
his Lieutenant in Africa, Opt. 286.
Nil potius a me agi pro instituto meo, ipsiusque Principis munere oporteat,
quam ut discussis erroribus, omnibusque temeritatibus amputatis, veram
religionem, universos, concordemque simplicitatem, atque meritam Omnipotenti
Deo culturam, praesentare perficiam. He thought it not only his duty as a Man,
but as a Prince, to banish error, and by cutting off rash judging, (which was
the thing they complained of in the Judges at Rome*) all Men might preserve the
true Religion, etc. And in another place, he tells his Bishops, that he was
(...), A Bishop under God, in the external affairs of the Church: So that the
Objection made by the Popish Authors, that Constantine was a Novice, and
understood not his own Power, nor the Laws of the Church, but invaded the
rights of Meltiades, or that he was forced thereunto by the restless
importunity of the Donatists, and afterward asked pardon for his offense, will
signify nothing; if we consider, that as he was bred a Christian, so he was
too tender of the Bishops rights to invade them, which he defended to his
utmost power; and he was also more prudent, than to neglect his own duty, or
that authority which God had given him, for the welfare of the Church: In which
also Saint Augustine, Epistle 162. defends the Emperor. Peradventure (says
he) Meltiades with his Colleagues, the Transmarine Bishops, ought not to have
usurped the judgment, that had been determined by the 70. African Bishops,
Tigisitanus sitting Primate; And what say you, if he did not usurp this Power?
(says St. Augustine) for the Emperor being desired, sent Bishops to be Judges,
who sat with him, and determined what was just, and to his care (whereof he
was to give an account to God) that business did belong. Where it is
observable, that in the judgment of St. Augustine, Meltiades ought not to have
interposed in the difference of the Bishops beyond the Seas, but it had been an
Usurpation so to do; and when he did meddle, it was by the Emperors command,
who joined other Bishops with him. And doubtless had the Africans owned the
Pore's Universal Pastorship, they would have gone directly to him, whereas they
entreated, not the Pope's Holiness, but the Piety of the Emperor to appoint
them Judges: Or at least they would have stood to the Pope's determination,
which they did not, either at Rome, or at Arles, but appealed from both to the
Emperor; And if the Appeal had been unlawful, either Meltiades, or his
Successor would have found a means to let the Emperor know his Error, who was
more likely to gratify them in their just demands, than the Donatists in what
was unjust. The Popes of later Ages would have been as loud as the Donatists
were, when they found the Emperor severe against them, Quid est Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with the Church? But we find not any of
that Age to contradict what the Emperor had done, but contrarily they approved
and submitted to it. And when the Donatists objected in the case of Felix, wh^
was acquitted by Aelian the Proconsul, The Bishops ought not to be judged by
the Secular Power, St. Augustine defended it, sayin^ it was not Felix his
seeking, but the Emperor appointing, to whom it did belong: Epistle 16^

But Constantine is made to pay dearly so his meddling with the concerns of the
Pope and if the Donation which the Church o^ Rome boasts of, had not been
forged, the Pope's Universal Pastorship would have bee^ proved more
irrefragably from this Donation than from that of Christ to St. Peter, o^ which
they boast with equal vanity.

And because the very mentioning of thi^ Donation will be confutation enough, I
will give a brief account of it, as I find it in their late Writers, for among
the Ancients there is no foot-step of it: Baronius who is wont to improve every
thing for the Pope's Power, being ashamed of this, does only refer to the
Writers that have particularly treated of it.

This Donation is said to be made to Pope Silvester at Rome, the Third of the
Calends of April. Augusto Constantino 4to, and Gallicano 4to. Coss. The
Original is pretended to have been found, written in the Greek Tongue, in the
Vatican at Rome, among other old Records, by Bartholomaeus Pincernus, who
translated it into Latin, and presented it to Pope Julius the Second. The
occasion of it mentioned in the Grant it self, is said to be this, That
Constantine having revolted from the Christian Religion, and persecuted many of
the Bishops, he was smitten with a loathsome Leprosy all over his Body, and
having tried many physicians in vain, he was at length advised by the Priests
of the Capitol, to slay so many Infants as should fill a Cistern with their
blood, and bath himself therein, while it was warm; but being moved at the
cries of the Mothers of those Infants, that were appointed to be slain, he
resolved rather to endure his Disease; and the Night after that he had
dismissed the Infants, Peter and Paul appeared to him, and discovered a surer
Remedy, which was, that he should send for Silvester Bishop of Rome, who for
fear of the Persecution raised by Constantine, had hid himself in the Caves of
the Mountain Soracte, and by him his Leprosy should be cured. Hereupon
Silvester is brought to him, and the first question, that Constantine is there
said to ask him, was, Who those Gods were that were called Peter and Paul, and
whether he had any Pictures of them, whereby they might be known? Silvester
presently sent his Deacon, to bring the Pictures of Peter and Paul: at the
sight of which, Constantine knew them to be the same that appeared to him in
his Vision, and had willed him to send for Silvester. To him he therefore
confessed his sins, and desired his advice for his health. The Pope injoyns him
for certain Days to go in Sackcloth, within the Lateran, and afterward to
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and then he should be whole. Accordingly
Constantine submits to the Penance, and prepares for his Baptism; And being in
the Holy Font, he saw a Hand stretched from Heaven to support and cleanse him;
and being baptized by Silvester, he came forth sound, and clean from his
Disease; Then was he clothed in white, and anointed with Chrisme, and had the
Pope's benediction, which was, Pax tibi, and all the Clergy answered, Amen. The
most of these particulars are mentioned by Baronius, Anno Constan. 19. But
nothing of the Donation it self.

After this he makes a large confession of his Faith, which he had learned a
Catholico Hierarcha, (i. e.) from the Pope; And the fourth Day after his
Baptism, He confirmed the Donation: Wherein he granted that all the Clergy
should honor the Bishop of Rome, as their King, whose Throne he exalted above
his own, giving him Imperial Dignity and Principality, as well above the four
Sees of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem and Constantinople, as above all other
Churches: He grants him also his Imperial Palace of the Lateran, and taking a
Crown of Gold, set with precious Stones, offered to put it on his Head, but the
good Pope (as the story says) refused that, and desired only a white Coronet;
and to maintain his dignity, he gave him, not only his Palace, but the City of
Rome, and all the Cities and Provinces of Italy, ( Concedimus and relinquimus,
we grant and yield up as the words are) and thereupon the Emperor transferred
his Court from Rome to Byzantium, which he builded and called after his own
name Constantinople, and bound all his Successors under a Curse (which was
habeant Petrum and Paulum sibi contrarios) not to violate any part of this
grant. I think it not fit to tire my Readers patience, to give a full Copy of
all the Regalia given to the Pope, the Lorum superhumerale, quod Imperiale
collum assolet circundare, Chlamidem purpureum, Tunicam coccineam and omnia
Imperialia Sceptra, Signa and Banna -- And how he appointed all Officers to
attend the Pope, as he was attended in his own Person; and that the Clergy
should be honored, after the same manner, as the Senators of the Emperor were,
etc. Doubtless Pincernus (or some other that imposed on him) wrote a History of
the Pomp of the Court of Rome, which he saw in the days of Pope Julius the
Second, and not of what was intended by Constantine: for if that noble Emperor
had given the Pope any of those Dominions, he would not have left them to his
Children and Successors, who still had them in possession for many Hundred
Years after, all which time we hear nothing of the Pope's claim, in the days of
Constantius, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, etc. Some of which
were so pious, that they would not have Usurped the Rights of the Church, and
by violating the Will of their Renowned Progenitor, incur the Curse of God.

I have mentioned many Latin words in this Donation, because from them (which
are of a later Date, than the time of Constantine) the Divines of the Reformed
Churches, have raised shrewd suspicions of forgery: to evade which, the
Romanists plead, that these were to be imputed to the Translator, who rendered
it from the Greek, but the Original (if there be any) is kept so secret in the
Pope^ Archives, that the greatest Favorites are not admitted to see it; and
doubtless, if it had been published, there would have been more objected
against the Original, than against the Translation: For it is very unlikely,
that the grant should be made in an unknown Tongue; for Eusebius says, l. 3. de
vita Constable.
that at the Council of Nice, the Bishop of Rome, who was this very Bishop,
spoke Latin: And the Decrees and Epistles of Constantine were generally
written in the Latin Tongue, l. 10. c. 4.
out of which Eusebius says, he translated them into Greek, when he inserted
them into his History; and it is strange, that neither Eusebius, who wrote the
Life of Constantine, nor any other Historian, within some Centuries of Years,
should acquaint the World with this bounty of the Emperor. Nor do they tell us
of his Apostasy and Persecution of the Church, nor of his Leprosy Cured at
his Baptism, which was not long before his Death, and that, not by Silvester at
Rome, but by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in the 65. Year of his Age;
Silvester being dead about Five Years before. See Eusebius de Vita Constantini,
l. 4. St. Hierome in his Chronicle, Ruffinu^, l. 1. c. 11. Socrates, l. 1. c.
39.

And lastly, it is strange, that none of those Authors, that have written the
History of his Empire and Actions, many of which I have consulted in compiling
this his History, should say any thing of his revolt to Idolatry; but on the
contrary, do all agree in his constant care of the Church, and defending it
against Heresy and Schism. Especially considering his early institution in
the Christian Faith, and the many Victories which he obtained in the Name of
Christ, whom he was wont solemnly to invocate before his Battles, as he did in
the Fight with Maxentius, in answer to whose Prayers, there appeared in the
Heavens, to the view of all his Army, the Sign of the Cross, with this Motto,
(...), and accordingly Maxentius was overthrown at the River Tiber, wherein he
and a great part of his Army perished. And thereupon the Emperor did bear this
Sign afterward in his Standard, and stamped it on several Coins. This shall
suffice concerning that fable: I return now to the History. The Emperor, as you
have heard, yielding to the Donatists importunity, and to leave them without
excuse, appoints a Council to meet at Arles in France, and being at that time,
as Baronius says, on the River Rhine, intended to be present at it;
Accordingly he signified his pleasure to Silvester Bishop of Rome, to Marinus
Bishop of Arles, and to Chrestus Bishop of Syracusa, and generally to all the
chief Bishops in his several Dominions, that each of them taking to them two
other Bishops whom they should choose, should hasten to Arles: The Number of
the Bishops (as St. August. contra Parmen.) was Two Hundred, some say 600. so
Baronius, from whom Dr. Heylen tells us, that Restitutus Bishop of London, was
there present: Marinus Bishop of Arles sat President, though Fr. Baldwine
contends, that the Delegates of the Pope were President; but Valesius and
others of that Party confess, that Marinus was, and the Order of Subscriptions
confirms it. The time of Assembling being come, the Emperor meets the Bishops,
and commanding off his Guards, sets Himself in the midst of them, and acquaints
them that to satisfy the importunity of Donatus, who complained of partiality
in the Sentence at Rome, where (as he pretended) a few Bishops having shut
themselves up, Causa non satis cognita sententiam praecipitabant, did
precipitate judgment without inquiring into the merits of the cause; He had
called them to consult and determine of the differences, that had miserably
divided the Churches of Africa: and setting before them the Proceedings in this
cause at Rome, he also adds the purgation of Felix, who had ordained Cecilian,
which by the Emperor's care and direction, was dispatched about four Months
before, by Aelian his Proconsul in Africa; for the Donatists had alleged at
Rome, that Felix Bishop of Aptung was a Traditor, and they pretended that this
particular was not examined at Rome, and that it was the opinion of the Church,
that the Ordination by Traditors was null; Constantine therefore sent to
Aelian, to enquire into the Life and Actions of Felix, which he did with great
care and integrity, taking to his assistance Saturnius, who had been Curator of
the City, while Dioclesian lived, and so probably was best acquainted with the
behavior of Felix; and Gratianus the present Curator, Alfius Cecilianus a
Duum-Vir in the time of Persecution, and others. And first they question
Calidius and Saturnius, what they knew concerning Felix: Both which agreed in a
testimony of his Innocence, and Christian courage. Then was produced by the
Donatists one Ingentius a Notary, to testify that he had seen certain Letters
in the hands of Alfius Cecilian, which expressed the guilt of Felix, as a
Traditor; which being produced (and they are yet on record in Baronius) upon
examination, and the testimony of Alfius Cecilianus concerning them, they were
found to be forged, and thereupon Ingentius was condemned to the punishment,
called Equuleius, unless he would confess who had persuaded him to that
forgery: The terror of that punishment (which was in the nature of a Rack, for
two pieces of Timber being joined together, the Offender was stretched out at
length, and his Hands and Feet tied fast to the Timber, which being joined in
the middle by a Skrue, the Executioners extended it to the racking of every
Joint, and if the Offender did not confess, they added hot Irons and Pincers,
to burn and rent his Flesh) did so prevail with Ingentius, that he confessed
that he had forged those Letters, at the instigation of some of the Donatists;
and thereupon he was committed to the Custody of Petronius Probianus, to be
sent to the Emperor, by whom being examined, he acknowledged the Fact, and
implored his clemency. But the Emperor was so provoked at this, that he called
the Donatists, Officinam Diaboli, the Devil's shop.

Together with Ingentius, the Emperor receives a full account of the innocence
of Felix, and relates the whole business to the Council; so that this Objection
being answered, there was no considerable Article added de Novo, for the
Donatists did, Eandem cantilenam canere, only revive their old slanders, by
adding new impudence and malice in the prosecution of them. So that the Council
having with great patience heard the clamors and false accusations of the
Donatists, they justified Cecilian, condemning his Accusers, and appointed the
14th. Canon against them. Qui falso accusant fratres suos, placuit eos usque ad
exitum non communicare, sed falsum testem juxta Scripturam impunitum non licere
esse. These transactions the Emperor immediately confirms: But the Donatists
were so provoked, that they condemned the whole Council, and the Emperor also
of partiality, and especially that famous Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain,
who was in great favor with the Emperor, saying that he was not only a Judge,
but an Advocate for Cecilian; so that, as Antaeus in the Poet, the oftener they
were foiled, the more their fury was increased against their Adversaries.
Animosque ex vulnere sumunt.

These subtle Persons were content to be baffled abroad, while their Party was
succesful at home, and to animate them, they always sent home false reports of
the condemnation of Cecilian; and when these were refuted, of the partiality of
the Judges, so that their Numbers did still increase, notwithstanding the
Anathema of the Council against them; they had the far greater part of the
People, and above Two Hundred Bishops to strengthen them. And whereas they
pleaded formerly for themselves, that Christ's Flock was a little Flock, and
did not act but suffer persecution, their success had furnished them with other
Arguments, and with Arms too, for now they begin to boast, that none are so
Catholic as themselves, and their Brethren find, that none are so cruel as
they; for being much increased, they will not be confined to Africa any longer.

The gangrene begins to spread it self into Foreign parts, they planted their
Emissaries in France, and at Rome, where Victor was made a titular Bishop, with
whom they held correspondence, and had intelligence of all transactions that
concerned them; Their Party also grew formidable in Africa, and at Constantina,
formerly Cirta, they possessed themselves of the chief Church, and constrained
the Catholics to meet in the Fiscal belonging to the Emperor: and the
Catholics not being able to oppose their Potent Adversaries, petition the
Emperor that they might have leave to convert that place into a Church. The
Emperor commiserating their condition, caused a Church to be built for them at
his own cost, being unwilling to provoke the Donatists, whom he saw to affect a
false Martyrdom, and not only to glory in, but to gain by their sufferings.
And Donatus thinking to have his Faction established by a Law, soliciteth the
Emperor for another Meeting, which St. Augustine says, Epist. 162.
Epistle 162. was appointed at Millain, where the Emperor once more condemned
them, as the Authors of Schism, and Disturbers of the Peace of the African
Churches. In so much that the Emperor being wearied by their importunities,
sent word to Valerius his Lieutenant, that the Donatists were Furori suo and
Deo Vindici remittendi, as an incorrigible Faction to be left to be punished by
their own fury, and the righteous judgment of God. Ad Annum 316.
Which as Baronius observes, the Emperor was constrained to, because he could
not otherwise ^^tain Africa under his Dominion, but by yielding to so powerful
a Faction. He therefore wrote to his Officers, Vt eos libero dimittant
arbitrio, to grant them Liberty of Conscience, but in the same Letters, Sic eos
detestatur ut nihil ea indulgentia possit deformius inveniri, he so expresses
his Detestation of them, that nothing may appear more deformed than that
Indulgence: St. Aug. Brevic. Collat. Diei 3. c. 22.

Indeed the Emperor, though he was both wise and valiant, had great
difficulties to encounter. On the one hand the Senate, which was generally made
up of Pagans, would not yield to any alteration of their religious Rites, and
he was enforced to grant them a Toleration, Vt Senatui morem gereret: On the
other hand the Number of Heretics and Schismatics, which exceeded that of the
Catholics in diverse Countries, gave another check to his Authority -- Nos
Numerus sumus and magno dominamur Atridi. They were so numerous, that upon
their revolt all Africa was in danger of being lost. And here we shall observe,
that in all these Councils, nothing was to be determined, but the case of
Schism, as both Optatus and St. Augustine have recorded, that is, whether
Cecilian or Donatus were the true Pastor and Governor of the Church, for we
hear not of any dissent in point of Doctrine, Pares credimus and uno sigillo
signati sumus: nec aliter Baptizati, Opt. p. 72.
nec aliter ordinati quam vos, Testamentum Divinum legimus pariter. We have one
Creed, one Baptism, (for the Catholics allowed of their Baptism where it was
not repeated on them that were formerly baptized) we read the same Divine
Testament, we invocate One God, the Lord's Prayer is the same with us and you
(for they used it until they thought themselves so without sin, that they could
remit the sins of others, and then they saw they could use it no longer without
a manifest contradiction, Quid vocaris dum peccata confiteris tua, si sanctus
es cum dimittis aliena, Opt. l. 2.) but the Schism that was made, to the
dividing of the People of God, and to the destroying of unity, was the great
grievance. And it is also remarkable, that, though many Heresies were at this
time vented in the Church, as the Novatian, Macedonian, Audaean, Apollinarian,
and Arian too, yet none did so much afflict the Churches of Africa, as this
Schism: against which, as Optatus spent all his labor, so St. Augustine wrote
at least one of those great Volumes, which the Church of GOD does now enjoy.

The good Emperor, notwithstanding that the Donatists had defeated so many of
his endeavors for Peace, was resolved to try one more, which was to call in
some of the Eastern Bishops to join with those of the West, as he intimates in
an Epistle written to Alexander, and the other Bishops of Egypt, mentioned by
Eusebius in the Life of Constantine; who also says, that the Emperor was much
blamed for his too great indulgence toward these implacable Spirits: But if the
necessity of his affairs be considered, it will appear, that he could not do
otherwise: for having out of his Christian clemency condescended so far to
them, they take advantage of some unhappy Circumstances to force him farther.

For about this time Licinius, Anno 315.
to whom the Emperor had given his own Sister in Marriage, and almost half the
Empire, revolted, and begun a War against him. The Arian Heresy also was
spread over Egypt, and like a mighty Torrent overflowed the Christian World.
Of which Heresy it will not be impertinent to give a brief Account, because
many of the Donatists, to strengthen their Faction against the Catholics,
joined with them; And indeed the descent from Schism to Heresy, is very
facile and familiar. -- Arius a Presbyter of Alexandria in Egypt, appeared
about the Year 315. He was bred up under Meletius a Presbyter, while Peter was
Bishop of Alexandria, by whom Arius was made Deacon: but being found to have
maintained Opinions contrary to the Catholic Faith, both he and Meletius, that
had corrupted him, were excommunicated. Meletius persisted in his Heretical
Opinions, That Christ was not the Eternal Son of God, but a very Man, Ex
utroque Parente, and that it was lawful in times of Persecution to deny him,
which also he did; pleading for himself, that he had not denied God, but a Man
only, and at last Daemonibus sacrificavit, he sacrificed to Devils. Thus as
from Schism to Heresy, so from Heresy to Infidelity and Atheism, the
passage is obvious. Arius refined this Opinion of his Master, and differed but
in one Letter from the Catholics, teaching that Christ was (...), of a like
substance with his Father, not (...), (i.e.) of the same nature and substance
with the Father: which Opinion for a while he dissembled, until Peter the
Bishop was dead, to whom succeeded Achillas, who did not only restore Arius to
his Office of Deacon, but afterward ordained him Priest, and being a Man of
subtle parts, he was appointed to be a Reader of Divinity in the City of
Alexandria, which he performed with some applause, and go^ such an esteem among
the Inhabitant, that the Bishopric of Alexandria being void by the Death of
Achillas, he was Competitor with Alexander: but Alexander being a Person of
greater Wisdom and Piety, was preferred by a general suffrage. Whereat Arius
being much discontented, openly opposed Alexander; and having nothing to object
against his Life, or Learning, he began to contradict his Doctrine: for whereas
Alexander had taught that Christ was (...), of the same substance, and ought to
receive the same Worship with the Father; Arius taught that he was indeed the
Son of God, and more excellent than the other Creatures, but that he was not
from Eternity, but made Ex praeexistentibus, of things preexistent, and did not
partake of the substance of the Father, nor was of equal dignity and power, but
that the Son was inferior to the Father, and the Holy Ghost inferior to the
Son, by whom he was made. So that he affirmed Christ to be the Son of God by
Adoption only, not by Eternal Generation, and that he was mortal and passible,
not only according to the flesh, but as he was The Word of God. These Doctrines
the good Bishop could not endure, and finding that Arius did diligently
propagate and defend them, he first excommunicates him, and then procures his
banishment, and sends cautionary Epistles to his Colleagues, throughout
Alexandria, to suppress those destructive Opinions, and fortify their People
against them, which notwithstanding, a great part, as well of the Clergy, as
the Laity, were infected: So that Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a right good
Catholic, and a Favorite of the Emperor's, by the entreaty of Alexander,
persuaded Constantine to Summon a General Council of Bishops and Presbyters at
Nicaea, a City of Bithynia, where Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops, besides
Presbyters, and others, assembled together, the Emperor himself being present,
and moderating among them. About this time, Epiph. Here Is. 69:
(but whether during the Session of this Council, or before, it is not agreed
by Ecclesiastical Writers) Arius dyed, ( Baronius thinks he dyed not until the
Year 336.) But his Death happened thus: Alexander provoked Arius to a public
disputation, and the time and place being appointed, Alexander sets apart the
precedent day for public fasting and prayers to God, to put a stop to that
pernicious Doctrine, which had so much infected the Catholic Church, as that
the very foundations of Christianity were shaken. And the time of Meeting being
come, Arius going toward the place, was troubled with a violent pain in his
bowels, whereupon going aside to ease himself, the pains increased, and became
so yiolent, that he voided his very Bowels, and so miserably dyed. But his Name
and Doctrine survived in another Arius, (Arianus potius homo, quam Arius) who
appeared and disputed with the great Athanasius in the Council of Nice, to
which Council there was presented a Confession of the Faith of the Arians,
which was no sooner read but condemned, and presently rent in pieces: and the
judgment of the Council in Opposition thereto, was drawn up in the Nicene
Creed. They also ordered the burning of such Tracts, as Arius and his Party had
written. Constantine also published an Edict, that none should conceal any of
their Books on pain of Death. However Lirinensis observes, (...) 6.
that by these Heretics, not only the Foundations of the Church, but of the
Roman Empire were shaken, all things sacred and civil brought to confusion, Non
solum affinitates, cognationes, Domus, verum etiam Vrbes, Provinciae, Nationes,
imo Vniversum Romanum Imperium funditus concussum and emotum est. And St.
Hierome says, All the Eastern Churches, except Athanasius and Paulinus, were
corrupted.

Among the Bishops Eusebius Nicomediensis was a chief Defender of the Arian
Heresy; and Eusebius of Caesarea was tainted also, for he refused for a while
to subscribe the Anathema against them, though the next Day he was better
persuaded, and did it. But notwithstanding all the Learning and care used by
this Council, the Arians increased; for Constantine dying, his Son Constantius
succeeded him in part of the Empire, who being of the Arian persuasion, did so
countenance those Heretics, that many of the Catholic Bishops were banished,
and wandered up and down in remote Parts, among whom Athanasius, whom they
wickedly called Sathanasius, was forced to flee as far as Triers, and there lay
obscure several Years, until the Storm was over. Of which the good Leontius a
Catholic Bishop did foretell, when putting his hand on his gray Hairs, he said,
When this Snow shall be melted, much filth will be dissolved with it; Multum
Luti sequetur, meaning great Persecution and Impiety would shortly befall the
Church. To these Heretics the Donatists joined themselves, many of whom
defended the same Opinions, and they that did not, yet agreed in the
Persecution of the Catholics, as their common Enemy. To this Heresy (says
St. Augustine) those who are called Circumcellians in Africa do belong. De
Haeres. c. 69. And St. Hierome says, that Donatus wrote a Book, De Spiritu
Sancto, agreeable to the Doctrine of the Arians. For before Arius was well
known, Ebion and Cerinthus, and Corpocrates, while St. John lived, troubled the
Churches of Asia with the like Opinions, against which, St. John at the desire
of those Churches, wrote his Gospel, to assert the Eternal Deity of our
Savior. And Eusebius and others say, that Origin was the Father of Arius, for
he taught, That, As much as the Apostles were inferior to Christ, to much was
Christ inferior to God; and that the Son was not to be prayed unto with the
Father, seeing he was not the Author of granting our requests, but only a
Supplicator, or Mediator. And among these Heretics, the Gloria Patri was
altered, which they used in this form: Gloria Patri, per Filium, in Spiritu
Sancto. Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost.

To this Council we find that Cecilian was called, as appears by his
Subscription, but none of the Donatists, they being excluded from the Communion
of the Catholic Church.

The Donatists taking occasion of these troubles abroad, did with the more
violence prosecute their good old cause at home, and now they take the
confidence to petition the Emperor Constantine, to rescind and abrogate the
Laws made against them.

And whereas some of them had been denied the liberty of exercising their
Functions, either publicly or privately, and others banished for transgressing
the Laws, and enforced to return to secular employments, they urge that their
banished may be recalled, particularly that Silvanus one of their Bishops, of
whom we have spoken before, might return. He was banished upon the accusation
of Nundinarius, for selling the Ornaments of his Church: but his Party reported
that he was banished, for refusing to communicate with Vrsacius and Zenophilus,
two Catholic Officers under the Emperor, who, as they said, did persecute him.
This slander St. Augustine refuteth, l. 3. contra Cresconium, c. 30. where he
shows, that the cause of his banishment was not as they pretended, for denying
to communicate with the Catholics only, but -- Quia cum jam traditor fuit,
permanere haereticus voluit, ut falsum honorem in part Donati haberet, qui
habere in Catholica nullum potuit, tam manifestis traditionis suae gestis
publico judicio reseratis: because being evidently proved a Traditor, he would
continue in the Schism, hoping to find a false honor among the Donatists, who
could have none among the Catholics. It happened, that this Vrsacius being
employed in the Emperor's Wars, lost his life, at whose Death the Donatists
rejoiced, as a token of Divine vengeance against a Capital Enemy of theirs. I
may not omit another clause of their Petition, which was, that they might enjoy
-- Libertatem Arbitrii, that is, as Valesius, c. 17. interprets it, Liberty of
Conscience, but St. Augustine calls it more fitly, Licentiam agendi, a License
to do what they pleased, and that they might no more be constrained to
communicate Antistiti ipsius (i.e. Constantini) Nebuloni, with that Prelatical
Knave of his, Cecilian, Colloq. Carth. l. 3. c. 54. and Brevic. August. c. 21.
Declaring, that neither by threats nor promises, they would be thereunto
induced, bus would rather suffer a Thousand Deaths. These demands of theirs,
how insolent soever, were proposed in such a juncture of time, that the Emperor
could no^ deny them, but grants what they desired, leaving them to the Divine
vengeance, which had begun to be revenged on them. The consideration of this
restless temper of theirs, pu^^^ St. Augustine into so great a passion, that h^
said, Epistle 167. Puto quod Diabolus ipse^ I think that if the Devil himself
had been so often condemned, by Judges of his own choosing, he would not have
been so impudent, as to persist in such a cause. Now that this indulgence was
extorted from the Emperor, may appear by his consolatory Epistle, written to
the Catholic Bishops, which I shall here insert, from the Appendix to Optatus,
p. 287. -- You well know that I have endeavored, by all the Offices of
humanity and moderation, which either faith requires, o^ prudence and purity
would admit, that the most holy peace of that fraternity, wherewith the grace
of God has endued the hearts of his Servants, might in all things be kept
inviolate. But for as much as our good endeavors have not been effectual to
subdue that power of wickedness, which adheres to the judgment of those, who
still rejoice in the mischiefs which they have acted; we must expect, until by
the mercy of Almighty God, the malice of these Men, which from a few, has
infected many, be again mitigated; for, from thence we must expect a remedy,
from whence every good work proceeds: and until this heavenly Medicine be
applied, our counsels are to be moderated, that we may give an Honorable
testimony of our patience, and by the virtue of true tranquillity, we may
endure whatever their wonted insolence shall do or attempt. For it is a folly
to usurp that revenge, which we ought to leave to God, especially when by
faith, we ought to be confident, notwithstanding all that the fury of such Men
may cause us to suffer, that God will esteem it as Martyrdom: for what else is
it, at such a time as this, to overcome in the Name of God, and with a constant
heart no endure the insolent affronts of such, as afflict the People of peace?
This if your Serenity shall observe, you shall soon see by the grace of God,
that the Ringleaders of contention will be destroyed, when their designs shall
be frustrated, and their manners discovered: In the mean time, let all your
People know, that they ought not to be led to Eternal Death, by the persuasion
of a few desperate Persons; but that by the grace of repentance, and amendment
of their errors, they may be reconciled to Eternal Life. -- Moreover he was
pleased to certify Eumalius, and other his Officers in Africa, of Cecilian's
innocence. (Pervidi inquit Cecilianum, etc.) I have always found Cecilian to be
a Man of great integrity, and free from the crimes objected by his Adversaries.
But the Donatists were now by their great Numbers, above the Laws and Power of
the Emperor, for now was Constantine employed to suppress the War raised by
Licinius, which he did with much more ease, than he could the Tumults of the
Donatists. And the Catholic Bishops were busied in confuting the Arians. Credo
nostros in refutandis Arianis totos fuisse, Hist. Collat. Carth. p. 606. which
is the reason that we hear but little of the Donatists for five or six Years,
the Council at Nice continuing for three Years; but the Council being risen,
and the Catholic Bishops returned, the controversy is renewed, and carried on
with more fury than ever: For Donatus the first being dead, Donatus Magnus (as
his Party called him) succeeds him in the pretended Bishopric of Carthage: A
man of more Learning, and popular reputation than his Predecessor, and of no
less zeal, and obstinacy in opposing the Catholics, and supporting the
Faction, among whom there was none so proud and fanatic as himself. I find
this Character of him. -- Eo evasit Donatus, ut non modo tanquam alter Hannibal
Imperatores contemnebat, sed ut deus aliquis a suis coleretur. He got Troops of
Armed Men to prosecute his designs, and called their Captains Duces Sanctor^^m;
Optatus, p. 68.
these often affronted the Emperor's Officers. Baronius observes in the 26th.
Year of Constantine, that he did not only load the Prefects with reproaches,
calling them Senatus opprobrium, and dedecus Praefectorum, but did also cast
dirt on the Emperor, as if he had been corrupted by the Catholics, Corruptum
esse Imperatorem. Delib. Hist. p. 246. which he did on this occasion; The good
Emperor commiserating the great sufferings of the Churches of Africa, gives
Order for considerable Sums of Money to be sent to Cecilian, with a gracious
Letter, which is recorded by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 6. to this effect: Constantine
the Emperor to Cecilian Bishop of Carthage sends Greeting. I have sent
Letters to Vrsus Lieutenant of Africa, that he cause 3000. Folles of Silver to
be delivered to thy fidelity, for the relief of the Churches of Africa; and if
this suffice not, demand of Heraclus our Treasurer, as much as may be
sufficient. And whereas I understand, that some lewd People have much disturbed
the peace of the Church, I have given Order in the presence of Anilinus and
Patricius, to take cognizance thereof, and in no wise to permit such things. If
therefore those Men persist in their folly, acquaint the Governors thereof,
that they may act as I have appointed them. The Great God preserve thee.

This great bounty and grace of the Emperor, which did, as so much Oil, heal
the wounds and refresh the countenances of Cecilian and his People, had a
contrary effect on the spirits of Donatus and his Accomplices, whose malice was
hereby inflamed to rage and fury, so that he forbad his People to accept any
Portion of the Emperor's Largess, if it should be offered. Whereof Optatus
gives the reason, p. 64. Misit ornamenta Domibus Dei, misit Elecmosynas
Ceciliano, nil Donato. He sent Ornaments to the Catholic Churches, and gifts
to Cecilian, but nothing to Donatus, And at last, the Emperor saw a necessity
o^ using more severity toward them, and to rescue the Catholic Churches by
force out o^ the hands of the Donatists, who in the late times of distraction,
had taken possession of them, and triumphed alone, nobis absentibus, says
Optatus: The Emperor therefore by a more strict Edict, not only denied them any
public Places of Worship, but forbad them to reside in any of his Cities. St.
Augusti^^ mentions another Law against them, and any others that should
trouble the peace o^ the Church; by which it was provided, tha^ all such as
called themselves Christians, and refused to communicate with the Catholic^
Churches, sed in suis conventiculis separati^ congregantur, and gathered into
separate Congregations, should be suppressed. And that such Priests as did
ordain, or were ordained, otherwise than the Church did approve of, should be
fined in a Mulct of Ten Pounds of Gold, and the Place wherein such impious
Meetings were held, should be forfeited to the Emperor, if the owners were
consenting thereunto. Moreover they were made incapable of any Ecclesiastical
promotion, Vt nihil Ecclesiae nomine possiderent, and that the Goods of such as
were convicted, should be seized on for the Emperor, Fisco vindicarentur. St.
Aug. Epist. 47. and 166. and l. 1o contra Parmen. and Bzovius Epitome Ba^^^. p.
550. And that which made these Laws more effectual, was the Emperor's charge to
his Sons, to put them in Execution after his Death: whereby their hopes of
Indulgence were much abated, And by this means the Church had a Prospect of
Peace and Unity before it; and Children were restored to their Parents, Wives
to their Husbands, Servants to their Masters, and all of them the Unity of the
Church.

It may here be seasonable to consider, with what Mortar these Persons daubed,
to make a Building that consisted of such different Materials, ( Aedificium
quod de ruinis constat, as Optat. p. 62.) to subsist and join together,
notwithstanding the opposition against it, by so Potent and Religious a Prince,
and the joint endeavors of the Catholic Bishops and People, and several
Councils, as well Foreign, as of their own Nation. For the Emperor had sent
express command to Anilinus, not only to restore to the Catholic Churches, all
those possessions and privileges, which any of their Adversaries had usurped;
Sive hortos, sive Aedes, sive aliud quodcunque ad jus Ecclesiarum aliquando
spectaverat, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 1o. but more especially, he granted to the
Clergy, united in Communion with Cecilian, new Privileges and Immunities, --
As in the 7th. Chap. of Eusebius, l. 10. Vt absque ulla molestia proprie legi
obsequium praestent. But exempted as well Schismatics as Heretics from the
benefit of those Edicts. And in another Epistle to Cecilian, having ordered him
to receive what Money he should want, he adds, Quoniam accepi, etc. Whereas I
understand that some Men of unstable and ill composed minds, do seek by corrupt
practices to withdraw the People from the Catholic Church, I have given order
to Anilinus my Proconsul, and Patricius my Vicar, of the Prefects, when they
were with me, u^ rem ejusmodi nullo modo negligerent, that they should
carefully suppress such, and if you find any to persist in that madness, that
you speedily acquaint those Judges therewith, that they may punish them, as I
have commanded. And in another Epistle, ad Episcopos Catholicos, he acquaints
them, that he had commanded his Prefects to bring to his Court such Donatists
as did disturb them, ut ibi sib^ mortem pervideant, etc. that they might see
the terrors of Death, which were prepared for them. So that we may admire, how
such a peevish Faction should not only subsist, but the Leaders of it being Men
of pernicious Principles and Practices, should delude such Numbers of the
People, and retain them not only in their Communion, but at their Devotion: but
the Scripture has foretold, what Arts and Methods, the Instruments of Satan
should use to deceive unstable Souls, most of which were very diligently
practiced by these Donatists, as St. Augustine observed in his Epistle to
Vincentius.

As first their tampering with the weaker Sex, and most ignorant sort of
People, such as had weak judgments, but strong affections; and being once
seduced, were perverse and violent in their ways, and deaf to all reason and
arguments to the contrary. So Romans 16.18. it is said, they should deceive the
hearts of the simple; and 2 Timothy 3.6. Lead captive silly Women: Accordingly
Optatus observes, that the weaker Sex, and Younger sort, were generally seduced
by them, Exivit Vxor, etc. The Wives and Children were seduced from their
Husbands and Parents.

2dly, Their transforming themselves (as Satan himself may do) into Angels of
Light, pretending to greater Purity, better Ordinances, and a greater show of
severity, in the Discipline which they used, for the admission of lapsed
Persons; whence they were called the rigid Donatists, Ne Luce veritatis carere
ostendantur, umbram rigidae severitatis obtendunt. They supplied the want of
solid piety by the shadow of rigid severity. August. contra Parmen. l. 3. And
according to what the Apostle observed of the Gnostics, They had a form of
Godliness, but denied the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5.

3dly, Their good words and fair speeches, Romans 16.18. commending such as they
would seduce, for some excellent gifts, or good affections, and conversing
familiarly with them, promising glorious Privileges, and liberty to act
according to their own Consciences, assuring them of remission of their Sins,
and of special grace and favor with God.

4ly, They pretended also to immediate Revelations, and Answers of their
Prayers from God; As that an Angel was sent to confirm them in their ways; that
there were diverse Prodigies and Signs declared from Heaven, a^ tokens to their
acceptance with God; for if any strange accident fell out, they interpreted it
to the Vulgar, as a special providence, to assert their cause. If the Heathen
invaded the Emperor's Dominions, or overthrew his Armies, or slew any of those
Commanders that had been Instruments of their Correction, these were
demonstrations of God's displeasure against their Adversaries. Periit Macarius,
periit Vrsacius, cunctique comites vestri, Dei pariter vindicta perierunt,
August. contr^ Petil. l. 2. c. 92.

5ly, The false reports, and unjust censures raised against such as were not of
their Communion, as well Superiors, as Equals: for as St. Peter observes, 2
Pet. 2.10. They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities: as that Constantine
was corrupted by Hosius, a famous Bishop, St. August. l. 1. contra Parmen.
2dly, That Meltiades was a Traditor, Brevic. Collationis cum Donatistis. 3dly,
That the Catholics were. Idolaters and Persecutors, having extorted the Penal
Laws from the Emperor against them. They also spoke evil of their Worship, that
they had no Ministers nor Sacraments, nor was there Salvation to be had in
their Communion; so that as St. Augustine says, they carried on their work, Per
insanas querelas, and vana mendacia, by furious complaints, and vain lies:
Contra Donat. post Collat. And when nothing would stick on their Doctrine, then
against their Persons. Cum adversariorum Doctrinam refellere non possunt, eorum
mores accusarunt. Istae sunt Haereticorum Machinae, ut convicti de perfidia, ad
maledicta se conferunt; Hieron. contra Ruffinum. The miscarriage of one
Catholic, was enough to cause them to defame not only his whole conversation,
but the whole Church, quasi homo ille esset Causa: Aug. ad Crescon. They
rejected the Liturgy then used by the Catholics, which both Optatus, and
Tertullian before him, called the Legitimate Prayers, as the double salutation,
or Pax vobiscum, with which they begun, and ended their Prayers. The Prayer for
the Catholic Church, which, as it was framed by the Apostles injunction, 1 Timothy 2.1. so it had been from his days always continued in the Church, and was
called Sacrificium pro Ecclesia; They omitted also the Prayer for the Emperor,
in that Collect, Opt. p. 64.
mentioned by Tertullian to be used in the Church of Africa, even for such
Emperors as persecuted it; Oramus pro Imperatore, pro Ministris ejus, and
potestatibus seculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis, etc. And no wonder that
they rejected the Prayers of the Church, when they also left off the use of the
Lord's Prayer. They also pulled down many of their Churches, and such as they
thought fit to preserve for their own use, they washed the Walls and Pavements,
as if the Assemblies of the Catholics had defiled them: They razed their
Altars to the ground, and often cast their Bibles into the Fire, which was the
very crime that they objected against the Catholics, and particularly against
Cecilian, from whose communion they separated on that account. And all this
they did under a pretense of zeal for reformation, and a purer worship.

6ly, As often as they had power in their hands, they did not only silence the
Catholic^ Bishops, but deprived them of all sustenance, and banished them from
their Habitations. Aut tacenda erat veritas, aut eorum immanitas serenda, as
St. Augustine complained, Epist. 50. They must either conceal the truth, o^
yield themselves up to the cruelty of their Adversaries, that laid wait for
them, knowing that their errors could not resist the light of the truth;
Appendix ad Open. p. 612.
Nec praedicari a Catholicis veritatem patiebantur, contra suum errorem.

7ly, When they admitted any to their Communion, they Rebaptized, and imposed
new Vows and Covenants on them, obliging them not to approach the Catholic
Assemblies, or hear any of their Bishops, which St. Augustine desired of
Crispine, Epistle 172. And in the next Epistle, he acquaints us with another
Art used by Crispine, to increase and keep firm his Proselytes. Crispine being
a wealthy Man, as the Donatists generally were by the Spoils of the Catholics,
he employed none to dress his ground, or to manage his affairs, but such as did
profess to be of his Party; and to every one that would be rebaptized by him,
he gave a certain Sum of Money, and promised more, by which means he had
corrupted great Numbers, whose dependence being wholly on him, they were ready
to execute his designs against the Catholics. St. Augustine asks him, Epistle
173. how he would be able to answer Christ, when he should question him for
such sacrilegious practices, upon those souls, which he had redeemed with his
Blood; Crispine, Carum fuit precium tuum, ad emendum timorem Mappaliensium, and
vilis mors mea, ad emendum amorem Gentium? Plus valuit rebaptizandis colonis
tuis quod numeratum est de sacculo tuo, quam baptizandis populis meis, quod
manavit de latere meo. O Crispine, Why should thou corrupt with thy Money
those poor Souls, to live in fear of thee, whom I redeemed with my Blood to
live in the love of me?

8ly, Their Pride and Reputation with the People, kept off many of their
Bishops from the Church communion. Vinci possunt, suaderi non possunt, says
St. Augustine; he gives instance in Tichonius, who was one of their most
learned Bishops, and defended the Article of the Catholic Church, yet kept
himself in the Schism still. And though diverse of them knew and hated the
pride of Donatus, yet they deserted him not, or with a greater pride, to set up
for themselves in a more Congregational way. Alia schismat^ facta sunt ex
vobis, sicut Rogatense in Mauritania, Vrbanense in Numidia, etc. contra Cresc^.
l. 4. c. 60. Convicta est falsitas, apparuit veritas, and adhuc contemnitur
charitas. Post collat. They were convinced of the falsehood of their own
Opinions, and the truth of those of the Catholics, yet would not embrace
peace. So did Tichonius, who continued in the Schism, when he was convinced
that it was so; having espoused the Schism, and gained great reputation, he
knew not how to leave that, and his credit too. l. 2. contra Parmen. And i^ Men
do either love the pre-eminence, or to hear themselves prate, as Diotrephes
did, 3 John 9. or if they gain a livelihood, and wealth, as Demetrius and his
Crafts-men by the Shrines of Diana, Acts 19. their Ears are so stopped, that
neither the Arguments of St. Paul, nor the Eloquence of Apollos, nor the
Authority of Cephas, 2 Timothy 3.8.
are sufficient to open them, but they will still resist the truth; Men of
corrupt minds, reprobate (or as our Margent reads it, of no judgment)
concerning the Faith.

9ly, St. Peter tells us of some places of Scripture hard to be understood, 2
Pet. 3.16.
which they that are unlearned and unstable, do wrest; And this was another
evil art, whereby they advantaged their Party: They would, Proferre Evangelium,
take a Text of Scripture, as Optatus, p. 78. and usually such as they did not
understand, non intellectas Lectiones, from the Canticles, or Daniel, or the
Revelations, and these must be made to speak their Language, and promote their
designs. So they interpreted that of the Prophet Isay, Isa. 52.
calling the People from the Captivity of Babylon, to justify their
Separation, and from St. Paul, 2 Corinthians. 6. they would persuade the People not
to have any commerce with, or to salute others. So in the Conference at
Carthage, to prove that the whole World was Apostatized, except the Church of
Christ with them; they allege the revolt of the Ten Tribes, and compare
themselves to Judah. St. August. de Verbis Domini in Johan. Sermon. 50. names
their quoting of Canticles 1.7. as a proof, that they were the Church of
Christ: Because it is there said, that he makes his Flock to rest in Meridie,
(i. e.) say they, in the South, where Africa lay; of which see St. August. De
unitate Ecclesiae c. 14. (I wonder the less at these, when I find A Lapide,
from the same Text, telling us, that Meridies is Romana Ecclesia, ad quam
Petrus jubente Christo, ex Jerusalem and Antiochia, transtulit Pontificatum
suum.) Thus to prove themselves without sin, they alleged Ephesians. 5.27. where it
is said, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might present it a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, which they applied to themselves,
as St. Augustine observes. Absit ut quis nostrum ita se justum dicat ut sine
peccato in hac vita se esse jactaret, as did the Donatists in our Conference,
saying, that they were in that Church, which has no spot, no^ wrinkle, Epist.
50. They accounted themselves to be, Coelestes in Coelo, and other Terrestres
in Terra. August. Epistle 48. The^ were the few that were chosen, the rest were
reprobates. They were Israelites, and other^ Egyptians and Persecutors. They
the Flock o^ Christ, others were Wolves. Whatever the Text was, a great part of
the Sermon was to the purpose. Nec mirum si Scripturae pacem n^^ intelligent,
qui pacem cum Dei Ecclesia non habebunt. August. de Gestis cum Emerito. It i^
no strange thing, if they do not understand the truth, who do hate peace.

10ly, Their ready compliance with all other factious Parties, though never so
vile and heretical, was another advantageous practice. For though there were
great fewds between the Donatists, and others that separated from them on the
like pretenses as they separated from the Catholics, as Maximinianists and
Luciferians, who were professed Anabaptists, the Circumcellians much like our
Quakers, the Euchitae and Massalians, who were perfect Enthusiasts, and the
Arians, who denied the Deity of our Savior, and the Holy Ghost: yet as often
as there was an opportunity of vexing and afflicting the Catholics, they all
united as one Man, and forgetting their private animosities, armed themselves
as against their common Enemy; yea they scrupled not to join with the Jews, the
most implacable Enemies of Christianity; and when they were destitute of other
Assistants, to make use of the power of the barbarous Goths and Vandals. Thus
Manasseh vexed Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseh; but both joined to oppose Judah,
Isay 9.21. Thus it was in the Infancy of the Church, and thus it will be until
its Consummation: Herod and Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles and the People of
Israel, will conspire against it, Acts 4.27.

11ly, Their promiscuous receiving of Men of desperate fortunes, and as
desperate resolutions, into their Parties. Such as were in debt, or disgrace,
through their debauchery and vicious lives, such as were discontented, and
thinking themselves injured by their Magistrates, Parents or Masters, upon whom
they could not otherwise be revenged, made Donatus or his Successors their
Protectors, they were immediately above the Power of the Laws, their debts are
all satisfied, and all obligations of Nature and Religion cancelled, and if
they believe their Leaders, their sins are all pardoned. This honor did those
new Saints confer upon each other, while they lived, and promised no less than
a Crown of Martyrdom, if they dyed in defense of that Holy League.

12ly, Another Engine which they employed, was, the maintaining of Emissaries
in all places, where there was hope of advancing their cause and Party. They
had their Confederates in Rome, who scrued themselves into the favor of great
Men: nor wanted they their Advocates in the Emperor's Court; for being many of
them enriched by the spoils of others, they were very free in their Bribes and
Presents to Men in Power, to purchase liberty to themselves; and being Men of
smooth Tongues and soft discourse, as well as of crafty and complying
conversation, they did insinuate themselves to the acquaintance and counsels of
some good Men, with a design to betray them, and not unlike our Jesuits could
personate all sorts and degrees of Men, that by all means they might increase
the Number of their Proselytes, and support their Cause. To which we may add,
the familiar and constant correspondence which they held among themselves,
advising not only what was done, but what was most facile and probable to be
effected: no^ did they only meet frequently to consult o^ such means, but did
as unanimously agree and resolve on them, and having resolved, as vigorously
act and prosecute their designs with great secrecy and constancy; for, as our
Savior observed of the unjust Steward, The Children of this World are wiser in
their generation than the Children of light: Luke 16.8.
(i. e.) (according to the Hebrew phrase) in rebus sui^ agendis, in prosecuting
those worldly affairs wherein they are concerned, (for the Hebrews call the
actions of Men (...), i. e. (...), as Vatablus shows from Genesis 6.9. and
37.2.) And the reason of it is, because when Men are conscious to themselves of
unjust dealing with others, their own just fears do excite them to advise
warily, and act speedily and industriously for their security. Whereas the
righteous Man having also an honest cause, supposes his innocence to be a
sufficient guard, and therefore is less studious and solicitous for his own
preservation.

Lastly, And the great countenance they gave to the Vices of their Proselytes,
was no small advantage to the Faction, for they were better than their words to
them; they promised only liberty, but they allowed all manner of
licentiousness; they counted it no sin in them to rob, and deceive the
Catholics, nor to defile themselves with fleshly lusts. Vnde tantae turbae
convivarum ebriosorum, and innuptarum, sed non incorruptarum, innumerabilia
stupra foeminarum? Aug. l. 3. contra Parmen. They had Principles and Doctrines
that encouraged them to live more lewdly than others, as that all their sins
were already pardoned, and that they could never fall from the grace of God. In
so much as their sins, as well as their Opinions had a Toleration. Greges
ebrios sanctimonialium suarum, cum gregibus ebriis circumcellionum die noctuque
permixtos vagari turpiter sinunt. cont. Parm. l. 2o. Their Teachers permitted
the unclean Circumcellians to wander up and down, Day and Night, with young
Women, who pretended vows of Chastity, and more holiness than others, as the
Gnostics had done before them, but lived in all Uncleanness. If any Bishop or
Priest were cast out of the Catholic Communion, for scandalous offenses, and
fled to them, they received and defended him; and he that was in his own
account unworthy of the Office of a Deacon in the Catholic Church, is
accounted fit, not only to be a Presbyter, but to create Presbyters too among
the Donatists, as Splendonius did. Extant innumerabilia documenta in iis qui
vel Episcopi vel alterius gradus Clerici fuerunt, l. 3. contr. Petil.
and tunc degradati, vel pudore in alias terras abierunt, vel ad vos ipsos, vel
ad alias haereses, says St. Augustine. And when any Bishop or private Person
deserted them, to join in Communion with the Catholic Church, they did not
only defame him, but by open violence, and secret conspiracies sought his utter
ruin: to which the People were encouraged by their Priests, who taught them,
that therein they should do God good service, as they did concerning St.
Augustine. It was a difficult matter to find any one among them, that had a
good opinion of any that were of another Communion, or that did think soberly
of himself, but his proud conceit did generally swell, and poison their souls,
that they were the most excellent Christians, and others reprobates: Qui se a
Christ's anitate discindunt, se solos Christianos esse jactant, and damnant
caeteros. Aug. contra Crescon* l. 4. c. 59.

By these and other such arts, they increased their Faction, and made it
formidable, not only to the Bishops, but to the Emperor himself, by whose care
and good government, though the limbs of the Faction were cut off, yet the
heads and the heart remained still, and with innumerable affronts and
vexations, did they grieve that good Emperor, whom (as much as in them lay)
they had slain in In the Language of Optatus, they did occidere Oleum, slew him
with the sword of their tongues, and handled him, as if he had not been the
Lords anointed.
his reputation, and tantum non with violent hands brought down his gray Hairs
with sorrow to the Grave, in the 65. Year of his Age, and the 31th. of his
Empire: But their malicious spirits survived, to the perpetual trouble of the
Church, and of the Emperor's Sons, which succeeded him; whereof Constantine was
slain shortly after, by his Brothers Soldiers; Constans, who lived longer, and
was Heir to his Father's Virtues, as well as his Dominions, was also made the
object of the Donatists malice; for during these revolutions of the Empire,
they recruited their Faction, and had spawned a mad fry of Fanatic Persons,
called Circumcellians, to be their Champions, for though they did not always
own them to be of their Communion, yet did they on all occasions employ them to
fight against the common Enemy. These Circumcellians were encouraged by
Donatus, who pretended that an Angel had appeared to him, and assured him of
the confirmation of his Faction, and that he had immediate answer of his
Prayers from God, Oravit Donatus and respondit ei Deus e coelo, and that as
many as suffered violent Deaths, in defense of the good old cause, should have
a Crown of Martyrdom, and for their encouragement, white Altars or Memorials
were erected to their honor, and great commendations of them were celebrated
i^ public Assemblies. Anno 348.
Now Constans the Emperor, being mindful of his Father's charge, and in
imitation of his Example, sent Paulus, and Macarius with some Gifts and Alms
to the Churches of Africa, but with a Commission also, to endeavor the unity
of those Churches. Whereof Donatus having intelligence, although those Legates
whom Optatus calls operarios unitatis, did in a friendly manner apply
themselves to him, first offering him to partake of the Emperor's bounty and
then persuading him to embrace peace and unity with the Catholic Bishops, as
the Emperor had given them instructions, he not only refused to accept of the
Emperor's Largess, but returned many opprobrious speeches, Quid est imperatori
cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with the Church? (aut quid est
Ecclesiae cum Regibus Seculi quos nunquam nisi invidos Christianitas sensit?
and multa maledicta effudit) or what has the Church to do with the Kings of
this World? who have been always adversaries to Christianity: and so he
rejected the Emperor's propositions for peace, with as much pride and contempt,
as the Emperor did with Humility and Charity offer them.

There was at this time another Donatus Bishop of Bagaia, who gathered great
Troops of the Circumcellians, to oppose the Emperor's Legates, to intercept the
Gifts and Moneys which they were dispersing, for the relief of the several
Churches. Of which the Legates being advised, and apprehending themselves in
great danger, by reason of the flocking together of those desperate persons;
They sent to Silvester, who had then the command of the Soldiers, to send them
a Guard of Soldiers, not that they intended to be Aggressors, but only (vim vi
repellere) to defend themselves against those furious Persons, that were in an
extraordinary manner assembled: And the event proved, that they did but what
was necessary; for the People were stirred up to Sedition, by jealousies and
prejudices against the Emperor, which the Donatists had scattered through all
Africa, persuading them that Paulus and Macarius had brought with them certain
Images, which they intended to set upon the Altars, and to command a
Superstitious Worship and Sacrifice to them, whereas they came only as
Ambassadors of Peace, and Instruments of Union. And notwithstanding all the
affronts which they received from that furious and desperate Party, who often
set upon the Guards of Soldiers, to their own destruction, the Legates at the
request of the Catholics did forbear any farther acts of Hostility, nor did
they act any thing prejudicial to the true Religion. Nulli dictum est Nega
Deum, Incende testamentum, etc. Opt. p. 62.
None were required to deny God, to burn their Bibles, or destroy the Churches.
Sola fuerunt ad pacem hortamenta, ut Deus and Christus ejus a Populo in unum
conveniente pariter rogaretur. They only endeavored, according to the
Emperor's instruction, to exhort them to peace, and unity, that they would
worship God and Christ with one consent in an uniform manner. But these
exhortations to peace, did more offend them, than the tidings of War; they
loved the inheritance of Schism more than the Legacy of Christ; Nunciata
unitate omnes fugistis; at the very name of peace they all desert the Legates,
Opt, p. 64.
and become their Enemies, and both by open violence and secret plots, by their
slanders and Swords too are always provoking them. And yet these Donatists did
not only complain of Persecution by the Legates, but imputed it to the
Catholics, as if they had procured those Bands of Soldiers with a purpose to
destroy them, p. 69.
to which Optatus answers, Quod ab aliis vobis provocantibus factum est,
nobis non debet imputari; quicquid objecistis, vos fecistis; that if it were
true that the Donatists were slain by the Soldiers, yet it was false that it
was done by the procurement of the Catholics, who always mediated with the
Officers to spare them; And that in truth the Emperor's Officers never used
violence, but when they were first provoked; Nullus erat primitus terror, nemo
vidit virgam, nemo custodiam; there was no terror against any but evil doers,
no punishment or Prison threatened to any peaceable Christian, the Emperor only
preserved peace in the State. And about the end of Constans his Reign, there
was a Council held at Carthage, Anno 349.
Gratus being then Bishop, to restore peace to the Church, in which they
decreed diverse Canons against rebaptizing, and to prevent that desperate
practice of the Circumcellians, to cast themselves from high precipices, and by
other violent practices to destroy themselves. And thus for a while the fury of
the Donatists was abated, and the hopes of peace and settlement comforted the
Church. But this good Emperor is untimely slain by diverse Military men, who
conspired against him, thinking to divide the Empire among themselves. One
Marcellinus invites him to a Supper, and continuing with him late at Night,
Magnentius one of the Conspirators begins to affright him, whereupon the
Emperor fled to Helena, whither they sent a selected Company of Soldiers, and
murdered him; But Constantius his Brother succeeded him, who at his entrance
on the Government, did seem to favor the Orthodox against the Arians and
Donatists, but being settled in the Empire, he declares himself an Arian, and
consequently an Enemy to the Orthodox Christians, whereby the Arians and
Donatists rage every where against them; Donatus himself, and many of his
Faction joined themselves with the Arian Heretics (although they had formerly
declared their abhorrence of them) in hope of obtaining the greater power
against the Catholics by the Emperor's favor. And to this end, Donatus wrote
a Book, de Spirit^ Sancto, as St. Hierome has observed, agreeable to the Arian
Doctrine. And others of the Faction joined with the Macedonians, and as St.
Ambrose De Spiritu Sancto. l. 3. c. 11.
says, blotted out of their Books those words of St. John, God is a Spirit*
Maximus Bishop of Neapolis, was deprived of his dignity and function, for not
complying with the Arians, who placed one Zosimus in his See, Maximus keeps to
his charge and function, until they ejected him by force, and then he
denounces an Anathema against the Intruder, whereof the Intruder taking no
notice, applied himself to the discharge of his new Office, and endeavoring to
speak unto the People, his Tongue hung out of his Mouth, so that he could not
speak, nor draw it in again, until he went out of the Church, and then he
recovered the use of it; and this befell him a second, and a third time,
whereupon he forsook his new Dignity. And now lived that famous Ecebolius, a
Sophist of Constantinople, who while Constantius was a Catholic, professed
himself so too, and with him turned Arian; and when Julian was Emperor, was an
Idolater; and in the days of Jovianus, would become a Catholic again, and lay
at the Church Doors, crying to the Faithful, Me salem infatuatum pedibus
conculcate, to trample on him as unsavory Salt, fit for nothing. But it is more
worthy our observation, that within a short time that Constantius had declared
against the Deity of the Son of God, the Empire was taken from him, and given
to Julian.

This Julian the Apostate, who had from his Childhood been instructed in the
Christian Religion, l. 3. c. 1.
and (as Socrates says) had been a Reader in the Church at Nicomedia, being of
an unstable wit, declares himself an open Enemy to the Christians, forbidding
them to bear any Office in the Army, or to serve as common Soldiers: Then he
excludes them from the Magistracy, and all public Offices in the Commonwealth,
and permits them not to teach Schools, or instruct Youth in any human
literature. He did not persecute the Christians so violently as Dioclesian, and
others had done, but he contrived more mischievous ways to destroy Christianity
it self, if it had been possible, than others did to destroy the Professors of
it. For first, having shut up their Churches, and denied them the nurture of
their Children in Humane Learning, He sends for the Bishops of the several
Factions, and injoyns them to do nothing prejudicial to the peace of the
Empire, and then tells them they might securely follow their own different
Modes and Opinions, in the Worship and Faith of God; Eo modo nomen Christi de
terris perire putavit, St. Aug. Epist. 166.
si sacrilegas dissentiones liberas esse permifit: And this was that which he
designed, in showing any favor to the Arians, and calling back the Donatist
Bishops from Banishment; the total destruction of Christianity. And whereas the
Catholics looked on this indulgence of the Emperor's, as a design that would
prove in time to be fatal to Christianity, St. Augustine.
for (quae pejor mors animae quam libertas erroris,) there is no Death so evil
as the License of Error, which is the destruction of so many Souls: Yet the
Donatists are loud in their thanks, and acclamations to Julian, for this
liberty, as a most just and gracious Prince, when as he did only contrive and
allow it, as a more easy and ready way to destroy the name and being of
Christianity, which was almost lost already among the new denominations of
Arians, Photinians, Macedonians, and Donatists. And that it might be no more
had in remembrance, he imposes the name of Galilaeans upon them, as ( nomen
criminis not religionis) a name of criminal and wicked persons, not of a
religious profession. And against the being of Christianity he encouraged the
Arians, and others that denied the Divinity of Christ, and ever favored the
several Sects, more than the Orthodox. Upon this the Donatists grew more proud
and implacable toward the Catholics, and to ingratiate themselves with the
Emperor, pull down the Cross which Constantine had set up in public Places, to
the honor of Christ, and set up the Image of Julian in its place: and by how
much he was more severe against the Catholics, by so much the more they
applauded him. He silenced all the Men that were famous for their Learning, as
St. Basil and St. Gregory, both of Cappadocia, Eugenius Antiochenus, and
Apollinaris the Syrian, who wrote for Christianity against the Heathen, which
Book the Christian Bishops presented to the Emperor, desiring him to peruse it,
which he did, and returned it to them again, saying, Legi, intellexi,
improbavi, to whom they replied, Epist. 166.
Si intellexisses nunquam improbasses. In the Petition of Petilian, Rogatianus,
etc. they styled Julian the only Assertor of Public Liberty, from whom alone
Justice and Clemency was to be hoped for, when as St. Augustine says, nil
injustius, nil perniciosius. The Catholics wondered, as well they might, that
the Donatists, and the several Heretics should be so short sighted, as not to
perceive that Julian was striking at the very root of Christianity, which the
Catholics often minded them of, desiring them to consider, Opt. l. 2. p. 54.
that by the same Edict by which they were indulged, the Worship of Idols was
enjoined, and the Devil and they were let loose together, to compass the Earth,
and make Proselytes to their Party. Tunc reddidit basilicas Donatistis quando
templa Daemoniis. St. August. Epistle 166. And when Julian was dead, they often
wished their good Protector alive again. But as if Julian were too slow an
Executioner of the true Religion, the Donatists make more speed, by destroying
their Brethren with as much rage and cruelty, as their most barbarous Enemies;
for having by Rogatianus, Pontius, and Cassianus, three of their Bishops,
obtained some privileges, which were denied to the Catholics, they exercised
all manner of cruelty against them. Opt. 55.
Felix and Januarius two of their Bishop's, came to the Castle o^ Lemelle,
where the Catholics had a Church which being shut against them, they commanded
the Rabble which followed them, to pull i^ down, who presently got up on the
Roof, and uncovered it, and perceiving the Deacons defending the Altar, they
threw down the Tile stones, and slew two of the Deacons. In Thipasa a City of
Mauritania, Idem,
Vrbanus Formensis, and Felix Idicrensis, with their bloody Companions,
assaulted an Assembly of the Catholics, while they were at their Devotions,
and driving them out of the Church, slew and wounded a great part of them,
without respect of Sex or Age. The Bread of the Consecrated Eucharist, they
threw to their Dogs, which having eaten it, by the judgment of God grew mad,
and fell upon their Masters, renting them in pieces. They sold the consecrated
Chalices to Women for live uses, or to the Heathen for the Service of their
Gods, pulled down the Altars, and burnt the Books of the Holy Scriptures. Felix
who was one of their Leaders defloured a Virgin, that had a little before owned
him as her Spiritual Father; and none of the Heathen committed greater
outrages, than some of their Bishops. Julian by their instigation did shut up
their Church-Doors, and some of his Officers, with a kind of admiration of the
beauty and order, See Baron.
as well as the richness of the Ornaments and Utensils of their Church, took
them away, Theodorct l. 3. c. 12. Ecce quibus vasis ministratur Mariae silio.
as too good to be employed in the Service of the Son of Mary: but such
profanation as the Donatists committed, those Heathen never learned or
practiced.

This Storm was too violent to continue long; One of the Fathers thus comforted
the Church, that Julian was Nubecula cito transitura, and accordingly Julian's
ambition instigated him to a War against the Persians, where he dyed in the
midst of his own Army by the wound of an Arrow, shot from an unknown hand,
which he conceiving to be sent from Heaven, pulled it out, saying, Vicisti
Galilaee, and so dyed. To him succeeded Jovianus, proclaimed Emperor by the
Army, that was then in Persia, who desired them to name some other, because he
being a Christian, could not lead an Army of such Principles, as Julian had
formed. To whom the old Soldiers that had served Constantine and Constans,
answered, that they were Christians, Ann. 364.
and would have no other Emperor; But he dyed unhappily within seven Months
after, and Valentinian succeeds him, a right good Christian, whom Julian had
for that cause banished from his Court. He joins his Brother Valens to himself
in the Empire, who was an Arian. About the Fourth Year of this Emperor dyed the
Great Donatus, and Parmenian (against whom Optatus wrote his Seven Books)
succeeded him. It will not be impertinent to set down here a series of the
Bishops during this Schism, which is as follows.

The Catholic Bishops.
Mensurius. Cecilian. Rufus. Gratus. Genetlius. Aurclius.
The Donatists.
Majorinus. Donatus a Casi^ Nigris. Donatus magnus Parmenianus. Primianus.
Gratus and Parmenian are the two Bishops that were in competition, Anno 368.
Of what temper Parmenian was, Optatus his Cotemporary, a Person greatly
beloved, as well for his Piety as Learning, has shown at large. He wanted very
little of the Pride of Donatus, and for Calumny and Cruelty nothing at all. In
his days Ticonius, one of the most learned and sober of that Party, reading and
weighing the Arguments of Optatus for the Catholic Church, was so far
convinced, that he wrote in defense of it, confuting the Arguments of the
Donatists: and asserting, that (nullius hominis peccatum potest praescribere
promissis Dei) the wickedness of Man cannot make void the promises of God,
concerning the extent of Christ's Church, for which he was condemned by a Synod
of their Bishops, without any other Answer to his Arguments. Now the great
confusion which was at Carthage, drove St. Augustine (who was yet a Heathen) to
Rome, where he read Rhetoric, and Philosophy, until at length by the Prayers
of his Mother Monica, and his converse with Pious and Learned Men, especially
Saint Ambrose, he was converted, and baptized by St. Ambrose at Millain, and
became Malleus Donatistarum, a happy Instrument to destroy that Faction At his
Baptism Te Deum was first sung by S. Ambrose and St Augustine Alternatim.
. Which Valentinian seeks to do by good Laws and Edicts; diverse of which are
yet extant in the Codex Justinianus, as that against all Heretics; Nullus
haereticis ministeriorum locus, etc. That no Place be allowed to them that were
condemned by the Councils of the Church, to exercise their Ministry, and if any
such command or allowance were fraudulently procured, it should be null; That
the People should be restrained from such Meetings, and their Teachers banished
from Towns and Cities. Another Law was made against Rebaptizing, that the
Offender be deprived of his Priesthood, l. 2. Ne sanctum Baptisma iteretur.
Another against Conventicles: Conventicula illicita etiam extra Ecclesiam in
privatis aedibus celebrari prohibemus proscriptionis domus periculo imminente,
si dominus ejus in ea clericos nova ac tumultuosa conventicula celebrantes
susceperit. I shall name but one more made expressly against the Manichees and
Donatists, Tit. de Haereticis. Which in English is to this effect: We
do;deservedly prosecute the Manichees and Donatists with severity. Commanding
that they enjoy not the Privileges common to others, because they offending
against Religion, are injurious to all. We therefore pronounce them incapable
of enjoying any public bounty, or liberality, of making their Wills, and
bestowing their Goods; neither shall their Sons inherit their Estates, unless
they depart from their Fathers wickedness and if their Servants forsake such
Masters, to have communion with the Catholic Church they shall be indemnified.
These Laws are severe indeed, and by Men that had made conscience of any Law,
would have been thought obligatory: but to them that had broken the great Law
of Charity, they were as cords o^ Sand. The Donatists were now become so
numerous, and had so wasted the Catholics that they began to quarrel with each
other and in one Tumult, Donatus Bishop of Bagaia is thrown into a Well, in
another Marculus is cast from a high Rock. Salvius an Aged Bishop of Membresa
has Dogs hung about his Neck, while the mad People with obscene Songs dance
round about him; a cruelty, says St. Augustine, beyond that of the Hetruria^
Tyrant, who joined only Humane Bodies together. This is true, however strange
it may be; St. Augustine tells them, the City is nigh and there they may be
fully informed of it. Nor will it seem strange, if it be considered, how the
mad Circumcellians cast away their own lives, of whom I shall at present give
you only this short account, That they lived in madness, they dyed in
desperation, they lay stinking and noisome after Death, and yet there were a
madder sort left behind, that worshipped these abominable Wretches, as if they
had been Martyrs. Of these barbarities the poor Catholics desired their
Governors to acquaint the Emperor, and it was in a fit season, for both
Valentinian, and Valens the Arian, who gave them some countenance, being dead,
Gratianus and Valentinianus they younger succeeded, and chose Theodosius Magnus
to govern the Empire, who though he used great power and prudence to suppress
these Donatists, and hated them perfectly, as by the Laws made while he was
Consul, and his actions during his Government may appear, yet could he not
effect it. How much he honored the Church, may appear by submitting himself to
the censure of St. Ambrose, having by the instigation of some of his Courtiers
given order to destroy some of the Inhabitants of Thessalonica in cold blood:
But the wisdom of God intended to effect this by other means. Anno 389.
St. Augustine having buried his Mother Monica, resolves to return to Carthage,
to assist in making up the breaches of that Church, where the first Book which
he wrote against the Donatists, was that which he calls his Psalm, containing
an Epitome of their Opinions and Practices; and being afterward made Bishop of
Hippo in Africa, he bestowed much of his time and labor, as well in private
and public disputations, as in many learned Writings yet extant. But still the
Faction thrived, and was delivered of another Sect; For Parmenian being dead,
the Donatists meet at Bagaia to choose a Successor in the Chair of Carthage,
and there were two Competitors, Primianus and Maximianus: Primianus was the
most zealous, but Maximianus being of the alliance of Donatus, St. Aug. Epist.
162.
and having some good Women to assist him, hoped to succeed; but as St.
Augustine observes, for any real worth or ability, other than to head a
Faction, Maximianus might have been Minimianus, and Primianus Postremianus. The
Assembly is much divided, the greater part vote for Primianus, to the
discontent of Maximianus and his Party, who thence-forward deny to hold
communion with their Brethren, and gather distinct Congregations; and in a
short time, he and his Party had procured Forty Three Bishops to side with him,
and these condemned Primianus, and owned Maximianus for their Bishop. And St.
Augustine, on Psalm. 36. tells us of another Meeting at Cubursussita, where were
an Hundred Bishops that confirmed Maximianus; But still Primianus has the
greater Number, for shortly after, at another Synod at Bagaia, we read of Three
Hundred Bishops that rescinded all that the Maximinianists had decreed, and
establish Primianus: of this St. Augustine gives a full account, Contra
Cresconium; and there observes, that without scruple they could urge and
execute the Imperial Laws (against such as divided their Church) upon the
Maximinianists, but thought it a Persecution, when the Catholics proceeded by
the same Laws against them; they compared the Maximianists to Core, Dathan, and
Abiram, for dividing from them, St. Augustine confuted the Donatists by their
Arguments against the Maximianists. Hoc little factum multum valuit ut little ora
penitus clauderentur. S. Aug. Epist. 50.
yet would justify their Separation from the Catholic Church. Such is usually
the judgment of God upon Schismatics, as well as Heretics, to make themselves
condemned, returning their own actions, arguments, and censures against others
upon themselves: Quae tanta Dementia est, pacem in ipsa pace relinquere, and
eam in dissentione velle retinere, as St. Augustine most ingeniously applies
it; Contra Petil. l. 2.
What greater madness can there be, than to forsake the peace of the Universal
Church, and seek it in the midst of dissension? For it seldom happens that all
who separate, are of one mind among themselves, but there is a superfetation,
some are ready to set up for themselves as soon as there is another
opportunity. It was so with the Maximianists, who went off from the
Primianists, pregnant, and were shortly delivered of Twins, the Rogatians and
Claudianists, which as Vipers, endeavored to eat out the bowels of their
Parents. And now we are come to a Scene so full of cruelty and bloodshed, that
you will suppose it to be the last; But, Nec dum finitus Orestes, this Tragedy
is not yet at an end.

Arcadius and Honorius succeed their Father Theodosius, and at their entrance
on their Empire, make diverse as strict Laws against the Heretics in general,
and particularly against the Donatists, as the wisdom of Man could contrive:
but the more they were restrained, the more violently they acted. The Churches
generally enjoined a calm, the fury of the Arians and other Heretics was
spent, only Africa is pestered with new Monsters, of whom the Catholics send
their complaints to the Emperors, That their Bishops could not appear in
public without affronts, nor travel for fear of such as lay in wait to destroy
them; They burned the Bishops Houses, destroyed the Churches, slew their
Priests, particularly Restitutus, and Innocentius, having first dug out one
of his Eyes, and cut off his Fingers. St. Augustine hardly escaped them* for
having been abroad (as his custom was) to visit and comfort his Brethren, they
had provided some of their Circumcellians to lay in Ambush, in the way by which
he was to return, but by God's providence, his Guide conducted him home another
way. St. Hier. to St. Aug. Epist. 25. quos gladio nequeunt voto interficiunt.
But he could not escape the Sword of their Tongues, for they rail at him as a
Deceiver, and Murderer of Souls, and (dicebant and tractabant) they taught and
preached publicly, that it was not only as lawful to kill him, as to kill a
Wolf, that did destroy the Flock, but also that whoever slew him, should have
all their sins undoubtedly pardoned, and be honored as Martyrs. In the Year
401. Aurelius Primate of Africa, assembles a Council at Carthage, for
conversion for the Donatists, and supplying the Catholic Churches with
Ministers, which were much destroyed. To this they were encouraged by
Anastasius Bishop of Rome, and by his persuasion they offered, that whoever of
the Donatists would return to the Church, should still enjoy their Bishoprics
and Dignities. But their courtesy was a little regarded, as their authority;
only they prevailed with the Emperors, to send relief to the poor Catholics,
who suffered no less than if they had lived under Heathen Persecutors. The
Decretals of Anastasius made about this time, against the Donatists, are still
on Record. At Milevis also was a Council assembled against them, where St.
Augustine being present, Epist. 168.
describes their accursed practices, and gives an instance in a young Man, who
had been admonished by the Bishop for beating his Mother: The young Man
thereupon threatens his Mother, that he would become a Donatist, and then
would slay her, and so he did. For to them he flies, and is rebaptized, and in
white Garments, as a Circumcellian, he goes and sheds his Mother's blood; And
from this instance, St. Augustine draws this conclusion. That he who durst not
strike his Mother, while he was of the Catholic Church, slew her without
punishment, when he became a Donatist. Aurelius the Primate, summons a General
Council of all the Bishops of Africa, and sends express Messages to the
Donatists, that they would be present at that Council, to treat of the Union of
the Church, where he promised a full and calm disquisition of their arguments,
and pressed them to consider the great confusions, which that ( Veternus error,
as he calls it) old error of theirs had occasioned. Possidius is employed to
deliver this Message to Crispinus a Donatist Bishop, which having heard, He
replieth, (Patriarchali Sermon Definio, Recedant a me impii, vias eorum nosse
nolo) in a Patriarchal style, Depart from me ye wicked, I desire not the
knowledge of your ways; and a few days after Possidius was pursued as he was
traveling, by a Presbyter, that was also called Crispinus, and fled into a
Cottage to hide himself, but Crispine with his Armed Company, broke open the
Doors, and having drawn him down from an upper Room, St. Aug. Epist. 166.
would certainly have slain him, had not the People that were present entreated
for him, or rather had they not threatened to prosecute the Mutherers. St.
Augustine having heard among the People, how their Bishops and Presbyters did
often wish that they might meet and confer with the Catholics, for the
vindication of their practices, offers himself to discourse privately, or
publicly, with any of them. Particularly he invited Procidianus, who pretended
a great desire of it, Ep. 147.
but refused when it was offered. In the Year 404. is another Council at
Carthage, against the Donatists, from which Council they send Theasius and
Evodius two Bishops to Honorius the Emperor, to desire his Protection of that
part of the Church, and the due execution of the Laws that were made in that
behalf, which if well observed, would redress all their grievances. They name
especially the Edicts, whereby they were disabled to take or receive any
public dignities, or profits belonging to the Church, or to make their Wills
and dispose of Estates: and another Law for punishing those that should
schismatically or heretically ordain, or be ordained. Honorius was grieved at
the complaints of these Bishops, and professed, that the confusion and ruin of
the Church did grieve him more than the loss of Rome, which the Goths and
Vandals had about that time taken from him; and St. Ambrose observes of him
(fecit quod Pater fecit in Causa Donati) that he acted for the Church in the
case of Donatus, as Theodosius his Father had done, who was solicitous for the
welfare of the Church, as of his own Soul. Accordingly he gives order to
Adrian, his Vicegerent in Africa, to Vindicate the integrity of the Catholics,
and punish the perfidiousness of the Donatists, that did rent asunder the
Members of the Church, being as he describes them subtle to seduce, cruel to
destroy, provoking the Sons of Peace to War. Moreover, he forbad all that were
Enemies to the Peace of the Church, to come within his Palace. Opt. p. 650.
And upon the Petition of a young Nobleman, whose Sister being seduced by the
Donatists, divided a considerable Estate among them, without any Legacy to her
Brother; it was ordered, that the Estate should wholly descend to him,
according to a former Edict. It would offend the Readers patience, to repeat
all the Constitutions of the Emperors, and Decrees of Councils, against these
lawless Persons, who could break them with less trouble, than the Emperors
could make them; Witness their heinous Murder of one Maximianus Bishop of
Vaga, St. Aug. Epist. 50.
who having by sentence of Law recovered his Church, which the Donatists had by
force taken from him, came to demand it of them, and to take possession; But
the Donatists fell on him with so great fury, and wounded him so desperately,
that he was left for dead, through loss of blood; and when the Catholics came
to carry him away, they drove them off, and carrying him into a Turret, cast
him down thence, but it being no great height, and falling on soft Turfs, he
was afterward conveyed away, and recovered by his Brethren, and together with
other Sufferers, petitioned the Emperor to pity those persecuted Churches,
showing their wounds, and relating the Cruelty of the Donatists; with which the
Emperor was so affected, that he made Capital Laws against several exorbitances
of the Donatists, and enjoined a strict execution of them; which produced so
good effect, that St. Augustine says thus of them: It was my Opinion
heretofore, Epist. 48.
that none ought to be compelled to the Unity of Christ, but to be persuaded by
Reason and Argument, lest we should have dissembling Catholics, instead of
open Heretics; but this Opinion was overthrown, not by the contradiction of
words, but by the demonstration of Examples, for this my City (says he, that
is Hippo, whereof he was Bishop) which was wholly seduced by the Donatists, by
the Laws of the Emperor, which punished some Offenders among them with Death,
is so generally united in the Catholic Unity, as if there had been no Schism
among them; for being first awed by fear, they are afterward convinced by
truth, which they could not hear among their false Teachers, and are by degrees
made to understand, and abhor their wicked practices, etc.

And to silence their Objections, that they were persecuted and punished beyond
their deserts; He wills them to consider, first, what they had done, and then
what they did suffer, which was far less than their demerits. Leges puniendo
non possunt, quod isti saeviendo potuerunt: Epist. 170.
The Laws never inflicted such punishments on the worst Malefactors, as They
did on their innocent Brethren. How great mischiefs did some of your mad Clerks
and Circumcellians act among us? our Churches were burnt, our Books cast into
the flames, Men were taken out of their Houses, which they also burnt down,
having first plundered them, and then tortured their Masters, by maiming them
in their Limbs, and putting out their Eyes, says St. Augustine, contra Donat.
post Collat. These things were not done by the rabble of Circumcellians alone,
but by their Clergy; Qui duces eorum semper fuerunt, who were still their
Leaders. What Master was there that did not stand in fear of his Servant, if he
came to the Donatists, Epist. 166.
to make his complaint, and desire their Patronage? They constrain the Masters
to deliver up their Covenants, and let them go free; they force from the
Creditors their Bonds and Obligations, and deliver them up to the Debtors, and
if this were not done at their command, they assembled Multitudes with Arms,
and Fire, threatening present Death, and burning of their Houses, St. August.
Epistle 50. Praetexatus a Bishop of the Donatists dying, they ordained Rogatus
in his place, being a Person of good Learning and Reputation, who afterward
declared himself to be of the Catholic Communion, whereupon they so persecuted
him, that at length the Circumcellians plucked out his Tongue, and cut off his
Hand, as St. August. de Gestis cum Emerito. No good Catholic while he lived
among them, could be secure of any Possession, nor of life it self, Epist. 61.
for as St. August. Qui sibi nequam cui bonus? They that by Fire, Water, and
Precipices, desperately destroyed their own Lives, had an easy command and
power over the Lives of others; and yet these Men, would first cry out of
Persecution. Nos ab armatis vestris fustibus and ferro concidimur, and vos
dicitis pati persecutionem. St. August. Epist. 166. gives many instances of
their cruel usage of such Bishops and Presbyters, as were reconciled to the
Catholics. Marcus a Priest, of his own proper motion declared himself to be a
Catholic, and shortly after some of the Donatists met him, and would have
destroyed him, had not some that by accident came by, rescued him out of their
hands. Restitutus another Convert, was drawn out of his House, beaten, and
dragged through the Mud, and long kept a Prisoner, until Proculianus obtained
his deliverance. Marcianus had his House beset, and he escaping, they beat his
Subdeacon, so as they left him for Dead. They made public Proclamations, that
whoever should communicate with Maximianus, his House should be burnt; and when
Possidius was sent to Fugilia, to visit and instruct some People there, the
Donatists laid ambushes for him, which he having escaped, they pursued him to a
House, where he hid himself, and set it on Fire three times, intending to have
burnt him alive, had not the Country Men quenched the Fire: and this was done
by some of the Donatist Clergy, who being condemned for this outrage, in a
Mulct of Ten Pounds of Gold, the good Bishop Possidius interceded for them, and
got the Penalty to be remitted.

So desperately were they bent to ruin the Catholics, that sometimes they
joined with the Arians and Macedonians, and sometimes with the Pagans and with
the Jews (whom the Fathers of that Age called Coelicolas) to persecute the
Catholics. Who meet again in another Council at Carthage, and decree to send
Legates to Honorius, to complain of the great slaughters made upon them by the
Donatists, who had slain many eminent Person namely Severus, Macarius, Evodius,
Theasius and Victor, who were Bishops, besides great Numbers of other Persons.
They appoin^ therefore Restitutus and Florentius, to infor^^ the Emperor of
their continued cruelty; and St. Augustine sends Letters to Olympius, a M^^ of
great account with the Emperor, desiring that some Assistance might be speedily
sent ^^to them, upon which the Emperor sent (...) Rescript, commanding that
such Jews and Heretics as molested the Church, should be p^nished with
Banishment, or loss of Life. O^^ device of the Donatists may be here seasonably
mentioned, which is this: Honorius the Emperor, and Arcadius his Brother were
Persons of so much piety and clemency, that they could not immediately reproach
them, as Persecutors, and therefore they laid the blame of all the severe Laws,
that were enacted against them, St. August. Epist. 129.
upon the evil Counselors, that we^^ near them; These are not the Laws (say
they) of the Sons of Theodosius, but of Stilicho: yet when Stilicho was dead,
the same Law were vigorously executed against them.

I happened in the Year 410. that Attal^^ a Tyrant, had invaded the Emperor's
Dominions, and promised protection to all such as would submit to him,
whereupon many of the Donatists fled to him, insomuch that the Emperor was
enforced to grant a General Toleration, that every one should worship God in
what manner he pleased, to prevent that general revolt to Attalus, which was
feared. Upon this the Donatists grew more insolent than ever; so that they
permitted not the Catholic Doctors, to speak against their Errors, nor to
Preach the truth: They dragged Restitutus, a Presbyter, through a Chanel of
mud, Possidonius in vita Aug. and Contra Cresc. l. 2. and Epist. 166.
and after twelve days torments slew him: They put out the Eyes of others, and
poured in Lime and Vinegar into the holes; and with Fire and Sword terrified
all the Churches of Africa. To divert this fury the Catholics meet again at
Carthage, and send four Bishops to the Emperor, to acquaint him of the
Cruelties that had been committed, upon his Edict for Toleration, which he
recalls by hi Rescript in these words, Codex de Rel. l. 3. and de Haeret. 51.
Ea quae circa Catholicam fidem vel olim ordinavit Antiquitas, vel Parentum
nostrorum authoritas religiosa constituit, vel nostra Serenitas roboravit;
novella superstitione remota, integra and inviolata custodire praecipimus: That
whatever Laws had been established by himself, or his Predecessors, concerning
the Catholic Faith, should be held firm and inviolated. By the four Bishops
sent from this Council, to the Emperor, at the motion of St. Augustine, who
complained, that in the Regions belonging to Hippo, where the Barbarians had
not come, the robberies and violence of the Donatist Clergy, and their
Circumcellians, the Churches were made more desolate, than under the power of
the Barbarians; It was earnestly petitioned, that the Donatists might be
compelled to a public conference with the Catholics, all other endeavors for
Union being frustrated. This Honorius willingly grants, Pridie Id. October. 413.
and lest the Donatists should refuse this Christian means, or commit any act
of violence against the Catholics, he sent Marcellinus his Principal Notary
(or Secretary) to be a Moderator between them, and to take cognizance of the
proceedings: and lest he should meet with the like affronts, as Paulus and
Macarius did, when they were sent by Constans, upon the like occasion; He
commanded a sufficient Army to attend him, which also the Catholics, fearing
the attempts of the Circumcellians, justly desired. The day appointed for this
conference being at hand, the Donatist Bishops being as they reported 279,
enter the City with great Pomp and Numbers, so as they drew all the City to be
Spectators, and to admire their equipage. And though many of them lived on the
benevolence of their Faction, being rendered incapable by the Imperial Laws of
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Possessions, or upon that which they had wrested
from the Catholics in Licentious times; The Catholics were far inferior to
them, as well in Riches, as in Ostentation. The Catholics were in Number 286,
many of their Party had been slain, and many were afraid to Travel, because of
the Circumcellians, however their Number much exceeded the Donatists, for when
St. Augustine viewed the Subscriptions of that Party, to satisfy himself of
their number, he found that the noise of 279. was shrunk into 159. The Meeting
was appointed to be at the Gargilian Baths, in a spacious Room fitted for that
purpose. Aug. de Gestis cum Emerito.
Before the Catholics enter, they agreed mutually by solemn promise, That if
the Donatists could evince, that the Marks of the true Church belonged to their
Party, they would not desire to retain their Episcopal Dignities, but leave
them to the Donatists to be disposed of, (bono pacis) for the peace of the
Church: And if it should appear, that they were in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, they would notwithstanding admit of the Donatists as their
Brethren and Colleagues, upon their conformity, to enjoy their several
Dignities; and wherever there was a competition for the present, between a
Catholic and a Donatist, for any Ecclesiastical Preferment, there should be a
present provision made for the Donatist, and if the Catholic dyed he fore him,
he should have an (...), (as the Civilians called it) a right of succession,
wherein they manifested their real charity, who as they generally professed,
(Parati erant Episcopatum pro Christi unitate deponere and non perdere sed Deo
commendare) were prepared to lay down their Bishoprics for the Christian
Unity, and not think them lost, but entrusted with God. Delib. p. 220.

This charity was not answered with the like from the Donatists, who as soon as
they had been saluted by the Catholics as Brethren, Marcellinus wills them
all to sit down. Accordingly the Catholics took their Seats, but the Donatists
refused, and Primianus their Titular Bishop of Carthage replied, August. post
Collat. Carth.
Indignu^ est ut filii Martyrum and progenies Traditor^^ in unum conveniant: It
is an indignity to the Sons of the Martyrs, to sit with the offspring of
Traditors; Another said, Odi Ecclesian malignantium, and cum impiis non sedebo.
To which the Catholics answered, that they were met to enquire of the truth,
and not of Men's persons, and desired that (nec causa causae, nec persona
personae praejudicet) former cause and persons might not create a prejudice to
the present. At length they condescend to take their Seats, and then it was
proposed by Marcellinus, that for Orders sake, there should be a Select number
appointed by both Parties, to discourse pro and con. This after some reluctance
by the Donatists, was yielded to, and the Number on each side were to be Seven,
whereof St. Augustine was to be Prolocutor for the Catholics, and Petilian
(who had been a Civilian) for the Donatists: There were also four Notaries
appointed by each Party, to write down the several Arguments, and Answers,
which being printed at large, and joined with the Works of Optatus, I shall
refer the Reader to them, and only give a brief account of what is pertinent
to the present case of the Schism. Marcellinus having produced the Emperor's
Rescript for the Treaty, promises them all candor, freedom, and protection
during the Conference, and entreats them to direct their discourse to the
causes and grounds of the difference, which was between them. But the
Donatists, who as St. Augustine observes, Contra Emeritum.
(hoc unum agebant ut nil ageretur) make use of all possible cavils, and
subterfuges, as if the chief business that they had to do, were to take care
that nothing might be done, and to return with as much Pride and Pomp as they
came. First therefore they object, that the time appointed was elapsed; then,
that there was no certain Date to the Imperial Edict, because the Names of the
Consuls were not inserted. These being answered, they desire to know who
procured the Edict for that Meeting, that the Names of the Legates, and their
Petition might be read; tacitly reflecting upon the Catholics, (says St.
Augustine) for referring the cause of the Church to the Emperor. To this it was
answered, that the Catholics (who confessed that they procured it) had done no
other, than they themselves appealing from the Sentence of Meltiades in the
case of Cecilian, unto the Emperor Constantine. Then they begin to reflect on
the Persons of Felix and Cecilian, and having almost tired Marcellinus, to keep
them from impertinencies, repetitions and evasions, he brought them at last to
the merits of the cause. But, Quid dignum tanto? I know not any thing that may
raise greater admiration, than to consider what trifles, and apples of
contention, like the forbidden fruit, engaged all Africa in such desperate
fewds, as made it an Aceldama, for bloodshed and slaughters, and employed so
many Emperors, Bishops and Councils, for more than an Hundred Years together,
without any considerable effect. For when the differences and causes of that
confusion came to be considered in this Conference, we do not hear that the
Donatists could plead in justification of their Schism, that their supposed
Enemies did deny God, or Christ, or the Resurrection, or did actually persecute
them, or that they did with pride, and contempt, deny to admit them to their
Communion; nor did the Catholics charge the Donatists with Apostasy from the
Faith, and denying Fundamentals of Christianity: We do not hear them urging, as
they might, their rebaptizing and joining with the Macedonians, or Jews, and
Pagans, against those whom they knew to be Orthodox Bishops. They all professed
an agreement in all such necessary points of Faith, that it is strange, how
they could differ in any thing; And yet the Donatists persecuted the Catholics
so cruelly, as if they had not been agreed in any principle of Christianity.
Marcellinus having heard the whole Conference, declared against the Donatists,
and charged the inferior Officers speedily to execute the Imperial Laws, in
seizing their Churches for the Catholics, scattering their Conventicles, and
confiscating their Meeting places; which Edict the Emperors confirm, and cause
to be entered among the public Acts. That which was pretended by the Donatists,
as the ground of the Schism, was, that Cecilian, who was Bishop of Carthage,
for almost 100. Years before, was a Traditor; that he, and other Catholic
Bishops had admitted lapsed Persons into their Communion, whereby all their
Churches were defiled, and ought not to be communicated with: Quia lapsi vel
haeretici qui resipiscerent admittebantur. Prosper de promiss. and praedict. So
I find the Question expressly stated, by consent of both Parties: Vtrum Ecclesia
permixtos malos usque id finem habitura, praedicta sit, an omnion omnes bonos
sanctos atque immaculatos ab hoc seculo usque in finem habitura sit. Whether
the Church of God (according to the predictions concerning it) were to consist
of a mixture of good and evil, or only of such as were holy and undefiled. The
Catholics maintained the former from the predictions of the Prophets,
concerning the Universal extent of Christ's Kingdom, from many Parables of our
Savior concerning his Church, from the Commission he gave to his Apostles, to
Disciple all Nations, from the event, which succeeded upon the Apostles
preaching, the Conversion of all Nations, from many Arguments used by St.
Cyprian against the Novatians; and lastly from their own practice, in
readmitting the Maximianists, who had revolted from the Donatists, and used
another Baptism. And most unreasonable it was to think that the wickedness of
one Man should ruin the whole Church of Christ. St. Aug. Epist 50.
Nec peccavit Cecilianus, haereditatem suam perdi^^ Christus. Against this, the
Donatists urge that the same Prophets foretold, that the Church of Christ
should be Holy, as well (...) Catholic, that Jerusalem was to be a Hol^ City,
the Spouse of Christ must be without spot, a chaste and undefiled Virgin. To
which St. Augustine replies, Perfectio promissa non data.
that these things ough^ to be endeavored in the Church in thi^ World, but
would never be effected, unt^^ Christ do come in the end of the World, whe^^ he
will thoroughly cleanse his Flowr, and gather the Wheat into his Garner, and
burn up the chaff with unquenchable Fire.

Then the Donatists begin to recriminate Mensurius and Cecilian, that had been
long dead; To which it is presently answered, That they were absolved by the
Emperor, and Councils of the Church then in being, as did appear by most
ancient Records, which were ready to be produced, and thereby also Donat^^
stood condemned. But (says St. Augustine) if those Bishops had been wicked,
the Church of God cannot be judged to have perished with them. Whether they
were good, or bad, they were our Brethren: if we knew them to be evil, we would
join with you to condemn them, but not to desert the Church of God, because of
them. If Cecilian were good and innocent, he has the reward of his innocence,
and I rejoice at it; but I never placed my hope and faith in his innocence: if
he had been evil, yet the Church thought fit to continue in his Communion, and
so do we. Melius est per patientiam far malos quam per calumniam relinquere
bonos, St. Aug. in Colloq. Carthag. The several Arguments and Answers are too
large to be here set down. Upon the whole, Marcellinus adjudged, that the
Donatists arguments and pretenses were invalid, their Schism unjust, their
practices cruel; and therefore he willed them to return to the Communion of the
Church, and live in peace and unity; otherwise he would provide, that the
Imperial Laws should be executed upon them. In the mean time, he prevailed with
them to subscribe the Records of the Conference, which had been faithfully
taken, by the Notaries on both sides, and so dismissed them. After the
Publication of this Conference, and of the Emperor's reinforcing the Laws for
pecuniary Mulcts, and Banishment against them; some Thousands of the common
People deserted them, and returned to the Catholic Church, and to their honest
and lawful callings, which they had long omitted, as generally the
Circumcellians did: But the Donatist Bishops and Presbyters were for the most
part obstinate, and endeavored to continue the Schism. There were many
imprisoned, and condemned for Murder, and Robberies, committed in that Tumult,
wherein Restitutus and Innocentius were slain; for these St. Augustine
mediates, and obtains Pardon. But the Donatist Bishops return in great
discontent, and report among the People, that they were not permitted to speak
with that liberty and freedom, as they ought: And Petilian, who went off from
the Conference, before it was ended, having lost his Voice by raving and
passion, pretended afterward, that he was dissatisfied with the partiality of
Marcellinus; and therefore he persuaded the rest to Appeal from his Sentence,
pretending that they had been kept as Prisoners, and were not suffered to
prosecute their Arguments; and that Marcellinus was corrupted, and pronounced
the Sentence at Midnight, which was contrary to Law. And St. Augustine going
afterward to Mauritania, was challenged by Emeritus, one of the Donatist
Bishops, who undertook to defend the Conference, in a Personal disputation,
which St. Augustine agreed to, and has given us a particular account of it.
But as St. Augustine says, Hoc proprium Donatistis eandem cantilenam canere:
It was their custom to inculcate the same Arguments again, which had been
often confuted many Years before.

There being no reformation among the Leaders of the Faction, who continue
several Tumults, Cruelties and Murders: Thirty of their Bishops were condemned
to be banished, who met together, and resolved rather to cast themselves over
the Precipices, (as the practice of the Circumcellians was) and to dye Martyrs
for the cause. And some did destroy themselves in Wells, and by throwing
themselves from the Rocks. In so much that Dulcitius, who was joined with
Marcellinus in the Government of Africa, advised with St. Augustine, what was
most fit to be done with those obstinate Persons, that still seduced the
People; and what counsel St. Augustine gave him, we read in the 61. Epistle:
Furiosus error paucorum non debuit tot populorum salutem impedire. Proculdubio
melius est, ut quidam suis ignibus perirent, quam pariter sempiternis ignibus
Sacrilegae dissentionis ardeant universi. That the error of a few distracted
Persons, should not be permitted to involve all the People in confusion and
ruin: and that without doubt, it was better, that such as were Incendiaries,
should dye in the flames which they had kindled, than that all the People
should still suffer in the fires of sacrilegious Dissension.

Thus I have given you a Summary of the History of these dangerous Persons, for
full an Hundred Years, and might pursue it yet farther; but considering how
troublesome and unsafe it may be to follow them too nigh, I shall desist, and
only add some Reflections upon the Faction: And first,

Of their several Sects.
The Luciferians, as the most moderate, shall have precedence: These were so
called from Lucifer Calaritanus, Bishop of Sardinia, who in the Nicene Council
was a zealous Defender of the Catholic Faith against the Arians for which he
was banished while they had the power: He is commended for it, by Athanasius,
Hilarion, and St. Hierome. When the Arians were suppressed, he was recalled,
and restored to his Bishopric: but perceiving that many of the Arians were on
very easy conditions admitted to the Catholic Communion, and made capable of
Ecclesiastical Dignities, he was much dissatisfied, and denied to hold
Communion with the Church, for being so charitable to those new Converts. He
therefore lays the Foundation of his Schism in Sardinia, where the Catholics
solicit him, by all gentle and rational means, not to divide that Church whose
Faith and unity he had so strenuously asserted; but finding that he was not
only resolutely obstinate, but indefatigably industrious to propagate the
Schism, the Catholics thought fit to suspend him, and to dissipate his
adherents. Whereupon he transports himself into Africa, whither great numbers
of his persuasion follow him, and join themselves to the Donatists, but kept
themselves as a distinct Faction, in this respect, that they did not rebaptize,
as the Donatists generally did: but their Pride and contempt of the Catholics,
was in a short time equal to that of the Donatists. St. Augustine commends them
for not renouncing their Baptism, but condemns them as much for cutting
themselves off from the Catholic unity, and much urges that known Axiom,
Extra Ecclesiam non est salus. Oration de obitu Satiri.
St. Ambrose writing to his Brother Siricus, who espoused this Schism, does
thus acquaint him with the danger of it: Non est fides in Schismate; cum enim
propter Ecclesiam passus est Christus, and Christi corpus sit Ecclesia: non
videtur ab his Christo exhiberi fides, a quibus evacuatur ejus passio, and
corpus distrahitur. There is no true faith in Schism, for whereas Christ
suffered for his Church, and that Church is his Body, it does not appear, that
true faith in Christ is in them, by whom his Passion is frustrated, and his
Body divided: for Christ gave his Natural Body, for the preservation of his
Mystical Body, the Church. Saint Hierome therefore comparing these Donatists
with the Novatians, calls them both, Non Ecclesiam Christi, sed Antichristi
Synagogam. These Luciferians stood as independent on the Donatist
Congregations, or any of the other Factions, which were generally
Anabaptistical: For they did not only Rebaptize the adult that came over to
them, but refused to baptize Children, contrary to the practice of the Church,
as appears by several discourses of St. Augustine. The most desperate Sect of
all, were the Circumcellians, who were as so many Hectors, to fight for the
Donatists on all occasions. These were the Zealots, which did abound in every
faction, and pretended to higher dispensations, than their Brethren: for they
believed, that they were inspired by God, to act and suffer extraordinary
things, which they were ready to attempt, as often as their Brethren, or their
own lusts did prompt them thereunto. They met sometime in lesser, and sometime
in greater Numbers, either as Robbers, to abuse and plunder all that were not
of their own Persuasion: Slaves would rob their Masters, and Debtors would
force their Creditors to deliver up their Obligations, and had the perfect
Principles of Levellers, holding that none had right to any of their
Possessions, but by partaking of the same Faith, and Profession with
themselves. Dominium fundatur in gratia, was their Maxim. Or else they would
meet in great Numbers well armed, and able to affront the chief Armies of the
Emperor: And were often the Aggressors, provoking the Roman Soldiers to their
own destruction. Thus they set upon Paulus and Macarius, who were sent with
Presents to the Church of Carthage, from the Emperor Constans, who being
assisted by the Proconsul, slew great Numbers of them. These were animated by
their Leaders, who were generally Donatist Bishops, and called Sanctorum Duces,
Captains of the Saints, and were animated by a Persuasion, that as many as
suffered a violent Death, in defense of the Religion, were Martyrs: Optat. p.
146.
and accordingly, Altars were built to their Memorial, and Prayers offered up
on those Altars. These Circumcellians had a Solemn initiation; for having
devoted themselves to violent Deaths, (which they sometimes voluntarily
executed on themselves, or at the command of their Brethren) their Neighbors
and Relations gave them all possible respect and attendance, so that nothing
was denied to them for their encouragement, that like so many fatted Beasts,
they might be fit for the slaughter, rather than for a Sacrifice, which yet
they were persuaded, that they were offering up to God in an acceptable manner.
And as often as they declared themselves ready for such desperate designs, their
Brethren assembled, and prayed, and gave thanks for that supernatural and
heroic spirit, wherewith they were inspired. Being thus in a most diabolical
manner initiated, they would go forth sometime armed, sometimes unarmed, but
resolved to provoke whomsoever they met with, railing, beating, and wounding
them; sometime slaying others, or suffering themselves to be slain; and if this
happened not, they would cast themselves into deep Wells, or over high
Precipices, to their certain destruction. Sometimes these Circumcellians
assembled in great Numbers: Sub specie Martyrum rapientium latrocinantes;
playing the Robbers under pretense of Martyrs, as Philaster observes: or else
really attempting such acts of Hostility upon the Catholics, their Houses, and
Churches, or upon the Emperor's Soldiers, as caused the ruin of many
Thousands. De fabutis Haereticor. St. August. Epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
Theodoret tells us of a Company of these, who went abroad armed, and resolved
to run this mad race, and meeting with a young Man unarmed, they were so
humane, as not to destroy him with such unequal Numbers, wherefore they all
agreed, that they would deliver their Weapons to him, to wound and kill them,
as he pleased; but threatened him also that if he did not execute them, they
would miserably destroy him. The young Man seems to accept of the Conditions,
only he tells them, it was fit they should suffer themselves to be bound, not
only that he might the better fulfill their desires, but also because he
feared* that when he had shed the blood of some of the Brethren, the survivors
might, to preserve their own lives, take away his. They therefore do all agree
to this, as a reasonable proposal, and forthwith submit themselves to be bound
and fettered by the young Man, which having done, with as much skill as he
could, he first destroyed most of their Weapons, and then beats them soundly
with the rest, and so departs, leaving them in their bonds, to be mocked and
derided by the Passengers. This frenzy they thought a very high Enthusiasme,
but Malus Demon istam phrenesim immisit; it was the Devil, (that was a
Murderer from the beginning) that inspired it. There were two mad Captains of
these Martyrs of the Devil, that, as Theodoret says, were instar Corybantum;
furentes and debacchantes, like the Priests of Bacchus, drunk with fury, and
led on great Numbers of the Circumcellians, to destroy as far as they went, all
sorts of Men, Women, and Children, burning Houses and Churches, razing the
Altars, and casting the Bibles into the Fire. With some such Donatus Bishop of
Bagaia assaulted Macarius and Paulus, who having the Roman Soldiers to guard
them, slew great Numbers of them, whom being destroyed, he afterward disowned,
and denied them Burial; and at last cast himself headlong, and perished in a
Well. You have heard formerly of Salvius, a Bishop of the Donatists, who made
another Faction among the Membresitans. He built a Church for his Party, and
kept a separate Congregation for a while, but being abandoned by the Donatists,
who condemned him in a Synod of theirs, was left to the fury of the mad
Circumcellians, who, as you have heard, hung dead Dogs about his Neck, and
danced about him, August. l. 3. cont. Parmen.
singing filthy Songs. This Saint Augustine says, they would excuse, because he
was condemned by a full Synod of Bishops; to which he replies, That if he
suffered justly, being condemned by their Bishops, they ought not to repine and
murmur it they also suffered, who were so often condemned by the Bishops of the
Catholic Church; and desires them to consider, Prius quid faciunt, deinde
quid patiuntur: First what they do against others, and then what they suffer
from others. The History of the Maximianists you have had already; I shall now
acquaint you with another Faction, which they had established at Rome, for when
they perceived that they could not Answer the Arguments of the Catholics, for
the Universality of Christ's Church, and considered how numerous they were in
all Africa, they sent their Emissaries abroad, and especially at Rome they had
planted some of their Faction, so that at length they pretended, that no Party
were more Catholic than themselves. Victor was settled as the Titular Bishop of
Rome, in the days of Constantine: his Successors were, First, Bonifacius
Balatensis: 2. Encolpius: 3. Macrobius. 4. Lucianus. 5. Claudianus: who lived
in the days of St. Augustine. But as both Optatus and St. Augustine say, they
could pretend no higher than Victor, whereas the Churches of Jerusalem and
Rome could derive their Succession from the Apostles. But Victor was, Filius
sine Patre, Discipulus sine Magistro, and Episcopus sine populo, A Son without
a Father, a Disciple without a Master, and a Bishop without a Flock; nor could
any of them produce their (literas formatas) communicatory, or testimonial
Letters, signifying their Communion with the Universal Church. Besides, Sr.
Augustine tells them, that they lived at Rome more like Beasts of Prey, than
like a Flock of Christ, and never met but in Speluncis, in Dens and Caves
without the City, where they kept their Conventicles; and from their wandering
from place to place, they were called Montenses, Campitae, and Rupitani, as St.
Hierome observes, not unlike our Quakers, Quod inter homines solet esse
commune, Optatus p. 78.
salutationis officium auferunt, and ne Ave dicunt cuiquam nostrum, -- Nec
monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti. They would not salute any, nor bid
them God speed. I shall name but one mad crew more, which were headed by
Optatus Gildoniensis, a Donatist Bishop, who was called Gildoniensis, from one
Gildo, a barbarous Person, who invaded Africa with a great Army, and made
havoc of the Catholic Churches. To him this Optatus, with a great Number of
the Circumcellians, joined himself, and was first Latrociniis infamis,
notorious for his Robberies. He snatched away the Wives from their Husbands,
and Children from their Parents, causing many Abortions, and in his Cruelties,
exceeded the very Barbarians; for they would kill them at once, but he would
torment them many days together, that they might dye daily. So that Historians
observe, he as much exceeded the Circumcellians, as they did exceed others in
Cruelty.

Their Opinions.
It appears not, that they were accused of any false Doctrine for a long time,
until they began to Rebaptize, upon an Opinion, that there were no true
Ministers in the Catholic Church, and by consequence no true Sacraments. St.
Augustine says, that in his time, they were, Pares Doctrina and Ritibus, agreed
in the chief points of Doctrine, and in the Ecclesiastical Rites. And when
Optatus wrote against Parmenian, Optat. p. 72,
They had generally One Creed, One Testament, and One Baptism (viz.) in the
Name of the Blessed Trinity; they prayed to One God, and used the Lord's Prayer
alike. The Controversy was not, ( de Captie, but de Corpore) concerning the
Head, but the Body of the Church: But their Schism, which divided that Body,
was sufficient to condemn them. Opt. p. 72. St. August. cum Emerito.
Extra Ecclesiam omnia possunt habere praeter salutem: possunt habere honorem,
possunt habere Sacramentum, possunt cantare Hallelujah, possunt respondere
Amen, possunt Evangelium tenere, possunt in nomine patris, and filii, and
Spiritus sancti fidem habere, and praedicare; sed nusquam nisi in Ecclesia
Catholica salutem possunt invenire. He granted, they had the Scriptures, the
Sacraments, the Prayers, and Preaching, materially the same as in the Church,
but yet Salvation was not to be had but within the Church. All which is true,
upon the grounds of St. Paul, as well as St. Augustine, because, without
Charity, all these gifts and exercises do profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13. And
therefore the Primitive Fathers did so passionately declaim against Schism,
not only, because it was the Occasion of greater confusion in the Church, than
Heresies ordinarily were: but because it did equally endanger the Salvation of
those that obstinately persisted in it, fitting them for any Error. Dionysius
Alexandrinus wrote to Novatian, Quisquis ab Ecclesia Catholica separatus est,
quanquam laudabiliter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi
unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam. Epist. 152.
that he might rather do any thing, than rent the Church of God by Schisms,
which (says he) you ought to avoid, as much as Idolatry: for, when you fly
from Idolatry, you consult only your own safety, but when you avoid Schism,
you consult for the benefit of the Universal Church. I shall therefore only
mention that great Error, in the chief Article of Faith, wherein Donatus
himself, and many of his Followers, agreed with the Arians; as diverse of the
Aug ad quod vult Deum.
Ancients have recorded, (viz.) That the Son was less than the Father, and the
Holy Ghost than the Son. This being a Consequent of the Schism; (And it is
usual for such as first desert the Unity of the Church, to deny the faith and
verity therein professed, within a short time.) It is my intent to speak
chiefly of such Opinions, as led them to it, or hardened them in it, that others
may see and avoid them. There was a strict Canon in the Catholic Church,
forbidding Christians to hold any Communion with such, as had in times of
Persecution turned Apostates, or Traditors, until they had undergone the
censure of the Church, and manifested their repentance: but as if this Canon
were not strict enough, the Novatians first, and then the Donatists, made
themselves wiser than the Laws, and would not on any terms admit such Persons;
accounting, that by Communion with them, the whole Congregation was defiled;
and such as had been of the Clergy, they accounted of as lay Persons; and the
lay People, they esteemed of as Heathen: their Baptism being frustrated, upon
this ground they withdrew from the Communion of Cecilian, and other Catholic
Bishops, pretending they had been Traditors and that all the People adhering to
them, were polluted; and that the Bishops and Clergy of the Church, could not
lawfully rule, or teach the People, nor administer the Sacraments, the efficacy
of all these Ordinances depending o^ the Holiness of the Minister; and that
there were no such true Ministers, but among themselves. For this Opinion they
urge Acti 19.4. where St. Paul gives order, that they who had been baptized by
St. John, should be baptized again in the Name of Jesus. Now if John's Baptism
(say they) who was a Friend of the Bridegroom, was made void, much more ought
the Baptism of those, that are Enemies and Apostates, to be so accounted.
Against this Opinion, Optatus argues thus; Non dotes Ministri sed Trinitatem
in Sacramento operari, cui concurrit fides, and professie credentium: The
efficacy of the Sacrament depends not on the endowments of the Minister, but
the grace of the blessed Trinity, in whom if they that are baptized, do
believe, and make profession accordingly, their Baptism will doubtless have
its effect: for the believer is regenerate, not according to the abilities of
the Minister, but the power of the Sacrament; Nascitur Credens, non ex Ministri
sterilitate, sed ex Sacramentorum fertilitate. This is handsomely expressed by
Gregory Nazianzene in the allusion of an Image, engraven on two Seals, one of
Iron, another of Gold, where the Image being the same, the Iron Seal makes the
same impression, as that of Gold. But St. Augustine observes also, the
difference between the Baptism of St. John, and that of our Savior Christ,
which was in the Name of the Holy Trinity, and therefore both Optatus, and St.
Augustine charge the Donatists, with no less sin than Blasphemy, when (as their
practice was) they would exorcise those, whom they had rebaptized, with this
form of words, (Maledicte exi for as) calling the whole Trinity, in whose Name
they had been baptized, accursed. Optatus therefore farther urged, Opt. p. 86,
Si datis alterum baptisma, date alteram fidem, date alterum Christum. It is
superfluous to renew the Baptism, where there is no alteration of the Faith.
He adds, Etsi hominum litigant mentes, non litigant Sacramenta: The Sacrament
is the same, although the judgment of those that administer it may differ. The
Bishops of the Catholic Church did therefore admit of those that were baptized
by the Donatists, although the Donatists would by no means approve of the
Catholics Baptism. Which plainly argues, as well their excess of Pride, as
their defect of Charity, both which St. Augustine observed in a Donatist Bishop
that Preached in his City of Hippo, who used this comparison, that the Church
of God was like Noah's Ark, it was pitched both within, and without; without,
Ne admitteret baptisma alienum; and within, Ne emitteret suum; that it might
not admit of those that were baptized by others, nor baptize any but such as
were of their own persuasion. They u^ged the bare Authority of St. Cyprian for
their rebaptizing, which as St. Augustine says, the^^ despised, when he pleaded
for the unity of th^^ Church, Cyprianus tolerandos in Ecclesia malos, potius
quam propter cos Ecclesiam deserendam and exemplo consirmavit and praecepto
admonuit.
though his arguments we^^ enforced with Scripture and Reaso^^ And for their
practices his sole Authority is alleged against the Authority and practice of
the Church St. Cyprian in an Epistle to Julian^^ said, Baptizandos esse in
Ecclesia Catholica qui fuerunt in haeresi and sc^^^ mate baptizati; to which
St. Augustine a^swereth, Ego ejus authoritate non teneor, q^^literas Cypriani,
non ut canonicas habeo, sed e^ex canonicis considero, and quod in iis divinar^^
Scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum lau^^ ejus accipio, quod autem non
congruit cum pa^^^ ejus respuo. (i.e.) Though St. Cyprian ho^^ that they who
have been baptized by Heretics or Schismatics, ought to be rebaptized, yet I
am not bound by the authority of St. Cyprian, whose Epistles I do not esteem of
as Canonical, but do judge of them by the Cano^^ of Scripture, and what agrees
to the authority thereof, I receive to his praise, but what is contrary, I
refuse with his peace. And whereas they had pleaded, that Conscientis sancte
dantis attenditur quae abluat accipientis; that the efficacy of the Sacrament
flowed from the holiness of him that administered it: Saint Augustine answered,
that as to the visible Ministry, both good and bad might baptize; but he to
whom both the visible Baptism, and the invisible Grace does belong, does
invisibly baptize by both good and bad: Contr. Cresconium, l. 2do. But it as a
sad kind of Baptism, which was practiced by Crispine the Donatist, who with
his Money hired some to be rebaptized by him, and having got a Number of poor
People together, that would not be corrupted by his Money, he drove them by
force into a River; and, Vno terroris impetu, octoginta ferme animas
rebaptizando submerfit, Drowning them in the Water, baptized them with their
own blood; St. August. l. 2. contra Petil. The cruelties and mischiefs that
have always followed Anabaptistical Principles, may cause all sober persons to
abhor them, and therefore I shall not repeat any other arguments against this
absurd practice, which as St. Augustine says, if it should be repeated, as
often as it was administered by an unholy person, they need to do nothing else
but rebaptize.

Another Opinion of the Donatists, was, that the Church of Christ ought to
consist only of such as were Holy and Undefiled. Against this those two Fathers
pleaded: That the glory of a Prince, consisted much in the extent of his
Dominions, and that God had promised to give unto his Son, the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the Earth for his possession; and
therefore they were very sacrilegious to confine the Church of Christ to their
own Conventicles; especially, seeing God had according to his promise, planted
the Christian Faith among all Nations; And that Christ had foretold, that as
the Seed of the Faithful should be disseminated over the face of the whole
Earth so the Devil should sow his tares in the same Field. From this Opinion of
being more pure than others, they proceeded at length to think themselves
without sin, as the Novatians, or Cathari had boasted before them, and
therefore they refused to join in the fame Prayers with others, or to use that
Petition of our Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses; but as the Pharisee
of old, stood by himself and prayed, God I thank thee I am not as other men:
Opt. p. 57.
So would Donatus, Non habeo quod ignoscat Deus: I know nothing for which I may
ask God forgiveness, (said he.) To this St. Augustine replyeth, Christophorus
Justellus in Codice Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae Canone 108. haec habet: Quod in
Oratione Dominica Sancti pro se dicunt, Dimitte nobis debita nostra; Placuit ut
quicunque dixerit in Oratione Dominica Sanctos dicere Dimitte nobis debita
nostra, non pro scipsis quia nonest iis xecessaria ista petitio, sed pro aliis
qui sunt in suo populo peccatores, and ideo non dicere unumquemque Sanctorum
Dimitte debita mea sed debita nostra, us hoc pro aliis potius quam pro so
justus picere intelligatur, Anathema sit. Item placuit ut quicunque epsa verba
Dominicae Orationis ubi dicimus Dimitte nobis debita nostra (...) volunt a
sanctis dici ut humiliter non veraciter hoc dicatur, Anathema sit. Quis enim
ferat Orantem and non hominibus, sed ipsi Domino mentientem: qui labiis sibi
dicit dimitti velle, and cord dicit quae sibi dimitrantur debita non habere?
This Council was held at Carthage by Aurelius, and 214. Bishops. Honorio xii.
and Theodosio Coss kmal^majas.
Quaero utrum ores oratione Dominica; si non, unde aliam didicisti pro
majoribus meritis tuis, excedentem merita Apostolorum? si sic, quomodo dicis
Dimitte nobis debita nostra, etc. Ista verba orationis aut te non permittunt
esse dei deprecatorem, aut aperiunt esse peccatorem: but when they left the use
of that Prayer, he would no longer call them Brethren: Tum desinent dici
fratres nostri, In Ps. 32.
cum desierint dicere Pater noster. And now it is no wonder, if they despised
the usual Prayers of the Church, and particularly that Form which was made in
behalf of the Emperor. Bz. p. 550.
But they went a point beyond this, affirming, that they were so without sin,
Opt. p. 56.
as to be the Justifiers of others, who no sooner were admitted to their
Congregations, but they presently assured them of the pardon of their sins, and
if they suffered in their Society, of a Crown of Martyrdom. And Donatus
himself exceeded all these, he became a perfect Enthissiast, and pretended
immediate revelations from God; August. Epist. 165.
particularly, that an Angel had appeared to him, and assured him that his
Faction should be established. And it was a frequent boast of the Donatists
against the Catholics; Oravit Donatus and respondit ei Deus e Coelo: When
Donatus prays, God answers him from Heaven; and therefore to him they went,
as to an Oracle, when they would attempt any design, that he might seek God,
and then give them direction. To this Optatus replies, Opt. p. 84.
Vt quid pulsetis Coelum cum hic in Evangelio habetis testamentum: In vain do
you expect new revelations from Heaven, having the complete will and testament
of Christ here on Earth. Agreeable to that of Tertullian before him, St. Aug.
de unico Baptis.
Non opus est revelatione post Evangelium, etc. They held it to be a pollution
not only to communicate, but to converse with others. There wants nothing now,
but a Spirit of Infallibility, to make him the great Antichrist, instead of
which he had infallibly the Spirit of Contradiction to carp at, and reproach
every thing that was not agreeable to his own fancy. When we say yea, Opt. p.
84.
you say nay, (says Optatus) Et inter Licet nostrum, and Non licet vestrum,
nutant, and remigant animi Christianorum: nemo vobis credit, nemo nobis, omnes
contentiosi homines sumus: While we plead for the lawfulness, and you object
the unlawfulness of Ecclesiastical affairs, the minds of the People are
alienated from us, and they condemn us all for contentious Persons; So that the
Heathen of that Age might well say, Cum tot sint inter Christianos sectae, sit
anima mea cum philosophis.

Their Opinion concerning the Magistrates Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
It is seldom that a Faction is made in the Church, but the Authors of it do
raise Sedition in the State, their Principles do show what their practices are
like to be; Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia, August. l. 2. ad Petil. 92.
and quid nobis cum Regibus Seculi, quos nunquam nisi Invidos sensit
Christianitas? What has the Emperor to do with the Church, or what have we to
do with the Kings of this World, whom Christianity has always found to be
Adversaries? And hence, they did not only refuse to pray for the Emperor, which
the Catholics persuaded them unto, according to St. Paul's exhortation:
Orandum pro Imperatore quanquam Gentilis, quanto magis quod Christianus, quod
Deum timens, quod religiosus, and misericors? To pray for Kings, although they
were Heathen, much more for such as are religious, gracious and merciful; but
instead of Prayers, Invenit Donatus Bagaiensis unde contra Macarium furiosam
conduceret turbam: Opt. p. 68.
Donatus Bishop of Bagaia, could raise Armed Troops against Marcellinus. But
they held also, that they ought not to be restrained by the Emperor's Laws in
the Worship of God, and therefore they cried out of Persecution, as often as
any Penalty was to be inflicted on them for their disorderly Assemblies: They
were (contumaces and legibus hostili modo repugnantes) insolent, and professed
Enemies to the Laws. When any of the Emperors sent their chief Officers to make
Peace, and establish Unity in the Church, quia uni Deo convenit ut in unitate
colatur; as Constans sent Paulus and Macarius, and Honorius sent Marcellinus
and Dulcitius, who came not, as Florus did, to shut up the Doors of the
Churches, Opt. p. 71.
or to pull them down; but, ut pigri in Basilicam cogerentur, to regain them to
the Church that were refractory, that God and Christ might be invocated with
one consent; they cry out of oppression, and invading the Liberty of their
Consciences; and like David's Enemies, When he spoke to them of peace, they
made themselves ready for battle. To this the Fathers plead, that the Church
was in the Commonwealth, that is, in Romano Imperio, and not the Commonwealth
in the Church; that God had promised, that he would send Kings to be nursing
Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church; and required our Prayers for
them, and our obedience to them, that under their protection, we may lead quiet
and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty: And accordingly, the
Catholics being sensible of their duty, were always loyal, and as ready to
spend their lives for the Emperor, as the Donatists were to adventure them
against him: whereby they consummated an evil life with a worse death, as St.
Augustine said: And if the Magistrate may be the Sword punish Murder,
Oppression, and Robbery, and Witchcraft, why may he not also, says St.
Augustine, restrain such practices, as give occasion to all these? Whatever
evils you suffer from the Magistrate, you draw them on your own heads: Si
occidi malum est, ipsi causa mali estis, and therefore your sufferings are not
a Persecution, but Justice, as the same Father.

Again St. Augustine minds them, that they themselves had made use of the
Emperor's Laws and Edicts, against the Maximianists, and we blame you not
(says he) for restraining their fury by the secular Sword, but that you
condemn that in others, which you hold lawful for your selves to do. You can by
the Theodosian Laws, exclude and punish them for opposing the Party of Donatus,
and yet you are highly offended, if any censure pass against you, Qui adversus
Orbem terrarum Sacrilegae dissentionis altar erexistis, Who have separated
from all other Churches in the World. How as it probable they could live as
good Subjects, when they accounted their Emperors Enemies and Persecutors of
their Religion; and that such dyed Martyrs, who desperately cast away their own
Lives, in opposing their Brethren, and the Officers of the Emperor, that were
sent to provide for the common Peace? Si vestros videri Martyrs vultis,
probate amasse pacem in qua prima sunt Martyrii fundamenta, Opt. p. 72.
aut dilexisse Deo placidam unitatem, aut habuisse cum fratribus charitatem
sine qua maxima and imperiosa virtus caret effectu: If you would have those,
that dye in your persuasion, to be accounted Martyrs, you ought to prove that
they were lovers of Peace, Unity and Charity, without which all other Virtues
are ineffectual to that end: Non in passione certa est justitia, sed in
justitia passio est gloriosa. Whatever severity they met with, the Catholics
were far from occasioning it, as the Donatists did charge them. They did
sometime Petition the Magistrate to relieve and protect themselves, but never
to destroy the Donatists; but when they had provoked the Secular Power, the
Catholics interceded for them: whereas on the contrary, the Donatists did not
only provoke the Magistrate, but the Heathen also against them, as in the days
of Julian, who did indulge them, as well as the Donatists, until by their
means, Julian was enraged against the Catholics, and the Donatists were made
his Instruments in many Cruelties against them: Optatus. p. 57.
Vrgentibus and praesentibus Episcopis vestris, persecutionem disponebat; So
that they exceeded the Arians in their malice, for they, Armed by the Emperors
of their own Persuasion, ( Constantius and Valens) did persecute the
Catholics, but the Donatists persecuted them, non modo non adjuvantibus, se^
reclamantibus; when the Emperors did strictly forbid it. Si Imperatoribus
^orunt communionem derestantibus talia ausi sint, quid facerent si iis per
Imperatoris communionem aliquid efficere liceret? August. contr. Petil. l. 1.
So far were they from indulging that liberty of worshipping God to their
Brethren, which they themselves expected from the Emperors, that they would
complain of Persecution, if it were not granted them. While Constantine was in
the Throne, none petitioned and pleaded for Toleration more than the Donatists,
and professed themselves irreconcilable Adversaries to all Persons, and
Principles, that should tend to disturb, or punish Men for their Conscience
sake. But as soon as Julian was settled in the Empire, and called home some of
them from Banishment, and restored their Churches to them, the Emperor himself
was not so imperious and sanguinary as they. Whatever good Laws Constantine had
made for the welfare and unity of the Church of God, were condemned, as acts of
Arbitrary Power. But when Julian granted their Society some Privileges, to the
vexing and grieving of the Catholics, these were applauded as acts of Grace;
nor had Constantine that love and obedience from them, which they manifested to
the Apostate. And evident it is, that one reason why the Catholics were so
much envyed and hated by the Donatists, was; because the Emperors did favor
them, as being more peaceable and loyal. Eusebius tells us, that Constantine
frequently advised with his Bishops, even in Secular Affairs: And then, Quid
Episcopis cum Palatio? What have Bishops to do at Court, (say they) or to
meddle with the Government? Vos portatis Imperatorum Sacras, (i.e.) literas,
nos portamus sola Evangelia: You are busy in promoting the Edicts and Mandats
of the Emperors, we study only the Gospels. To this St. Augustine answers,
Epist. 166. Because you have no Power with the Emperor, you would raise envy
against us that have: but Melius est portare veras jussiones Imperatoris pro
unitate quam falsas Indulgentias pro perversitate. Whatever their study was,
their practice was contrary, their hands were the hands of Esau, though their
voice was like Jacobs. I cannot omit to enlarge a little concerning their
Arguments for Liberty of Conscience, that there might be no violence, or
restraint laid upon them, to reduce them to Unity, in the Service of God.
Gaudentius a Donatist Bishop, argues thus, Scriptum est, fecit Deus hominem,
Aug. l. 2. contra Gaudent.
and reliquit eum in manu Arbitrii sui; that is God made Man, and left him in
the power of his own judgment, that is, to the Liberty of his own Conscience,
(as the following Discourse expounds it) and why should that be forced from me,
which God has granted to me? Mark (says he) how great Sacrilege i^ committed
against God, when humane presumption takes away what he gave, and boasts it
self to act for God, and to defend him with force and violence, as if he could
not avenge the injury that is done to him. Christi par volentes invitat, non
cogit invitos: The peace which Christ teaches, inviteth them that are willing,
and does not force them that are unwilling. God sent Prophets to teach the
People of Israel, not Kings; and Christ, to promote the Salvation of Souls,
sent not Soldiers, but Fishermen. To which I may add that of Petilian, Contra
Petil. l. 2.
Absit! absit a nostra conscientia, us ad nostram fidem aliquem compellamus:
Far be it from us, that we should compel any to be of our persuasion Si
voluntas libera unicuique tribuenda est, Ceciliano prius tribuatur, August.
post Col: lat. cum Donatist.
. To which St. Augustine. replies, (1.) By minding them of their Proceedings
against the Maximianists, against whom they made use of the Theodosian Laws.
And (2.) how when under Julian, they had gotten some power, they improved it to
the utmost against the Catholics. So that, as St. Augustine says, the Kite
that is frighted from preying upon the Chicken, may as well be thought a Dove,
as they be accounted mild and gentle, who only want power, and not malice: And
then he shows, how irrational and impious their Arguments are, by which all
humane lusts and outrages should go unpunished, and no King should restrain his
Subject, nor a Father his Children from any wickedness: For if you once blot
out that which the Apostle says, for the good government of Mankind; Let every
Soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. you open a Gap to all
Licentiousness. Clamate si audetis puniantur homicidia, puniantur adulteria,
sola sacrilegia volumus a regnantium legibus impunita. How can you say that
Murder and Adultery ought to be punished by the Magistrate, but Sacrilegious
Schisms ought to be permitted? Or, that it i^ not the duty of the Magistrate,
to contradict or punish you, when you are injurious to his Church and Worship?
If a pretense of Conscience may supersede the Penalties of the Law, few
Offenders would be retrained or punished for any Transgression. And therefore
St. Augustine calls it, a most vain and impertinent way of reasoning, which
their own practice did contradict and confute, as often as they had power in
their hands; and tells them, they did most incuriously condemn the Emperors, as
Persecutors, when they only restrained evil doers, and dealt with unruly
Persons, as Physicians use to deal with phrenetick Patients, that bind them up
from hurting themselves, and others. Non persequitur Phreneticum Medicus sed
Medicum Phreneticus. If Men be frantic, and being diseased themselves, shall
endeavor to infect and disturb others, he is a Physician, not a Persecutor
that binds them to better behavior* St. Augustine wrote an Epistle to
Bonifacius, which in the second Book of his Retractations, he calls, Librum de
correctione Donatistarum: Wherein he asserts the power of the Magistrates, to
make coercive Laws in the Case of Religion. 1. Because the Kings that did it
not under the Law, were blamed, and those that did it, commended. 2. Because it
is their duty, as Kings, Aliter enim servit quia homo, aliter quia Rex: As a
Man, the King ought to serve God, by living faithfully, as a King, by executing
with convenient rigor such Laws, as command things that are just, and
forbidding what is contrary. For what sober Man will say, to Kings, Nolite
curare in Regno vestro a quo teneatur vel oppugnetur Ecclesia Domini nostri? It
is not your duty to take care who join themselves to the Church of God, or who
oppose it; as if they ought not to regard the piety of Men, as well as the
Chastity of Women, or it concerned them, that there should be no Bastards, and
not that there should be no Idolaters, or Sacrilegious Persons in their
Kingdoms. 3. Because Kings may redress what others cannot, they having the
Sword given them to that end; and whereas the Donatists objected, Cui vim
Christus intulit? Whom did Christ ever constrain? He propounds the case of
Saint Paul, that was stricken to the Earth, in whom they might perceive, Christ
first restraining, and then teaching him -- And our Lord appointed Guests to be
first invited, and upon refusal, to be compelled to his great Supper. Wherefore
if those that are found by the Highways, and Hedges, (i.e.) among Heretics, or
Schismatics, be constrained to the Lords Vineyard, by the Power which the
Church has received, ever since Kings received the Christian Faith, let them
not find fault, that they are driven by force, but consider whither they are
driven, even to those Pastures where they may find true food, and rest to their
Souls. 4. Because the Donatists used unjust violence, to suppress the
Catholics, much more might Christian Princes use their just Power to support
them: Cur non cogeret Ecclesia perditos filios ut redirent, si perditi filii
coegerunt alios ut perirent? It is unworthy a Christian Emperor, to deny his
Subjects Power to destroy other Men's lives, and to leave them Power to destroy
their own, and other Men's Souls. And, when the Emperor makes Laws for falsehood
against the truth, they that are faithful, are approved, and they that
persevere are crowned; And when he makes Laws for truth against falsehood, those
that were cruel are restrained, and those that are intelligent are reformed. He
therefore, that will not obey the Laws of the Emperor, made against the truth,
obtains a great reward, and he that will not obey the Laws made for the truth,
deserves a great punishment: See Epistle 50.

It happened that Donatus a Presbyter, was summoned to appear at one of the
Councils at Carthage; to prevent the censure that he expected there, he threw
himself into a Well, and would have certainly perished there, had not others
been more charitable to him, Epist. 204.
than he was to himself. From this accident, Saint Augustine reasons thus: If
they be justly esteemed your Friends, that preserved your Natural Life, when
you endeavored desperately to destroy it, how can you think them your Enemies,
who in love to your Soul, seek to preserve that unto Eternal Life? An justior
est privata violentia, quam regia diligentia? And again, Contra Parm. l. 1.
An perperam agitur, cum Reges prohibent divisionem, and non cum Episcopi
dividunt unitatem? Doubtless the good Laws which were made and executed by
public Authority, to prevent such barbarous actions, were much more just than
those acts of violence, whereby they destroyed themselves and others. Therefore
he proves that none of the Donatists were so severely dealt with, by the lawful
power of the Christian Emperors, for the Peace and Unity of the Church, as they
dealt with one another, in their private Divisions, nor as they dealt with
themselves, in violently procuring their own Deaths: and yet their Survivors
justified this practice, from the Example of Razius, 2. Macchab. which St.
Augustine confutes at large in the 61. Epistle. And in his second Book against
Petilian, he says, Nemo vobis aufert liberum Arbitrium, sed attendite, quid
potius eligatis, utrum correcti, vivere in pace, an in malitia perseverantes,
falfi Martyrii nomine, vera supplicia sustinere. That good Laws did not deprive
them of the liberty of their wills, but did require them to consider, what was
most eligible, whether by gentle correction, to be kept within the bounds of
peace, or by persevering in malice, instead of a pretended Martyrdom, to
suffer deserved punishments.

It may here be seasonable to Answer an Objection, which is made by some
Persons, for Liberty of Conscience, and against the enacting of Penal Laws in
the Cause of Religion, which I am obliged to take notice of, because it
particularly asserts, that none of those Christian Emperors, through whose
Lives I have drawn the Series of this History, did enact any Laws, or use any
force for the Suppression of Sectaries, or Heretics, but granted them all a
free Toleration. Dr. Stubs improved this Objection to the utmost, in a Treatise
concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in things of Spiritual
concernment, which Treatise, I hope he has put among his Retractations, as St.
Augustine did some Opinions of the like nature.

And first, I wonder why he should mention, p. 4th. that Law of the Twelve
Tables, Separatim nemo habessit Deos, neve novos, sed nec advenas, nifi public
adscitos, privatim colunto; (the breach whereof the Romans often punished with
Death) unless he thought the Christian Magistrate less obliged to take care of
the true Religion, than the Heathen were of a false. It being matter of fact,
which I am concerned to Answer, I might confute the Objection (as the
Philosopher did him, that denied motion, by rising up and walking before him)
by transcribing the several Imperial Laws, made to restrain both Schisms and
Heresies, which I shall add by themselves hereafter, and shall now reflect on
those, which he says, were made in favor of them. And first, I say, in
general, with St. August. contra Parmen: Nec pro pro iis aliquid promulgasse
quis invenitur, nisi Julianus Apostata. That Constantine was he first that
published many Edicts against them, (which have been particularly mentioned
already) and that none, but Julian the Apostate, may be found to have enacted
any thing in their favor. And yet p. 55. the Objector says, Constantine did
allow an Universal Toleration, and to that purpose, he quoteth Eusebitus in the
2d. Book of the Life of Constrantine, c. 55. where the Reader may easily
observe, that the Liberty there granted, was to the Heathen, whom he
distinguishes from the faithful, and (says he) let them (if they will) erect
Groves and Altars to Vanity: for indeed they would do it, whether the Emperor
would or no, All the Senators, and the far greatest part of his Dominions,
being Heathen; and Constantine could not deny them their Ancient Rites, (Vt
Senatui morem gereret) lest he should displease the Senate. And the Objector
notes that Eusebius spoke largely of this, to no other end, but to confute
those, who had given out, that he had abolished the Heathenish Rites and
Customs. And indeed he did not seek to bring the Heathen to Christianity by
force; but that he did by force endeavor to keep Christians in Unity, is
beyond all doubt. And those very Edicts which seem to grant Liberty to the
Heathen, were framed purposely in favor of the Christians, as that made by
Constantine and Licinius, mentioned by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 5. For Licinius
being a Heathen, violently Persecuted the Christians under his Dominions, to
prevent which, this Edict seems to grant a General Toleration, but it
especially respected the welfare of Christians, (for the Heathen (as I have
said) were not to be suppressed) -- as, That Liberty be not denied to any, to
embrace and imitate the Christian Religion without molestation -- And,
Nominatim Christianis decernimus, that such Places wherein the Christians were
wont to meet, however alienated, should be restored to them, whether they had
been seized by the Emperors, or by them given, or sold to any other. After
this, we are told Of several Pagan Philosophers, that were in favor with the
Emperors; as Sopater with Constantine, who sat him sometime at his right hand;
Libanius, who under Constantius, had the tuition of Julian, as also Maximus
Tyrius had; so Themistius was a Senator in the time of Theodosius; Symmachus
was Praefectus Vrbis, in the days of Valentinian and Valens, and Consul in
Theodosius his Reign: of all which we may say, as the Objector does, concerning
Generidus, who was made General under Honorius; That the Emperor did it out of
necessity, p. 88. But that Honorius favored the Donatists, and did only punish
them a while, by the instigation of Stilicho, the Donatists found to be an
untruth, when after the Death of Stilicho, the same Laws were still executed
upon them, so severely, that as the Donatists grieved for the death of Julian,
so they rejoiced at the Death of Honorius. It were no difficult matter to
transcribe many Laws made by the Christian Emperors, against the Pagan Rites;
but it is not to my purpose, and therefore I shall only trouble my Reader with
that of St. Augustine, Epistle 48. Quis nostrum, quis vestrum non laudat leges
ab Imperatoribus, adversus sacrificia Pagana? illius quippe impietatis Capitale
supplicium est. But at last we are told, that though there were very severe
Laws made against Heretics and Schismatics, yet the Emperors never did, nor
intended to execute them. So p. 80. Constantine (says he) made Laws against
Heretics, rather for show and terror, than for execution; and so he tells us
of Theodosius, that he made a Law, that the Sectarians should have no
Assemblies, nor make any profession of their faith, nor ordain Bishops and
Pastors, and that some of them should be banished the City and Country, others
made infamous, and have no public Preferment, and this he enacted with severe
Penalties, which yet (says ^he) the Emperor did never inflict, for he did not
ordain these things with an intention to punish, but to terrify his Subjects,
that they might better agree in Religion. This had been a very politic device
to bring their Authority into contempt, when the Imperial Laws, like the Blocks
of Wood cast down from Jupiter, among the Frogs, having made a little noise,
shall ever after lie still, for every creeping thing to leap and insult over
them. If the courage and resolution of those Emperors, or rather the
opportunities for the execution of those Laws had been answerable to their
prudence in making them, they might, in all probability, have stopped that deluge
of Christian blood, which was poured forth in greater abundance, through all
Africa, by the Donatists, than by the Heathen Emperors, And the Execution of
those Laws, with such moderation, as the Catholics did always desire, expressed
in several Epistles of St. Augustine, to Bonifacius, Cecilianus, and other of
the Emperor's Officers, had been, as St. Augustine says, Epistle 50. magna in
eos misericordia, as great an act of Charity to the Bodies and Souls of
Christians, and of Piety toward God, as the Indulgence granted by Julian was
an occasion of Impiety and Cruelty; whereby he had almost destroyed
Christianity, by permitting Divisions among its Professors. Nor were the
Christian Emperors negligent in the execution of their Laws, as far as the
present necessities, and iniquity of the Times would permit. The Objector
instanceth in the banishment of Arius, and four or five more with him, under
Constantine, p. 60. And of Eunomius, under Theodosius, for keeping
Conventicles, and I have given diverse other instances. If we may believe the
complaints of the Donatists, they were not only in terrorem, they felt not only
the Rod, but the Sword too, sometime, which as the Scripture says, The
Magistrate bears not in vain; You may hear them complain, Quod eos
Costantinus ad Campum, (i. e.) ad Supplicium duci jussit, l. 1. contra Parmen.
that they were in great Numbers exiled, and had diverse Punishments, even unto
Death inflicted on them.

And we read that St. Augustine and the Catholics, Epistle ad Bonifacium.
did often mediate with the Emperor's Officers, that their Punishment might not
be unto Death, and yet they accuse the Catholics, as if they had been the
cause of forming and sharpning the Instruments of Punishment against them, such
as the following Laws mentioned in the conclusion of this History.

Of their unjust Censures and Calumnies.
The Foundation of this Schism was laid on the ruin of the reputation of
Cecilian, and the Catholics in Communion with him, whom they reported to be
Traditors and Idolaters, that they had nor Ministers, nor Sacraments, and their
whole Worship was corrupted by Superstition, and strange Images, which were set
upon their Altars. As for St. Augustine, he was a contentious Disputer, and a
perverter of Souls, rather to be avoided than refuted, or to be dealt with as a
Wolf, or a Beast of prey, and accordingly they did lay many secret Snares to
entrap and ruin Him. It is evident, that by the very act of separation, they
did condemn their Brethren, as guilty of some heinous sins, for which they
refused to hold Communion with them, and as much as in them lay, excommunicated
all the Churches of Africa, as corrupted by Traditors, and become Apostates.
They appealed from Meltiades, not only as partial, but as being himself a
Traditor. Nor was the Emperor free from their Calumny, for they report him to
have been misguided by Hosius the famous Bishop, and other evil Counselors:
Imperatorias aures pravis suggestionibus sufflatas; whereof he was never more
guilty, than in yielding so far as he did, to their importunity, which he did
to a good end: Eorum perversitatibus cedens, and omnimodo cupiens tantam
impudentiam cohibere; being wearied by them, and hoping by so many sentences
against them, he might for ever silence their impudent clamors. Of Mensurius,
who preceded Cecilian, they said, that he was, Tyranno saevior, Carnifice
crudelior, more raging than a Tyrant, and more cruel than a Hangman; and that
he had chosen Cecilian, Opt. Append. p. 291.
as a fit instrument of his cruelty, whereas Mensurius was well known to yield
himself up to the pleasure of Dioclesian, rather than to betray his Brother;
and of Cecilian's innocence, you have heard sufficiently. Nor did they deal
thus only with the Clergy, but with the Magistrates also. Donatus writing to
Gregorius a Prefect, begins directly in the Language of our Quakers, Gregori,
macula Senatus! Dedecus Praefectorum! Thou Gregory, blot of the Senate, and
disgrace of the Prefects, Opt. p. 64. This was not their common, but their holy
Language; Profertis Evangelium and facitis convitium; their Preaching was
little else besides Railing. And as if their Preaching was not enough, they did
in perpetuam Reimemoriam, fill their Libels and Writings with such unsavory
Language. Nullus vestrum est, qui non tractatibus suis convitia nostra miscet:
And this they did to maintain prejudice in the hearts of the People, and to lay
a scandal, or stumbling block in the way of such, as might otherwise be brought
over to a better Opinion of their lawful Pastors. Auditorum animis infunditis
odia, inimicitias docendo, suadetis, Haec omnia dicendo contra nos scandala
ponitis, Optat. p. 78. And though there were many among the People of the
Catholic Communion; that lived unblameably among their Adversaries, yet did
they condemn them for remaining in the Faith and Communion of their Pastors; as
Petilian told St. Augustine to his face; Qui fidem a perfido sumpserit, non
fidem sumpsit, sed reatum: August. contra Petil. l. 1. When Constans sent
Paulus and Macarius to promote Unity, and comfort the Catholics, that had been
much vexed and injured by the Donatists, they report that they were come to
advance Idolatry and Superstition, that they had brought Images, which they
intended to set upon the Altars, and would command the People to Worship them;
Whereas those Statues were sent rather as a token of the Emperor's favor, (it
being a Custom of those Emperors, to send their Effigies into those Countries
under their Dominion, to which they could not come in Person) and the Christian
Emperors had provided by their Edicts, that Cultura excedens hominum
dignitatem, supremo numini reservaretur; Only a civil respect was to be
yielded to them, and Divine Worship to be reserved to God alone. And the event
proved them liars, for when those peacemakers came, and communicated with the
Catholics, Nil tale visum est, nil viderunt Christiani Oculi quod horrerent.
There was no change or innovation in the Public Worship, but the same decency
and order was observed as formerly, and those Images proved to be only
imaginations of their own brains. The Second Nicene Council calls these Images
of the Emperor's, Laurata and Iconas, which being sent to great Cities, the
People went out to meet them, with Acclamations to the Emperor, whom they did
honor, and not the painted Image. Thus also they accused Marcellinus, as if he
had been corrupted by Bribes and Presents from the Catholics, to incline him
to their Cause. And Honorius the Emperor was said to be seduced by Evil
Counselors, though he acted by the known Laws of his Ancestors. And as to
false accusations, they gave such proof of their faculty in contriving them,
that St. Augustine at the Conference at Carthage, hearing them, contrary to
evident truth, to charge Felix and Mensurius for Traditors, and to allege that
Optatus had written, that Cecilian was condemned by Miltiades, and that
Constantine had imprisoned him at Brixia, tells Cresconius, that he wondered how
the Donatists could have any Blood in their Bodies, and not blush at the
mentioning of such things. And as to St. Augustine's particular, they gave him
no other Character, but of a contentious Sophister, that was rather to be
avoided than confused, and to be dealt with as a Wolf; upon no other
provocation, but because, as St. Augustine said, they had rather cover a bad
cause with wicked slanders and excuses, than to end it by fair disputations and
inquiry after truth. And this is the reason, says he, that Cresconius (Me
fecit causam cum defecisset in Causa,) fell so foully on my Person, when I had
fairly overthrown his cause. Leave off such subterfuges, (says he) I am but
one Man: It is the cause of the Church, not my own, that is now in question;
what my conversation is, is known to those among whom I live, we are now to
inquire into the cause of the Church. Optatus complained of the like Calumnies
long before. Nullus vestrum est, Opt. p. 69.
qui non suis tractatibus convitia nostra miscet, lectiones Dominicas
incipitis, and tractatus vestros ad injuriam nostram explicatis. Profertis
Evangelium and facitis absenti fratri convitium, idem p. 81.
nec voluntatem bonam vis habere nec pacem: They wrested and tortured the
Scripture, to make it speak against their Brethren. There is not one of you
that does nor fill up his Sermons with slanders. You begin to read the
Scriptures, and expound them to our injury and disgrace. You have neither
Peace, nor Good will. Turba gravis paci placidaeque inimica quieti. --

Of their Cruelty.
What St. Cyprian (Epistle 49.) observed of Donatus, was true of these, In ipsa
persecutione, alia nostris persecutio fuit. St. Augustine, in the Psalm which
he wrote against the Donatists, says more, Quod persecutor non fecit, ipsi
fecerunt in pace. They that were prodigal of their own Lives, could not be
sparing of other Men's. No sooner did any of the People fly from the Catholics
to the Donatists, but they were of another spirit, clean contrary to what the
Gospel inspires good Christians withal. This made the Lion as mild as the
Lamb, but among the Donatists, not only Men, but Women, of Sheep became Wolves;
of faithful, perfidious of patient, furious; of peaceable, contentious; and of
modest, impudent. Optatus ( p. 99.) says, they were pragmatici and crudeles,
busy and diligent in exercising Cruelty. (Episcopi vestri multas caedes,
propria manu perpetrarunt:) Many of their Bishops did with their own hands,
shed that Blood, for the sparing of which Christ shed His. Under Constantine,
and other good Emperors, they did not make such havoc of the Churches as they
would, they were then awed by a greater Power; Epist. 48.
But St. Augustine tells them, Nulla bestia mansueta dicitur, quod neminem
mordet, cum dentes and ungues non habet: The Lion or the Bear do not lose their
Natures, when they lose their Liberty, or their Paws and Teeth; and that their
intentions were always cruel, their actions manifested, as soon as they got
liberty, and their power was increased under Julian. Quae caedes a vobis factae
postquam Julianus Basilicas tradidit? What Murders did they not commit, when
Julian restored the Churches, and gave them power? They forced the Catholics
from their Habitations, and Churches, into the Mountains, or into Places of
strength, and there assaulted them, with as much fury as the most barbarous
Enemy. they slew the Bishops at the Altars, and those Churches which Dioclesian
had spared, were by the Donatists razed to the ground: they were Interfectores
Prophetarum, Murderers of the Prophets, and built Monuments to those that
murdered them. And this did animate them, to slay the Catholics with a rage
that reached up to Heaven, they were taught, that they did God good service in
it. When Men think their Passions to be warranted from Heaven, and that they
act by a Commission from God, they think themselves obliged by their greatest
hopes and fears, to act them to the highest, as St. Paul did before his
Conversion. But such a furious zeal is without knowledge: For the Wisdom that
is from above, is first Pure, then Peaceable, etc. How far the Donatists were
from this temper, the many Massacres made by them do demonstrate; it was a
sport to them to shed Blood, for as Optatus says, they did Vivum facere
Homicidium, make Men dye often, starving some to death, cutting off the Hands
and Fingers of others, putting out the Eyes of others with Lime and Vinegar,
Deturbatos bonis and dignitatibus, Opt. p. 99.
vivere in poenam quasi sibi ipsis superstites sinitis: The very mercies of
these wicked Men were cruel. Yea, they persecuted them after Death, denying
them Burial, and exposing their dead Bodies to the Beasts, and Fowls of the
Air: Vt terreatis vivos, male tractatis mortuos, negantes funeribus locum cum
mortuis litigatis.

Clarius a Priest, being ready to perform the solemnity accustomed at the
Funerals, in the Village of Subbulia, was forbid by his Bishop, who was a
Donatist, and so did insepultam facere Sepulturam. I shall name but that one
instance or Novatus, of whom St. Cyprian tells us, Epist. 49. ad Cornelium,
that he suffered his Father to dye for want of Bread, in a neighboring
Village, and would not permit him to be Buried when he was Dead. He kicked his
Wife, so as to cause an Abortion. And in a word, among such as Novatus and
Donatus were, they are esteemed most Religious that are most cruel and
unnatural, as if they had a command to hate Father and Mother, etc.

Of their Pride.
They thought so well of themselves, that they would not sit with the
Catholics, and thought themselves injured if the Catholics called them
Brethren, as St. August. contra Gaudentium, Opt. p. 52.
l. 3. So Petilian refused to sit with the Bishops in the Conference at
Carthage, pretending it was forbidden in Scripture to sit with the wicked.
Donatus the first was a Person that often affronted the Emperor's Chief
Officers, and as the Emperor complained, much hindered his service by the
Tumults which he raised against them.

He kept the Bishops of his own Party at such a distance, as if they all had
their dependence on him. When he met any of them, his question was, Quid agitur
de part mea? What success have my Party? and the Bishops thought it a great
honor to write themselves (as they did in public acts) Episcopos ex part
Donati: and as if the Title of Bishop had been too mean for him, he was called
Donatus of Carthage, by way of eminency.

Donatus the Second, whom they called Magnus, (after the Title of him that
subdued the whole World) was not content with civil honor; Eum non minori metu
omnes Episcopi venerabantur quam Deum: All his Bishops honored him as if he
had been a God. They did not only, jurare in verba, resign themselves to his
sole conduct, as if he ruled them by an Infallible Spirit, but swear by him,
which is not lawful to do by any, but God, Opt, p. 65. and seeing he did not
forbid it, it is plain that he made himself as God: And the People generally
reputed him as their Tutelar Angel, by whom Carthage was preserved, and all
Africa blessed. He pretended such familiarity with God, as if he had immediate
Answers to all his desires, Oravit Donatus and respondit ei Deus de Coelo.
Seldom did he converse with any of his Brethren, but as an Oracle, to give
rare and indisputable Answers, which Tichonius objected against him, who though
he continued in Donatus his Party, yet found his Pride to grow intolerable, for
he gave no other reason for his practice, but, Quod volumus sanctum est. St.
August. Epist. 193. When Marcellinus at the Conference of Carthage, had
entreated the Bishops to sit down, refusing to sit himself (though he then
represented the Emperor) until they had taken their Places, the Catholic
Bishops sat down, but the Donatists refused, and began to dispute the
lawfulness of it, urging that of the Psalmist, Odi Ecclesiam Malignantium,
Psalm 26. I hate the Congregation of the wicked. To which the Catholics
relplyed, first wittily, that the Psalmist said also, Cum iniquis non
ingrediar, that he would not enter into the Assembly of the wicked; and seeing
they had condescended so far, as to come into their Company, they might as
lawfully sit down with them. And then they desired them more seriously to
remember, that David did not so hate the wicked, as for their sakes to forsake
the Temple of the Lord; Delib. Hist. p. 218. And so after much entreaty they
were persuaded to sit, but desired the Public Notary to enter it among his
Acts, that they did it at the pleasure of Marcellinus, and not of their own
accord. The like pride was expressed by Parmenian, who being in Conference with
some Catholics, and brought to a nonplus, rose up in a fume, and said
(Modicum fermentum, totam Massam corrumpit. Dixit hoc Parmenianus and abiit. l.
3. contra Parmen.) A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, and so went away.

This pride of Spirit appears in that, when they entered upon the Churches of
the Catholics, Opt. p. 98.
they did wash the very Pavement, and whited the Walls, they broke the
consecrated Chalices, and sold them away; and lest any part of the Sacrament
which the Catholics had consecrated, should have touched the Linen Clothes,
wherewith at the administration of the Sacrament they covered the Altars; Quis
fidelium nescit ipsa ligna linteamine cooperiri? they did not only remove them,
but the Altars themselves, which they razed even to the ground Ne ad Deum
solito more supplicatio ascenderet, impia manu scalas subducere laborastis,
Opt. p. 94.
Optatus ( l. 6. p. 95.) bids them dig deeper, seeing they knew not how far the
pollution might extend; Altam facite scrobem, sed observate ne veniatis ad
inferos, and illic inveniatis Core, Dathan, and Abiron, Schismaticos Magistros
vestros; but beware, says he, that you did not so low as Hell, where you may
find your Schismatical Masters, Core, Dathan, and Abiron. These Men, says St.
Augustine, thought better of themselves than the Apostles did, and worse of
their Brethren, than they did of Judas, Com quo Apostoli acceperunt primum
Sacramentum Coenae; with whom they received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper:
Psalmo contra Donatistas. So that it will be a hard matter to find out any sort
of Men, to whom that Character of the Man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. better agrees,
Who opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God, and is
worshipped.

And thus having shown to what height of impiety and mischief this Schism did
grow, from very small and inconsiderable beginnings, so by that, all Men may
see the madness of such, as give themselves up to dividing Principles, as
manifest as the Scripture said it should be: and though I have not painted the
Sin as black as it was, 2 Timothy 3.9.
yet enough is done to affright all such, as profess the Gospel of Peace, and
pretend to the Spirit of Love, from such destructive practices: For, as Solomon
says, they are fools that make a mock of sin, and think light of so great an
evil: That cast Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death, and make themselves sport, as
if their work and their Religion engaged them (as the (...), or Priests of
Mars) to scatter Fire in the Church of God; Behold, says St. James, how great
a matter, a little fire kindles; that fire he means, which is kindled in the
Hearts and Tongues of such as profess the Christian Religion from beneath, when
they think themselves inspired from above. All Africa was not fuel enough, it
put Rome, and France, and Spain into a flame, and that not for the present Age
only, in Epistle.
but St. Gregory says, it continued both name and thing to his time, and though
those flames were for a good while after abated, the heat of those distempers
having consumed the vitals of religion, the true knowledge and fear of God, and
although the fire was raked up under the ashes of ignorance and impiety, yet at
length some rash and unwary Persons brought home from beyond the Seas into
these Kingdoms, such burning Coals, as meeting with combustible matter, and
having glowed a while, and only obscured and sullied the beauty of our Church
by their smoke, at length brake put into a devouring flame, and (not to renew
our sorrows, by recounting the almost innumerable mischiefs that it did)
consumed the very foundations both of Church and State. And though by the
wonderful compassions of God, (which because they failed not, therefore we were
not consumed) our foundations were not only new laid, but glorious structures,
to the envy and admiration of our enemies were raised on them; yet we still
feel such unnatural heats, (though God be thanked we do not yet see the flame)
that we have no Reason to be secure, or to think our building and establishment
to be safe, though the foundations be sure; especially if we shall consider,
how like this fire has been to that of Hell, it having been for so many
Hundred Years unquenchable.

How much the Holy Waters of the Church of Rome, which have been abundantly
sprinkled on us, have contributed to the increasing of our flames,
(notwithstanding the boast of their extinguishing Virtue) is more to be
deplored than disputed. If any thing may be available, our penitent Tears, and
importunate Prayers to the God of Peace, That he would give Peace in these our
days, may be most effectual. And of this blessing we need not doubt, if every
one would sincerely endeavor to withdraw that fuel of spiritual Pride and
Vainglory, of Envy and Malice, of Carnal Lusts and Secular Interests, and let
the Word of God, the Water of Life, dwell richly in him; for those living
Plants of the knowledge and fear of God, obedience to our Governors, love and
good will to our Brethren, of humility and a mean conceit of our selves, would
resist and suppress those flames, whereas our formality and empty profession, a
zeal without knowledge, a spirit of pride, contention and contradiction, and
ambitious aspiring, as the bramble in the Parable of Jotham, makes us like so
many dry sticks and sapless Leaves ready to take fire at every blast and motion
of the Winds. Let us therefore study to be quiet, and to do our own business,
to repent of our own sins, and amend every one his own life, instead of
Reforming Churches and Kingdoms. And as Solomon advises, Fear God and the
King, and not meddle with them that are given to change.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have thought fit to Transcribe some few of those Laws, made by the most
Christian Emperors, against this rude Faction, the execution whereof (when all
other means had been used i^ vain) gave a check to its growth. Constantine, as
his Nature, and his Religion more especially inclined him, had long endeavored
to reduce them by lenity and indulgence, but the insolence of the Faction
necessitated him to a greater rigor, for he well perceived that his Indulgence
to the Donatists, was not only an occasion of their Cruelty to the Catholics,
but of great disturbance in his Empire. St. Augustine also, who had been an
Advocate for them, against the rigor of the Emperial Laws, saw it to be
expedient to execute those Laws against them in all their Sanctions, except
only in the case or Life. And whoever shall impartially consider the History of
those Times, may observe with me these two things: First, That as the Emperors,
and their Councils, became more zealous for the Christian Religion, they made
stricter Laws, and with greater severity caused them to be put in Execution. --
2ly, That by the diligent execution of such Laws, the insolency of the Faction
was much restrained, and unity and peace in a good measure established in the
Church. And indeed the life of the Laws, as Sir Francis Bacon observes, is in
the execution of them, without which they are always a dead (and sometime a
killing) Letter, and it were much more convenient not to have them made, than
being made, not to have them executed; for, by this neglect, the Offenders are
animated, and Authority contemned: As in the Natural body, when physic has
not its due operation, but only stirs the humors without purging them, it
causes a new fermentation of blood, and makes way for the noxious humors to
seize on the vital parts: Or like the placing of an impotent Dam, to a growing
River, which causes the Waters to swell and roar, and with a greater impetus,
than they could have otherwise exerted, to overflow all bounds. What Solomon
observed of the Laws of God, is as true of the Laws of Men: Eccles. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Common experience
teaches us, that if we only threaten our Children or Servants, and chastise
them not as they deserve, they grow the more presumptuous and self-willed. And
Solomon says, Prove. 13.24. He that spares the rod hates his Son, but he that
loves him, chastneth him betimes.

Besides, what prejudice and jealousies does such a neglect beget between a
Prince and his People? The Prince sees a necessity of curbing the insolency of
his People, by making wholesome Laws; The People fancy that the Prince has an
inclination to Tyranny, but, not executing those Laws, they suppose him to want
power, and to be like a foolish Builder, who having begun to build, is not able
to finish. And when they perceive a defect in power, as well as in prudence, to
manage the Reins of Government, they endeavor to get the Bit, that was put
into their Mouths, between their Teeth, and run away with their Rider. In a
word, there is no Fruit more desirable to corrupt Nature, than that which is
forbidden, the very prohibition does endear it, and irritate our desires to an
enjoyment. How many have publicly declared, that they could, and would have
conformed to our Liturgy and Ceremonies, had they not been imposed by a Law: as
if those things which are in their own nature, lawful and good, became evil and
unlawful, when enforced by a Law. This was long since practiced by some
Nonconformists, in the days of Archbishop Laud, who commending to his Clergy
the wearing of short Hair, they that had been zealous for it before that time,
did afterward suffer their Hair to grow to an excessive length. This is such a
spirit of contradiction, as will not be charmed with. Reason and Arguments,
though the Charmer be never so wise; Nor will good Laws silence or suppress it,
without a seasonable and vigorous execution of them, which was the course taken
by the first Christian Emperors; as appears by the following Instances.

Sozomen Hist. Tripartit. l. 3. c. II.
De Novatianis, Phrygibus, Valentinianis, etc.
Contra hos omnes Imperator (Constantinus) posita lege sancivit auferri eorum
Oratoria and Ecclesiis applicari, and neque in Domibus privatorum eos
Congregationes neque public celebrare: melius enim judicabat in Ecclesia
Catholica communicandum and in eam cunctis convenire suadebat, propter quam
legem (Arbitror) haeresium memoriam fuisse destructam --

Post hanc enim legem neque public in Ecclesiis poterant convenire, neque
latenter, dum Episcopi civitatum and Clerici observantes talia prohiberent:
hinc ergo plurimi metuentes, ad Ecclesiam se Catholicam contulerunt, Alii vero
manserunt in sua sententia, non tamen successores haresis reliquerunt.

Anno Constantini 20. lib. 1. Codicis Theodos.
De Haereticis.
Privilegia quae contemplatione Religionis indulta sunt, Catholicae tantum
legis observatoribus prodesse oprtet; Haereticos autem and Schismaticos, non
tantum ab hiis privilegiis alienos esse volumus, sed etiam diversis muneribus
constringi, and subjici.

Euschius in vita Constantini, l. 3. c. 61.
-- Et haec cautio eo vim suam porrigat, ut non mode non in publicis, sed ne in
privatis quidem aedificiis, aut in locis ullis separatis, hujus vestrae
superstiosae dementiae factiones coeant: and propterea etiam Jubemus, ut
universae aedes vestrae, in quibus congressus illos celebrare consuevistis,
penitus evertantur. Ac quo provisio haec, in curandis erroribus, robur, and
firmitatem sibi necessariam assequatur, mandavimus, ut omnia Superstitionis
vestrae loca, in quibus convenire solebatis, omnia dico haereticorum templa,
(si modo templa appellare convenit) sine recusatione aut controver sia
diruantur, and diruta, absque mora Catholicae tradantur Ecclesiae, reliqua loca
publico Reipub. usui abdicantur, nec ulla in posterum v^bis celebrandi
conventus relinquatur facultas.

Hac lege promulgata istarum sectarum memoria, magna ex part deleta est,
plurimis ad Ecclesiam conversis; aliis autem, cum discipulos facere nequirent e
vita sublatis. Bzovius ad Annum 20. Constantini. Anno 418.
Vt pulsis ex urbe primitus capitibus dogmatis execrandi, Caelestio and
Pelagio, si qui hujus de cetero sacrilegii Sectatores quibuscunque locis
potuerint inveniri, aut de pravitate damnata aliquem rursum proferre sermonem,
a quocunque corrupti, ad competentem judicem pertrahantur, quos sive Clericus
sive Laicus fuerit, deferendi habeat potestatem, and sine praescriptione aliqua
perurgendi, ut probationem convicti criminis stilus publicus insequatur, ipsis
inexorati exilii deportatione damnatis.

Anno 419.
Vt nefandi dogmatis repertores ab urbe Roma veluti quaedam Catholicae
veritatis contagia pellerentur, ne ignorantium mentes scaeva persuasione
perverterent, sed quia obstinati criminis pertinax malum ut constitutio
geminaretur coegit, recenti sanctione decrevimus ut si quis eos in quancunque
provinciarum part latitare non nesciens aut propellere aut prodere
distulisset, praescriptae poenae velut particeps subjaceret. Praecique tamen ad
quorundam Episcoporum pertinaciam corrigendam qui pravas eorum disputationes
tacito consensu asserunt, vel publica oppugnatione non destruunt -- Quicunque
damnationi supra memoratorum subscribere, impia obstinatione neglexerint,
Episcopatus amissione mulctati, interdicta in perpetuum, expulsi civitatibus
communione priventur.

Anno 421.
Mandatum Volusiano Vrbis Praefecto.
Vt omnes qui Dei invident pietati diligenter inquirat and eos faciat statim e
muris urbis expelli; it a tamen ut ne intra centesimum lapidem habeant
licentiam consistendi.

Notat Vossius quod post ista edicta alii Episcopatu dejecti ut Julianus, etc.
alii legum severitate territi seu fidei luce convicti ab erroris semita in
veritatis viam revenerunt: uti Turbantius, and Leporius, qui de se sic
confitetur, sic imperitia and superbia, sic stulta simplicitas cum persuasione
noxia, sic fervor cum intemperantia, sic debilis fides, in me viguerunt, ut
haec ab animo potuisse cedere, mihi stupenda Gratulatio.

Socrates, l. 2. Cap. 15. Historiae tripartitae.
Victor Constantinus Max. August. Episcopis and Populo.
Malignos and impios Arius imitatus, dignum est, ut illorum quoque suscipiat
ultionem: Sicut ergo Porphyrius divinae pietatis inimicus iniqua volumina
contra religionem proferens dignam promeruit invenire mercedem, and talem per
quam imposterum esset opprobrium and plurima compleretur infamia Et nunc
placuit Arium and consectores ejus vocari Porphyrianos, ut puorum mores imitati
sunt eorum vocabulo perfruantur. Super haec autem, si qua conscriptio ab Ario
facta invenitur igni tradatur, ut non solum prava enjus doctrina depereat, sed
neque ulla ejus possint remanere Commenta. Hoc etiam praecipio, si quis Arii
conscriptiones cellasse comperitur and non repent proferens, igne
consumpserit, mortis supplicio subjacebit, mox enim ut in hoc fuerit captus,
capitalem suscipiet ultionem. Deus vos custodiat.

De Trinitate.
Nullus haereticis Ministeriorum locus, nulla ad exercendam animi obstinatioris
dementiam pateat occasio. Sciant omnes, etiamsi quid speciali quolibet
rescripto, per fraudem elicito, ab hujusmodi hominum genere impetratum sit, non
valere. Arceantur cunctorum haereticorum ab illicitis congregationibus turbae,
unius and summi Dei nomen ubique celebretur. -- Omnes haereticos illicitas
agere intra oppida congregationes vetamus; at si quid eruptio factiosa
tentaverit, ab ipsis etiam urbium moenibus, exterminato furore propelli jubemus.

Euchario and Siagrio Coss.

De Episcopis and Clericis.
Si quis Episcopus Sacerdotio pulsus, praesumpserit ingredi civitatem ex qua
pulsus est, Jubemus hunc monasterio in alia regione constituto tradi, ut quae
in Sacerdotio deliquit, in monasterio degens corrigat.

Conventicula illicita, etiam extra Ecclesiam in privatis adibus celebrari
prohibemus, proscriptionis domus periculo imminente, si dominus ejus in ea
Clericos nova ac tumultuosa conventicula extra Ecclesiam celebrantes,
susceperit.

Honorio and Aristaeneto Coss.

De Haereticis.
Omnes haeresses, legibus Divinis and imperialibus vetitae constitutionibus
perpetuo quiescant, nemo ulterius conetur profana praecepta, vel docere, vel
discere, nec Antistites eorundum audeant sidem insinuare quam non habent, and
ministros creare, qui non sunt; nec per conniventiam Judicantium omniumque
quibus per constitutiones paternas super hoc cura mandata est, ejusmodi audacia
negligatur and crescat. Haereticorum autem vocabulo continentur, and latis
adversus eos sanctionibus succumbere debent, qui vel levi argumento, a judicio
Catholicae religionis and tramite detecti fuerint deviare.

Ausonio and Olybrio Coss.

Manichaeos, vel Donatistas meritiffima severitate persequimur; huic itaque
hominum generi, nihil ex moribus, nihil ex legibus commune sit cum caeteris. Ac
primum quidem volumus esse publicum crimen quia quod in Religionem divinam
committitur in omnium fertur injuriam; quos bonorum omnium publicatione
prosequimur, ipsos quoque volumus amoveri ab omni liberalitate, and
successione, quolibet titulo veniente. Praeterea non donandi, non emendi, non
vendendi, non postremo contrahendi cuiquam convicto relinquimus facultatem; in
mortem quoque inquisitio extendatur. Nam si in criminibus Majestatis licet
memoriam accusare defuncti non immerito and hic debet subire tale judicium,
ergo and suprema illius scriptura irrita sit, sive testamento, sive Codicillo,
sive Epistola sive aliquo alio genere reliquerit voluntatem, qui Manichaeus
fuisse convincitur. Sed nec filios haeredes eis existere aut adire permittimus,
nisi a paterna pravitate discesserint: Delicti enim veniam poenitentibus damus.
In eos etiam auctoritatis nostrae aculei dirigantur, qui eos domibus suis,
damnanda provisiene defendunt. Servos insuper extra noxam esse volumus, si
dominorum Sacrilegium evitantes ad Ecclesiam Catholicam servitio fideliore
transierint.

Honorio and Theodosio Coss.

Si vero Diminus temporalis, requisitus and admonitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam
purgare neglexerit, ab haeretica pravitate, post annum a tempore monitionis
elapsum, terram ipsius exponimus Catholicis occupandam, qui eam exterminatis
haereticis absque ulla contradictione possideant, and in fidei puritate
conservent: and

quae sequuntur ibidem.

Ariani, Macedoniani -- Donatistae and qui ad imam usque scelerum nequitiam
pervenerunt, Manichaei; nusquam in Romanum locum conveniendi morandique habeant
facultatem. Manichaeis etiam de civitatibus pellendis, and ultimo supplicio
tradendis, quoniam his nihil relinquendum loci ast in quo ipsis etiam elementis
fit injuria. Cunctis quoque legibus, quae contra eos, caeterosque qui nostrae
sidei refragantur, olim diverfisque temporibus latae sunt, semper viridi
observantia valituris. Sive de donationibus in haereticorum conventicula (quae
ipsi audacter Ecclesias nuncupare conantur) factis, sive ex ultima voluntate
rebus qualitercunque relictis, sive de privatis aedificiis in quae domino
permittente, vel connivente, convenerint venerandae nobis Catholicae Ecclesiae
vindicandis, sive de procuratore qui hoc nesciente domino fecerit, December
librarum auri mulcta, vel exilium si sit ingenuus subituro, Metallum vero post
verbera si servilis conditionis sit; it a ^t nec in publicum convenire locum,
nec aedificare sibi quasi Ecclesias, nec ad circumscriptionem legum quicquam
meditari valent, omni civili and militari, curiarum etiam and defensorum and
judicum sub viginti librarum Auri interminatione prohibendi auxilio. Illis
etiam omnibus in sua manentibus firmitate, quae de militia, poenisque variis
deque diversis haereticis sunt promulgata, us nec speciale quidem beneficium
adversus leges valeat impetratum.

Felice and Tauro Coss.

Apollinaristoe, vel Eutychianistae, non Ecclesias sibi construant, parasynaxes
and conventicula tam diurna, quam nocturna, non contrahant -- Nec eis public,
vel privati^ convocandi caetus, vel circulos contrahendi and de errore
haeretico disputandi, tribuatur facultas. Nulli etiam contra venerabilem
Chalcedonensem Synodum liceat aliquid vel dictare, vel scribere, vel edere, vel
emittere, aut ali^rum dicta vel s^ripta super eadem re proferre. Nemo hujusmodi
habere libros and sacrilega Scriptorum monumenta audeat servare: quodsi qui in
his criminibus fuerint deprehensi, perpetua deportatione damnentur.

Constantio and Rufo Coss.

De Baptismate.
Antistitem, qui Sactitatem baptismatis illicita usurpatione geminaverit,
sacerdotio indignum esse censemus, etc. Gratiano and Merobaude Coss.

Si quis rebaptizare quempiam de Ministris Catholicae Sectae fuerit detectus,
una cum eo qui piaculare crimen commisit, (si tamen criminis per aetatem capax
sit) and hic cui persuasum sit, ultimo judicio percellatur.

Lucio and Hadriano Coss.

Hi qui sanctam fidem prodiderunt, and Sanctum baptisma haeretica superstitione
profanarunt, a consortio omnium segregati sint, and a testimoniis alieni --
Lapsis etenim, and errantibus subvenitur, perditis vero, hoc est sanctum
baptisma profanantibus, nullo remedio poenitentiae succurritur.

Tatiano and Symmacho Coss.

Eum qui servum, sive ingenuum, invitum, seu suasione plectenda, ex cultu
Christianae Religionis, in nefandam Sectam, ritumve seduxerit, cum dispendio
personarum, capite puniendum esse censemus.

Theodosio and Valentiniano Coss.

St. August. contra Parmen. l. 3.
Si quid pro hujusmodi iniquitatibus patiuntur, si nolint corrigi, saltem non
audeant gloriari.

FINIS.

