Elegant Apothegms In the SPEECH of Lewis IV. King of France To His Revolted
SUBJECTS.
BEfore I shall receive your Oath of Fidelity, (which I may justly demand, and
You may justly take,) I let you know, you have re-call'd this Prince, who
(during his Exile) had nothing else to do, but to Rule and Reign; And hereby I
shall enforce you to believe, that You shall not make a Royal Throne a Passage
into my Fathers Prison; and after you have presented me with a Crown, to dare
once to think of Chains and Irons. I know well, that this Discourse will
surprise You, and that You did not believe when you presented me with a
Scepter, that I should not rather have received it with Thanks, than
Reprehensions; But this Act is extraordinary in its Commencement, Progress, and
Constitution; And it is Just that all Circumstances should be proportionable.
Let it then suffice you, only to know, that if they be Ignorant in that Point,
Subjects are to pay their Obedience, yet I am not ignorant to what degree
Sovereigns may extend their Clemency, notwithstanding there is difference
betwixt them: Subjects have no limits for the first, but Sovereigns have for
the latter. The People are obliged to the Princes Will, both by their Birth and
Laws; They owe them their Goods, their Lives and Liberties: Their Prince owes
them nothing but Justice, which can hardly Pardon Traitors. If these Truths and
Maxims had been equally understood, and followed by the late King my Sovereign,
and You his People, Affairs had not been in so sad a condition, the State had
not been reduced to such Confusion, the Provinces had not been Canonized,
Germany had not been so full of Faction, Italy had not been so divided; all the
Cities of the Kingdom had not had so many Kings as they had new Governors, You
had not been guitly of the Crime of Treason, in elevating an Usurper to the
Throne; his Tomb might have been bedecked with my Tears, his Hearse covered
with Trophies, and not with Chains; And (in short) You might have been Happy
and Innocent: But as His Clemency, and Your Rebellion, were the sole Cause of
all those Evils, so Your Obedience, and my Justice, are the only Means to make
Reparation. Consider a little, (I pray you,) that You fail not back into the
same Estate wherein you were; You have violated all sort of Rights in the
Person of your King, Yon have raised a War against Him, Assaulted him, and
afterward Poisoned him; You have abused the Confidence he had in You, and
delivered him Prisoner, with as great Treason as Injustice, Insolency as
Cruelty; Insolency which was never offered to the Person of an ordinary Herald.

Thus you have impudently abused your KING during a Treaty of Peace, led him
from Prison to Prison for Five Years together. You have forced him to despise
his Crown, and transferred it to another Hands than mine: To conclude, You have
put Him to Death, and you have reduced Me to a strict Necessity to show my
Misery beyond Sea, and seek my Safety by my Flight. It has happend, that
sometimes Grandees of a Kingdom have Interposed Themselves against a Tyrany,
and destroyed it; But it was never seen, that They Themselves advanced a Tyrant
to the Throne as You have done. In these kind of Crimes, the Abetter may be
said to be more Criminal, than He who received all the Fruit; For if every one
of You had aspired to set the Crown upon his own Head, You had been more
excusable, than to snatch it from your Lawful Prince, and place it upon the
Head of a Usurper. But You may say to Me, the Prince that boret it, was not
able to support it: To that I shall Answer, as I had the Honor to be his Son,
and Subject, it belongs not to Me to determine what He could, or what He could
not; Seeing He was my Father, I ought not to presume to be His Judge, and He my
King; I ought not to be so Impudent to Censure, much less Condemn His Actions,
He being not obliged to give an account to any, but God alone: The same Respect
I have for his Memory, You ought to have for his Person, He was Your King as
well as Mine. Seeing then that KINGS are called Fathers of the People, their
Subjects are obliged to have for Them a True Resentment of Respect which their
very Birth may infuse into them: Besides, Sovereigns are the true Images of
God, that splendor of their Puissance, is a Beam of their Power; when you see
the Comets appear, the Sun Eclipsed, the Thunderbolts fall on Innocent Heads,
we see the Floods drown whole Towns by their Innundations, the Sea passing its
Bounds, swallowing whole Provinces in the bottom of the Deep, devour them up;
Yea, when you see Earthquakes make Kingdoms Tremble, Then it is permitted to
the People to Murmr; Do you not discern the contrary in these occurrences,
they re-double their Vows and Prayers, and that they are never more obedient to
God, than at such a time, as if God had forsaken the Providence of the
Universe. And when it shall so happen, that Heaven gives you a Prince, (for
punishment of your Sins,) under whose Reign, Policy and Prudence are not well
observed, during whose Government Foreign and Civil Wars, devour all with cruel
ravages, it belongs not then to You to Condemn your Sovereign; For is he
Feeble? then you ought to sustain him; Is He Unfortunate? then you ought to
bemoan him; Is he Wicked? then you ought to look upon him as a Scourge sent
from Heaven, and to wait with Patience for a Remedy from that Hand which has
caused your Evil: For when a Prince Commands his Army, and gives Battle, if it
so happens that the Soldiers perform not their Duty, that the Squadron yield,
the main Body be broken; and in the end, after he has done Miracles in his
Person, He be yet constrained to Retreat from his Enemies, is it not the Prince
that suffers the Disgrace, and is reputed Vanquished, and bears the Infamy of
the Day? notwithstanding by his own particular Actions he has merited to be a
Conqueror? Seeing it thus, why will ye not bear with the Misfortunes of your
Prince, as well as They do with Yours? Or to come something nearer to the
quick; why do you not regulate these Disorders by your more exact Obedience?
The Prince alone is obvious in a Battle to the Infamy, Cowardice, Misfortunes
of his whole Army, and You are Thousands who are obliged to strengthen the
Authority of your King. Believe me, if all Subjects would be Loyal, no Kingdom
could be Miserable; And if all Princes thought on Severity more than Clemency,
there would not be so many Subjects Rebels: Moreover, if it were permitted to
the capritious People, to take, and give Crowns when they fancied a Change, I
conceive there is not a Shepherd but he might hope to be a King, and not a King
but reduced to a Shepherd, so unruly are floating Judgments. But to speak the
truth to you, these things ought not to pass, We are Your Masters, and You
ought not to become Ours. It is not that I am ignorant, that God disposes of
Crowns and Scepters as he pleases, and gives them to whom he lists. I tell you
in general, that Kings ought not to lose their Crowns, but with their Lives,
and that nothing can Dispense Subjects from the Loyalty they owe to their
Sovereigns, not any pretense to Authorize a Rebellion. If Sacred Persons may
not enjoy their particular Privileges, they shall be exposed to more miseries
than all sorts of Men; their very Guards will appear to them as so many
Enemies; their Thrones a Direful Precipice, rather than a place of Honor. A
King of this kind, is no better than an Illustrious Slave, when he shall have
as many Masters as Subjects. This Disorder will quickly cause a Second: For
when the Nobility of a Kingdom fail in their Duty to their Prince, Vassals and
Tenants will forfeit their Fealty to Them, and then Rebellion is communicated
from the Grandees to the Commons, and so descending from one sort to another,
till Universal Confusion devours all; Every one will Command, and no person
Obey, and so every one proves a Slave to his own Ambition; This in effect is
the most sad condition a Kingdom can fall into. For my own part, when I
consider my self to be the Son of a King, Successor of so many Kings, and yet
notwithstanding that, I immediately succeed not my Father; This Idea imprints
in Me a strange Confusion as toward You, and extreme Grief as toward my self,
when I reflect how the same Subjects, who Inchain'd CHARLES in Fetters, placed
LEWIS on the Throne; The Malice which they bore to the Father, may it not
easily fall upon the Son? And may not They fear that the Son will Revenge the
Outrages against the Father? Yet (some may say,) present Loyalty will blot out
the Memory of their Ancient Diss-service. This is certain, in the exact Rule,
no Noble Action ought to pass without its Recompense: Yet it is as really true,
that no Crime ought to escape its Punishment. You have called Me to the Throne,
it is true, but if you had not, You had been as Criminal against Lewis as
Charles; Your Wives and Children are not exempt from these Crimes, seeing
(without doubt) they made Vows for their Parents offending, and Prayers against
their Prince. Whereas then I cannot punish you all, but that I must entertain
you, It rests at my choice, whether I would become a King without Subjects, or
to Pardon You out of pure Grace. It may be, during your Lives ye may Repent you
of your Ancient Crimes, and become as Faithful as you were Disobedient; Think
not then, that by taking an Oath of Fidelity, that I am thereby engaged not to
do what becomes a King; No, I come to a Throne, where, if I should be a Slave,
I had rather be obscured in a Prison as my Father was, than not to Reign as a
Sovereign. Those People with whom Loyalty is Elective, forbear not to make
their Kings Absolute, because they could have no pretense of Justice to do
otherwise. Judge then, if those who hold their Crowns from Heaven, ought to
acknowledge their Subjects for their Masters. I find it far better to be a
Glorious Subject, than a King dis-obey'd. Deceive not your selves, the Value
and Providence of a Prince are not sufficient of themselves to make a Kingdom
happy; The Subjects ought to contribute their proportions, the Nobles to offer
their Loyal Obedience, the People to follow their good Example. See what your
Prince has said to You, in Lieu of Punishing, has Pardoned; Instead of
Fighting with You, prepares to Defend You, Instead of Your Enemy, is Your
Conservator.

Printed by N. T. in the Year of our Lord, MDCLXXXV.


