THE Abominations OF THE CHURCH of ROME: Discovered in A RECANTATION-SERMON,
Lately Preached in the FRENCH Church of the Savoy.

Whereunto are added many Curious Particulars, of the Practices of the PAPISTS
beyond the Seas.

BY FRANC. DE LA MOTTE, Late Preacher of the Order of the CARMELITES, newly
Converted to the Church of England.

ENGLISHED.

LONDON: Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the Sign of the
Angel over against the little North door of St. Paul's. 1675.

Where you may likewise have the same in French, as it was Preached.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SR JOSEPH WILLIAMSON, One of His MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IF I were not fully persuaded of Your kind acceptance of these Sheets, I
should not be so bold to offer them to Your Honor: But the sensible
expressions of Your great goodness and favor which I have already received,
and the Approbation with which You were pleased to honor this Discourse when it
came out of the Pulpit, at the time of my Recantation, will not suffer me to
doubt, but that You will accept of it also now that it comes out of the Press.

I hope it will not be unserviceable in this Nation, to settle in the
profession of the Truth the wavering minds of many too much inclinable to
Popery: This Consideration, with the importunities of my Auditors, have
prevailed upon me to publish these lines: which I desire may be looked upon as
a testimony of the sincere profession of my Faith, and of that Loyalty and
Obedience, which I do hereby vow to the Gracious Monarch of these Noble
Kingdoms, where I am come to seek for a shelter. I might with reason expect to
find it amongst Protestants; but the insolency and insulting humor of the
Party that I forsake, and the affronts that I have already met with, even in
the streets, since my profession, force me to fly to the Protection of Your
Honor; whose extraordinary Abilities and Fidelity have given You so near an
access to His most Excellent Majesty, and cause You to act so worthily in that
noble station, unto which Your own deservings and Your Prince's favor have
promoted You.

Your Generosity and Goodness will, I hope, pardon my present boldness, as
proceeding from a thankful acknowledgement of Your former favors, and from an
earnest desire to be esteemed, as really I am,

Right Honorable, Your Honor's most humble, most obedient, and most obliged
Servant, FRANCIS de la MOTTE.

To the READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
I Might very well have excused my self in not yielding to the earnest requests
of several Eminent Persons, who have again and again desired this publication,
if I had regarded either the common unhappiness of Writers, especially such as
offer to meddle with Religion, or the censures and hatred of my former Friends,
which this will infallibly draw upon me. But I intend not to be much concerned
at the Sayings of those, who are engaged by their Vows to spurn at every thing
that disagrees with their Superstition, who are wont to condemn a Book at the
sight of the Title, and to execute it in the fire before they have perused it.
I have considered, that their displeasure alone should not hinder me from
giving this to the Press, because I am certain that others more impartial and
less prejudicated, will vouchsafe unto it their favorable construction; seeing
that it may prove to be useful to such as are blinded with error, by
discovering to them the Truth. Besides, in regard some have been pleased to
surmise that I did not dare to publish many of those things which I mentioned a
month ago in the French Church of the Savoy, at the time of my Abjuration,
saying, that they were false Inventions, because I named neither the places nor
the persons guilty of those disorders, of which I did then accuse the Church of
Rome, and that I had made its Authors and Doctors speak that which they never
intended, etc. I have thought my self obliged in vindication of my Credit to
reveal and declare their Calumnies in a larger Discourse, so that they
themselves may now perceive, that they were not a little engaged to me for my
sparing them s^much, for I might with justice have said a great deal more. They
might have considered, that I was then in a place where it is not usual to
speak all that is known, and that the respect which I have yet for many of the
Romish Clergy, of whose hands I have received many personal favors, did hinder
me from the discovery of all their nakedness.

But seeing they are so earnest with me to desire me to show them the passages
which I alleged out of St. Bernard, Baronius, Bellarmine, and others, and to
name the places where the grievous abuses concerning the Worship of Images and
the Relics of the Saints have been seen, I cannot deny their request; for it
may be God intends to make use of this their simplicity, to make them
understand how much they have been deceived. This is the chief cause that has
prevailed upon me to publish this little Tract: I may call it little, it is so
indeed, for it is not to my purpose to examine and thoroughly sift out all the
Controversies of Religion: I must needs acknowledge, that I am not so well
versed in and acquainted with such matters, which I never understood but from
the Romish Schools, as many other Persons that have and do write of them. My
design is only to declare by the motives of my Change of Religion, that the
Church of Rome alone is sufficient to convince any man, and cause him to
perceive its Abuses and Errors.

The Protestant Party ought not to be offended, nor wonder at the hearing any
scandal cast upon this Treatise or its Author; I entreat them to show me so
much favor; for they must understand, that the Papists are bound in
conscience, for fear of the guilt of a mortal crime, to speak ill of me. If
they did but give the least countenance to a Book that appears with such a
Title as this does, or did but mention with respect and honor a person that
has done what I have, they would commit a grievous offense against the Laws of
their Religion, of which they cannot be absolved, but by those who have
obtained the privilege of giving Absolution in cases reserved to his Holiness.
Besides, they believe as they are taught every day by their Preachers, that it
is lawful to make use of any means to attain unto a good end; that is to say,
that it is lawful to invent a thousand lies and calumnies to spoil the credit
of a book or of a person contrary to their Religion. I must not expect a more
favorable treatment at their hands, seeing that they have been so bold for
that end to attempt upon the lives of Men, nay of Sovereign Princes, as we may
find in the Records of this City, and of other places. But I have no reason to
be afraid of this kind of persecution, I mean of their Tongues, for I may say I
have lived amongst them without blame, as may be conjectured from the
considerable Employments which I have had in the Church of Rome, for their
Bishops never admit a person into their Cathedrals to preach, unless they know
him to be of an honest and good behavior: And the Religious of that Order, of
which I have made profession, (the Carmelites) which doubtless is one of the
most exemplary of the Romish Church; if these had not had a good opinion of me
they would never have promoted me to that degree of honor amongst them which I
have held, having been three times the Priors Deputy in the same Convent, which
Office is given to none but to such as are very regular and exemplary in their
lives. It is therefore needless that any person should trouble himself with an
inquiry for the place from whence I came, and of my carriage while I have
remained in the Church of Rome, to discredit this little Book. I am not afraid
in the least of any such thing, I am rather fully persuaded that there is no
man in those Towns where I have made my abode, nor in the Convents where I have
dwelt, but will give me the reputation of an honest and just man, blameless in
my carriage until now, as much as is possible, in case the change of my
Religion be concealed from them. I think therefore that thou had best peruse
this Treatise with a calm and unprejudiced mind, that thou may be better
able to judge of the things therein declared, and gather from thence the
instructions needful to undeceive thy judgment, if thou art yet in the same
errors as I have been. Those that will read over these lines with that good
disposition, will approve of my change, and of this publication, and will be
constrained to confess, that there are causes and reasons strong enough to
oblige any man to forsake the Romish Church, and embrace the Profession of the
Protestant Religion.

The Prayer before Sermon.
O Lord God, infinite in goodness and mercy, who have by the gracious hand of
thy divine Providence taken and lead me as Abram out of the superstitious Ur of
the Caldeans, as Lot out of the filthy flames of Sodom and Gomorrha, as Israel
out of the bondage and tyranny of Egypt, as Joseph from his dungeon, as Daniel
out of the Lions den, and as the blind Man of the Gospel out of that fearful
blindness which has since my infancy hindered me from the discovery and
acknowledgment of thy Sacred Truth! O God, who have preserved me from all
perils, and conducted me safe out of the hands of enemies with thy powerful and
stretched out Arm, here I am prostrate at the footstool of thy Divine Majesty,
convinced in judgment, with a contrite and an humble spirit; here I am in the
midst of thy Elect, of thy Royal Priesthood, of thy Holy Nation, of thy People
purchased with thy Blood, in the midst of Believers; not with an intention to
offer up unto thee their prayers, for I am not worthy of so holy a Ministry, my
Tongue is not yet able to speak so loud as their sighs, and my Lips are too
much defiled; but I am here to beseech Thee, O'Searcher of the Heart! to
hearken to their vows, and the prayers of their Souls, for the advance of thy
Glory, the accomplishment and preservation of thy Church, especially for this
which worships Thee in spirit and in truth, in these three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, for the prosperity of the King that Commands here, for
his Spouse Queen Catherine, for James Duke of York, and for all the Royal
Family; for the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Teachers of thy Church, that
it may please Thee to enlighten them with the Spirit of thy Truth, and inflame
them with an holy zeal for the Salvation of Souls; for the Lords and others of
the Kings Council, for the Magistrates and other Inhabitants of these three
Kingdoms, that it may please Thee to supply and succor them in all their
wants, whether they be spiritual or corporal: But more especially we pray Thee
for all such as are yet engaged and plunged in error, take them out of the
same depths of sin from whence Thou have drawn me; open their eyes whether they
will or no, that they may perceive the truth of thy Gospel; open their hearts
by the divine power of thy Holy Spirit, that thy Blessed Word may be received
as in a good and fruitful field, that it may bring forth an hundred fold! In
this occasion be pleased to accept of my prayers with thy peoples, for I know
by experience that Thou alone art able to turn and convince a Soul brought up
in error, and change a heart nourished from its infancy with an abhorrency of
thy Holy Word! Therefore I pray Thee, or rather we all pray Thee together, to
open the eyes of so many blind persons, whom I leave behind me in the regions
of darkness; and touch with the efficacious finger of thy Holy Spirit, so many
stony hearts that resist the motions and offers of thy Grace with so much
obstinacy! Lord, Thou have performed in me a blessed change, for which I offer
up unto Thee my hearty thanks and praises, beseeching Thee to pardon my
unworthiness, and graciously to accept of the thanks which thy faithful people
here assembled do render unto Thee for my sake! But O merciful God, at this
same time that I find my self obliged to offer unto Thee my thanks for a favor
received from thy hand, I find my self in a necessity to beg another favor and
mercy of granting unto me the power and ability to declare unto this numerous
Congregation the great mercy that Thou have showed me by bringing me to my
Conversion! I am desired, O my God! it is but just that I should give glory to
thy Holy Name; Justice and Reason require that I should declare thy Goodness
where iniquity has so long appeared with impudency, that I should employ the
members which have been abused in warring against Thee to discover thy
wonderful mercy in me; these lips, this tongue, and this voice, which has
uttered so many lies and errors against the light and suggestions of thy Holy
Spirit; these members that have declared so many falsehoods, preached up so many
abuses, confirmed so many blasphemies, committed and caused so many sins to be
committed; it is just that they should glorify thy Holy Name! Forgive, O my
God! forgive me the sin of having so long detained thy truth in unrighteousness
against my conscience and thy secret motions! Grant me the grace that I may
this day be able to make an honorable amends, that I may give the same
testimony to thy Blessed Truth which I have given to Heresy; and that I may
bring forth fruits suitable to my repentance! For this purpose, O good God,
purify my unclean lips, touch them with a coal from thine Altar, cleanse this
tongue yet venomous which has so often conveyed a poison into many hearts,
inflame it with some of those cloven tongues of fire which lighted upon thy
Holy Apostles, and which caused them to be no more dumb but eloquent! Change
the accent of this voice, which has been heard in the Pulpits of the Romish
Religion! make it never to be heard any more in vindication of error, and that
it may never accent and pronounce any thing but that which is altogether
conformable to thy Word! These are the petitions that I now present unto Thee,
O good God, especially at this time, beseeching Thee also so to prepare the
ears and hearts of my Hearers, that they may be the better by my discourse,
more confirmed and settled in their Faith, and more resolved in an obedience to
Thee! These mercies we beseech Thee to grant us, O merciful God, by the merits
and only mediation of Jesus Christ; in whose Blessed Name we continue to pray
unto Thee, as He Himself has taught us; Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
ROMANS 5. verse. 20. -- Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.
HEre I am, my Brethren, in this Pulpit to acquaint you at present with the
causes of that which you have seen me do this morning: I am here to express
unto you a repentance suitable to the hainousness of my sins, by a public
abjuration of those grievous errors which I have formerly professed in the
Church of Rome, that I might show forth the accomplishment of this holy Oracle
pronounced by St. Paul, Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. You may
be fully persuaded, my Brethren, that Gods grace has obliged and constrained
me to what I have done, for my Change of Religion proceeds not from the
unconstancy of my mind; I have done nothing suddenly, I have been seven years
in a continual deliberation, struggling with my self, convinced in my judgment,
but could never resolve until now. You must not therefore look upon my
alteration as the effect of some calamity, or the consequence of an unworthy
behavior, or a disgrace: I never wanted bread, I have always had too much at
command, and have ever met with more happiness in my undertakings than I could
expect. Neither is this Change the product of any miscarriage; no, blessed be
God, I am not ashamed of any thing that I have done, those Honorable Persons
unto whom I have been recommended in this place may bear witness from the
information of such as are worthy of credit. The greatest crime that I have
committed is that which I have been guilty of this day, by forsaking a
superstitious Religion and embracing a purer, by leaving the broad road to Hell
and turning into that of Heaven. God out of his infinite goodness and mercy
has obliged me to it, notwithstanding all the natural persuasions of worldly
interest; for I have left the assurance of a sufficient provision for my
maintenance, to embarque my self and rely wholly upon Gods good providence. I
have caused my best friends to become my most deadly enemies, I have made of my
parents and relations my persecutors and sworn adversaries, I have left forever
a Country where I enjoyed as much worldly happiness as was possible, to come to
live and dye in another, where I have no other expectation nor means to advance
my self but only from your kindness and favor. God knows how strong these
reasons have been to detain me so long, and what difficulty I have had to
command my self to a final resolution, but at last grace has overcome; God
has had in me more power than the world and humane reason, and the hopes of my
salvation more than the advantages of this life. That I might declare this unto
you, I have now the liberty to appear in this Pulpit, I shall therefore do it
as briefly as I am able, I shall give you an account of some of those disputes
which I have maintained in my mind, before I could resolve to do what I have at
last done: I shall therefore begin to declare the reasons that have kept me so
long in the profession of the Romish Religion, and that as far as I am able to
judge do detain the rest of its Professors: I shall afterward discover to you
the reasons that have destroyed the first groundless reasons, and that have
caused me to forsake the Romish Religion and embrace the Protestant, to
renounce error for faith, heresy and idolatry for the truth, the babylonish
Rome for the celestial Jerusalem, my Country for Haven, and all for my God. By
this Discourse you shall perceive the greatness of Gods mercy toward me, in
that he has been pleased of a stone to raise up a son to Abraham, and has
caused his grace to abound where sin abounded before.

THE FIRST PART.
THe first and chief cause which has so long detained me in the Church of Rome
is, that venerable Antiquity which is ascribed to her alone: I did sometimes
consider her gray hairs, her pretended Founder the Apostle St. Peter, who as it
is said governed her during the space of five and twenty years: I did sometimes
look upon her Sovereign Authority, which she says Christ himself gave unto her
in the person of that Apostle, which since has continued successively in all
the Popes who have commanded in that See: This Succession of the Popes and
Bishops of Rome has never been violated nor interrupted, as they pretend, but
they have immediately succeeded to one another; the like is not to be seen in
any other Church. Besides, I did sometimes view a long Catalogue of Martyrs and
other Saints, who are said to have lived in an obedience to the Church of Rome,
and to be dead in the profession of that Faith which is there now, and has
been always taught, as is pretended. I did examine all these plausible Titles,
these glorious Attributes, and her divine Prerogatives, as I found them
recorded in the Books and Schools of that Church, which could not but oblige me
to an high esteem of her excellency, and to wonder how men could be so blind
and irrational as to deny her to be the only true Catholic and Apostolic
Church. In this manner, my Brethren, I have continued about the space of six or
seven years, seriously considering these advantages that were given to this
Church: At last I took that liberty which is not granted to any of that
profession, and that is, to open my eyes and examine more narrowly from whence
proceeded these magnificent and glorious Attributes, and what reasons Rome has
to claim them to her self alone: For that purpose I perused the Holy
Scriptures, and its most ancient Interpreters, as the most worthy of credit,
and by them I was constrained to alter my judgment, and to entertain
persuasions contrary to that received from my Forefathers, from my Masters, and
from the Reading of the Romish Divines.

I have found that Antiquity, in which Rome boasts so much, discovers her shame
and disgrace, as the Antiquity of a Noble Family is a reproach to a degenerated
Son. I have found that the Authority which she claims has no other foundation
nor beginning, but the pride and tyranny of such Popes as have succeeded
Gregory the Great, for neither he nor any of his Predecessors have ever thought
it lawful for them to challenge or pretend to an universal Dominion or
Authority in the Church. I have found this Succession, which is said to be
without interruption, to be an abyss, where the most learned Historians lose
themselves; they can find no sure footing, so that they themselves are forced
to confess, that they flote upon the waves of a Sea subject to calms and
tempests, to ebbing and flowing, if I may make use of their own expressions.
Sometimes they see this Ship of St. Peter without Helm or Pilot, overwhelmed
with the billows, without hope of a recovery or expectation of salvation for
such as are there imbarqued. I have found that the Holiness wherewith this
Church was adorned under the Conduct of its ancient Bishops, is at present much
degenerated, an universal corruption has spread it self into all the Members
of this politic Body; so that where grace did formerly abound, there at
present sin and heresy abound, to the shame and disgrace of Christianity. This
I have found, as soon as I could open my eyes to take notice of such matters
without prejudice or partiality, which we must banish from us if we will give a
true judgment: This I have learned in the study of Holy Scripture, in the
reading of the ancient Fathers of the Church, and from the Records of
Antiquity, without the assistance of Protestant Books, or any information from
Ministers.

. Antiquity has always had a Command over the minds and judgments of men: We
look commonly with a great deal of reverence and respect upon a head which time
has laden with gray hairs, and which discovers the number of its years by the
many wrinkles of its face; we see many times the ruins of an old Dwelling,
encompassed about with a few rotten Oaks, is more looked upon than the noblest
Palaces, reared up according to the newest and most regular form of Art; a
Brass Medal shall be more esteemed than ten others of a more precious Metal, if
it can but show forth the Image and Name of some ancient Monarch, or of a
Conqueror of former Ages. This respect, which Nature and Custom discover for
things of a long continuance, is not disagreeable to the directions of Moral
and of Christian Policy: We are to have more esteem for a State that has
subsisted a thousand years, than for another that has continued but one or two
hundred; and we are advised to have most regard for that Religion which can
produce the ancientest Records, and prove its establishment to be the first.

This has always been my judgment. As therefore I did look upon the Church of
Rome as the most ancient, as that which had been founded by the Apostle St.
Peter, as the Romanists would persuade us, I have for a long while entertained
the greatest esteem for her, and judged such as were not agreeable to her
Principles to be but hasty productions of Nature, in comparison of an ancient
Tree, or as Bastards in comparison of the Child well born. I did wonder how men
could harbor any other thoughts. My Mind being thus filled with partiality for
my ancient Religion, I could not imagine how any man of wit and ability, without
being grievously blinded, could embrace any other. I did oft-times argue with
my self in this manner: Is it possible, that there should be some men so silly
and ridiculous, to prefer a Religion which we have seen in its Cradle, to
another which has continued sixteen hundred years; a Church formed by the wit
of Calvin and Beza, and some others, to that which Christ and His Holy Apostles
have established, etc. Thus it is, says Lactantius, in his Book of the Rise of
Error, l. 2. c. 7. Thus Antiquity commands the judgments of men: Its authority
is so great, that we look upon it as a crime to inquire into the qualities of
that which is ancient, and to question its rights; credit is given to it at the
first sight, as to a most known truth. In the same manner (says that Author,
l. 2. c. 8.) some imprudently neglect the advice of wisdom, approving without
any examination the inventions of their forefathers, suffering themselves to be
lead as beasts whithersoever others please, and not whither they should go. In
this manner they are deceived, and are willing to be so, by taking for the rule
of their faith the belief of their forefathers, out of a strong conceit, that
they cannot be wiser than they were before, because they have succeeded them,
and that it is not probable that they were deceived, seeing that they have
preceded them and are named their ancestors.

These words of this wise man, and some passages of others, made me think, that
it was not so great a crime as is declared in the Church of Rome, to examine the
Antiquity of the Religion of our Forefathers, and to consider from whence it
proceeds, whither it tends, what it has been, what it should be, what are its
Privileges, Duties, Doctrine, Laws, Conduct; if that which is professed to day
be the same as that of yesterday, that of this age be like to that of the first
times, or whether it be not differing, or a strange Bastard put into the room
of the true Child; whether it has not robbed the lawful Heiress of her Titles
of Honor, usurped her Rights by counterfeit Letters, seized upon her Demesnes,
driven her from her Inheritance; banished her out of her Dominion by a disguise
under the most beautiful habits; and whether by this means the Romish Church
has not seated her self in the seat of the lawful, to procure unto her self a
greater esteem amongst men, who have so much respect for things that appear
with a grave and ancient countenance.

I have seriously examined these things, I have sought for the Rights and
Titles of the Church of Rome amongst its pretended Ancestors, Christ, St.
Peter, and St. Paul, who have been, says she, my Founders and Apostles. I have
read over the Privileges that they ascribe to her, and the Duties that they
require from her, that which she has received from them, and that which they
command her to have, the language which they teach her, and the Laws that they
have given her, and how they behaved themselves that succeeded immediately
after her first Founders. When I had thus compared the one with the other, the
present Rome with the ancient, the World that is now with that which was, the
Children with the Father, that which is believed and preached at present with
that which was believed and preached heretofore, that which was practiced and
that which is now done, that which is seen with that which was anciently; I
have found, after a serious examination of all these things, that there can be
nothing more contrary than these two things, the ancient Christian Rome and
that which appears now, the Church then with the modern, the Faith and
Christian Religion under the Popes Government with that Faith and Religion
which the Romans first embraced, and professed a long whiles under the Teachers
and Bishops which the Apostles left them. Let any man read over the Gospel and
the Records of the Primitive Christians, since the time of the Apostles until
the fourth or fifth Centuries, to seek what Church Jesus Christ established
upon the unmovable foundation of His Word and Merits; let him take notice of
that which St. Luke describes better with his Pen than with his skilful Pencil,
of that which all the approved Writers of the Ecclesiastical Affairs
immediately succeeding do represent unto us, which professed no other belief
but in Jesus Christ, which had rejected an Angel from Heaven, if he had
preached any other Doctrine but that which is contained in the Holy Gospel, and
in the other Books of Sacred Scripture. This Church acknowledged no other but
Christ, looked upon such as named themselves of Apollo's Party, of Peter's or
Paul's, as so many Sectaries, and allowed of no other Judge of Controversies
and Governor but Jesus Christ. Call but to mind all that you have ever read or
heard of this Church, since its beginning, until the time of the Bishop of
Rome's usurpation of the Sovereign Power, under the name of Pope, and compare
that Church of Rome with this in our days, examine the Tenants, Maxims, Laws,
Behavior, and Customs of both, and you will be forced to confess, that they
are not the same, but two Churches, as much differing the one from the other as
the day from the night. We must not therefore mention the Antiquity of this
Church, but as of a languishing and decayed Body we may say she is ancient, in
the same manner as we say of women that shamefully yield themselves to pleasure
in their old age, whilst they were young, chaste, and beautiful, they were
worthily esteemed and admired of every one, but since age and lechery, time and
debauchery, seises upon them, they become so strangely altered, that they seem
not to be the same persons. We must look upon the Church of Rome in this
manner: She is no longer that beautiful Wonder, that ravishing Spouse, whose
Picture Solomon labors to draw in chap. 4. of the Canticles; but an old Whore,
the Mother of fornications and abominations of the earth, mentioned by St.
John, Revel. chap. 17. She is old I confess, like unto those old Palaces, which
time and want of repair have brought to ruin. I may express this by another
resemblance: She is ancient, as are the old Bodies infected with Leprosy, and
abounding with vicious humors, which putrefie the older they grow, and corrupt
the more with age, the continuance of the disease having so changed their
constitution, that they are not to be known by the former idea's of their
persons. In this manner the Romish Church may be said to be ancient: Antiquity
does but discover her shame, reveal her Apostasy, and declare her grievous
Corruptions. Let us say something more to the purpose.

Men are known by their speech, the home-born Inhabitants of a Country are
distinguishable from strangers by their language and pronunciation. I desire no
more, to show that the Church of Rome is not the true Church of Christ, and
that the present Church is not the same as that which was first established:
Listen to the language of both, and you shall find a vast difference; hearken
to the Popes language and to that of Jesus Christ, to what the one commands and
the other forbids, to what the first affirms and the latter denies, to what
Christ with his Apostles preach and the Pope with his Doctors declare and
publish. We need but read the Holy Gospel and the Decretals of Rome, the
Scripture and the Canons of the Council of Trent, the Books of the ancient
Fathers and the Belief of the Jesuits and of modern Authors; to understand,
that the Church which styles her self Christian, Catholic, Apostolic, and
Roman, is nothing of all that, and deserves none of those glorious Titles, for
she is neither Christian, nor Catholic, nor Apostolic, nor Roman, if we take
the Roman Church for what she was anciently. She cannot be properly named
Christian, because she acknowledges another Lord and Superior besides Jesus
Christ, and denies Him to be the only Savior of Men, ascribing this honor to
the Virgin Mary, and others, by saying, that she may and does save many by her
interceding for them, that the Pope is able to do the like by pardoning their
sins and granting unto them his Indulgences, and that they themselves may
contribute to their own salvation by their good works, etc. She is not
Catholic, in that sense which the Romanists give to this word, because she
preaches a Doctrine not agreeable to that which God has revealed to us by His
Son and Ministers, and prefers her own Traditions before the Oracles of the
Holy Scripture, because she invents many superstitious Laws which occasion
grievous sins. She is not Roman, like unto that Church which was anciently so
called, for besides that primitive Church, as we shall further take notice,
never did claim an universal Dominion, for she did acknowledge the Churches of
Antioch, Alexandria, and of Jerusalem, and others, to be her equals in all
respects; therefore her Bishops never believed themselves to be their
superiors, but their brethren and companions. The Christians of those days
understood nothing of Indulgences, of Fraternities, of Holy Water, of
Consecrated Crumbs, of Relics and Repositories, of Medals and Beads, and other
such like Baubles, in which the Church of Rome places the Holiness of
Christianity. They knew nothing of Holy Bread, kept in little Tabernacles, to
be there worshipped; they never had in their Churches Images, like to those of
Rome, as may appear by the words of Epiphanius, who lived in the fourth
Century, and writ to John the Patriarch of Jerusalem an Epistle, which St.
Jerome has translated into Latin, and therefore declares the Judgment of those
two Eminent Persons. In this Epistle he says, that when he went into a Church,
situate in a Country Village, he perceived upon the door a veil where there was
an Image to be seen, therefore he caused it to be taken down, and to be torn in
pieces; for, says he, by this means men may introduce Idolatry amongst
Christians. By this passage we may understand, that the Worship of Images was a
strange thing in that Age, as other Historians, and after them Baronius, are
forced to confess. Christians of those days did rather choose to be burned alive
and tormented, than to suffer the least grain of Incense to fall from their
hands into that fire, which was intended to burn it in honor of an Image or
Idol, which they were required to worship. Those wise and courageous Christians
did choose rather to behold their own Arms and Members consume in a fire, and
endure the most sensible pains and tortures, than to behold the Smoke of
Incense, fallen from their hands, mount up to the nose of a senseless Idol.
They did rather choose to expose themselves to the fury of the fires, and of
drawn swords, and undergo the torments of the wheels, of the wild beasts, etc.
than to bow their knees before a graven Image, and yield unto it the least
respect. O Romans of our days! if any of the ancient Christians could but rise
out of their graves, to come amongst you into your Churches on some Festival
day, what would they say or think, when they should see the accomplishment of
Ezekiel's Prophecy, chap. 8. so many abominations in the midst of God's
Sanctuary, the worship due to God alone paid to dumb Pictures which stand about
the walls of your Temples? when they should see that your Christian Devotion
consists chiefly in such apish tricks, in the kissing of Altars, in cringings,
stretching out of your arms, and signs of the Cross often made, sometimes three
or five times in kneeling before an Image, with hands lifted up, in offering to
it frankincense, in numbering a few beads, in casting holy water upon the bones
of the deceased, in burning a wax candle, put out and lighted again as many
times as you have things to desire from a Saint, etc. How many tears would
these ancient Catholic Roman Christians shed, when they should see this Church
practicing such foolish things, so much contrary to the Truth of Christian
Religion? How many sighs, groans, and lamentations should we hear from their
pious Souls? Jeremiah never uttered so many over the Ruins of Jerusalem. O
Rome! Rome! would they say, what change is this? what are these impertinencies?
what wonderful metamorphosis? Heretofore the Truth did command in thee over
Error, the Laws of God over the Inventions of men, the Precepts of the Gospel
over the Traditions of the people, and true Piety over Superstition, and God's
Worship was chiefly regarded; but now we see the contrary. Therefore the Church
of Rome which is now, is not the same as that Christian Church of Rome first
established there, but a shadow of it, which has nothing of its likeness. I
would desire the Papists never to boast of the Age and Antiquity of their
Church, they have no reason to glory, in that Rome was anciently one of the
most famous Churches of Christendom, for it is not like what it was heretofore.
Miserum istud verbum fuisse, says Seneca. It is but a sad comfort, and a bad
cause of glory, to say we have been, if we cannot say also we are yet. This the
Papists should endeavor to make good unto us. They ought to show us by their
Doctrine and Works, that the Church of Rome at present is the same as it was of
old, which cannot be done but by a reformation of all the abuses, and a
reducement to the first estate; whilst they continue as they are, they shall
never discover what their first fathers have been. The most learned of all
their Doctors, who have undertaken to show their conformity with the ancient
Church of Rome, seem to be much perplexed in the proving of this matter, very
weak in their arguments, and so contrary to one another, that we need but their
own Books to find out the falsehood of their Doctrine. This every one may take
notice, that will peruse them without partiality. I might here name an hundred
passages out of their Books to prove the truth of what I say, but I think I
have said enough to make the Papists apply unto themselves Tertullians
reproach, directed to the Heathens, Apol. adv. Gent. cap. 6. Tell me, where is
your Religion? where is that respect that ye owe to your forefathers? you are
not like to them in your habits, in your manner of living, in your customs,
opinions, and in your language: You praise antiquity, but every day you admit
new inventions: You differ much from the worthy institutions of your
predecessors: You declare by your behavior, that you retain nothing of those
things that deserve to be retained, but observe that which deserves it not.
This is a true representation of the Church of Rome.

In the next place, that Sovereign Authority which this Church claims did seem
to me to be very well grounded, when I did consider that which Jesus Christ
says to St. Peter in many occasions, especially in that where He tells him,
immediately after the Confession of his Faith, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it; I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose
in earth shall be loosed in heaven: Matthew. 16. By these words, Christ seems to
give unto him and his Successors a full power, and more than to the rest. There
are other passages of Holy Scripture that make for the same purpose, and St.
Austin, and several other Interpreters, seem to favor this opinion, and Reason
it self seems to teach us the necessity of a visible Head over Christ's Church
on earth, answerable to its estate. In this manner I did argue with my
Comrades, having been instructed in the Schools of Thomas Aquinas, Suarez, and
others, that gather from thence many reasons to prove the Pope's Authority and
Sovereignty. But when I had a little better examined these passages, perused
the Writings of the Fathers, to understand their judgment of this matter, I
have found that there is nothing more false than the Doctrines of the Popish
Schools in this occasion; for Christ's words to St. Peter were not said to him
alone, as may appear if we look into the Gospel, for Jesus Christ asked not
only Peter, but all His Disciples, and Peter answers not only in his own name,
but also in that of the rest of the Apostles, in persona omnium Apostolorum
says St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, and the other ancient Interpreters; which
words the Papists have inserted into their Breviarum, or Rubric, speaking of
this passage: When therefore the Son of God returns unto St. Peter, as a reward
of his confession, the power of binding and loosing, and the keys of heaven,
etc. it is not to him alone that He speaks and grants all these privileges,
but to the rest, in whose name St. Peter did answer, therefore a few days after
He repeated unto them the same thing, and confirmed the same privilege to all
the rest of His Apostles, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, etc. Matthew. 18. verse. 18. He addresseth Himself to them all, and not to
one alone: And if after His Resurrection, Christ speaks to St. Peter only, Feed
my sheep; this was as St. Cyril, and other wise Interpreters have taken notice,
with an intent to confirm and re-admit him into the office of an Apostle, which
he had renounced by his Apostasy from Christ. He had denied his Master thrice,
therefore the Son of God proposes this question, Love thou me? three times.
All this is noted in the Roman Rubric. Thrice (says St. Cyril, lib. 12. chap.
64.) He commands him to feed His sheep, to renew unto him the dignity, and
confirm him in the office of an Apostle, for fear that the denial of his Lord,
which he had been guilty of through the weakness of the flesh, should seem to
have cashiered him. For it is to contradict what Jesus Christ said to all His
Apostles, when He appointed them to preach the Gospel to Mankind, to teach and
baptize, etc. to say that none but St. Peter had this power granted to him.

But a great many passages of Holy Scripture do expressly contradict this
Doctrine: You have but one Master, but one Father, which is in heaven, says
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 23. verse. 8. I am the good Shepherd, I know my Sheep, and
lay down my life for them: He says not, I am an hired Shepherd, but the true
Shepherd, John 11. As there is but one Flock, there can be but one Shepherd;
now who is this Shepherd, Christ or the Pope? My Father has given me all
power, in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. I have power to pardon sins on earth,
Mark 2.10. God has committed all judgment unto me, and power to execute
judgment, John 5. How can these passages agree with the Popes Sovereign
Authority? Is it not a grievous affront offered to Jesus Christ, to set this
Divine Savior aside, as Bellarmin does, secluso Christo, to help up the Pope
to his Throne, and invest him into his usurped Sovereignty? If we are to
acknowledge but one Shepherd, but one Master, but one Lord, but one only Heir
of the Fathers Power and Authority, shall we not rob Christ of these His Divine
Prerogatives, if we should offer to bestow them upon the Pope?

I am not ignorant of all the distinctions made use of in this occasion, to
justify the Pope from this Usurpation, but they are but philosophical and
aerie distinctions, of the same nature as are commonly invented by the wit of
man, to justify Aristotle from his Belief and Doctrine of the Worlds Eternity;
Thomas Aquinas, and others, from their saying that the Virgin Mary was
conceived in sin; Tertullian, Origin, St. Bernard, and others, from teaching
that the Souls of Saints are not admitted to the Vision of God before the day
of Judgment. They are such like distinctions as the Pirrhenians invented, to
prove that white was black, that a hat was the same as a slipper, and an Ape
like a Lion, etc. All these arguments and distinctions might be well resented
from the mouth of Aristotle, of Plato, Pythagoras, or from a Cartesian
Philosopher, but not from a Catholic Christian, who ought not to mind what he
might say, but what he should believe in conscience; not what he can maintain,
but what he is bound to embrace. When an Article of our Faith is concerned,
such a one must set aside his disputing humor, and the quirks and tricks of
Logic, taught him in the Schools, to make a plain and sincere profession of
the Truth. For my part, I think it is the best, to declare ingenuously, that
there can be no solid reason found out, to authorize our ascribing to a man
that which belongs to Jesus Christ alone by his own words. No man can justly
condemn me, for having denied to the Pope, that which I read in the Gospel to
be Christ's Prerogative only: It is not possible, faith an ancient Father, to
give too much to God; especially when man enters into competition with Him.

But listen, I pray, to what the Apostles and primitive Fathers say upon this
Article: There is one sovereign or great Shepherd of our Souls, says St.
Peter, Ep. 1. chap. 5. with whom, when He shall appear, we shall appear also
with Him in glory; such as feed the flock of Christ committed to their charge,
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being lords over Gods heritage, but,
etc. Does St. Peter establish here the Popes Monarchy? does not he rather
undermine the foundation of it? No man, says St. Paul, can lay another
foundation but that which is already laid, Jesus Christ. There is one Lawgiver.
Who art thou, says St. James, that judge another? He has the Keys of David,
that opens and none can shut, that shuts and no man can open, Revel. 3. How
does this agree with that which the Papists would persuade us of St. Peter, and
of the Pope? Ought we not to gather from these passages, Doctrines contrary to
their belief? No man can lay another foundation, etc. They are therefore much
deceived, that affirm, that St. Peter is the foundation of the Christian
Church, and that the Pope is the head. There is but one Lawgiver, the Pope
therefore has no authority to command and appoint Laws: He is to be looked
upon as a Deceiver, when he would persuade us, that they are all out of the
Church, that will not acknowledge his power. Jesus Christ has the Key of
Heaven, He opens and no man can shut, etc. I must therefore seek an entrance
from Him, if He opens me the door, I shall be admitted, maugre the Pope, his
Priests and Excommunications; if He shuts it to me, the Pope has no Absolution
nor Indulgence of a sufficient efficacy and power to open it. All the primitive
Doctors confirm this Doctrine, they ascribe to Jesus Christ only, that which
the Papists ascribe to St. Peter, and to the Pope, whom they have made his
Successor. When Jesus Christ (says St. Chrysostom, Tom. 3. Ser. de pent.)
has said, upon this Rock I will build my Church, He did not say upon Peter,
for He has not built His Church upon a man, but upon this Faith. What means
(says St. Austin, Tract. 10. in Epist. Joan.) what means He by these words,
upon this Rock I will build my Church? He means upon this Faith, because he had
said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. St. Ambrose, St. Hilary,
Theophylact, and many others, affirm the same thing. Optat. Millevitanus
speaking of Pope Siricius, he does not call him Master or Holy Father, etc. but
Noster Socius, our Companion, Contra Parmen. lib. 2. Art thou bordering upon
Achaia (says Tertullian, de Praet. cap. 36.) thou art near to Corinth, if thou
art joining to Macedonia thou have Philippi Thessalonica, if thou can go over
into Asia thou shall find Ephesus, and if thou neighbourest upon Italy thou art
not far from Rome, where we have authority.

Thus the Primitive Fathers discourse unto us of the Church of Rome. They never
ascribed unto her any more power or privilege, than to all the other Churches.
Let any man therefore judge, what impudency and presumption the Popes are
guilty of, in that they claim a Sovereign Power, not only over Spiritual
Affairs, but also over the temporal, in all Christian Kingdoms. How blind, or
rather how malicious, must the Popish Divines be, to employ all their learning
and skill in maintaining of this Doctrine? I am persuaded, that there are but
few that commit this sin out of ignorance. Do you judge if it be not a grievous
blasphemy, to extol the Pope as those Doctors do, and to appropriate unto him
these Titles and Praises given him by some Councils; for example, that which
Pope Nicholas II. said of himself, Can. omnes did. 22. That be was invested
with the Empire of Heaven and Earth. And Martin V. named himself, The Light of
the World, and the Father of Kings, etc. The modestest of them all have
suffered themselves to be called, without renting their garments, as Paul and
Barnabas once did in a like occasion, The King of Kings, the Sovereign of the
World, the Judge of all Controversies, from whose Sentence there is no appeal
to God's Tribunal, for it were to appeal from one to the same Being, for God's
Authority and that of the Popes is but the same; as if the Father, the Son, the
Holy Ghost, and the Pope, were but one God. They name him also, the Lamb of God
who takes away the sins of the world, God's Majesty on earth, the Brightness
of God's Presence, the Bridegroom of the Christian Church, the Lion of the
Tribe of Juda, God's Vicegerent, the Holy of Holies, Infallible, Almighty, etc.
The Popes have claimed these and many other Titles, which I am ready to show,
not only in the Writings of the Roman Doctors, but also in their Rubricks, if
any man shall question what I now say. They have claimed them both by word and
deed, requiring the Kings themselves to kiss their slippers, and with their
feet they have cast down the Crowns of Emperors from their heads, as Pope
Celestin treated Henry the Sixth: They have trampled them under their feet, as
Alexander did the Crown of Frederick Barbarossa. What may be more said of Jesus
Christ, to put a difference between him and the Pope? Here is the fulfilling of
all the Impieties which St. Paul did foretell, 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 3. The man of sin
shall be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, on that is worshipped, so that he as God sits
in the Temple of God.

The pretended Succession of the Roman Bishops, so much spoken of in their
Writings, and in the Pulpits of that Church, did seem to me to be very well
grounded in Holy Scripture; and by the continued Catalogue of all the Popes,
which the modern Popish Authors have gathered from the ancient Historians, I
did judge, that this was but the consequence of Christ's promise to St. Peter,
when He told him, that his faith should never fail, and that the gates of hell
should never prevail against his Church. I was persuaded, that this was plainly
to be seen in the Church of Rome; that above sixteen hundred years no Schism
has been so great, as to hinder the Popes to succeed one after another. There
is no place in the world, where so long and noble a Catalogue is to be seen,
and a Succession of so many lawful Bishops.

But since I have curiously examined the Truth, since I have looked into the
Histories to find out this continued Succession of Roman Bishops for so many
years, I have found the Writers so perplexed upon this Subject, nay the Papists
themselves are so obscure and ambiguous, that we may justly say, that the most
part of them speak they know not what, for most of them are guilty of
contradiction; for how can they agree this continued Succession without
interruption, with what Onuphrius says in his Chronicle, where he mentions no
less than six and twenty Schisms in the Church of Rome, the twentieth lasted
forty years, and the twenty sixth continued since Urbanus VI. until the Council
of Constance, as Genebrard says, Chron. lib. 4. an. 1378. the one and
twentieth lasted six and thirty years, as the same Author affirms; during all
this time the Church of Rome had two Popes, that did excommunicate one another,
Ann. 1389? How can we agree this Succession with what Baronius says? for he is
forced to acknowledge it, after so many Historians, that at Rome there have
been no less than three Popes together, whom he names tricipitem bestiam portis
inferis emergentem, tom. 11. and ann. 1044. sect. 5. a beast with three heads
ascending out of the bottomless pit.

All three says Bellarmin, namely, Gregory XIII. Benedictus XIII. and John
XXIII. had the same apparent right to the Popes Miter, de pontif. lib. 4. c.
14. How can we also agree this Doctrine with Baronius, an. 912. sect. 8? He
says, That the Clergy were not admitted to the Election, that the Canons were
not observed, and all ancient Customs of choosing Popes set aside: what
Cardinals think ye (says he) that these Monsters did create? for according to
the usual course of nature every thing begets its likeness, etc. Lechery (says
Platin. in vita Benedicti) brought forth these Monsters, these Prodigies, who
by ambition and gifts have intruded themselves in, and not lawfully enjoyed St.
Peter's Chair. See what the Historians of the Church of Rome have been forced
to acknowledge, although they have endeavored to palliate its imperfections,
and hide them from the knowledge of the world. How can any have the impudency
to maintain, that the Faith of this Church has never failed? that the gates of
hell could never prevail against it? and that there was never any
discontinuance in the succession of its Bishops, etc? Yet this is impudently
affirmed, with allowance, in the Schools of the Papists. This Doctrine I have
also heretofore defended in Theses, which I published amongst them: That
although the Election of the Roman Bishops has passed almost at every time by
bribes, fraud, violence, murder, etc. Although the Church of Rome has been
frequently, and for a long while, divided into Sects and Factions, and that
much disorder has happened in it, nevertheless we ought to believe and affirm,
that the Holy Ghost did govern these Elections, and that they were by Gods
appointment, and that the Faith of this Church has never failed; because I did
suppose there has always been a wonderful agreement between all its Members,
etc. Let any man judge, if ever Arius, Pelagius, Marcion, or any other
Heretic, did ever teach such impudent Doctrine as this; in Mahomet's Alcoran
there is no absurdity found like unto it.

The great crowd of Martyrs, and the multitude of other Noble Saints, who have
performed so many Miracles, and are challenged by the Papists as their own, was
another powerful motive, to persuade me of the Truth of their Faith, and of the
Sanctity of their Religion. Who is it, said I to my self, that dares deny, that
a Religion where so many Martyrs appear, that have laid down their Lives for
Christ's Cause, where so many Saints have observed the Rules of the Gospel, and
made such a glorious profession of all Christian Virtues; a Religion, where so
many pious Souls do yet live a very exemplary and a holy life, having forsaken
the World to confine themselves to a Convent: Who dares deny such a Religion to
be the best, the securest, and the holiest of all? In this manner I did argue,
and many judicious Persons suffer themselves to be thus deceived with a false
appearance.

But such as will, as I have done, look more narrowly to this particular, and
weigh every thing in the Scales of the Sanctuary, shall find by experience,
that the Church of Rome has no cause to glory so much in them. There are many
Martyrs reckoned in the Church of Rome, I confess, but this is no infallible
proof of its excellency: There have been many also in the Churches of
Jerusalem, of Antioch, of the Georgians, Muscovites, Greeks, etc. yet the
Papists esteem them not the more. But they say that many Saints in this
Profession have, and do yet perform notable Miracles. I have cause to question
the truth of this Assertion, for many false ones are published; but when they
should be real, they are no infallible signs of the Truth of their Faith, for
the Magicians of Egypt, by Gods permission, did also work Miracles, Exodus chap.
7. God, whose Secrets and Judgments are not to be searched out, may suffer the
Devil to keep men in ignorance by this means. But the Papists say, that amongst
them many Religious Persons are to be seen, that lead a most holy life. I
answer, that they are for the most part but whited Sepulchers, and that this is
the Devils cunning to deceive Souls. I shall say something more in this
Chapter. But what advantage do they expect from this Argument? There are men of
honesty every where, amongst the Heathens and Heretics as well as amongst the
Christians and Catholics there are persons of good behavior, or at least
appear so to the world. This is therefore no infallible sign of a true
Religion; but suppose it were so, that the holiness and integrity of life were
an infallible sign of the Truth, the Papists will never be able to better their
Cause by this reason, unless their Chief and Governors, who are to be looked
upon as the Paterns of the rest, change their manner of living. The Church of
Rome is not so holy, as it is said to be to the simple people, ignorant of the
Affairs of that City. Examine the Transactions there now, and within this eight
or nine hundred years. If we did but see the disorders of this Church plainly
presented unto us, we should have cause to wonder at the things related by the
Papists themselves of their Popes. I shall here mention some of them, and that
I may not be traduced as a Liar, I shall bring two or three of their own famous
Writers speaking of the Court of Rome, such I mean who endeavor to cover its
imperfections, and have never made use of their Pens but in its defense. The
first is devout St. Bernard, Ser. 1. de Convers. Pauli: This man's integrity
can never be suspected. In this manner he speaks of the Court of Rome: Iniquity
proceeds from the grave Judges, who are named Christ's Vicegerents, and who
seem to govern His people. Of them we cannot say, As is the People so is the
Priest, for the people were not like or so bad as the Priest. And elsewhere, de
Consid. ad Eugen. lib. 1. cap. 4. From all parts of the world, the ambitious,
the covetous, and persons guilty of symony, sacrilege, debauchery and incest,
and such like Monsters, did flock to Rome, to get the Ecclesiastical Honors,
or to keep them by the Pope 's Authority. About the year 897, Cardinal Baronius
affirms, That there were the most wicked Varlets brought in to sit in St. Peter
's Chair, men of most infamous lives, most fearfully debauched; of a corrupt
and filthy behavior, every where, and in every respect. And when he speaks of
the year 900, he entreats the weaker sort of Christians not to be offended from
thenceforth, if they see sometimes the abomination of desolation in the Temple
of God. Afterward he cries out: What horrible Monsters were introduced into
this See, which the Angels respect? O disgrace! O grief! how many evils have
proceeded from them? how many grievous tragedies have been acted by them? what
villainies have been here committed in this glorious See? what filthy and base
actions have appeared here? etc. In the year 912, he says, sect. 8. this
Church was so debauched and swimming in vice, That the filthiest and the noted
whores did govern all at Rome. At their pleasure the Sea was disposed of, the
Bishops were created, and their Favorites and Gallants were chosen in St.
Peter 's Chair to be Popes. This is what Baronius has been forced to
acknowledge, after many other Historians, who have recorded the disorders of
the Roman Church. Let any man read Genebrard. Chron. l. 4. ad ann. 902. Isidor.
Peleus. l. 3. epist. 323. Baptist. Mantuan. de calam. suorum temp. l. 3. Alvar.
Pelag. de planctu Ecclesiae. Or let any man go to Rome, to see how such behave
themselves, who pretend to be established of God to govern His Church on earth;
and they shall find there more wickedness than ever was in Sodom or in Nineveh.
Let Rome be therefore ashamed, says a Learned Man who beheld these
abominations, Claud. Espens. in Epist. ad Tit. c. 1. Let her never offer to
show a Catalogue of her shameful Crimes. I would advise her to not mention nor
produce this Calendar of so many Saints, whom she has canonised, and in whom
she glories so much; for all those former Saints discover her shame, seeing
that the Lives of the present Popes and Governors are quite contrary to
theirs; therefore she has no cause to challenge them as her own. Those former
Worthies are her reproach and condemnation, because she does not imitate their
Example. Nevertheless the Popish Doctors are so impertinent, to boast of these
disorders, vices, and abominations, and to gather from thence reasons to prove
the truth and holiness of their Religion. Who would believe that Baronius,
after that he had filled his Annals with the filthy debaucheries of many Popes,
should gather from thence a conclusion to the advantage of his Church? Yet this
he does very boldly; for when he has taken notice of the debauched and
abominable Lives of some Popes, declared their vices in a most horrible manner,
and acknowledged all that has been written of them by his predecessors to be
very true, that there have been Popes very ambitious, covetous, symoniacal,
impious, Murderers, lecherous, incestuous, Atheists, and Sodomites; which
things the Papists cannot deny, because their own Historians declare them.
Nevertheless, when Baronius has said all this of the Popes, he concludes, as
boldly as if he had to prove the Divinity of Jesus Christ, That all these
Vices, by which St. Peter's Chair has been dishonored, are proofs of its
Holiness, Excellency, and Infallibility; because, says he, God has permitted
all these debaucheries and wickednesses in such as were the Governors of His
Church without punishing them; this discovers that this Estate is more sacred,
more holy, and more regarded of God, than that of Kings, whom God commonly
chastises as soon as they are unfaithful and abuse their Authority. I must
needs confess, that I was never more astonished, than when I found this
Argument made use of by this Learned Man, and heard it approved of in the
Popish Schools: Me thinks I could as easily prove the union of Contraries to be
found in the same Subject, as to show the union and correspondency of this
Conclusion with the Principles from whence it is drawn. In this Church most
abominable Popes have been seen. Alvar. Pelag. a Portugues Bishop, tells us,
lib. 2. art. 15. of many Popes, who have crept into that See by their factions,
agreements, covenants, and large promises; and when they have got in, all their
endeavor was to enrich and raise their Relations, to promote their friends to
the chief Offices, to live themselves in pleasure, and to dignifie their
Kindred, building Towers and Palaces in Babylon, I mean Rome, so called by St.
Jerome. These Popes have fomented the Wars and Factions in Italy, instead of
maintaining the unity of the Church: They have wasted the sacred Revenues,
advanced most unworthy persons, and gloried in their chariots, elephants,
horses, rich garments, numerous train, guards, and noble attendants: They have
by the power of the sword often endeavored to enlarge their own Borders, and
seize upon the Territories of their neighboring Princes, never minding the
salvation of souls, but have been addicted to the pleasures of the flesh, etc.
These Men for money have sold, as Judas did, Christ's Body, consecrated the
Sacraments, and celebrated Orders for silver, etc. We have seen, (says the
same Author, lib. 2. art. 2. fol. 104.) men that have made this City like Sodom
and Nineveh, by letting in, and countenancing all manner of vices, public and
private, as covetousness, ambition, symony, usurpations, uncleanness, vain
glory, envy, tyranny, and other crimes which cannot nor ought not to be named.
We have seen in God's sanctuary (says the Bishop of Bitonte, in the beginning
of the Council of Trent, orat. hab. in council. Trid. sess. 1.) shameless
monsters, rotten vessels full of infection, public plagues, etc. so that there
remains no appearance nor hopes of good life, but an immoderate and
extraordinary debauchery, a not able impudency, more crimes than can be well
credited. We have seen (according to the testimony of some Cardinals, chosen by
Pope Paul III. for the Reformation of the Church, Council. delect. Cardin. tom.
3. page 823.) Whores walking about the streets of Rome as honorable Dames,
carried upon Mules, attended and waited upon by Noblemen and Cardinals
Chaplains, such like scandals have never been seen elsewhere but in this City.
We have seen (says Guischardin, Hist. of Italy, lib. 1. sect. 2.) Rodericus
Borgia, who was afterward Pope Alexander VI. buy the privilege of disposing
of the Holy Treasury. And Platina and Baronius relate, that there have been
some Popes introduced by violence, who have clapped in prison such as were
before in possession of the Sea of Rome, as Christopher did Leo VIII. Some have
been so base and furious, that they have taken up the Bodies of their
Predecessors, whose Fingers, wherewith they had given their blessing to the
people, they have cut off and cast into the Tybur, as Stephen VI. treated
Formosus. In short, we have seen men more covetous, ambitious, impious,
lecherous, cruel, and wicked, than in the most licentious Courts, than amongst
the most barbarous Nations. And Genebrard. Chron. lib. 4. says, that these
disorders have lasted sometimes 150 years together. During this time, says
Baronius, ann. 912. sect. 8. Jesus Christ slept very soundly in the bottom of
the ship, and winked at all these mischiefs. Therefore from hence he gathers
this conclusion, for this cause the Church of Rome must needs be the truest,
the holiest, and best beloved of God, infallible, and the only Church that may
be named Catholic, etc. Let any man judge, if this be not the most impudent
and unjust reasoning in the world: The Heathenish Philosophers have taught
these Popish Doctors to argue in this manner for their Religion, from this
ancient Maxim of theirs, Ex quolibet fit quodlibet: That from any Principle we
may draw any Conclusion, either good or evil: They care not so they can but
maintain their Thesis and Opinion; but these kind of Reasons discover their
weakness: For any Understanding may perceive from thence the feebleness of
their Doctrine, the falsehood of their Religion, seeing that they are driven to
draw such Conclusions as are quite contrary to the nature and truth of the
things themselves. If any man say that this Reason is not in Baronius, word for
word as I have expressed it; the premises are there, and the Conclusion, not in
two or three words, and in such a plain and succinct manner as I have here
related it, but it is laid down in a more ample, and more florid Discourse,
which tends to no other end, but to prove the Truth, Holiness, and Excellency
of of the Popish Religion, from the Vices and Debaucheries of its Priests and
Popes. This cannot but be looked upon as very ridiculous by any man of
Judgment. For if their Reasons were good, I might as well say that Pharaoh's
Kingdom was holy, because God suffered it to continue so long without punishing
him, and did many Miracles for his sake; and that the Turkish Religion must
needs be the holiest and the best at present, because God has suffered it to
abide so many years, and increase every day, although its Chieftains lead most
filthy lives.

These and such like Considerations, which I have had by reading the Books of
the Popish Doctors and Historians, have lessened that vast esteem that I had
formerly for that Church, and made me to understand, that all its excellent
Privileges which it claims, and which they assign to her, are but whimseys and
Chimaera's begot in their fancy by their fondness for their Religion, the Popes
ambition, and the credulity of silly minds, who are ready to believe any thing,
the greatest absurdity, if boldly asserted. Let us proceed next to our other
Considerations.

THE SECOND PART.
THE Second Reason that has so long time kept my Mind in a balance, was
grounded upon the Faith and Articles of that Church. I did seriously examine
all those things which she engages us to believe as infallible Truths; the
Pope's Infallibility, the real and corporal presence of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, the Invocation of
Saints, and the certain damnation of all those who acknowledge not the Pope for
their Superior, etc. I thought all this to be very true, when I looked upon it
with the Popish Spectacles which they give to all that read their Writings, or
study in their Schools; and judged this Church to be the best and holiest. Has
not Jesus Christ said, I have promised to St. Peter, that his Faith should
never fail? does not he mean that his Successors should be always Infallible?
has he not said in celebrating his Holy Supper, that the Bread was his Body,
and the Wine his Blood, expressly, and in proper terms? etc. In this manner I
did argue upon all the Articles of the Popish Faith, concluding always to its
advantage.

But when I had more narrowly Examined these matters alone, without partiality,
I found that I was very far from Truth; that all these Articles of Faith were
not conformable to Holy Scripture, but altogether contrary; and the Popish
Religion opposite to that of Jesus Christ, of the Apostles, and of the
Primitive Fathers.

. For where shall we find any thing of the Pope's Infallibility in the Holy
Scripture? shall not we find rather, that the holiest of men are liars? Psalm.
115. 11. and 61.10. That we fail all in many things, and that if any man fails
not in word, he may boast of being a perfect man. Jam. 3. and St. John informs
us, that we are all Sinners. Moreover, this Infallibility is according to the
judgment of the Popish Doctors, one of its Divine Attributes, styled by them
Uncommunicable, how can they therefore say that God has given it to a man? and
why to the Pope of all other men? seeing that according to the Papists
confession, he is many times a very wicked man. And St. Peter himself, unto
whom the Son of God had promised that his Faith should never fail, from whence
they would establish this Doctrine, was guilty of a great mistake concerning
the Circumcision of the Jews and Gentiles, as St. Paul affirms, I have resisted
him to his face, says he, for he was to be blamed. Is it possible, that the
Pope, chosen by a company of men who know not whom they pitch upon, and
promoted many times by Legerdemain, by Bribes, subtilty, temporal Interests,
Princes favors? Is it possible, that these Popes, who are to be all Italians
born, elected out of the number of Cardinals, and so aged, that they can scarce
do any good, but by others? Is it possible that these Popes, promoted by the
assistance of Whores, and the Cardinals Courtizans, as Paronius and Bellarmin,
and others acknowledge, should be more infallible than St. Peter, chosen by
Christ himself? How can we imagine that such a man should be a Treasury
entrusted with Divine knowledge and the will of God? that his voice pronounced
out of his Chair, should be the voice of Heaven; that he should be able to
cause the Holy Ghost to go and come at his pleasure; and to oblige God to
ratify and confirm all his Laws in the World, to command when he commands, to
prohibit when he prohibits, to damn when he damns, and to save when he says
the word! Before we can believe this, they must deprive us of our judgments,
and make us become beasts before we can become Christians, and deal with us
worse than Mahomet deals with his Mussulmans.

The Pope, being assisted by some of his Brethren, has pronounced the
Sentence, which they say is, ex Cathedra, and condemned Jansenius and his
followers, he has declared them to be Heretics; must I believe it as an
Article of Faith? because he says, that in the Book of this Learned Bishop
there are five Propositions, the same as were condemned heretofore in Calvin,
and that only from the information of the holy Fathers the Jesuits: Must I take
all this as an Article of my Faith; although Mr. Arnaldus, and other Doctors of
the Port Royal have proved to all that can but read, that these Propositions
are not be found in his Books. The Pope says that Peter d'Acantara, Francis de
Sales, and Pius V. are He-Saints in Heaven; that Mary Magdelen of Pazzi, Mother
Rose, and others, are She-Saints; he commands us to pray to them: If I doubt of
it, and speak as the wise Son of Sirach, Eccl. 9. whose Book is received
amongst the Canonical, That no body knows whether he be worthy of love or
hatred, much less does he know this of others: if I should say as the Gospel,
that it belongs to God to judge men, and that all Judgment is left unto Jesus
Christ; or as St. Paul, that the Judgments of God are unsearchable, and that
therefore I leave it to him; I am an Heretic amongst the Papists. Since these
He and She-Saints have been Canonized, it is become an Article of Faith to
believe them in Heaven: Before I was at my own choice, to credit what I
pleased; but since that time I am no longer free, the Pope has said it, we
must therefore believe it: if I despise their Mediation, if I neglect to pray
to them, out of a distrust of their happiness and credit with God; I am an
Infidel, and an Athiest, in the judgment of the Papists. Is not this to mock
God and men?

Some of them answer, that the Pope may err in matters of fact, but not in
matters of right, Bellarmin. de Po. l. 4. cap. 2. But we all know that most of
their questions of right depend upon matters of Fact; and that the judgment of
right, which concerns not only the Doctrines of the Holy Scripture, but an
infinite number of other things received by Tradition, proceeds from the
testimony and information which they have received of several matters of Fact.
Suppose therefore that all these informations should be false, as they may be;
for the Pope, who only is to be looked upon as Infallible, according to the
Papists Doctrine, has not seen all these things, he believes it from the
testimony of others. For Example; It is an Article of Faith amongst them, that
St. Peter has been twenty five years Bishop of Rome; that he has added the
word enim to the words of the Consecration, saying, Hoc est enim corpus meum;
and not as it is in the Gospel, Hoc est corpus meum: that he did mingle Water
with the Wine, in the Mass. If these things, that are all matters of fact,
which cannot be proved by Holy Scripture, be false, as we have cause to imagine,
what certainty can we have of the right and truth which depends upon it?

Moreover, I find the Papists Sacrament of the Lords Supper differing very much
from the description which Christ and his Apostles have left us. It is the
bread of life, say the Romanists, the bread of Angels, the Heavenly bread, the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ: I have always believed it to be so, I think
there is no good Christian that doubts of it. We all know that it is no common
Bread, no body will contradict them in this, St. Justin shall not be condemned
for affirming it. That the Bread becomes the Body of Christ, and the Wine his
Blood, etc. all this is well and very true, we are not ignorant that St.
Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, and many other
ancient Doctors name it so. But how can the Papists show by the Holy Scripture
that Christ is there, in the same manner as they affirm, by a real presence,
which is not only spiritual, but material and corporal? That he is there in the
same manner as he was of old in the Virgins womb, in the manger of Bethlehem,
upon Mount Tabor, and upon the Cross, and nevertheless that he is in the
highest Heavens, at the right hand of God the Father? Where can they find in
all the four Evangelists any Text that mentions this prodigious Miracle of the
Transubstantiation, or transmutation of the bread into the real Body of Jesus
Christ, and of the wine into his Blood, with a destruction of the first, and a
creation of the latter, by the efficacy of four words uttered by a Priest?
Where is there a Writer of the Greek, or of the ancient Latin Church, that
speaks of this Mystery in the same manner as Thomas Aquinas; who maintained a
corporal presence multiplied, without division; accidents sustained without
their proper substance; a discontinuance of a being, without corruption; a
production of the same effects by a cause that is not; an humane and divine
substance under the appearance of a Wafer; a God made man, where nothing of his
manhood is to be seen; a body without extension; a life without motion; an
infinite number of equal parts, proportionable to their totum in a Mathematical
point; a relation from the same to the same, from the first to a second, who
are but one; a situation without space; an abiquity without place; a general
destruction of all Predicaments by this supposed Mystery, or Manhu, as he calls
it? a word which expresses the admiration of the Israelites, when they saw the
Manna fall amongst them. Did ever St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, or any of the
four chief Doctors of the Christian Church speak in this manner? they did never
imagine that so many absurdities could enter into the minds of men. I am
persuaded, that if this Doctor, styled by them the Angelick Doctor, because of
the rare Inventions of his Wit, had lived in the days of St. Austin, and had
spoken unto him in these terms, that Primitive Father would never have
understood him, although he understood the Predicaments of Aristotle without
Tutor: doubtless he had taken him for a man fallen from the Clouds, dwelling in
the Globe of the Moon, or for one that maintains that there is there another
World.

Where have they seen in Holy Scripture, or amongst the ancient Fathers, That
the Laymen must not communicate in both kinds; that the Mass is a Sacrifice
where the Passion of our Savior is really renewed; that Jesus Christ will be
there worshipped in a visible manner, by an adoration that relates to the
substances, as God himself, if he were to be seen; according to the Command of
the Council of Trent? I have been several years reading and perusing the Holy
Scriptures and its Interpreters, but I have found nothing there like to these
Doctrines, unless it be in the Popish Authors; for I have met with an hundred
passages contrary to this belief. I confess we find in Holy Writ that Christ
has said, This is my Body; but he has said also, I am the Door, I am the
Stone, I am the Vine, and the Shepherd of the Sheep, etc. If we are to take all
these expressions in a literal sonse, we must believe that he is a Door, a
Stone, a Vine, a Shepherd of Sheep. But the Scripture says that Jesus Christ
is ascended up into Heaven, and that he sits there at the right hand of God the
Father. Therefore he is no longer upon Earth; for it is not possible that the
same Body should be in two distinct places at once: If that were likely, as the
Philosophers tell us, the same Body might be in twenty, in an hundred, in a
thousand, and in ten thousand places in the same moment: From hence we might
conclude, that it is possible to make one man become a great Army; that one man
should kill himself a thousand times, and yet continue alive; that he should be
a Saint in one place, and a Devil in another; damned in one place, and saved in
another; the object of Gods wrath and goodness at the same time: these are
impossibilities, and plain contradictions. Christ commands us to do this in
Remembrance of Him; therefore he is not there really and bodily; for we do
nothing in remembrance of a man present before us in a corporal manner. The
Papists instance the Manna, which was kept by God's command in the Ark, in
remembrance of that which God sent down from Heaven; which was both the
remembrance, and the thing remembered; the representation, and the thing
represented. This is one of the most plausible Examples of the Papists, but it
is to little purpose; for besides other Reasons that may be alleged against
it, I think they are mightily mistaken, to compare a totum integrans with an
individual one; and the same may be divided, and the parts carried into several
distinct places, where they may be looked upon in diverse manners; but the other
is altogether repugnant to division and separation. The Manna that was in the
Ark, I confess, was a memorial of that Manna which the Israelites had fed upon
in the Wilderness, but it was not the same. How can they therefore from hence
conclude, that Christ's body must be in several places under distinct notions?
Christ informs us, That His words are spirit and life; and that the flesh
profits nothing; that it is the spirit that quickens. It is not possible to
speak any thing more contrary than this, to the Papists Doctrine; for these
words assure us that Christ is there really, and in truth, but spiritually, not
corporally, nor substantially; that He is there by his Spirit, virtue, and
efficacy, to produce the same effects in us as if he were there in a sensible
manner. This was taught by the Primitive Fathers, and thus the Protestants
believe it. He commands us also To eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, in both
kinds: St. Paul repeats the words; and the Council of Constance, which is
esteemed by the Papists as highly as a fifth Evangil, says that since the
Apostles time Communicants did receive in both kinds; wherefore did they then
take away the Cup? why did they establish this Law, that forbids Laymen to
drink of the Cup? They acknowledge, that Jesus Christ has appointed it to be
so; that the Apostles did practice and command it; and that it had been an
universal custom amongst Christians, for all men to communicate in both kinds.
Nevertheless this Council was so insolent to forbid it, and command the World
to believe that this Prohibition proceeds from the Holy Ghost, although it be
contrary to Christ's Institution, to the Apostles Doctrine, and the Practice of
the first Christians; we must have a notable Faith to believe this. The
inconveniences which they mention to color their Change are ridiculous. They
tell us, that some men wear long Beards, and that a drop of Christ's Blood may
chance to drop upon them; and that some that are sick may by this means give
their Diseases to others, etc. But how comes it to pass that Jesus Christ did
not foresee all these inconveniences? were the Bishops of this Council wiser
than Christ himself? Did not the men of our Savior's days, and in the
Primitive time wear long Beards? were they not as subject to spreading
Diseases, as well as in the time of this Council? St. Paul tells us that Jesus
Christ has offered himself up once for all, as a Sacrifice; but they affirm
that he offers himself not only once, but every day, and a thousand times a
day, and in a thousand distinct places, in every corner where the Mass is sung,
which is, say they, a true and real Sacrifice of the Body of Jesus Christ. Whom
must we believe? what the Papists say? or what St. Paul? But suppose the Mass
were a true and real Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, a second death, and his very
Passion, as they teach; are not their Priests Murderers and Executioners? from
whence proceeds this effect? is it not from a real cause that is in them?
Whence is this Sacrifice, is it not from a true and real Sacrificator?
Moreover, according to their own Doctrine, three conditions are chiefly
required in every Sacrifice, the Offering, the Consecration, and the
Destruction; where shall they find the latter in this Sacrifice of the Mass? Do
they destroy the Body of Jesus Christ? if they answer, that they destroy the
Bread and the Wine, they don't answer to the question; for it must be the
Sacrifice that must be consumed and destroyed; for either we must say that only
the Bread and the Wine are sacrificed, or that the Body of Jesus Christ is
there destroyed and consumed: Hence we must conclude, that he is both dying and
immortal, dead and risen, and worshipped by the Angels, and at the same time
eaten by Men, things altogether inconsistent and impossible. But where do they
find that we must worship the Bread and the Wine, as being united to the Body
of Jesus Christ? that we must kneel at every time that we see them, as before
God himself, if he were visibly present? Does not Jesus Christ command the
contrary, when he says, that the time is come that we must worship God in
spirit and in truth? How in spirit, if we worship the Bread and the Wine? How
in truth, if Jesus Christ be not there really present? as we have good cause to
question it, and as it may happen, according to their own saying. For in case
the Priest be not a true Priest, in regard of some Canonical impediment; or if
his intention be elsewhere in celebrating Mass, what kind of Mass will it be?
and what shall the People adore? Some young men come to receive Orders very
much unprepared, whom the Lord Bishop says that he has no design to receive
and admit to the Priesthood: as for example, when they send other persons in
their stead, that are more Learned, to be examined for them; when they make use
of false and supposed Letters; when they are mentioned in a Decree, or deserve
an Excommunication. All these persons, according to the Popish Doctors, are not
really Priests; they have not the power to make the Body of Jesus Christ,
although they may pronounce the words of the Sacrament. Others have not a right
intention, out of negligence or design, these cannot cause Jesus Christ to come
down under the species of the Bread and the Wine, although they pronounce the
words of the Consecration. I have known a Priest, that caused a noble Dame to
Receive almost every day, at the end of his Mass, to hide from her Husband the
secret correspondency that was between them, and to cover it over with a fair
show of Devotion; and for four or five years he never gave unto her a
consecrated Wafer, for fear of committing Sacrilege, by causing her to receive
in an evil disposition. And about six months ago, some Priests of a Town where
I have dwelt, to satisfy a devout Woman fallen into Frenzy, that did earnestly
desire them to admit her to the Communion, resolved amongst themselves to put
an unconsecrated Wafer into the Chalice, which should be separate from the
rest. In such a case, I desire you the Divines of the Church of Rome to tell
me, if you believe that Jesus Christ is not present in the Bread and Wine but
when the Priest pronounces his words with an intention to make him come down
from Heaven, whether the people that assist there and worship the Wafers, don't
commit a grievous Idolatry? Yes, you will say, they commit a material Idolatry:
But pray tell, whether the Priest and the penitent Woman, the Whoremaster and
the Whore, did not commit a crime in your judgment? was not this as great and
as formal an Idolatry as ever was seen? I shall not mention many other stories
of the baseness, Sacriledges, and Idolatries of the Romish Priests, which they
are guilty of in this occasion; for I intend not to make a satirical Libel of
this serious Discourse. I shall only say in general terms, that if the
Father-Confessors of the Church of Rome would but speak truth, and declare what
I have heard, there is no reasonable man of any persuasion, but will say that
which we cannot utter without blasphemy, that Jesus Christ would be extravagant
and mad, if he were in the Mass, as the Papists believe.

. Purgatory is another new Article of their Creed, which has no ground nor
appearance in Holy Scripture. The Papists mention a certain place out of the
Maccabees, Book 2. chapter 12. v. 43. but this Book St. Jerome, praefat. in Proverb.
and many more, as Cajetan, in fine Comment, in hist. Esther, and Cardinal Hugo,
in Prolog. Hier. in lib. Regum, declare to be Apocrypha. Another passage is
cited out of St. Matthew. 12. where Jesus Christ says, that there are some Sins
that shall not be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the world to come:
From hence the Papists conclude by a Maxim of Right, Exceptio firmat regulam in
contrarium; that there are some Sins that shall be pardoned in another world,
that is to say, according to their meaning, in Purgatory. But we may easily
perceive that they miserably wrest this passage, and argue very impertinently
to make this conclusion; Some Sins shall neither be pardoned in this world, nor
in the world to come; ergo, There is a Purgatory. A Chemist would sooner
extract ten ounces of Oil out of a Pumice-stone, than to gather this conclusion
from the premises: But there is nothing impossible to the Popish Divines; they
can make a fire with any wood, when they are to warm their own Kitchen. If I
might argue in the same manner, I might say with more reason, that Judas
Macchabaeus never thought to speak of Purgatory in the foregoing passage, but
of the Resurrection of the dead: I am persuaded, that from St. Paul's words,
Heb. 1.3. He has by himself purged our Sins; we may conclude a Doctrine
contrary to this of the Papists; For seeing Christ has purged our Sins, what
need of any other Purgatory; seeing that he has done this by himself, that is,
by his Blood, as St. Paul says, Revelat. 1.6. there is no need of the Fire of
Purgatory.

But pray tell me which of all the first Doctors of the Christian Church
mentions Purgatory? and how was that Festival established in the Church of Rome
to pray to God for the deceased? I have many times been ashamed, when I have
been questioned, because I was forced to allege a Dream as the cause and
ground of one of the chief Articles of that Religion. The Abbot of one of the
Monasteries of St. Benedictus, as the Roman Legend declares, heard upon the top
of a Mountain from whence certain flames did proceed, not much unlike to those
of Aetna and Vesuvius, a confusion of voices; occasioned by the struggling of
the flames with the air round about, as the Philosophers inform us; as many
times it happens when the Air is shut up in Rocks and concavities: this
brainsick Abbot fancied that these voices came from the departed Souls burning
in those flames, to desire his Prayers. Therefore he appointed in his Convent a
Festival-day, to pray to God for the deliverance of these poor Sufferers. The
next night it is said that he had a vision of these Souls, which to his seeming
were mounting apace toward Heaven at the same time that his Monks were praying
in their Church for them. Afterward he published his Dream and Vision, which
was looked upon as a Divine Revelation; when the Pope came to understand it, he
soon established a Festival, like that of the Abbot and Monks in their Convent,
to be observed all over Christianity: The design succeeded very happily; the
silly women, that believed that their husbands Souls were frying in Purgatory,
gave vast sums of Money, and great Revenues, that Prayers might be said for
the happiness of the deceased. About this time some Dreamers had Visions in
their sleep, the Priests asssured them that their departed Friends did require
from them Prayers; this Doctrine was proclaimed in the Pulpits, and believed
every whereas an undoubted Truth; it passed for an Article of Faith, for which
the Priests were more willing to dye, than for the Faith of one God, or for the
belief of the Incarnation of the Son of God. This was the first beginning of
that Festival, and of that mode received for current in the Church of Rome, to
pray to God for the deceased Souls. From hence we may judge of the thing in it
self; and whether it is not to the abuse of men's credulity, to deliver upon
these grounds this as an Article of Faith.

But, that we may refute the Papists Errors from their own confessions and
belief, If we may obtain a full Indulgence to be exempt from the flames of
Purgatory; if by wearing a little Scapulary, a Medal of five Saints, or by
repeating three times in our sickness Jesu Maria before a Crucifix, or by being
of the Fraternities of the the little Habit of the Virgin, or of the Rosary, or
of the Dying: What reason have they to be so earnest with the Widows, that
Prayers may be said for their Husbands? etc. when they have seen them perform
all these duties which they impose upon the negligent, as weighty Cases of
Conscience, especially at the time of Confession, what need of any Mass to be
said for their deliverance from Purgatory? They affirm at Rome, that one Mass
said before a privileged Altar is able to bring up a Soul from the very bottom
of Purgatory, although it has been condemned to remain there one hundred or a
thousand years, or till the day of Judgment: Wherefore then do they oblige
Children to buy daily Masses for many years in all the Churches of a City, and
give away their Revenues for ever, for the repose and happiness of their
Parents Souls? If one Mass be sufficient, what need is there of so many
thousands? wherefore do they condemn them as Atheists that will have but One,
because they trust upon the Privilege of such Altars? And if the Pope has the
power to let the Souls go out of Purgatory when he pleases, as the Papists
say, why does he not free them? Is it not for want of Charity, to suffer them
there in Torments? to release but one, when he may release a thousand, or all.
Is it not pity to see needy wretches labor and sweat all the Week long; poor
Widows take the Bread out of their Childrens mouths, before they come to be of
age, and give it to a fat Priest on the Sunday, that he might say a Mass, and
deliver by that means from Purgatory the Soul of a Wife or of an Husband, when
the Pope may perform this with two words, by granting an Indulgence? From hence
we may plainly discover that the chief design of this was to enrich the Clergy
with the spoils of the Orphelin, and of the poor Widows, and with the Estate of
the deceased.

. The Invocation of Saints is another senseless and groundless Doctrine; for
there is no Text of Holy Scripture that mentions any thing of it: it is there
neither commanded nor allowed of, nay several passages prohibit this Idolatry:
There is one God, says St. Paul, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. there he confirms the Faith of one God, and of one
Mediator: If any should offer to maintain to a Popish Doctor that there are
many Gods, he would exclaim in a rage upon him, as upon a wicked Idolater: Fair
and soft, Mr. Doctor, you have little cause to suffer your wrath to kindle
against a person as innocent as your self; you are no less guilty, in regard
that you affirm that there be many Mediators, although St. Paul protests that
there is but one, as there is but one God. The King of Samaria was punished
with death, because he had sent to enquire of the god of Ekron, as if there had
been no God in Israel. The Papists deserve as great a punishment, because
Christ has been pleased to invite us unto himself, and oblige us to seek to
him alone; Come unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you: learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.28. No, replies a
Papist, I will not go to thee, I will not address my self directly to thee; for
thou art a rigorous God, thou will not suffer Sinners to be so bold to speak to
thee, only Saints are allowed to offer up unto thee their Prayers. Does not
this language of a Papist contradict Christ's command, and slight his call and
gracious design? When the Son of God came into the World, he had no other
intention but to banish out of it all Idolatry, and to establish the Worship of
the true God. Because, says an Eloquent Bishop of Ravenna, that wonderful
Majesty in which God appeared unto Moses, and the dreadful threatenings and
punishments of his Law did hinder his people to make their addresses to, and
trust in him, and did encourage Idolatry, by causing them to seek to other
gods, more tractable, and of a more easy access; he has been pleased to
become Man, like unto us, To win them by the expressions of his kindness, and
to hold them fast bound to his service, by the testimonies and declarations of
his Goodness, Petr. Chrysol. Ser. 147. This was God's design: But by that
strange propensity of men to Idolatry, they hinder its accomplishment; for
instead of looking up to him, and receiving from him grace and mercy, they have
run to others, and sought for other Mediators and Protectors, other visible
Gods, whom they implore in their indigency: This alienation from God proceeds
from their fancying him who is their Brother, and like unto them, and who is
become their Friend, armed with severity and justice; by this means they are
frighted away from his service, and cannot with so much confidence as they
ought rely upon his Mercy. In this manner God's divine Wisdom is disappointed,
and his Design frustrated by the ignorance, baseness, and blindness of men. The
Intent of the Son of God, says Tertullian in his ordinary strain, when he took
upon him our nature, was totally to abolish Idolatry; he knew that men were
very inclinable to this vice, that few in the world would be content to worship
God in spirit and in truth; he had seen them bow down to a golden Calf, to
mortal Men, to Statues of stone, Onions, etc. This is an Impudency, says
likewise St. Austin, which was unsufferable to him; he had an intent to bring a
remedy to these disorders, by condescending a little to men's inclinations;
therefore he took upon him a Body, that men might have a God according to their
own mind and desires, and that they might adore a Man without offense: Ut pro
impudentia idololatriae satis Deo fieret per impudentiam fidei. How did men
answer so great a Mercy? I confess they prayed unto, and worshipped this
God-Man very faithfully for several Ages; but at last the Spirit of darkness
crept in amongst them, and has drawn some away to their former Abominations:
instead of being governed by that holy Impudency which Faith furnishes them
with, and prompts them to, to adore God in a Saviour-Man, and worship a man as
God; they have substituted others in whom they confide, to whom they present
their Vows, and offer their Sacrifices. This is the Papists Crime: Jesus Christ
is not properly their God, they worship and pray to the Saints; they forsake
the Lord, that calls and invites them to come to him, to go and make their
Prayers to, and worship the Servants. Look but into their Chapels and
Churches, you shall scarce see ten persons kneeling to the Crucifix, when you
may perceive several hundreds before the Altars of the Virgin Mary, and of the
other Saints: I have often taken notice of this when I was amongst them. I am
persuaded, that if the Papists had not their Idol of the Mass, I mean the
Sacrament, to present to the people to receive their homages, Jesus Christ,
whom this Sacrament signifies, would be quite forgotten; they would scarce
think upon him, if they did, it would be with much indifferency. You shall see
something more of this in the next Article.

. The Worshipping of Images is one of those things that was most offensive to
me in the Church of Rome, since I took the liberty to read the Holy Scripture;
for I never found any one passage that seems to allow this Superstition, but
have met with many that represent it as the most grievous of all other crimes.
I know that their ingenious Wits have distinguished their Worship into that of
Latria, which is only due unto God; and into Dulia and Hyperdulia, which may be
paid to the Creature: But how can the ignorant Vulgar make this distinction?
And does not God in express words prohibit, in one of the Ten Commandments
written with his divine finger in the Tables of stone delivered to Moses upon
the Mountain, To make any Image, or likeness of things which are in Heaven or
elsewhere; and command us, not to fall down to them, nor serve them? Do not the
Papists by their daily practices violate this Sacred Law? To what purpose are
their cunning distinctions, and the right direction of their intentions, their
elevations of their mind from the Image to the Saint, and from the Saint unto
God, seeing they do what God has expressly forbidden? I desire to convince the
most obstinate of all the Papists by their own thoughts, and the reflection of
their minds, for this consideration has been very powerful to undeceive me.
When I did consider the continual disputes between Protestants and Papists
about the worshipping of Images, I thought upon St. Austin's words, to Petil.
and the rest of the Donatists, and that his direction was the best means to end
the controversy, and to understand which of them was in the right, To. 7. de
unit. Eccles. contr. Epist. Petil. c. 3. Non audiatur haec dico, haec dicis,
sed haec dicit Dominus, etc. we must not heed what the Protestants say, nor
what the Papists affirm; but only what God declares, according to the
exposition of those Doctors that were of neither side: let us take one of them,
or if the judgment of one is not sufficient, let us take ten, put into their
hands that by which we shall all be judged, the two Tables delivered to Moses,
the ten Commandments of God, let us entreat them to read over that which
concerns the Worshipping of Images; Thou shall not make unto thy self any
graven Image, or the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth, thou shall not
how down thy self to them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God, visiting the iniquity, etc. Exodus 20. Let us lead these indifferent men
into a Church of the Papists, and into another of the Reformed Religion, let us
desire them to tell us which of these Persuasions is to their seeming most
conformable and obedient to this Law: will they not say that it is the Reformed
and Protestant? For amongst the Papists they may see several Churches and
Chapels, and in each of them eight or ten Saints, or rather Images of Saints,
and before every one of these Images they shall find above twenty men and women
kneeling with lighted Tapers in their hands, they shall see others carrying
their Offerings up to the Saints Altars, and a Priest in his Mass, often
perfuming the nose of the Image with Incense, they shall see a Deacon appointed
to read the Gospel, reading that appointed for the Saint's day, over the head
of such diseased persons as they imagine that the Saint can cure, they shall see
many others, as well Priests as other Clerks, singing upon their knees the
Litanies of that Saint before the dumb Image, and such like abominations they
shall see. What think ye in conscience that these Primitive Doctors would say
if they beheld all this foppery? would they not cry out against that which God
has prohibited? You are in the Error, would they say to the Papists, for ye
do what God has forbidden in express words: He forbids you to make Images, and
your Churches are full of them: He forbids you to make any Likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, and nevertheless you make unto your selves the
Likeness of those men whom you fancy to be in Heaven: He forbids you to Bow
down to them, and yet you Kneel to them: He forbids you to Serve them, and
behold all your Priests are employed in their Service and Worship, one says
Mass, another smoaks the Idol's nostrils with Perfumes, another reads unto him
his Gospel, another is busy to light Wax-candles about him, all the rest are
singing his Praises. What think ye, Papists! will not God, that declares
himself to be a jealous God, be offended to see you pay unto such senfless
Idols that Honor and Service which he has expressly forbidden? Will not he
punish you according to his threatening, to the third and fourth Generation?
There is no person of the least reason will have this thought, for the thing of
it self is very plain; we need not much Logic to discover this Error, and to
condemn it. Therefore it is not without good cause that the Church of Rome
forbids the reading of the Holy Scripture, nourishes her people with a strong
and indisputable respect for the Pope and his Oracles, although he commands
things contrary to God's Word, they believe nevertheless that they are obliged
to obey and credit whatsoever he says as an Article of their Faith, and to
curse as Heretics all such as follow not their example. The Reasons that they
pretend to justify their Superstitions are very frivolous and unlikely: They
commonly tell us, That they worship not the Image, nor the Saint that is
thereby represented, but God in that Saint showed unto us by the Image. This
Reason is very impertinent, seeing that God forbids not only the worshipping of
Images, in the same manner as we believe the Heathens did, but he forbids us to
make them, to make any likeness, to carry it abroad, to serve and fall upon our
knees before it; which the Papists do daily. Besides, this Reason has no
likelihood; for we see by our experience every day, that the Saint, or rather
the Image of the Saint is worshipped and reverenced, and not God in the Saint,
as the Papists would fain persuade us. For if they worship only God in the
Saint, wherefore do they esteem more a graven Image than a painted one? We can
never see the people going out of their Parishes and Precincts to pay their
homages to an Image painted in another place; wherefore is this? If they only
seek in the Image the resemblance of the Saint, to call to their minds his
virtuous behavior and actions; wherefore do the Papists beyond the Seas trot
a-foot an hundred leagues from their own homes, to cringe and bow to a
monstrous Image, which in some places has not the appearrance of a man, who
should be represented decently, about six foot high; for this Image is like a
misshapen Dwarf, ugly and ill-favored, having the Virgin Mary standing by him
in the shape of a Onild about seven or eight years of age; whereas these
persons leave their own Parish-Churches, next to their houses, where the Image
of the same Saint more decent, more like to the Original? and more beautiful,
stands without receiving the like respect. Wherefore do we see in the Church of
St. Anna of Auray, in Britany, fifty or sixty thousand Pilgrims in her
Festival-day, whereas it may be not ten shall be found in other Chapels
dedicated to the same Saint, at that time? Wherefore is there such a vast
number of silver and golden arms, legs, hearts, heads, and little children
hanging there, rather than in the other Churches consecrated to the same Saint?
where, it may be, we shall find no other Ornaments but those which have been
dedicated to, and left her by the devout Snails behind them; I mean, their
silver-colour'd slime with which they beautify her walls, and paint the face
of this worthy Saint; it may be we shall find there nothing but a crazy Shrine,
broken in many places, and one before the great Altar made up with the tail of
some old Gown, and so tattered, that many times it is no easy task to tell of
what stuff and color it was of, etc. Wherefore do the common people throng to
this Church only, their hands laden with Crosses, Beads, Medals, and other
baubles, to have them touch the Image of St. Ann, which to my knowledge is but
a block of decayed wood, almost rotten, and which was found in a puddle, lying
in the mud over head and ears; if they believe not in this wood any divine
virtue more than ordinary, and more than in other Images of this Saint?
Wherefore have the Carmelits, the Keepers of this Church, been so careful to
preserve so long every morsel and crum of this rotten wood which they have been
forced to cut off to mend the Image? and wherefore have they offered it about
the Country in little bits to the Noble persons and Gentry, that have desired
it to sanctify their Closets, if they did not believe in this crazy wood some
holy quality, some wonderful virtue, like to that which the Heathens affirmed
to be in their Idols? Let them not therefore tell us that they seek nothing
else in the Image of a Saint but the representation and likeness, to call their
Virtues to remembrance. For they take all men to be fools and Idiots, whom they
would persuade to admit of this excuse, by doing what they do. A Heathen might
with as much reason tell us that he is a Christian, that he believes, and that
he acknowledges and and worshippeth but one only God; when I see him upon his
knees before his Idols, offering to them his perfumes.

To say the truth, I think that there is but little difference between the
ancient Heathens and the modern Papists; if there be any, it is only in their
names; for at present the Papists speak in the same Idolatrous language as the
Heathens did, for without exception nor reservation, they say now in the Popish
Dominions that the Images themselves may be worshipped; I am certain that the
Heathens never showed more respect to their Gods, than the Papists do at
present to their Images. This thought came into my mind at every time that I
did look over the Ecclesiastical Histories where they mention the Pagans
Idolatries. I was confirmed in it by what one of the most famous of the Popish
Doctors tells us; Thomas Aquinas, named by them the Angelical Doctor, maintains
very solidly and rationally, that a man or a child that has attained to an age
able to understand the natural truths, and to make use of his reason, if he can
but discourse upon the things that he sees, he must needs discover the
necessity of a first Being, of a primitive Principle, the Origin of all other
things; of a first Truth, the only source of the rest; of a first Cause, that
gives motion and action to all secondary causes; he must needs find the
necessity of the Being of a Sovereign Moderator and Governor of the Universe,
who commands in chief over all things that are and shall be in the World: It is
not possible but that such an one must find out by the light of Nature, that
There is One God, and that there can be bu^ one Only God. When I had made this
supposition, and did nevertheless find that Aristotle, Plato, Pythagoras,
Dioclesian, Trajan, and other Emperors until the time of Constantin the Great,
had Canonized many men, and reared up unto them public Statues, to receive the
Worship of the People, and Sacrifices; and that a certain Valentin had caused
no less than thirty to be made of a new fashion, fifteen makes and fifteen
females. Is it possible, said I to my self, that men should be so stupid as not
to understand that there can be but one only God, one only true, perfect and
sovereign Divinity? Had not they as well as we, the light of Reason and Nature
to know this? Yes, doubtless they Knew it, and according to the judgment of
Thomas Aquinas, it was unpossible but that they must have this discovery; they
knew this God, they did worship him, they did rear unto him Altars as well as
to the other Gods: As may appear by that Altar at Athens, consecrated to the
Unknown God, which was the occasion of St. Paul's Preaching unto them: some of
these primitive Heathens did place Jesus Christ in the number of their Gods.
How came they therefore to be guilty of Idolatry? wherefore are they accused of
this crime? It was because they did worship men and other creatures with the
true God. They did fancy some divine qualities in certain creatures, and
therefore they reverenced them, or rather they reverenced and adored God in
them: For we cannot conceive how those great Philosophers, who are yet received
amongst us as our Teachers, could worship a Rat as a true God; it is not
credible that they were guilty of so great a mistake, to take a Rat or an Onion
for the great Creator of Heaven and Earth. Neither did they imagine that their
Caesar's and their Hero's, men whom they had seen entering into the world, living
and departing as other men, were real Gods; but they believed that they were
the chief Friends and Favorites of the true God. They had seen them perform
notable and wonderful deeds whiles they were on earth, which made them judge
that God had yet a particular affection for them, and that he had more regard
of them than of other men; therefore they thought themselves obliged in duty to
pay unto them more respect, to adore in them the divine qualities which God had
given them, and to pray unto them, as to persons whom they imagined to have an
influence upon God, and to be well esteemed of him. For this cause they built
for them Temples, reared up Altars, erected their Images, and put them in
frequented places, to be there adored of the people; they appointed Festivals,
that they might be then worshipped in a particular manner; in these solemn days
the people did throng together to kneel before these dumb Statues, to offer to
them their Vows, Prayers, and Sacrifices; all which are homages due to none but
to God alone. This was their fault, this was their crime, which causes them to
be condemned of Idolatry. Don't we, said I to my self, don't we do the same as
they did* do not we render to our Saints and Images the same devotion as the
Heathens did to their false Gods? Let us judge by this comparison between them
and us. They made Images, we do the like; they set them in public places, we
likewise; they did fall down and kneel before them, and burn incense unto them,
and do not we do the same? they prayed unto them in their need, to Mars in time
of War, to Neptune when they did set sail to go to Sea, etc. Don't we Papists,
said I, imitate them? These and such like considerations did often trouble land
disturb me against my will, for I could not well suffer such reflections that
did lay open to me the nakedness and abominations of my Religion, so much like
to the Heathenish, condemned by God himself. For the Papists in time of War fly
to the Saints that are the Protectors of their Kingdoms; as if St. Denis, St.
Marcellus, and the other Protectors of France were at their request, (...)
^^gage in a quarrel for their sakes in the Court of Heaven, against St. James
St. Theresia, and the other Protectors of Spain when those two Nations are at
variance. The Papists pray to St. Yues when they are at Law, because he was a
very good Lawyer; as if such as were of an employment on Earth were to continue
it in Heaven; St. Joseph was a Carpenter, St. Crispin a Shooemaker, and so of
the rest. We call upon St. Roch in time of the Plague, St. Eutropius for the
Dropsy, because the Legend informs us that these Saints have been sick of
those Diseases; as if the Saint that has been troubled with an infirmity on
Earth, did enter into Paradise only to become there the Physician of it, to get
a Patent, and pass the degree of Doctor. They pray to the Virgin Mary at all
times and seasons, and give her many ridiculous names; they pray to her for
their Eyesight, stiling her Lady of the Light; they worship her by the name of
Our Lady of good News, when they have any Ships sailing upon the Seas; they
call upon her in distress and affliction, and style her Our Lady of Gladness;
in a grievous Sickness they make their addresses to her, and flatter her with
this title, Our Lady of Pity, or, Our Merciful Lady; and in all other
necessities they honor her with these glorious Names, Our Helpful Lady, Our
Assisting Lady, Our Lady adorned with all kind of Virtues: Thus to this one
Saint they ascribe many names, titles and properties, that they might make the
silly people believe that she is in some respect not much unlike unto God,
whose attributes and perfections are infinite. But that which I find to be very
ridiculous amongst them, is the manner of representing and worshipping Jesus
Christ: they have made him a monstrous Statue, about ten or twelve foot high,
which they baptize by the name of St. Savior; now this Saint, distinguishable
from their other petty Saints by his great stature and large bulk, is
worshipped by them for the preservation of Corn, and of the Vines from the cold
and frost, for the curing of their Cows of a disease called the Swelling, and
for the healing of the Horses of the distemper named the Staggers; this Saint
is prayed to for to keep their Sheep from the Rot, their Bees from dying, and
their Lambs from the fury of the Wolves, etc. Therefore on his Festival-day at
Nantes and at Tours, and other places where these great Images are erected, you
might see an infinite number of Pilgrims of all ages, conditions and estates,
bringing their gifts to these Statues; one brings thread, another wool, this man
corn, another butter, and some, sucking pigs or pieces of bacon, others bring
grapes or pots of honey, or other commodities, but all bring wax-tapers to burn
all the while that Mass is saying at his Altar, all come with money or some
other thing; so that about the Altar of this good Saint at such a Solemnity you
may find coffers full of wheat, barrels filled up with butter, tables laden
with great pieces of meat, and such a prodigious number of little wax candles,
that one time when I had the charge to gather up the remains, which the people
did cast yet lighted at the foot of the Statue, although each end of the candle
was so short that I could not hold it in my hand any longer, I gathered up in
five hours full threescore and ten pounds of wax. It may be that some ingenious
Papists will turn all this to the advantage of their Church, as they do the
other abuses and abominations committed in it: They will say, that this is an
expression of the wonderful Faith of their people, therefore they are apt to
blame a Religion where they cannot spy so much Zeal amongst the Professors, and
accuse it, as if she had neither Faith nor Devotion: But we may very well
suffer them to speak in their own defense, for this is a most palpable
Idolatry, the Heathens were never guilty of so much; I do not think that it is
possible to do more to Jesus Christ if he did return into the world. But I may
say they are to be excused, if they entertain their people in these Idolatries
for a thousand Crowns, which they receive in one day by the credit of one of
these Images, may satisfy for a mortal Sin, and free them from the penalty
that it deserves.

There is but one thing more required to make them perfectly like to the
Heathenish Idolaters, which is to have an universal Idol, proper to represent
several Saints, which might serve in many Festivals. The Emperor Trajan had an
Idol of this nature; he had a golden head of an Idol kept secretly in his
Closet, which he caused to be put upon the body of the Statues that he had a
mind to worship; in this manner he did take off the head of his Gods as he
thought fitting. I have seen amongst the Papists something like to this, in a
little Town of Britany, in the Bishopric of Vannes; if it were not for the
respect that I bear to some persons concerned, I would name all the
circumstances, which I shall be forced to do, and many other things that I now
conceal, I shall declare to the World, if any offers to accuse me of lying and
falsehood: in that place I have seen a mutable Saint carried up and down,
wearing several apparels, according to the peoples devotion; it was the Image
of St. Maurice, who was prayed unto in his day, that he might heal the sucking
Babes of a disease called by the Countrey-people Carrel, a benumming disease,
or the Rickets. On St. Giles's day they carried the Image to another place, and
of a Bishop that it was before they made it an Abbot, clothing it accordingly,
and seeking unto it for another distemper called the Disease of St. Giles. On
St. Yves's day they changed his Abbot's attire into that of a Lawyer, they put
a corner-cap upon the Image's head, and a bag full of Writings in its hand
instead of a Croche; in this manner it continued to be St. Yves until another
Festival-day; and the people did pray unto it not only to get the better of
their Suits in Law, but also that St. Yves might kill and destroy such as were
thought to be the authors and inventers of calumnies cast upon them. For the
Papists there, when they are injured by any slanderous discourse, or by
another, they summon the supposed offender to appear before St. Yves within a
year; for they confidently believe that he that has done the wrong shall
surely dye before the limited time: Let any man judge, if it be likely that a
Saint should destroy a man for a trifle. We may from hence perceive what
grievous abuses, errors, superstitions and mistakes reign in the Church of
Rome. There is therefore no difference between this Church and the Heathens. I
relate not here the follies and abominations that have been heretofore
practiced, but these that are now visible; I intend not to recollect the
passages of the time past, but only to make mention of the present; I speak not
by hearsay, but that which I have often seen to my unspeakable grief and
confusion; because I was in reason forced to condemn a Religion which I was
engaged to support and maintain, and to preach up a Worship which I knew in my
soul to be pure Idolatry.

I did often wish, that the Papists would but confine themselves to the limits
of Reason in their Zeal and Devotion for these petty Saints; and would have
shown more to St. Peter, St. Paul, or to the other Apostles, but they are not
so much esteemed, because they are not in such reputation for their Miracles; I
did often observe their Churches forlorn, their Images without ornaments, all
covered with dust, and the Spiders hanging by their lips and noses; I did not
see so many sacks full of wax, so many arms, legs, dugs of silver and of gold,
crutches, hoods, shirts, and garments of little Children hung up in their
Chapels, as are round about the Churches of these Saints so much in vogue for
their pretended Miracles: The Festivals of those great Saints unto whom we are
next unto Christ most obliged for our Religion, are celebrated with little or
no solemnity; there are no more Chapels built for their sakes, and such as are
erected are decaying every day; they are put out of their places, and grow out
of credit, and other new Saints put in, as I took notice; their Images are cast
behind the Church doors amongst the sweepings, and lie along with the besoms,
because they cannot get their expenses, their Chapels and Altars cost more to
keep them, than they bring profit; whereas if it be but generally credited that
the rotten. Image of a little Saint has been pulled out of the dirt and mire,
that such a one grants every man his request, that he obtains for them their
suits in Law, that he procures a safe arrival to Ships and Merchants goods at
Sea, that he gives rain or fair weather as people require, that he heals
diseases, the Toothache, the infirmities of the Eyes, etc. all the world will
throng to him, all will run with their hands full of Gifts, and laden with
stately Offerings. From whence proceeds this? It is because that people have
forsaken God, to adhere to the creature, and their minds are possessed with a
devilish superstition, which aims so much at their present advantage, that they
will have no devotion but for themselves, they will seek nothing but their own
contentment in the worship of their God, nor adore him but for their profits.

What I have heard from the mouth of a Suffragan of a Bishop of Britany, whose
name I shall conceal for the respect I have for him, will further confirm unto
you this Truth: He assured me, that when he was in the Visitation with his
Bishop, he passed by a Parish situate at the entrance of a Forest, where the
Country people did worship a Saint named St. Gontran, or Gautran, that he
might protect their Sheep from the Wolves; the Bishop's curiosity more than his
devotion led him into the Parish Church, to see the Saint, whom he found
holding a Wolf tied to his garment, but so much decayed, that there was scarce
any thing to be seen of the Saint, only the bold Wolf did there appear: the
Bishop being a good and understanding man, and such a one as labors to remove
and banish away, as much as he can, all Superstitions of this kind, commanded
the Image to be taken down, with the Wolf, and to be burnt together; because
the Saint being decayed by degrees, and vanishing out of sight, the
Country People began to reverence, and pay their devotions to the Wolf: If the
rest of the Roman Bishops were but like to this Prelat, the Popish Religion
would soon become Reformed. Now it happened by chance that the very day that
this Protector of the flocks was consumed in the fire, the Wolves of the Forest
came out and carried away three Sheep out of the Village; the people
immediately believed that the Saint had sent them this misfortune, because he
had been burned in the flames; therefore they flocked about the Suffragan, whom
they believed to be the occasion of the Saint's burning, they loaded him with
imprecations and curses, and threatened him in such a manner, that if he had not
withdrawn himself out of their sight, they had stoned him. All this makes me
believe, that these Papists seek not so much God's honor, and the glory of
their Saints, as their own worldly gains and benefit, as the Heathens did when
they worshipped their Idols: For I am fully persuaded, that if the Saint that
is reverenced in the Church of Rome were a Devil, they would nevertheless pay
him respect and devotion, if he had but the reputation of working Miracles and
granting Petitions, so abominable they are in their Superstitions.

There is another grievous abuse crept in, occasioned by the Relics of the
Saints, because the Primitive Christians did entomb with honor, and secure the
bodies of the deceased Martyrs, and gather up the ashes and bones of their
consumed bodies, that the Heathens might not express their cruelty upon them
after death, nor make a sport of them after death; therefore by degrees this
superstition is crept in: men pay them now as much respect as to Christ's body,
if it were upon earth. This Idolatry was in St. Austin's days, as he himself
declares, de opere Monach. c. 2. The Devil has clothed a great many of his
hypocrites with a Monkish attire, they wander up and down the Provinces without
being sent; they are never settled, never fixed, never resting; some of them,
says he, make sale of Martyrs members, or such as are supposed to be so, etc.
This Traffic is nothing in comparison of that which is nowadays; for such
things are sold at an excessive rate, as dear as the Devil intended to buy
Christ, with the power of Kingdoms and their glory, upon condition to fall down
to them, and worship them; the whole World is full of this deceitful commodity,
which may be said to be the most subject to cozenage. We have good cause to
wonder, to hear no less than eight or ten Churches boasting to have the Virgin
Mary's Girdle, Christ's Winding Sheet and Seamless-coat; there have been many
suits in Law in the Courts of Parliament between several Churches, about the
keeping of one Relick, for every one did affirm theirs to be the truest. If all
the bits of wood which are now esteemed to be pieces of our Savior's Cross,
were gathered in a heap, one hundred men would not be sufficient to carry them;
and if all the nails which are said to be the true nails of his Cross were
together, there would be enough to nail a Coach: we may say the same of all the
other Instruments of his Passion; I would mention them all, but they are
already reckoned up by others; and there is no man that has peeped out of his
Cradle, and seen never so little of the World, but knows what I say to be true.
Go to Turin, there you shall find some ready to swear that Christ's
Winding Sheet is there kept entire; go to Besancon, you shall find the same
thing. But that which has surprised me most, was that which I have seen in a
Convent of devout Virgins unto whom I was a long time Confessor. I had no
design to name them; but because some have accused me of falsehood in this
Article, I find my self forced against my will to particularize more than I
intended: it was in the Nunnery of Religious Carmelits called of Nazareth, in
the City of Vennes, in the Province of Britany. At a certain time I went in
amongst these devout Nuns, to receive the Confession of one of them upon her
deathbed, when I came a way, three or four of them according to their custom
brought me back from the place where their sick are kept, to the gate; one of
them invited me to visit their ancient Chapter, which was an old decayed
Chapel at a corner of their Convent: I went with them, and at the entrance I
wondered to see them kneel in a place where I perceived no Image, I desired
them to tell me the cause; they informed me that it was because of some Relics
that were there; I went to them, and found in the Wall, in a place very clean,
a great number of Bones, with an Inscription that declared that they were the
Relics of eleven thousand Virgins. I asked of them the reason why they had not
put them into a vessel fit for Relics, according to the custom, and why they
did not make them more public? They replied, that the Bishop had caused them
to be visited before he would suffer them, by three Surgeons and the
Physician of the Convent, and that all of them had found and agreed together,
that the most part of these Relics were the Bones of Horses; nevertheless they
were resolved not to burn them, as they had been advised, because their ancient
Records did assuredly tell them that they were the Bones of these marcyred
Virgins; they did further say that it was possible in the massacre of these
Virgins, that there might be an Horse killed amongst them, this did not make
the rest less true and real Relics. I answered them, It may be that the Bones
of some of those cruel Butchers were killed by the Soldiers that guarded them,
were there also; it is not therefore well done, said I, to kneel to them: one
of them answered, You preach to us every day that we are saved by Faith. This
is the usual answer which they return every time that such like mistakes are
objected to them: As if Faith, that looks upon God as its only object, or upon
the divine enjoyments, had need of the Bones of a dead Horse to assist its
contemplation, as if it did require from us a veneration for the Relics of a
dead Beast, or of an Idolater. Let any man, that questions the truth of what I
say, inquire, or cause to be inquired, from the Nuns of that Convent, I am
certain that they will confirm this relation. From that time I took away all
the Relics that I had carefully kept, and gave them to friends, putting in
their room another, which was worth a great deal more than the former, of which
I was then more certain.

For in regard that men go in pilgrimage two or three hundred leagues, to look
upon our Saviors winding sheet, the Virgin Mary's peruque, St. John Baptist's
head, and other Relics, I did conceive that I could find one nearer that was
worth all these: It was the piece of linen which is called the Corporal, upon
which we put the chalice and the consecrated bread in the Mass: I took a piece
of it, upon which I had oft-times placed the consecrated wafer, for it was old
and decayed. This has been done by many besides my self. If my Doctrine and
Religion be true, said I, this is a good as Christ's winding sheet, as His
seamless coat, the pillar, and the holy Cross, the crown of thorns, the
handkerchief of St. Veronica, and the other Relics, which receive so many
pilgrimages from far. All their sanctity is derived from the Body of Jesus
Christ, which they have had the honor to touch. Besides we are not certain if
they be true, for there are so many Churches that quarrel about them, that we
have cause to doubt; but I am certain said I, according to my belief, that this
linen has touched the Body of Jesus Christ. This linen therefore I laid up
safe in my box of Relics, where I kept it along while after. I am persuaded I
had good reason to do so, in regard of the nature of the thing, and assurance
that I had I think that every good Roman Catholic ought to do the same, if he
has any belief in his Religion and Doctrine; for if their excessive faith,
which they have for Relics, is pleasing to God, and sufficient to cause
Miracles to be done by them, although these relics be false, as they
themselves confess to happen sometimes; what is the reason that their Religion
does not cause them to repose their trust in that which they believe to have
certainly touched the Body of Jesus Christ? and wherefore does not this linen
produce Miracles? Nevertheless we see that scarce any body respects it, it is
cast aside with other linen without respect; a little bit of St. Francis's
slipper is more reverenced than all such linen and chalices of the Papists.
Wherefore do we not see their Zealots gather up the parings of their Priests
nails, that touch their God every day? It is certainly because they have no
faith where they should have; or if they have, it is but an erroneous faith,
that is not able to work a Miracle: It has not that efficacy as their belief,
or their mistaking of a ship nail for one of our Savior's Cross, and the bones
of an horse for that of she Saints, as the Vapists would persuade. They may
reply, that the linen, the chalice, and the Priests nails, have touched only
the elements: But I answer, are not these elements strictly united to the Body
of our Lord Jesus Christ? This is the reason they pretend for their adoring
them. Their Divines declare this union so strict and extraordinary, that they
make no difficulty to compare it to the Hypostatical Union, for as they say
both are divine and wonderful; for as the humanity subsists in the incarnation,
without a natural and a proper subsistence, likewise the bread and the wine
remain in this Sacrament, without their own and natural subsistency, which they
suppose to be destroyed, to give way to a Transubstantiation. These things
being so, wherefore may not the elements sanctify a thing, seeing that they
are really united to Jesus Christ, God-Man* and why do the Papists so little
regard that those things that are known to have touched them, when they
reverence others that are said, without any likelihood of truth, to have
approached near to Christ's humanity? This is unjust, and a reproach to their
Faith, not only in regard of Relics, but also in regard of their Sacrament of
the Altar.

. Let us proceed next to another Article of the Popish Faith. That whosoever
depends not upon the Pope, whosoever don't acknowledge him for their Lord, and
the Head of the Church; whosoever he be that lives out of his obedience, shall
be infallibly damned: of which Article I could never be fully persuaded;
therefore I was always very favorable in enjoining penances to them that did
willingly in their Confessions discover that they doubted of the truth of this
part of the Popish Creed: For such as behold the manner of the Protestants
living, and their Christian behavior, cannot well be persuaded of it; I have
known some Ladies miserably tormented with despair, because they could not be
persuaded of the damnation of such persons: My ghostly Father, have they said
to me, I am damned, and without hopes of salvation, for I cannot possibly
believe one of the Articles of our Creed: I cannot be persuaded that such a
Lady, a Hugonot, can be damned, in regard she is so pious and virtuous in her
conversation; every morning I know that she is about an hour at her devotions
in her closet, afterward she takes a religious book and reads, or applies her
self to work, she is never idle, all her discourse is of God's holy Word, and
her self appears so sensible of what she speaks, that she forces tears from
the eyes of the assistants; it is not possible to be more just, charitable, and
fearing God than she is; it is not possible to be more zealous in God's
service, and more careful to oblige her domestics to live well, according to
the Laws of God; I cannot believe that such a person can be damned: nor I
neither, said I to my self, I am of your mind, nevertheless it was then my
interest to dissemble the inward persuasion of my mind; Don't let that trouble
you, I was about to say to such, if you have not committed a more grievous sin
than that, I shall not load you with an heavy penance. I am certain that many
are of my mind in the Church of Rome: It is a cheat and a design, to force
people to believe it as confidently as the most holy mysteries, and a great
error, to tell them that they cannot have any hopes of salvation, if they are
not persuaded that the others are assuredly damned, although God commands us to
the contrary by his Apostle not to judge others, Romans 14.3. Jam. 4.12. and
assures us in his Gospel, that there needs nothing else to attain unto
salvation, but the keeping of his Commandments; which the Protestants profess
to do, and perform. Therefore I did often argue in this manner: It is not
possible to be damned without sin, for sin is that alone that shuts heaven, and
draws upon us the wrath of God: Now there is no sin but is against his
commandments; either we must omit what he enjoins, or commit what he forbids.
Every one therefore that believes what God has revealed unto us by his
Prophets and Apostles, and by Christ, and shall keep the commandments of God,
shall infallibly be saved: the Scripture declares it; He that believes in me,
although he were dead yet shall he live, says our Savior, Joh. 11.25. and
whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never dye. He don't tell us we must
believe in the Pope, to be saved; but we must believe in him. He repeats these
words in several passages of the Gospel, Verily verily I say unto you, if any
man keep my word he shall never see death: he speaks the same to that man which
enquired of him what he was to do to be saved, If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments, Matthew. 29.16. when he enquired which? Christ answered,
Thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, etc.
Now the Protestants profess and observe these two things; to believe in God,
and to obey his commandments. This is their Faith, and the principles of their
Religion; to believe all that God has revealed, and to do all that he has
commanded. Wherefore should they be damned? Because they don't believe in the
Pope, answers a Papist, and because they don't keep the commandments of the
Church of Rome. But, my friend, from whence have thou that these two things are
also necessary for thy salvation? is it from God, or from man? can you find in
any passage of the Holy Scripture, or in the three Creeds of your Religion any
thing of this doctrine? It is true, you shall find, I believe in God the Father
Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord, etc. You shall not find there that you must believe in the Pope, that the
Bishop of Rome is the Head of all the Christian Church, that he is infallible,
and that he must be obeyed as God himself: You shall not find there any mention
made of the Sacrifice of the Mass, of Purgatory, Indulgences, the Worshipping
of Images, nor of the other Articles of the Popish Religion. And the two other
Creeds, made about two or three hundred years after the first, to explain and
paraphrase it, speak of no such things: Listen attentively at your Morning
Prayers, or when Mass is sung in your Churches publicly; you shall hear
nothing of the Pope, nor of his Church, you shall only hear of the Articles
which Protestants believe with less additions than you; for they credit them
only because God has revealed them, they will have no mixture of humane
authority with the divine. Look over all the commandments of God's Law, you
shall not find there any thing of praying to Saints, of worshipping of Images,
of abstinence from meats, of fasting in Lent, of confession of sins to men; but
there you shall find that we must worship God, that we must not make any graven
Image, etc. All these commandments are kept more religiously by the Protestants
than by the Papists, what reason therefore can we find for their Damnation? how
come they to be so bold as to thrust this into their Creed as an Article of
Faith; ambition and antichristian rage against them has persuaded them to it.
But I wonder how they can offer to maintain this doctrine, with this addition,
that there is no salvation but by an union with the Pope, whom they affirm to
be the Head of the Church, and by consequence, to influence and give life to
every one of its Members. Suppose the Pope is a wicked man, as many such have
been; according to their own confession, if he be covetous, profane, lechrous,
an Heretic, a Negromancer, or a hellish Monster, how can any relation and
union with such a one do me any good? can he make me partaker of that holiness
which he himself wants* I have good cause to fear that he will infect me with
his vices. Is it not a grievous mistake, and a ridiculous fancy, to say, that I
cannot please God, unless I communicate with, and be related to his enemy; and
that I must not expect salvation, but by a communion with him that is assuredly
damned? Nevertheless this is one of the Articles of the Popish Creed and Faith.

. Their Doctrine concerning Traditions is also contrary to the Holy Word of
God. It tends to withdraw us from our faith and belief in it. If Jesus Christ
did now live in the world, he might with reason treat the Papists in the same
manner as he did the Pharisees: In vain do they honor me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men; for laying aside the commandment of God, ye
hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many other such
like things; you do transgress the commandment of God by your tradition: Mark
7.7. and 13. Matthew. 15.3. The most part of the Papists Principles and Articles
of Faith are nothing but Doctrines and Commandments of men, which have
altogether changed the appearance of Christ's Church in all those Kingdoms
where they have been admitted. I might make this appear more plainly, if I did
but run over all the grievous impertinencies, that are by this means received
as so many Articles of Faith in the Church of Rome; if I did but make an
enumeration, of all the false Miracles published for true; but I should exceed
the narrow limits prescribed to my self. I shall therefore confine my self to
one thing, that has very much scandalized me in this Doctrine, it is the
reason and expedient that they have to maintain it, which tends to the total
subversion of Christian Religion, and to the destruction of Christ's Church.
For to persuade people the more that their Traditions are necessary, they exalt
them above the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and advance such doctrines,
and propose such questions, as might make any man an Atheist that will hearken
to them. How do you know, say they, that these Writings that bear Moses's name
have been written by him? How do you know that St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Mark,
St. Luke, and St. John, are Authors of the Gospel? that St. Paul, St. James,
and St. Peter, have written the Epistles? unless it be by Tradition? Have you
seen the first Originals of these Writings, that you credit so much? And if you
did see them, who is it can affirm, that they were written by these great
Apostles, that have been dead so long? unless you believe the men of our days,
who have received what they affirm, either by writing, or otherwise, from the
hearsay of their Forefathers. This we name Tradition. Pighius argues in this
manner, Hierarch. Eccles. l. 1. c. 2. This was also my reason and argument,
that I have often made use of; but when I had seriously examined its strength,
its veracity and design, I found it to be but weak, and tending to undermine
the foundations of our Faith, of our Laws and Religion; for if I might have the
liberty to propose such questions, I might as well make others, which shall
entangle them in as great a difficulty as theirs do us: How know you, may I
say, that your Tradition is good and true? How do you know, that such as affirm
St. Peter to have been Bishop of Rome, speak truth? How came you to be
persuaded that there is a Bishop of Rome? have you seen him? How are you
certain, that the Pardons and Indulgences that you receive came from him? that
he has confirmed them with his signature? could not the persons that have
delivered them to you counterfeit his hand? May not an Atheist make use very
well of this argument, and ask, How do you know that there is any other God
besides the Sun? have you ever seen him? have you ever spoken with him? How do
you know that there are three Persons in the Godhead? How do you know that
Jesus Christ has lived upon earth? that there have been Apostles? etc. This is
the drift and end of these questions, which we must reject as the Devils
cunning to ensnare our Faith. Hearken not to those that will speak in this
manner, says St. Austin, Confess. l. 6. c. 5. How know thou that these
Books proceed, and are derived unto men from the Spirit of a true God? for this
we must believe above all things. And Tertull. contra Hermogen. I acknowledge
the fullness of the Scripture, Hermogenes cannot find there any pretense for his
errors, therefore he and his fellows fly to the assistance of Tradition. And
elsewhere he says, Take away from Heretics that which is common to them with
the Heathens, and confine them to the Holy Scriptures, and they can no longer
subsist. De Resur. carnis. I think this answer is a sufficient reply to the
Papists. Many others have been given, which are to be read in the Books of
Controversy. It is my judgment, that God has fully as much power as men, and
that his voice is as efficacious and perfect as ours. We are to be
distinguished by our voices and speeches, as when a Son hears his Fathers
voice, he needs not that a Servant should inform him that his Father speaks;
likewise our Savior Christ assures us, that his sheep hear his voice and know
it. We need no other but Christ's voice to know that it is His, that He speaks
unto us in the Holy Scriptures. Let not the Papists propose any such questions
for the future, and let them take notice of what St. Jerome tells us upon Hagg.
That the things that are invented are false, as for example, such as are said
to be the Apostles traditions, which have no authority nor testimony from the
Holy Scriptures, are marked by God's sword.

. From this Doctrine of Tradition proceeds their Faith of Miracles, a Faith as
ill grounded and ridiculous as the Traditions themselves, that are but old
wives tales. We may judge of such as are related to us of former ages by them
that are published and performed in our days, of a thousand there is scarce one
that has the least appearance of reality, if we will but seriously consider
and examine them. Nevertheless they are as boldly delivered for truths in the
Popish Pulpits, as the Gospel. I have declared many, being forced thereunto by
my Office, that I knew to be very false. Several persons of the common people
have related to me accidents, that have happened in places of devotion, which
they looked upon as notable Miracles; but when I have examined them well, I
have understood that they were but natural effects. If they had addressed
themselves to some other persons, their belief and declarations had passed as
current as Christ's Resurrection from the dead, and Lazarus rising out of the
Sepulcher; they had been recorded, and laid up for posterity to read. For
example: A Country fellow comes to me, with two or three of his neighbors,
assuring me, that his wife had been at the last gasp, and that because he had
offered her to St. Mathurin or St. Anne, the very next day she recovered of her
distemper. But he did not tell me, that the Physician, that had judged her
sickness so desperate, was but a Country Chyrurgeon, who has scarce seen the
outside of Physic Books, and therefore knew not how to judge of a disease by
the symptoms. I have healed many in this manner, by prescribing to them no
other receipt but patience. I did not discover to them, that the dangerous
distemper, which had taken from the Patient speech, proceeded from a Crisis, or
the turning of the blood, or from the working of some violent physic. Another
comes to me, and tells me, that his child has been thought to be dead for
several hours* but when in time he comes to take notice, that it was a
Convulsion-fit, or the Falling Sickness, he don't go back to acquaint the
Priest, that what he thought to be death is but a disease. Who is it that would
not have really believed to be true, what the Bishop of Angers published in
print, he is a person not easily to be persuaded; he caused an exact enquiry to
be made, and was certainly informed that Jesus Christ had visibly appeared in
the Parish Church of Ulmes, in the Priests hands as he was saying Mass? Yet he
has been forced to acknowledge, to the shame of the whole Church, that it was
but a fiction of the Priest and a few Parishioners, who thought to enrich
themselves by that means: If this Priest had but dyed a few days after, he had
been Canonized for a Saint; but he has lived, and declared by his Life what
manner of man he is: the Bishop has been forced for his scandalous behavior
to degrade him, and cast him into a Prison, where I think he remains yet. We
may judge by this what to think of all the other Miracles noised abroad in the
Church of Rome.

. The last Article relates to the Indulgences. I don't here question whether
the Pope has power to pardon sins when he pleases; Jesus Christ can do no
more, the Pharisees would never allow him that power. I desire therefore that
the Divines of the Church of Rome would resolve me these Questions which I have
often proposed to my self: Wherefore do the Popes proclaim their Universal
Jubilees, which causes ^o many thousand people to trot to Rome; or to some
other great City where the place is appointed, to gain them? For if they
answer, that it is to obtain the forgiveness of our sins: I may reply, that
there is no need to go so far to obtain this forgiveness; there is no Parish
but a full Indulgence may be bought every year several times: There is scarce a
noted Town, but it may be purchased every day; only one being concerned and
initiated into the Fraternity of the little habit of the Virgin, many times
obtains for us above one hundred and fifty every year: I shall not speak of the
other means to get these privileges and advantages. Now those Indulgences, as
the Popish Divines affirm, free us as well from the punishment, as from the
guilt of all manner of sins: if therefore this is to be had in every
Parish Church, what need is there of a Pilgrimage to Rome? if all our sins are
pardoned, what will the Pope's or his Agents Absolution profit us? Is not this
to make a sport of men's credulity, and to deal with them as with blind men and
fools? It may be they will answer, that at such solemn occasions the Pope
absolves from grievous sins, reserved to himself, which are not forgiven every
day; but if I have not been guilty of such horrid crimes, wherefore am I
solicited and pressed upon to go and purchase a Jubilee? wherefore am I
obliged otherwise to make a general confession of my sins? and if I don't,
wherefore am I looked upon as an Atheist? From hence we might conclude that
their Church is never perfect but in the time of the Jubilee, because at that
time only it has a power to forgive all manner of sinners: But Bishops and
Priests are to be found in every corner, that have power granted to absolve
these grievous and horrid sins; there is scarce a petty Monk but will say he
has that privilege, four or five sins excepted, which scarce happen in an
hundred years in a Province: If none but such as are guilty of these sins did
go to Rome, the Roads of Italy would not be so populous as they are at this
time.

I might here mention the other Indulgences that may be obtained every day. The
abuses are so great and ridiculous, that if you please to view the instruments
of a Popish Zealot, you shall see stuff and trinkets enough to set up a Shop:
You shall see Beads of all sizes, shapes and numbers, fifteen in a string,
fifty in another, thirty in another, ten in another; all this is full of
mystery: you shall see little garments, like childrens babies attire, some
white, others red, others brown; you shall spy Medals of all sorts, Cords with
knots of several magnitudes, and Crosses of all fashions: The Papists are
become so ridiculous to cause their Zealots to wear two pins across upon their
sleeve of breast, assuring them that they shall obtain the forgiveness of
several days sins, as often as they kiss this Cross, or pronounce over it two
or three hard conjuring words. I was never more astonished and scandalized than
I was the last year, when I was sent about the time of the Festival of the holy
Sacrament to preach in the City where I made my abode, I found every body
stored with these Indulgences, wearing pins across, they informed me that the
devout and right Reverend These Knaves and Cheats of that bloody Society play a
thousand such tricks in those Kingdoms and Cities that are at their devotion,
as in Spain, Italy and France.
Father of the Jesuits, called Father Huby, had recommended this notable piece
of devotion to them: By this means he disposed of above ten millions of pins;
which he had the conscience not to sell, he gave them out of an excess of
charity; but in requital his charity did require for every two pins a sum of
money, to help his Brethren the Jesuits traveling in China and in far
Countries to say Mass; for in those places they cannot meet with such fools
that will encourage them, by contributing to their subsistence.

If we did but run over all the other Tenants of the Romish Faith, we should
find as many errors, mistakes and abominations as we have done in these. But
it is not my design to mention all, I intended to be more succinct, and I look
not upon my self as able to make this description so well as others who have
more studied the Disputes and Controversies.

THE THIRD PART.
THE Third Reason that has so long kept me in the Romish Religion was grounded
upon the practices and Laws of that Church, the solemn Festivals, the Auricular
Confession, Abstinence from Meats, the Forty days of Lent, the Priests Vows of
Chastity, and the austere Lives of the Monks. All these things did present
themselves as it were in a body together in my mind, and caused me to entertain
so high an esteem for Popery, where I saw so many holy and religious customs
observed, that I could not look upon the rest but with disdain, hatred and
aversion, because I could not find the same things.

But when against my will I was forced to open my eyes, and being engaged by my
Office to seek into the beginning of all the abominations that I saw acted in
the world, I found that these things proceeded from the Laws invented to
deceive the most subtle wits, and entice the devoutest souls into the broad
road of hell, by the Devil, who sometimes appears as an Angel of Light.

. What a vast number of disorders have been occasioned by the many Festivals of
the Church of Rome? There were so prodigious a multitude lately observed in
France, that the King was forced about seven years ago to get a Dispensation
for the ease and benefit of his People from the Pope, who abolished a great
many. But this Dispensation has caused a strange deformity in all the
Bishoprics of France: Some were willing to obey the Popes order, by casting
out of the Calendar such Festivals as were abolished; other Bishops would not
admit it; some cut off a few, keeping still the rest; others were offended,
that the King did incroach upon their privileges, therefore instead of
diminishing the number of their Festivals, they established new Feast-days;
some fast in the Saints Eve, and keep not the day; others regard neither the
fast nor the day; others cause them to be kept only 'till noon; others to
prevent all inconveniences have appointed all Feast-days to be observed on the
Sunday, and their Fasts on the Saturday: So that yet we may see two men of the
same Village, or of the same Family, of a different persuasion; one obliged to
keep a Festival-day for fear of a mortal sin, and the other not; nay the same
person is engaged to this observation if he stays at home, but if he steps over
a gutter or rivulet to go into another Parish he commits no such sin, and may
do what he pleases. Can any man think that these practices proceed from God?
Yet this they believe, and the Casuists amongst the Papists affirm.

. Auricular Confession is another Invention of man's brain. The Romish Clergy
have imposed it out of policy, as a necessary means to keep men in their duty,
and to hinder them from mischievous attempts. The design was good, but the
means employed is unjust and tyrannical: I may safely name it so without fear,
for I know sufficiently what I am to think and say upon this subject. I have
read over and over the Holy Scriptures and the Fathers concerning this matter,
and because I did not trust to my own judgment, I entreated the assistance of
some Learned Men of my acquaintance, to see whether they could find any thing
out of St. Ambrose, St. Austin, or other Fathers, to assist and confirm my
Meditations, that I was to deliver in Sermons, which I composed upon this
Subject; but I could never see nor find any passage there, that confirms this
politic Institution, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome. We may find
that we must confess our sins unto God, but not to men; we may also find, that
it is well done to declare and discover the troubles of our consciences to them
that have the rule over us, and are appointed by God to instruct us, that we
may understand and receive from them seasonable comforts and instructions. This
is very useful to us, and sometimes absolutely necessary. But it is not
required that we should reveal all our weaknesses, mention all our sins small
and great, to particularise their number and quality, and all their
circumstances and aggravations, to a sinful man, as vicious as my self, who
ought to confess also it may be to me, as the Priests of the same Church
confess their sins to one another; it is not required that I should make this
confession, as it is practiced with so many ridiculous questions, that teach us
to commit sins that we knew not before: The Casuists are of opinion, that when
a Priest should be inclinable to the most abominable sins of lechery, and in
danger to be tempted to them by every apprehension, yet when he receives the
Confession of a Virgin, he had better omit nothing than to cause her to pass
over any thing, and to commit by this act a material sin in their opinion: This
can never be proved, unless the Papists offer to do it by a new Bible, by other
Evangelists, and other Interpreters, than have yet written upon the Holy
Scriptures.

I could never digest the doctrine of the Popish Divines, that teaches us two
kind of sorrows required in true repentance; the one they name Contrition,
which is, say they, when we are grieved to have offended God for his sake,
because he is so infinitely good, and because sin displeases him: this grief
is sufficient to obtain from God the forgiveness of our sins, in case we cannot
conveniently go to confess them; for if a Priest be present we cannot be
dispensed from this duty. The other grief or sorrow, named Attrition, is when a
man is grieved to have offended God out of worldly interest and selfishness,
because sin deprives us of the hopes of Heaven, and condemns us to Hell, etc.
This sorrow, say they, is not sufficient of it self to obtain the absolution of
our sins, but only when it is accompanied by the Priest's absolution. That is
to say, that although a man upon his deathbed shall confess all his sins, if
the Priest will be so hard-hearted to deny him absolution, in case he departs
in that estate with such a sorrow in his heart, he shall be damned for all
that. Let any of the Popish Divines tell me which of the holy Evangelists have
taught them this distinction? which of the Apostles did ever preach such
doctrine as this? Nevertheless I think they have reason to recommend it,
because the salvation or the damnation of souls is so highly concerned,
according to their teaching, and many times of ten thousand souls in one
Church: This bastard Sacrament is not of the number of the Sacraments of which
we are never to be partakers but once; for it is commanded every year at
Easter, and some persons are partakers of it almost every day, as is usually
practiced in the Church of Rome. What is the reason that neither Christ, nor
his Apostles have ever mentioned it? Or rather how came these persons to be so
bold as to impose these distinctions as Articles of Faith? Is it possible that
the Priest's presence or absence, or the opportunity of Confession, makes our
repentance true or false, according to such trivial circumstances? If I am at a
distance from a Romish Priest, am I therefore to be looked upon as if I were at
as great a distance from God, and in a worse estate than another from whose
sides the Priest is not to be drawn? Does this cause my sorrow to be less or
more able to prevail upon God's mercy? Does true repentance depend upon the
Priest's good pleasure? And Attrition, which is but an imperfect sorrow, of no
validity of it self in God's sight, is it more considerable, more perfect, and
more able to save me, when a Priest shall have marked me with the sign of the
Cross upon my forehead? when he shall have whispered two or three words in my
ear? What am I the better for all this? Is God's Justice thereby satisfied? and
his Mercy more inclinable to pardon me?

According to this ridiculous Doctrine, suppose I should weep and lament for my
sins as bitterly as St. Peter, with as many expressions of holy love as Mary
Magdalen, if I do not confess them to a Priest, I shall be nevertheless damned
for them. And suppose I should be guilty of the most horrid crimes, if I can
but imitate this imperfect sorrow, a superficial displeasure to have offended
God, for the love that I bear to my self, if I reveal them to a Priest, I shall
be saved notwithstanding. Wretched Judas! had thou had but a Romish Priest at
the foot of thy Gibbet, thy Soul might have gone straight to heaven; for he
performed all the conditions required by the Popish Doctors in a true Penitent;
for they say that three particulars are to be observed, the compunction or
pricking of the heart, the confession, and satisfaction; compunction in the
soul, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of the hand. Judas was a
zealous observer of these particulars, as may appear by his History in the
Gospel, Matthew. 27.4. He wanted not comp^nction, or a hearty displeasure to have
sinned against God, for it is said he repented: He confessed also his crime, I
have sinned, said he, in betraying the innocent blood. David, in his
repentance, could say no more; and the greatest Casuists amongst the Papists
demand no more; for he did not confess only in general, but he mentions also
the greatness and nature of his sin. There was also in his repentance a
satisfaction, for he restored back his ill gotten money, he brought back the
thirty pieces of silver. How comes it to pass therefore, that penitent Judas
was damned? It was, says a Papist, because there was no Priest at the foot of
the Gibbet, where he hanged himself, to give (...) absolution; if there had
been one never so cont^^ptible, to speak to him but these two words, Te
absolvo, he might have made him a Saint, and following Ages would have built
Temples in honor of him, Altars and Images, as to the other Apostles, to
receive the devotions of the People. Some may reply, that Judas had not that
sincere and hearty sorrow required in a true Penitent, and that this was the
cause of his damnation. I am of the same opinion, I acknowledge that to be
true; but I affirm, and can prove, that Judas had as much sorrow and
displeasure as the Papists require in a sinner, when they give absolution, and
assure him of his happiness. I know that some of them will say, that this
attrition must be supernatural, grounded upon a divine faith, as the fear of
forfeiting the joys of heaven, of falling into the pains and torments of hell,
or a grief proceeding from these and such like persuasions; it is not derived
from God, or His Love, but from our interest revealed unto us by faith. In
Judas, we may take notice of a displeasure as great, and not much unlike to
that which proceeds from these principles, as may appear by his own words, I
have sinned in betraying the innocent blood: He declares publicly the
innocence of our Savior, which was an act of faith; moreover he declares, that
the consideration of Christ's innocence was the chief cause of his displeasure.
There is no ghostly Father of the Church of Rome but will take Judas's
repentance, not only for an attrition, but also for a true contrition. I am
certain that they give absolution to many persons, who never had so great a
sorrow for their sins as Judas. Therefore why was Judas damned? St. Ambrose
returns us a satisfactory answer, (...) which we may understand, how dangerous
it is sometimes to confess our sins rather to men than to God: Arbitror, says
he, enim quod etiam Judas potuisset tanta Dei miseratione non excludi a venia,
si poenitentiam, non apud Judaeos, sed apud Christum egisset. Ambr. l. 2. de
poenit. c. 5. I am persuaded, says he, that Judas might have been admitted by
God's infinite mercy, if instead of professing his repentance to the Jews, he
had addressed himself to Christ. He went to confess his sin to the Jews, who
instead of reproving him for it, and exhorting him to trust in God's
unspeakable goodness, returned him an answer, that tended to confirm him in his
malice, and cast him into despair, Quid ad nos? tu videris; said they to him;
What is that to us? see thou to that. This is the true model of the Papists
repentance: They confess their sins to a Priest, as much laden with guilt as
they are themselves. I have been drunk, says a drunken Sot in his confession
to a ghostly Father, who is sometimes more debauched: Quid ad nos? replies the
Father, tu videris: It is no great crime, we are apt to be drawn away with the
love of good company, therefore for penance I enjoin thee to cause a Mass to be
said for thee before the Virgin Mary's Altar; after that he is perfectly
absolved. I have been guilty, says another, twenty times of the sin of
Fornication; Quid ad nos? replies a lecherous Father-Confessor, tu videris. It
is a difficult task to suppress the motions of love; therefore thou shall for
thy penance number over thy Beads, that is sufficient for thee: such a one is
afterward certain to obtain salvation, by this absolution so easily obtained.
I have worshipped Images, will a nice conscience it may be say, contrary to
God's command; I have believed many things not agreeable to what is recorded in
the Holy Word of God; I have preferred man's inventions to the Laws of God,
etc. Quid ad nos? tu videris. Thou must do so, says a Priest, by this means
thou shall come to be a Saint. This is a Judas's repentance, and a dealing like
to that of the Jews: Let any man judge if it be able to secure the salvation of
our souls.

I might add to this, that extraordinary Power which the Romish Priests claim
of pardoning all manner of sins, and of blotting them out with the breath of
two words. Is not this to make themselves equal to Jesus Christ, and to declare
themselves to be the Saviors of Mankind? Wherefore do they treat their
Penitents as slaves, and deal with them as if they were their Gods?

Moreover, they treat the Son of God most unworthily, and are guilty of the
same sin as the wicked Macedonians, who affirmed that the Holy Spirit was but
the servant of the Father of Eternity. The Romish Divines deal with Christ in a
more disgraceful manner: For by their doctrines they make him become their
Priest's servant: For when they are pleased to say, we absolve this sinner, it
is the same as if they said to Jesus Christ, we command thee to give to this
soul sanctifying grace, that it may be justified and acceptable to God the
Father. We will not grant absolution to that sinner, that is to say, we forbid
thee to show him or her so much favor as thou did to penitent Mary Magdalen,
to wash away her sins; this belongs to us; we will do it a fortnight hence; we
command the sinner to come to us at that time; until then we will bind him or
her with a tie not to be loosed: The Lamb of the Revelations, without our
assistance, cannot open the book of a sinners conscience, to take away from it
the impressions of sin. This is the imperious language of the Popish Priests to
their Penitents; they deal with them in this manner; their Missionary and
Itinerary Preachers are yet more cruel to such as are at their mercy: I would
not have any man think that I add more than is true, I will assure him that I
speak nothing but what I know to be too true. If the Father-Confessors speak
not these words always, they have them in their thoughts, seeing that they deal
thus with the people, and maintain that they must do so: So impertinent and
ridiculous they are.

But consider in what manner this Confession is made. They begin by a
repetition of the Confateor, saying, I confess my self to God the Father
Almighty, to the Blessed Virgin Mary, to St. Michael the Archangel, etc. What
an impertinency is this! Does my absolution depend upon the will of God the
Father, of the Virgin Mary, of St. Michael, and of the Priest equally, must
they all consent to the forgiveness of my sins? is not God's mercy sufficient
alone? why do they rank them with God? Afterward the Priest forces them to
mention all their sins, every particular, and circumstance; asking them
questions according to the condition of the persons, but such many times as are
more proper to teach than to reprove vice, daily experience declares. But what
manner of sins think ye that the Penitents are forced to confess? Such as many
times are but the whimsies of the ghostly Fathers, who would persuade their
Zealots of being more spiritual and more subtle than ordinary by this means, to
oblige them to a greater reverence of their persons. What ridiculous
impertinencies have some of these Father-Confessors taught their penitent Nuns,
in their Confessions: You shall see what the right reverend Father, Father Yves
a Capuchin of Paris, has written in his Letters of Agathon to Erastus, and
Father Chiron a Carmelite, in his Book called The Examen of the Mystical
Theology. They bring a devout Nun before her Father-Confessor, accusing her
self in this ridiculous manner and nonsensical language: Benedicite, ghostly
Father, I accuse my self, and confess that I have not been early enough upon my
tip-toes, in the heart, and about the concerns of my internal houswifery; in
the time of my prayer I have not been fixed to the In-action, nor to the
contemplation of the In-being, I have not acted my devotions in a fit temperies
of soul and body, I have suffered my senses to wander from the domination of
the Man-spirit; thus has it been almost all the time of the aeconomical work
of my obediential duty; I have eaten and drunk, and taken of the creature too
freely, otherwise than in sight of natural mercy, without minding in due time
to do acts of stop, stop to my All, by a recall of my self within my self, of my
outward part within the compass of my inward, in the bottom of my soul: I have
not done my best endeavor to keep my self always in the fiery Meridian of the
full reigning of God in me; I have not rested my self under the caliginous
mists of the enlightening Pedagoge: I have not been thankful enough to the
triple Spirit of God in me, to the tear-heart, the endure-God, and the
transpiercing lover-God. These two Authors affirm that the Missionary Priests
of Peter Camus Lord Bishop of Bellay, and Father Donatian have taught their
devout Nuns to confess their sins in this extravagant manner. Let any man judge
if such lessons as these are not ridiculous and impertinent; if their
consciences are not deceived, by believing all these niceties to be crimes;
they had better declare with David, I have sinned, I acknowledge my offense, O
God have mercy upon me, than to run over so many sidle-fadles. The time of
Confession is spent in reckoning up such impertinencies as these; and after
all, the Priest enjoins a penance more ridiculous than the confession it self.
A certain Monk informed me of a very discreet and virtuous Lady, who was so
conscientious, that she came to him to entreat him to mitigate or change a
penance commanded to her by a Missionary Priest, which was to dip her smock in
cold water, before she went to bed, and to sleep in it every night for a whole
year; she had been once obedient to him, but her obedience almost cost her her
life. Nevertheless she was persuaded that there was no salvation for her if she
did not perform her penance, this cast her into a despair, and made her almost
mad. See unto what grievous follies and mistakes this supposed power drives the
Papists: They pull Jesus Christ from his throne, to place their Priests in his
seat; they enslave the souls and consciences of men to their wills, so that
they believe themselves bound to credit whatsoever they say, to do whatsoever
they command, yea the greatest follies and impossibilities.

. Abstinence and Fasting I have always looked upon as a very holy and useful
practice; but I could never understand, under this dispensation of God's Grace,
in this liberty and freedom from all laws that are not of his enacting, how it
is possible, that a good piece of beef, or a slice of fat bacon should be able
to damn my soul, sooner than a red herring. For we are commanded by St. Paul,
to eat that which is set before us; and our Savior assures us, that it is not
that which enters into the mouth that defiles the soul, but that which comes
out. They tell us that Moses, Elias, and our Savior Christ have done so before
us; their virtuous examples in this respect were admirable, but not imitable;
the Papists are not careful to follow them exactly, no more than the
Protestants: For they should spend forty days and forty nights without eating
or drinking. I am persuaded that if the Pope should make any such law, the
Romish Bishops and Cardinals would never believe that he was inspired of God.
But we may see by experience, that abstinence from meats and fastings are quite
out of fashion, and seldom observed by the Roman Catholics; their Casuists
allow liberty to so many, that but few in these days think themselves to be
obliged to keep these Laws; for if you please to set aside all Women with
child, all wet Nurses, all Handy-crafts-men, Plow men, Mariners and Seamen,
Servants that work all day, all Travelers, weak and sick, such as have no
means to eat a good meal, that is to say, such as have no fish, or something
like that for their dinner; set aside the Magistrates, and others, that labor
with their brains, the Ladies, that cannot sleep without a good supper in their
bellies, and generally all such as have not attained to the Age of one and
twenty, I or that are above threescore; and tell me, how many will remain? And
of those whom we have not mentioned, but very few observe fasting, for it is no
fasting to feed twice a day. I am certain, they are rather guilty of gluttony,
to fill their paunch above measure at noon, that they might not long for meat
the rest of the day. I think they had better never have made any such Law,
which concerns so few, and which by them is very ill observed. But the Prince
of Darkness has found out this expedient, to beget doubts and scruples in the
souls of men, that they might sin against their mistaken consciences, and by
that means run into damnation.

I must take notice here of another consideration, unto which I could never
find any satisfactory answer, and which has helped me to discover the vanity
of all these feigned austerities, whereof the observation is no small
hinderance to a true Christian mortification, a subduing of our passions and
unruly lusts. If our perfection in Christianity, and the holiness of our Souls,
depends so much upon fasting, abstinence, and such mortifications of the body,
the Pharisees were good Christians, and the Turks would deserve a greater
esteem of holiness than we; for the Pharisees did perform all these things
exactly, and the Laws of the Turks forbid them to drink wine, and to forbear
eating of several meats all their life time, besides they have certain Monks
very austere in their living, the Dervises whip themselves publicly in the
streets, they cut their skin with sharp rasors, and suffer many such cruelties
in their bodies, as Calcondile and Michael Baudier relate. The wilful penances
of our Monks are not to be compared to theirs. We may therefore conclude, and
speak confidently, that this Law is as great an hypocrisy and abuse, as the
other Inventions of the Papists. To make our Christian perfection consist in
such niceties and follies, is to catch at the shadow instead of the body, to
mistake the color for the substance, the appearance for the reality, the shell
for the pearl, and the night for the day: But such as are inveigled by the
perusal of the Popish Books, which are only allowed to be read in that Church,
and such as are besotted and deceived by the repeated lessons of their
Preachers, who seldom cry up any thing else in their Pulpits, cannot well make
all these reflections and considerations.

. The unlawfulness of the Priest's Marriage is a Law contrary to the Holy
Scriptures, and the cause of many abominations, and of the damnation of many
Souls, which might otherwise be sanctified and saved. What I shall say
concerning this matter, may be applied to the Monks and Nuns. Jesus Christ
himself has approved of Nuptial Solemnities and Marriage by his presence. He
does in no case disallow it. Marriage, says the Apostle, is honorable amongst
all men, Heb. 13.4. Virginity it is true causes us to be very like the Holy
Angels, nevertheless the same Apostle assures us, that it is better to marry
than to burn, 1 Cor. 7. The Examples of the Apostles, and of their Successors,
should be sufficient in my judgment to answer all the objections that may be
invented; for although our virtue be never so extraordinary, and God's Grace in
us be never so powerful, it is a grievous presumption to affirm, that we have
more virtue and grace than the Apostles had, more than those illuminated Souls,
full of the most wonderful perfections. It is to no purpose, that they extol
what the Holy Scripture and the Primitive Fathers have said in praise of
Virginity. Children that know not what it is to engage in a vow, to observe
that which depends more upon God than upon our ability, may approve of their
reasons, but we cannot allow them. If we did all but understand, as I have done
by the confessions of many persons, how many horrid and enormous crimes this
Vow has occasioned in the Church of Rome: It fills it with abominations and
filthiness, and causes such as should be examples of holiness to be paterns of
all manner of vices.

Virginity, I confess, is praiseworthy, I have not changed my Opinion in
relation to that: I remember very well what I have read upon this subject in
St. Ambrose, St. Austin, and in other Fathers, who have employed their eloquent
pens to set forth the praises of these noble virtues, if we may so style things
that are in themselves indifferent. The same Sermons that I have preached in
France in praise of a single life, I dare preach in England, without fear of
reproof. But I could never yet find in all the Holy Scripture, nor in the
writings of the Fathers of the Church, any thing that should oblige us to
engage in this rash Vow; or that it is a virtue which we may promise to our
selves to observe and keep faithfully till death: I cannot find that God ever
promised to bestow the graces necessary for the observation of this vow, to all
that shall undertake it. After a long experience and acquaintance with the
consciences of men, I have understood sufficiently that this vow of perpetual
Virginity engages some in the commission of grievous abominations, who might
otherwise be Saints.

Therefore I am forced to condemn this Law, as one of the most wicked
inventions of the Devil in Christianity, and one of the most dangerous of all
his snares: I dare not say all that I know of this matter, if I did, I should
force every modest Reader of these few lines to blush; for I might declare not
only sinful thoughts, or desires, and wicked deeds caused by this vow, so
highly esteemed as a virtue, these are but natural brats of that devilish
father; but I might mention unto you the most fearful monsters, actions,
crimes, and unheard of abominations proceeding from it, such as deserve the
fire of God's vengeance from heaven, which once fell upon Sodom and Gomorrha,
such as deserve that the earth should swallow us up alive, but God will not
punish the innocent with the guilty. How many crimes have been acted! bloody
murders and secret cruelties perpetrated! If Tertullian were now alive, he
might with as good reason exclaim against the promoters of this law, as once he
did against Marcion, who attempted to hinder the begetting of children. He
compared that wicked man to Herod, and says, that in his opinion he was more
criminal than Herod, for that Tyrant cut the throats of children already born,
but Marcion was guilty of a greater cruelty, because he did endeavor to hinder
the generation of infants. The Promoters of a Single life amongst the Priests
are guilty of the same heinous offense; they are guilty of Herod's cruelty,
Marcion's barbarity, the Gnostick's murders: All this they cover with the
shadow of a pretended virtue; they destroy many souls by engaging them in an
estate where it is almost impossible that they should obtain salvation; and
cause them to commit many anticipated murders and cruelties. Whosoever has
been where I have, seen what I have beheld, and heard what I have heard, shall
say the same as I do now. I have many times pitied those poor fouls that have
revealed unto me their secrets in relation to what I speak: How miserable, said
I, is this poor man! if it were not for this one thing he would live like a
Saint; all his confession is stuffed with nothing else but with the sins
against his vow; that excepted, I find his desires are zealous, he is devout in
prayer, religious in his behavior, exemplary in his life and conversation: and
because he cannot make use of that remedy which God has allowed to the rest of
men, as a prevention of sin, he is in inevitable danger of damnation, if God
don't hinder him by his wonderful mercy. If these lines happen to come into the
hands of a Priest of the Romish Church, I am persuaded, that in his conscience
he cannot blame me for what I now write, nor will he think that this is a
stayrical Libel, or that these are unjust or ill-grounded accusations; for
whosoever has been a Father Confessor amongst the Papists, knows an hundred
times more than I dare reveal. He knows, that the greatest vice of Priests is
the breach of their Vow, and that this is such an ordinary sin amongst them,
that a Priest is looked upon as a notable Saint, if he be never guilty of other
sins but of drunkenness, and if he can command his unruly self so much for a
week only, so as not to let a lecherous thought escape toward a woman. At
least if they would allow a time sufficient to to try our own strength, and to
experience the effects of God's Grace within us. But far from this, they
determine their Children to the Cloister, while they are yet in the Cradle: The
eldest Son, as is most usual, being designed for Marriage; the second must be a
Knight of Malta; the third appointed for a Churchman, into whose hands they
often thrust the Breviary before he can yet pronounce the Title of the Book,
and complement him with the reverent style of Abbot, while he is as yet
un-acquainted with his Alphabet, and what reluctance soever he shall hereafter
have against it, yet must he necessarily still continue an Ecclesiastic. But
if the elder Brother chance to fail, the Vocation then cease, and the Spirit
(that blows where it lists) seems to have with drawn its influence, he
throws of his purple robe, and the Gentleman, who was but since yesterday
changed from a Clergyman, is now as ready for the Nuptial as he was before for
the Religious Vow; and all this (say they) proceeds from God, which those may
believe that think fit, but I for my part never could. As for the Daughters, if
there happen to be three, they do usually enter two of them into the Covent;
and here it is observable, that God is wont to call the most deformed, whilst
the other is born for the enjoyments of the world. The Peasants indeed do cause
their eldest Sons to apply themselves to their studies, but after they have
performed their Exercises, and spent a considerable sum in their Education, it
is no longer at their choice, whether they will become Priests or not, but are
compelled to it, for fear of incurring the displeasure of their Parents. Thus
it is, that they betake themselves to the practice of this Law, and from hence
proceed so many disorders, which might easily be prevented, if the Church were
left to its primitive liberty.

But that which makes these Constitutions of the Church of Rome to seem unto me
the more strange and extravagant, is this, that they commonly prefer them to
the Commandments of God. Let a young man have given himself over never so much
to the sin of the flesh, yet when he comes to take Holy Orders, this shall
create no necessity of taking out a Dispensation; but if he shall chance to
have married two wives, or but one, if she has been married before to another
man, (which they call Bigamy,) this woman being dead, he cannot take Orders
without a Dispensation from the Pope, for which he must pay sauce. Although a
man should never so often have taken the Name of God in vain, and uttered a
thousand blasphemies; yet even for such offenses will any Priest very readily
give his absolution, and he shall be freed from his guilt and penalty by
putting himself to the charge of two or three Masses: But if he should at any
time in Lent happen to eat a morsel of flesh, there is no absolution to be
obtained for such a crime, but from the hands of the Bishop, who will inflict
so severe a penance, that he shall have cause to remember it all the rest of
his life. Let a woman be never so notoriously guilty of fornication, and
prostitute her self as often as Lais or Messalina, there is no Confessor so
inconsiderable but can give her an absolution: But if by extraordinary
misfortune she shall on a Friday have tasted but one spoonful of soupe which
was left the day before, she must necessarily apply her self to the Bishop, and
shall (if it be possible) be sent to the Pope himself. By these means it comes
to pass that such disorders have crept into the Romish Church, and that at
present they prefer humane laws to the Commandments of Almighty God

Before I conclude, it is necessary to answer an Objection, that the Romanists
are wont to make to any person that shall upbraid them with the abuses and
disorders whereof we have before treated. Whence proceeds it then (say they)
that there are so few persons that forsake the Romish Religion? and that in
lieu of those few that go over to the Protestant party, we see great numbers
return to the bosom of the Church, and make, as they call it, their
Recantation, whereas of all those that have abandoned the Protestant Religion,
we see scarce any that return unto it after they have once forsaken it? To this
I might answer several ways, and I could give many particular reasons, why
several Protestants in France of great worth and quality have shifted their
Religion, which is there no longer in fashion, and accommodated themselves to
that of the Church of Rome. I shall only say this in general, which may be
observed in the case of every particular person; that it is Interest, which
first invites, and then detains them: this is that which first causes them to
change, and then obstinately to adhere to what they have embraced.

They act many things against the dictates of their conscience to avoid a
private persecution, which is often more severe than that which is more open
and avowed. The Charges which they offer, the Preferments which they bestow
upon persons of Quality, on condition that they shall change their Religion,
and a Pension of a thousand Crowns promised to a Minister, provided that he
quits his Party; are very powerful motives and arguments for the Romish Church;
and I have often admired at such as could resist so great Temptations. A Lady
of quality, whilst as a Messenger sent from God I solicited and exhorted her
to acts of Charity and compassion, caused me once to make an offer of 8000
Franks to a Maidservant of the Reformed Religion, (and at such a time as she
had received some ill usage from her Mistress) to try if I could by that means
make her become a Proselyte. I attempted it with all the Rhetoric and
Philosophy that I could make use of for such a purpose, but she still remained
constant, and slighted us both for the vanity of our attempt. This is no common
virtue, and I believe there are few servants of the Romish Religion in this
City, but might be prevailed with by so considerable a reward. But it is not by
such means as these that we ought to endeavor the conversion of our Brethren;
but by the principles of conscience, and the more rational motives to salvation.

On the other side, those that are acquainted with the Reasons that retain the
Romanists in the Religion which they profess, will not wonder that there are so
few of them made Proselytes: They know well enough that the Nobility and the
Commonalty, the Learned and the Unlearned, the Zealots and the Libertines have
an hundred invisible chains by which they are held fast. Never expect that a
rich Abbot of 5000 Livres per ann. should quit such a preferment to become a
Minister, or that a man in favor at Court should incur the displeasure of his
Prince, by renouncing the Pope. Nor can you with any more reason hope for the
conversion of the Learned: for you must look upon them in their Schools as
Disciples to no other but Aristotle; for they learn to dispute before they are
taught to believe, and become Philosophers before they are Christians: If at
any time they read the Holy Scripture, it is not with any intent to satisfy
themselves which doctrine is most agreeable to that divine Rule; but that they
may find therein some Text or other to be wrested in favor of themselves and
their perverse opinions. I read the Scripture my self for a long time with this
very design: when I met with any thing in it different from my principles, I
thought my self obliged to encounter it, and applied my self forth with to the
finding of Arguments which might serve as an answer to it: And this is that
which renders the conversion of the Learned so difficult: nor is that of the
Ignorant any less; for these are the people that will have no other Faith but
that which they deposite with their Curate, and yet so great an abhorrence for
all such as follow not their superstitions; that come not to Mass, carry not
their Rosaries about them, make no use of the Office of the Virgin, nor pray to
other Saints, that they are always ready to attempt their extirpation, and
believe that they should therein do God good service. I have heretofore my self
had such unchristian intentions and desires as these wherewith the Papists are
imbued, and amongst the rest those of the Order of the Jesuits. I became once
so tractable a Scholar by the charitable instructions of these Masters, that I
was one of the first that raised the Tumult at Rennes, and set fire to a
Protestant Church, at such time as it was believed that they were immured
within it: and these reverend Fathers were so far from discountenancing the
outrage, that they declared their sorrow and regret that we had not at least
burnt the Minister there alive. Judge therefore if there be any hopes of their
Conversion, who from their Cradle have imbibed such sentiments as these. But
the Zealots are yet further removed from it, being blinded, and kept close to
their Principles by erroneous Maxims and superstitious Principles, in which
they are made to believe the truth and purity of the Christian Religion to
consist. They persuade them, that they must at a venture believe what the
Church believes, that is, what their Director tells them, that they ought not
to raise the least dispute about what is preached to them out of the Scripture,
as being incapable to comprehend those Mysteries; that to doubt in the least of
the truth of Miracles, Traditions, Indulgences; the Power of the Pope and his
Priests, or to entertain the least thought of the possibility of being saved in
any other Religion, is a most enormous crime. So that that very light, which by
the special favor of God is afforded them for their conversion, is looked upon
by them as a machination of the Devil, against which they are obliged to
engage. This renders it in a manner impossible that they should ever be
reclaimed. As for the Libertines, they have no thoughts of the well fare of
their future state, and therefore all Religions are to them indifferent,
carrying always about them some pernicious principles, wherewith they are
provided, to combat against whatsoever shall oppose their sensual inclinations,
and wherewith they extinguish the light of the Spirit, which is afforded them
for their relief. Amongst these I may rank the giddy and inconstant, that out
of a principle of Libertinism, abandon the Romish Religion, and a while after,
upon the like motives, return to their former estate; a mercenary sort of
people, that are ready to enroll themselves in the service of any that will
hire them at a dearer rate. Such men as these, having inconsiderately shut
themselves up in a Cloister, where they are obliged to lead a regular life,
grow quickly weary of their first design, the Cowl is burdensome to them, and
the Religious Yoke becomes insupportable; hereupon they fancy, that if they
sally out, and go over to the Protestant Party, they shall be received after
the same manner that they are wont to entertain the revolting Ministers in
France, who are usually complemented like Princes. With such imaginations as
these, and without any other motive, or being able to render any solid reason
of their actions, one of them presents himself to a Consistory, which they
presume to be with a good intention, and being unwilling to be so injurious as
to send him back, they receive him, in hope that he is sincere in his
profession, and will prove a good man; nor is the assistance of some charitable
persons wanting: But the man, finding himself free from all subjection, begins
to give the reins to his inordinate appetite, frequents Brothel-houses, and
gives himself over to a scandalous and sensual life; hereupon they summon him
to the Consistory, that he may have the punishment inflicted on him which he
deserves, the charity lately extended to him is withheld, and the Papists
again, by their solicitations, and promises of a Dispensation from Rome for
the future, and an Act of Oblivion for what is past, they assure him of all
possible encouragement, and thereby prevail with him to return to his former
state, without any conviction wrought upon his conscience, or any other true
motives of his change, than the inconstancy of his mind, and his propensity to
his lusts and pleasures. We need not marvel then, that such as these should
forsake the communion of the true Church, since we seem hereby the rather to be
confirmed, that that Church is the true Church from which they revolt,
according to their own argument, which infers the holiness and good discipline
of a Religious Order from the number of such as do renounce it. They went out
from us, says St. John, Ep. 1. c. 2.19. but they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, they would have remained with us, but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. By their works we may
judge of the sincerity of their conscience, and the truth of their faith, as
the goodness of the tree is judged by its fruit.

. There are several other things, which from my own experience I could speak
to, in laying open the Abuses of the Romish Church, which I have not at present
thought necessary to mention. But I am persuaded, that what I have said already
may be sufficient to convince you, that I have not without good reason forsaken
the Papists, that I might embrace the Religion of the Church of England. I will
conclude therefore, with my request to you, that you would reflect on what I
have done and said: I have not I hope in this act of mine, discovered any thing
of blind ignorance, or any unruly passion, which I trust I may say without
vanity, for by the grace of God I am free from it. I know very well, that I am
rather exposed to the pity than to the envy of the world, but this I have done
that I might give glory to God, and assert that which I am persuaded is the
truth.

All that I have said concerning the Abuses of the Romish Church, are things
whereof I am very well assured, and such as I have not without a great deal of
study and industry discovered: I have for six or seven years diligently
searched for Reasons, whereby I might defend them; sometimes applying my self
to the Holy Scripture, sometimes to the ancient Fathers and modern Authors: I
sometimes seriously proposed my Objections to a great number of most
accomplished men, with whom I had been long conversant, and never could receive
any satisfactory return. Wherefore after all these Essays, being perfectly
convinced of the truth of your Religion, I am constrained to renounce the
Religion of my Ancestors, and to take up a resolution to forsake it. But how?
and at what time? I must to the glory of God acknowledge it, that it was at
such a time as there was not the least probability that I should attempt it,
for certain reasons which some are not unacquainted with, and which are not fit
to be published.

It will be sufficient to declare in general, that I have forsaken Popery in a
time in which I had the strongest and natural engagements to keep me in my
predecessors Religion, and in my former Profession. How so? Because a change
must needs cause me to run many hazards, bring upon me the hatred of my
Friends, and the displeasure of my Kindred, make me appear to them as a
declared Rebel, and an Apostate: So that according to the Laws of the Land that
I have forsaken, I am to be punished in an exemplary manner, for embracing the
truth. These and the following Considerations did long retard my design; as
that by this alteration I should purchase to my self nothing but misery, and in
the judgment of some, the esteem of a vagabond, or of a licentious person,
guilty of some offense or scandal; and that I must never expect to be
entertained and live in the world, but as little better than a Beggar.

Notwithstanding all these obstacles and Panick fears, my Christian Brethren,
you see that I have freely and confidently engaged my self in the profession of
your Religion: I forsake without regret or apprehensions that of my Forefathers
to embrace the Protestant. This act ought to be looked upon, as an
encouragement of such as are doubting and wavering in their minds, whether that
which they profess is the best and the furest, without doubt it is. You may
believe me upon my word, which I have confirmed by my deeds, for God be praised
in this matter I am not ignorant, I have been long enough deliberating and
weighing the Reasons of both Parties, of Protestants and Papists; I know from
whence I come, what I forsake, and what I embrace. Besides, you may well look
upon and esteem me to be no mad man, that runs wilfully into his own damnation.
There is none more careful in the Church of Rome, than I am, to avoid the
causes of damnation: If I did but doubt of my salvation in the Reformed
Religion, or if I could believe that it were possible for me to be saved in the
Church of Rome, I here swear and protest unto you, before God, that I would
never do what you see I have done, I would rather undergo the most bitter
torments, and whatever might happen to me, I would never wrong my conscience.
This consideration therefore, and my example, should settle and confirm every
one of you in the Protestant Religion, should appease the troubles and
doubtings of your mind, fix your resolutions in the profession of the Truth.
And you, my beloved Brethren, that are sufficiently grounded in your Religion,
and whose lives are conformable, my example should oblige you to rejoice, in
that God is pleased to grant your private and public requests, and the prayers
of your Congregation, by sending to you, from time to time, Proselytes, and
bringing into your Flook the straying Sheep, or rather the lost Sheep, such
whereof the salvation was so difficult, that there was scarce any appearance or
likelihood that it should be brought to pass. St. Anstin was named the son of
Monica 's tears, because his religious Mother shed so many, that at last she
obtained her request, and her Son's conversion, from God's goodness. I may this
day style my self in the same manner, for I look upon my self as the return of
your religious and charitable prayers, and the Son of your sighs and tears. I
would therefore now express unto you my hearty thanks, but you desire that I
should render them only to God. I have nothing else to request from you, but
the continuation of the same prayers for all those whom I yet leave behind me,
especially for such as I have confirmed in their errors and mistakes; help,
and join with me in my duty, in endeavoring their conversion. But especially I
must entreat your prayers to God, that I may for the time to come lead a life
answerable to that holy profession, which I h^^e this day made; that I may not
be unworthy of your Communion here, and may attain with you hereafter to the
fruition of that Crown of Glory, which God has promised to his faithful
Servants. To One God, and Three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, and Praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

