REFLECTIONS UPON A Late Book, ENTITLED, The Case of Allegiance Considered:
Wherein is shown, that the Church of England's Doctrine OF Non-Resistance and
Passive Obedience, Is not inconsistent with Taking The New Oaths TO Their
Present MAJESTY'S.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Baily,
1689.

REFLECTIONS UPON A Late Book, ENTITLED, The Case of Allegiance considered.
SIR,
YOU desire my Opinion concerning the Author and the Treatise of The Case of
Allegiance; which I sent you, hoping that you being of a judgment dissatisfied
in that case, it might have some influence for your Conviction: But the Answer
which you returned me with that Book, was, That you thought the Author to be a
partial man, no Minister of the Established Church. And although the Treatise
might, as some Beauties, have a general approbation, yet there was in it
something of an Air which did not please you; and though you dealt with it, as
Martial with Sabadius, Non Amo te Sabade nec possum dicere quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere non amo te.
Yet knowing you to be a good Scholar, and an honest man, I resumed the Book,
and gave it a diligent Research; and upon second thoughts, am induced to think,
that the Author was either of the number of the ancient Nonconformists in the
Reign of King Charles I. or of those who of late are known by the name of
Trimmers, or at least a Latitudinarian, much differing in his Principles of
Loyalty from those which have been taught and practiced by the Church of
England, as by the Blessing of God it stands Established: A City-Minister I
believe he may be, (as he names himself) but whether of the number of those
that are by Law Established, I much doubt:

However, I do declare, that I am fully satisfied as to the design of the
Author, That we may and ought to pay our Allegiance to King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY, whom I pray God long to preserve and prosper, yet can I not approve of
the Premises from which he would infer that Conclusion: for notwithstanding the
many Male Administrations of the late King, I suppose (with submission to those
that judge otherwise) that we ought not, for those Reasons, to have made actual
Resistance (as we did not) by taking Arms against him, nor that the late King
did thereby forfeit his Right to the Crown, this being, as I yet conceive,
contrary to our Oaths and Declarations, and contrary to the Doctrine and
Practice of that Church whereof we profess our selves Members.

To which I add this Reason, because we should hereby justify that unnatural
Rebellion which was so smally carried on against King Charles the First of
blessed Memory, against whom it was suggested, That he had been accessory to
the poisoning of his Father; that he endeavored to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Government; to bring in German Horse, and other foreign Forces into
the Land; and causelessly imposed Fines and Imprisonment on his Subjects: All
which notwithstanding, I cannot think those otherwise than Rebels, that raised
War against him. And I hope their present Majesty's will not be displeased, if
we still retain our first Principles of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience,
during their Government: Nor once suspect, that they who have maintained and
practiced them under such unhappy Circumstances, as they were reduced to by the
Evil Conduct and Counsels of the late King, will cast off this which the Author
calls Super-Loyalty; as if it were contrary to a true English Temper, and a
peaceful Settlement of Church and State. And as for our Super-Conformity, I
think there needs no other Apology than what this Author has made, (viz.) That
before the Church was secretly practiced upon by the Arts of her subtle
Adversary, (which (by the way) did not prevail either with the chiefest for
Dignity, or with the most for number, who perceived the Design of our
Adversaries was to divide us, and thereby to destroy us) it was easily to be
discovered that her (i. e.) the Churches Principles of Conformity and Loyalty
were far more moderate and intelligible than those which have been since that
time most industriously and impetuously recommended under her venerable Name:
So that by this I cannot conceive how the Church should oblige the present
Government to treat her with less kindness than she does expect, as the Author
does suggest, page 34.

But here it will be demanded what security we will give for our Allegiance to
the present Government, and on what foundation we lay that Allegiance. I answer
to the first, Our Security shall be our Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive
Obedience, which we have always practiced in far more difficult times and
circumstances, than we can fear to see under the present Government. Secondly,
Our Security shall be the taking of the New Oaths, which we have seen and
maturely considered, and by the help of God shall religiously observe, as we
did our former Oaths, although the late King before his departure did absolve
us from them, and much more by his deserting of us, and as much as in him lay,
gave us up to Confusion: All which notwithstanding, there are still among us
some sober men, so nicely scrupulous, that they conceive themselves under the
obligation of them; though I doubt not, but the generality of the Members of
our Church will be ex animo, full Conformists to those Oaths.

As to the second demand, on what foundation we lay our Allegiance to the
present Government, I answer, We have an Act of Parliament in the Reign of
Henry the Seventh, for our indemnity, as to the Law of the Land; and I think we
have a Statute in an higher Court, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, the reason whereof is, for there is no power but of God; (and)
the powers that be, (...), for the translation of which, I suppose we have no
need of the correction which our Author does make, (viz.) There is no
Authority, if not of God, and the Authorities which are (of God's institution)
are ordered under God: for I think our Translation is the best, (viz.) For
there is no power but of God, and the powers that are (i. e.) are in being de
facto, are ordained of God, who gives them to whom he pleases. And it is no
difficult task to show that the Power then in being, was but an Usurpation on
the Senate of Rome, by the Army and such Favorites as they set up for
Emperors, against the Right of the Senate; of which, if need were, I could
give sufficient Testimonies of very Learned men, nor can I think that the (...)
was intended to be understood in such a critical sense, as to signify
precisely only such Powers as are de Jure, lawful.

But I depend not on either or both of these, nor on those overt acts which the
late King did wilfully commit, whereby he did abdicate the Government of the
Kingdom of England, qua talis, long before he left the Land; for the Government
being an Office entrusted for Administration according to Laws, and the late
King's Grandfather having declared to his Subjects in the Star Chamber, June
20. 1616. that being sworn to Maintain the Laws of the Land, he should be
perjured if he should alter them; and our ancient Lawyers declaring, that Non
est Rex ubi dominatur voluntas and non lex. And that of Fleta, Rex non a
regnando sed regendo, nam Rex est dum been regit Tyrannus cum populum opprimit.
And Spelman of the word Allegiantia, that it is a word importing vinculum
Arctius inter regem and subditos utrosque invicem connectens. And the
resolution of some very judicious Divines, that if one party that is mutually
engaged, do violate his obligation, the other is not obliged, and that that
Oath is not to be kept, the execution whereof is destructive of the common
safety.

On these grounds many great men may judge, that for these and the like causes,
a Crown may be forseited; yet I suppose there are other Foundations laid by
those great men in which I do acquiesce: As first, that the present King being
a free Prince, and no Subject of the King of England, and having a right Title
to the Succession to the Crown of England, as well in his own right as in right
of his Queen, whereof he was endeavored by the subtle arts of Jesuits to be
deprived; and the present King being also constituted the Head of the
Protestant party, who were destinated to utter ruin, by confederacies against
them, did for these causes successfully vindicate his Title and the legal
Succession, and put the Protestant Cause in a fair way of establishment, upon
which success the late King having deserted first the Government, and then the
Land, and fled to an inveterate Enemy of our Religion and Nation, whether
through his own or the counsel of the Jesuits, to whose conduct he had
committed his Conscience, and the administration of the Government, directly
contrary to the Laws of the Land, and leaving us under a standing Army, wherein
was a considerable party of Irish Papists, who being left unpaid, and ordered
to disband, were likely to be very injurious to the English Subjects; I am
convinced, that he has lawfully vindicated the Succession to himself and the
Royal Family.

And secondly, I assent to the judgment of my Superiors, that the Crown of
England being thus made void, was rightfully set on the Heads of the present
King and Queen; and that the present Transactions are much more justifiable
than what was done in the Case of Henry the Seventh, and acknowledged by
Parliament; my Reasons whereof I shall give hereafter, and shall now give you
my Remarks on the Case of Allegiance, wherewith I was generally well pleased
both with the Matter and Style, and which, I hope, may have a good effect with
many men for their full satisfaction, for which I verily believe it was
charitably and ingeniously intended by the Author, until in the last Page I
read this following passage, whereupon I began to make my Remarks, (viz) That
in the next Reign after King James, (which all know was that glorious Martyr
Charles First) when Popish and French Counsels found admission at our Court,
then arose together the new Principles of Super-conformity in the Church, and
Super-Loyalty in the State, which like a preternatural ferment, have ever since
disturbed the peace of both, and must be again cast out, if ever we recover a
true English temper, or peaceful settlement, etc. This, and some other
passages, which I shall name, made me suspect, that he was under some
discontent, though p. 2. he says, he had no angry resentment of his sufferings.
And p. 19. speaking of the Bishops who petitioned the late King, he calls them,
some of his Bishops. And of the Clergy he says, p. 31. There have been for some
time a Party among us who have appropriated to themselves the Church of
England, exclusive of their Brethren, yet we shall find enough on our side to
justify our Doctrines to be consistent with her Principles. And p. 32. That
the Principles of Loyalty which obtained in the Church at that time, ( viz.
Queen Elizabeth) were no other than what he asserts. He would prove from the
Prayer, they are charged with by the Parliament in Queen Mary's Reign, That God
would turn her heart from Idolatry, to the true Faith, or else shorten her
days, and take her quickly out of the way; and more to this purpose out of the
Journal of Simon D'Eurs, of which I doubt not to say, that these Assertions are
not agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of England.

These passages did a little amuze me, as reflecting too severely on the best
of Kings and the most discreetly Loyal Church in the World. As for the King of
Blessed Memory, his first years were full of peace, till being reduced to some
necessities, not through his own fault, but such as by other unhappy circumstances
he was reduced to, some Malcontents took advantage thereof to drive him to
greater; the vogue was his being misled by evil Counselors, such as the
Archbishop and Strafford, who I have reason to believe were as far from Popery
or French Counsels, as any Ministers of State before or since. As for that good
Prince, I cannot without indignation hear, that he inclined to Popish Counsels,
for tho he be termed the head of the Grotian Religion, and Grotius for an
arrant Papist, yet it is well known in what Religion he both lived and died, as
also did those two great Ministers, the Earl and the Archbishop, of whom Sir
Edw. Dearing said, That he had smitten the great Champion of the Papists under
the fifth rib. And though the King married to a French Lady, yet he espoused
not her Religion, much less the Counsels of that Court to which he was always
averse. Yet I remember it was said by a late Writer, That the Parliament (whom
he was bound to believe) made it their great argument and advantage against the
King, that he favored the Papists; on which supposition thousands came in to
fight for their cause. And one Article against the Archbishop was, That he
endeavored to introduce Popery; though Mr. Prynne proved a design of the
Papists to cut them both off, as their most formidable Enemies. And the
Relation of Dr. Du Moulin says, That at the death of that good King, a known
Papist was heard to say, That now their greatest Enemy was cut off. I think no
good man will accuse the Nation of Super-Loyalty in the State, when so much
real Mischief was wrought by such groundless Jealousies, that caused a fatal
War against so Religious a Prince; and by the same Arts a preternatural Ferment
(as he says) has ever since disturbed the Peace of the State.

As to the other head, the Super-Conformity that troubled the Church, which
must be cast out, or (he says) there can never be a peaceful Settlement in the
Church, I would gladly be informed whether the many Sects which have abounded
among us, all which conspired against both the Church and State, were not
rather the Superfetations of the first Nonconformists, who raised Divisions in,
and Separation from the Church on the like pretenses, that the Bishops were
Popishly affected: Which Ferment made the Presbyterians and other Sects to
impute Popery to the Bishops ever since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign; and such a Suspicion the Author would still cherish in the minds of the
People. And whether the Author be not soured with the same Ferment, that calls
the Petitioning Bishops, some of his (i. e. James the Second's) Bishops, I much
doubt. Nor can I tell how he should be of the Church of England, and yet record
his Sufferings, unless for some Nonconformity he was one of the Excluded
Brethren; which I guess by his distinguishing between the Doctrines on his
side, (i. e.) the Excluded Brethren, and those of the Church of England, which
he would make to be consistent: which I shall disprove, 1. By showing what was
the Doctrine of Allegiance constantly received in the Church of England; not
from the Reign of Charles the First, but from the beginning of the Reformation.
And 2ly, What is the different Doctrine that has been taught by him and his
Excluded Brethren, and the Reader may guess how irreconcilable they are.

Now the reasons of this my endeavor, are, 1. The great Scandal that might
justly be imputed to the Church, if she should be so inconstant as to recede
from her own Doctrine.

2ly, From the jealousy which the Kings, under whose protection the Church
subsists, might entertain of her, if the Doctrine of Resistance should be
allowed by her.

3ly, Because in the case which has now happened, she has not made use of any
Resistance.

4ly, Because some whom the Author calls Super-loyal and Super conforming
persons, for their maintaining the Doctrine of Non-resistance, may be thought
to have now cast it off, and are disposed to engage in a Rebellion against a
lawful Prince for Male-Administrations.

I begin with the first, viz. to show what was the Doctrine of Allegiance
professed in the Church of England ever since the first Reformation. The
judgment of the Bishops in the days of Henry VIII. and Edward VI. who were our
first Reformers, did set forth a Book called, The Institution of a Christian
Man, whereof Cranmer, Ridley, and other Martyrs, were the Compilers. On the
fifth Commandment they say, Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealty,
Truth, Love, and Obedience toward their Prince, for any cause whatsoever; ne
for any cause may they conspire against his Person, ne do any thing toward the
hurt thereof, nor of his Estate. And by this Command they be bound to obey all
the Laws, Proclamations, Precepts, and Commandments made by their Prince,
except they be contrary to the Commandments of God. And on the sixth
Commandment, No Subjects may draw the Sword against the Prince, for any cause
whatsoever it be; and though Princes, which be the Supreme Heads of their
Realms do otherwise than they ought, yet God has assigned no Judges over them
in this World. To these succeed the Authors of the Homelies, whereof Bishop
Jewel is said to be the Penman: Of these, the Author says, p. 32: That they
teach us to submit to lawful Authority, and to know our bounden Duty to common
Authority; but they teach no Loyalty besides or contrary to Law. Her Homelies
nowhere that I know of, assert the Errors that I have here condemned, or
condemn any of the Positions I have here asserted.

Now, Homely the first against Rebellion, says, p. 1. That Kings and Princes,
as well the evil as the good, do reign by God's Ordinance, and that Subjects
are bound to obey them. If Servants ought to obey their Masters, not only being
gentle, but froward, much more ought Subjects to be obedient to their sharp and
rigorous Princes.

Rebellion is worse than the worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto
has been. What if a Prince be evil indeed, and undiscreet, and it is evident
to all men's eyes that he is so? I ask again, what if it be long of the
wickedness of his Subjects that he is so, shall the Subjects by their
wickedness both provoke God to give them an evil and indiscreet Prince for
their punishment, and also rebel against him and against God? Hear what the
Scripture says, God makes a wicked man to reign, for the punishment of a
people. Let us deserve to have a good Prince, or let us patiently suffer and
obey such as we deserve; and whether the Prince be good or evil, let us pray
for his continuance and increase in Goodness, if he be good; or for his
amendment, if he be Evil. Our Liturgy, our Articles, our Constitutions, do all
inculcate the same Duty: So have the prime Bishops and Ministers of the Church,
especially Bishop Andrews and Bishop Sanderson, in the Reigns of King James and
King Charles the first, who condemned the Doctrine of Resistance as a Popish
Doctrine. Thus Bishop Sanderson, in a Sermon preached July 26. 1640. when that
unnatural Rebellion began, on 1 Cor. 10.23. says, That no conjuncture of
circumstances whatsoever, can make that to be done at any time, which in it
self is unlawful, and to take up Arms against a lawful Sovereign, offensive or
defensive, may not be done at any time, in any case, upon any pretense
whatsoever. And on 1 Timothy 3.16. As for our Accusers, if no more were to be
instanced in then that one accursed Position alone, wherein notwithstanding
their agreement in other things, they both ( i e. the Dissenters and Papists)
do consent, viz. That lawful Sovereigns may be by their Subjects resisted, and
Arms taken up against them for the Cause of Religion, it were enough to make
good the Challenge against them bo^^ which is so notorious a piece of
ungodliness, as no man that either fears God or the King as he ought, can
speak or think of, without detestation.

And beyond these Doctrines I suppose no Super-Loyalty has been taught, nor
beneath these has the Church of England at any time practiced. How they
behaved themselves in the Rebellion against Charles I. does appear by their
constant adherence to him, and sacrificing their Lives and Fortunes to his
Service. Their Loyalty to Charles the Second, was not any way culpable, unless
their Super-Loyalty was a crime. And to James the Second, had not the Monmouth
Rebellion, to which the Sectaries gave assistance, been opposed by those of the
Church, he might have been more certainly forced out of the World, than he was
out of his Kingdom.

Hitherto then we find no resistance in the Doctrine or Practice of the Church;
and I hope, that until there be any cause given, our present Gracious
Sovereigns, they never will on any malicious suggestions, or groundless
jealousies, entertain a contrary Opinion of the Church, or any of her true
Members.

The only thing therefore to be considered is, what has been done as to
resistance in this late Revolution; how the chief Bishops of the Church behaved
themselves under his Reign is fresh in memory; that in all lawful things they
yielded submission and obedience, and in things unlawfully imposed, they made
no resistance, but submitted to even illegal Impositions, Fines, and
Imprisonments, until the King's deserting of them; whereby he became as if he
were naturally dead; the case of Allegiance was altered and utterly ceased. It
is but vainly objected, that the late King was forced to desert the Government,
which in truth he never intended to administer as he ought; which intention was
evidently declared, notwithstanding his Coronation Oath, by the whole series of
his Government, having wholly devoted himself to the Counsels of Popish
Ministers, for the Subversion of the Established Religion and Laws, and for the
settling of Popery and Arbitrary Government, at the cost of his Life; wherein
being by a wonderful Providence disappointed, he chose to desert the
Government, I say he Chose, having declared, He would do it, or die in the
Attempt.

Now suppose a man does drink to that excess that he loses his Reason, and in
his Drunkenness is guilty of Murder, or sets his own House on fire, and leaves
it in a flame that threatens the consuming of the Neighborhood, such a person
is by the Law adjudged a wilful Criminal, and must suffer accordingly. And
doubtless, if men be intoxicated by destructive Opinions, tending to their own,
as well as the destruction of others, and by obstinacy in them, commit things
contrary to the Rules of Religion, Law, and Reason, and draw on themselves a
necessity of flying for it; such actions shall be accounted voluntary: for thus
when God gives up wilful Sinners, after long continuance in their sins, against
all the methods of Grace which have been despised by them, to follow the
hardness of their own Hearts, and ungodly Lusts, all the sins, as well those
committed before, as after their judiciary hardness, shall be imputed to them
as their voluntary acts: so is it in this case. And if the Fires kindled by a
drunken man in his fury be quenched, and that man becoming more sober, shall
desire to return again, when the Neighborhood have just cause to suspect he
will return again to his former Madness, I cannot see that they have any reason
to admit of him, or to confide in him.

And that the late King did voluntarily forsake his Kingdom, that which the
Author says, is a material proof, (viz) That the King declared to a Person of
Credit, That the Queen obtained from him a solemn Oath on the Sacrament, on the
Sunday, That if she went for France on Monday, he would not fail to follow her
on Tuesday. And though his Subjects used some force to hinder his Flight, yet
they used none to compel him to it.

I may seem to call in question the Judgment of the present Parliament, if I
should think their Wise Counsel and Determination stood in need of any farther
confirmation. I return therefore to show what I chiefly intended, viz. that
notwithstanding any thing that has been done by the Church of England, there
is no cause to charge her with prevaricating in the Doctrine of Non-resistance:
But the contrary is insinuated in the Author, and other late Writers; as where,
in p. 13. he says, In some cases a Defensive Resistance may not not only be
lawful, but a necessary Duty. P. 14. Whatever Grievance is without or contrary
to Law, the Subject is not bound to bear it, and we are not bound to yield
Passive Obedience to the King. That in some unhappy Circumstances (which he
mentions) the Subjects will be excusable before God, if they use so much
Resistance as he has made necessary for preserving the Government and
themselves. Page 18. He mentions the deposing of Edward II. and Richard II.
to prove, that the Nobles and Commons of England may remove a King from his
Government. Page 26. When the Kingdoms of the World are become Christ's by
incorporating his Religion among their Civil Rights, then we may use any
Expedients for the Defense of our Religion, which we may use in defending any
Privileges of our Civil Establishment. And p. 27. If it was lawful for the
People of England, in an extreme necessity, to remove a King whose Government
was become inconsistent with the Public Weal, and to set up another, by whom
the Public Interest may be secured, it is lawful still, notwithstanding our
Oaths or Declation. These Positions are so far from any consistency with the
Church- Homelies, that they were the grounds on which the War against King
Charles the first was carried on, and on which the prevailing People and
Soldiery destroyed him, and might have set up Cromwell to be their King. Page
33, 34. Having mentioned diverse instances for Resistance, he concludes, Such
were the Principles of the Church of England in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
and King James. And p. 32. That the Principles of Loyalty were no other at that
time, than what he had asserted, we may easily satisfy our selves from that
Form of Prayer they are charged with by the Parliament in Queen Mary 's Reign,
(viz.) That God would turn her heart from Idolatry, to the true Faith, or else
shorten her days, and take her quickly out of the way.

Now certainly this Form of Prayer was not in the Church-Liturgy, but it is as
certain that they were the Foamings of some Extemporary Zealots in their
Conventicles; concerning which, the Act 1o and 2o Phil. and Mary says, Such a
Prayer was never heard or read of to be used by any good Christian man against
any Prince, though he were a Pagan.

The Church of England had learnt to pray for them that persecute them, to
bless, and not to curse their Enemies, especially Kings, and those that were in
Authority: I shall therefore commend the Author to Mr. Prynne, for his
information what sort of People used this Form of Prayer, p. 65. of his Second
Part of The Loyalty of Pious Christians, where he says, That Queen Mary 's
zealous Protestant Bishops, Ministers, and Subjects likewise, made constant
Prayers for her; but some over zealous Anabaptistical Fanatics, using some
unchristian Prayers against her, That God would cut her off and shorten her
days, occasioned this special Act against such Prayers. And p. 66. he adds,
These Prayers were much against, and directly contrary to the Judgment of
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Farrer, Bishop Hooper, Rowland Tailor, John Philpot,
John Bradford, Edward Crome, John Rogers, Laurence Sanders, Edward Laurence,
Miles Coverdale, Bishop of Exon, and others of our godly Protestant Bishops and
Ministers, who soon after suffered as Martyrs. (And perhaps the rather for this
Provocation:) for in their Letter, May 8. 1554. they profess, That as obedient
Subjects, we shall behave our selves toward Queen Mary, and all that be in
Authority, and not cease to pray to God for them, that he would govern them all
generally and particularly with the Spirit of Widsom and Grace; and so we
heartily pray and desire all men to do, in no point consenting to any kind of
Rebellion or Sedition against our Sovereign Lady; but where they cannot obey,
but must disobey God, there to submit themselves with all patience and
humility, to suffer what the will and pleasure of the Higher Powers shall
adjudge.

And Bishop Hooper wrote his Apology against the slanderous Reports made of
him, that he should encourage and maintain such as cursed Queen Mary, wherein
he vindicates his Innocence and Loyalty, in praying for Queen Mary.

Now how ingenuously these things are objected to the first Reformers of the
Church to cast a Scandal on them, I leave to the impartial Reader to judge; as
also whether the Doctrines and Practices of such as dissented from her, which
are neither seasonable nor grateful to be now recounted, can give our
Governors better security for their Allegiance, than that which the Author
calls Super-Loyalty. And I am confident it cannot be suspected, that that
Church which opposed that Flood of Arbitrary Power which was breaking in upon
them, refusing the publishing of that Declaration, which would have owned the
Dispensing Power, to their great hazard, and did so innocently and patiently
wait for the salvation of the Lord, will cast off their Super-Loyalty to our
present most gracious King and Queen, whom God and the Nation have so
wonderfully established. For my part, I think that although on the present
occasion and emergencies, we do part with some extraordinary supplies, we shall
make a very advantageous Bargain and cheap Purchase of the Re-establishment of
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which were so nigh to a total Subversion:
And for the preservation whereof, if it had been lawful, we should not have
counted our Blood too dear.

FINIS.

