THE Healing Attempt Examined and Submitted TO THE PARLIAMENT AND CONVOCATION,
Whether it be HEALING or HURTFUL To the Peace of the CHURCH.

JOB XXIV. 2. Some remove the Landmarks, they violently take away the Flocks,
and feed thereof.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Freeman Collins, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin in
the Old-Bailey. MDCLXXXIX.

THE Healing Attempt EXAMINED, etc.
THE Author begins with his Blessing. And without Controversy, a good Conceit
therefore he seems to have of himself, who attempts to impose his Conceptions
on the Judgment of those Thirty Divines, to whom he presents them, and to
persuade them to Abolish that Government and Liturgy, to which they have
obliged themselves to live in Obedience and Conformity by their Oaths and
Subscriptions. And immediately to his Blessing, he subjoyns what implies a
Curse, for loading and increasing the Burdens of their Nonconforming
Brethren, though he seems to excuse it, as being done against their wills. And
gives it, as the Belief of his Brethren, That no good will be done them by that
Meeting or Convocation, seeing they say, it is impossible that they, etc. How
this should stimulate them to a greater earnestness to do what they believe and
have made impossible to be done, I cannot see; nor can the Author conceive,
seeing he thinks it unnecessary to propound any other Argument than what is
contained in the Title (i. e.) Such a Moderation of Episcopacy, that the Power
be kept within the line of our first Reformers, which will certainly destroy
his Project, and confirm the present Establishment, as to Episcopacy and
Liturgy, from the strict imposition whereof he hopes to be freed. The Author
complains of want of time and search, to excuse the slenderness of his Attempt:
But if Mr. Jo. Humphryes be the Author, I suppose he has had sufficient time
since his renouncing his reordination, which was about Twenty Years since; and
that he had made his search before, he with the help of other his
Non-Con-Brethren, set forth their Reply to the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet,
wherein the chiefest of his present Arguments were then urged, and shortly
after refuted, as by the following Account will hereafter appear.

He tells his Readers, That it is impossible for the Dissenters to Unite, if it
be still affirmed, That the Bishop and Presbyters are not of the same Order,
That the Power of Ordination is the sole Prerogative of the Bishops (i.e.) if
the Presbyters may not Ordain as effectually as the Bishops; That the
Ordination by Presbyters only is void, That the Ordaining them again by Bishops
is not reordination. This, says our Author, destroys the Church State, not
only of the Dissenters, but of all other Protestants in the World; which is a
very large stretch, seeing there are many other Protestant Churches, who affirm
and practice the same things with the Church of England; and yet he asserts,
That if a comprehension may not be had but on these terms, there can be none at
all. However, seeing he makes his Appeal to the Sentiments of the first
Reformers in the days of Henry VIII. Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, to them we
will jointly submit, because he says, that will heal our Divisions touching
Church Government; of which I doubt, seeing I have Reason to say, they are not
impartially proposed by Mr. J.H. nor will be found to be so exactly the same
with the Dissenters. So that if the present Episcopacy appear to be the same as
it was in the days of the first Reformers, Martyrs, and Confessors, and our
Liturgy much more Reformed, though they accounted it such a Grievance, as
neither they nor their Fathers could bear.

Their Non Conformity will still lie under the interpretation of a peevish
Humor and Obstinacy, though they do with the like Confidence pretend, that
they have Antiquity as well as our first Reformers on their side; it is a
condescension in the Author to acknowledge, that the Canons of James I. run
another way, and to those Canons the Clergy did consent, as do the present
Clergy; and if, as he says, Archbishop Usher adhered to the first Reformers,
we may yet hope for an Accommodation. As for the Opinions of particular
Divines, I shall refer them to their due place, and only intimate his
Observation to the Reader, That because Jurisdiction is given to the Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury, during the Suspension of the Archbishop, therefore they
have also the Power of conferring Orders, when other Deans and Archdeacons
also have an Episcopal Jurisdiction in their several peculiars, but neither of
them have the Power of Orders; and frustra est potentia quae nunquam reducitur
in actum. And St. Hierom expressly appropriates Ordination to the Bishops only.

As to Mr. Clerkson's Excellent Discourse of Liturgies, I shall recommend to
the Reader's perusal, what has been written by Bishop Tailor, Dr. Hammond, and
Dr. Faulkner, to which I may add Mr. Calvin's Epistle to the Protector, and
leave it to the Reader's determination, whether a Liturgy of Extemporary
Prayers are most agreeable to Public Worship.

I agree with the Author in his Introduction, That our Divisions had too great
a hand in bringing us under those Dangers, and keeping us in those Fears which
are still threatening us; but that Indulgence and Comprehension together will
secure us, I much doubt, because Experience has taught the contrary; and
therefore, though Mr. J. H. apprehends a necessity, for the saving of many
thousand Souls, to let in Men of more tender Consciences (Absit invidia) to set
open the Church-Doors wider, I think it may be a means to let in many
Adversaries with a few Friends. I know the Complaints of Dissenters have been
bold and clamourous ever since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and great boasts
made of their Numbers, and never louder than in the days of Charles the First
of Blessed Memory, where the Martial Canons were planted to throw down the
Ecclesiastical, and the Petitions of Dissenters worried that Good Prince and
the Archbishop out of their Lives; and therefore I think our Governors, both
in Church and State, had more just cause to complain of the Dissenters, than
these of them; whereof you shall hear a fuller account from those whom the
Author mentions, as Friends to his new Model. As to the Quotation from Sir
Robert Cotton, I cannot much commend the ingenuity of Mr. J. H. who in the
midst of it leaves out these words, (after these words) -- Duty to their
Sovereign: It thus proceeds: Therewith start up from among us some that might
have been recommended for their Zeal, if it had been tempered with Discretion;
who forerunning the Authority of the Magistrate, took upon them in sundry
places, and publicly to censure what agreed not with their private conceits;
with which gross humors, vented in Pulpits and Pamphlets, most Men grew to be
frozen in Zeal, etc. And the Marginal Note says, Some think, that if these Men's
zeal had by order been put to employ it self otherwise, and a task set them to
do some good and memorable thing in the Church, they might have been reformed
or made harmless by diversion. I desire Mr. J. H. to consider what it is, and
of whom Sir Robert there speaks, and to give a Reason why this was
interpoled. And to this Quotation I shall subjoyn another of Mr. R. B's in an
Epistle to his separated Brethren, That thousands are gone to Hell, and ten
thousands going after them; who would never have gone thither, if they had kept
in the Communion of their Parish-Churches.

But in the conclusion of the Introduction, he seems no way satisfied with the
Propension of our Governors to lay aside the strict use of Ceremonies, and
other more offensive Impositions, unless this one thing may be granted; and, I
think, such a grant will be still accounted a grievance, (viz.) a declaring the
Government of the Church to be no other than what it was held and intended by
the first Reformers; in the mean time he avers, That that Government which is
really established by Law, is not only inconsistent with, and destructive of
that which was settled in the Church by the first Reformers, but of the
Church State of all other Protestants. This Durus Sermo. This is his endeavor
as to the Reign of Henry the Eighth in his first Chapter.

Here I think fit to advertise the Reader, that the Materials for the new Model
of Henry the Eighth's Bishops, was fitted (though Mr. J. H. complains for want
of time) above seven years since, and the Scheme drawn-up by Mr. H. in's half
Sheet, and offered to a Parliament; and because he took no notice of what was
then said in Answer to his Model, in a Tract called, No Protestant, but the
Dissenters Plot, Printed 1682. He deserves to do Penance in a whole Sheet now;
and because that Answer may be after so many years become forgotten; or rarely
found; I beg the Reader's leave to repeat so much of it as concerns the State
of our Church, and the Opinion of the Divines that then lived as to Episcopacy;
because our Author says the whole stress of his cause upon it; saying, That
this one thing is the most effectual expedient in the whole World, to promote
his healing attempt; wherein I shall join issue with him. It might be expected,
that he should have laid a sure and solid Cornerstone for his new Model,
because an error in the foundation does usually run through the whole Fabric;
but this will appear to be nothing else but Slime and Sand; that is, in plain
English, a confident Imposture and Fiction of his own Brain; for, p. 9. the
account which this Author gives of that excellent Book, The Erudition of a
Christian Man, is this, That of these two Orders only, (viz.) Priests and
Deacons, Scripture makes express mention, and how they were conferred by the
Apostles by Prayer and Imposition of hands. Thus says Mr. H. There are but two
Orders only, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons, no third Order; Bishops therefore
must be of the same Order with Priests. And again, That all such lawful Power
and Autherity of any one Bishop, Mr. H. adds, in a Parenthesis (or Priest, for
they are in the sense of these great Divines the same) over another were, and
be given them by the Consent, Ordinance, and positive Laws of Men, and not by
any Ordinance of God in Holy Scripture. So far the necessary Erudition. Now
that there may be a fair trial of this case, I shall set down from Dr.
Stillingfleet's printed Paper, the Opinions of those Divines which consulted
about our Reformation in Henry the Eighth's days: concerning which I shall only
mind the Dissenters of an Observation of their own, viz. That though some of
these Reformers were of different Opinions as to some Points mentioned in this
Manuscript, yet they must be considered to have receded from them when they
subscribed the Necessary Erudition, being then all of that Judgment which is
there described.

The intent of Printing Dr. Stillingfleet's Manuscript, containing the
Resolutions of the Archbishop and several Bishops and Divines of some Questions
concerning the Sacraments, was, as Dr. Burnet says, that it might appear with
what maturity and care they proceeded in the Reformation. And the Subscriptions
which were at the end of every man's Paper, he tells us, p. 242. were in this
form: T. Cant. This is my Opinion and Sentence; which I do not temerariously
define, but do remit the Judgment thereof wholly to your Majesty -- and as is
also sometimes expressed, p. 201. without prejudice to the Truth, and saving
always more better Judgment: Cum facultate etiam melius deliberandi in hac
part. Now this Consultation was some years before the Book was published; and
if any of the Bishops had been then of a contrary Opinion, as the Dissenters
observe that Archbishop Cranmer was in the case of Excommunication, inclining
to Erastianism, from these they must be considered (say the Dissenters) to have
receded, because they subscribed the Necessary Erudition; p. 8. This Manuscript
speaks home to our purpose in

Quest. 9. Whether the Apostles lacking a higher power, as in not having a a
Christian King among them, made Bishops by that necessity, or by authority
given by God?

The Answer of the Archbishop to this Question, as indeed to many others, is
singular, and differs from the rest of the Reformers; being, as the Prefacers
themselves do observe, mere Erastianism, p. 7. but from these also (as they say
of his Opinion concerning Excommunication, p. 8.) he must be considered to have
receded, because he subscribed the Necessary Erudition; which being done on
more mature deliberation, we ought to impute nothing to the Archbishop as his
judgment in those controverted Points, but what is there by him asserted. I
shall therefore mention the Resolutions of the rest only as we find them in the
Re-collection; only of this first I shall speak at large.

York. We find in SS. that the Apostles used the power to make Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons; which power may be grounded upon these words: Sicut misit
me vivens Pater, sic ego mitto vos. And we verily think that they durst not
have used so high a power, unless they had had authority from Christ. But that
their power to ordain Bishops, Priests, or Deacons by Imposition of hands,
requires any other authority than authority of God, we neither read in SS. nor
out of SS.


London I think the Apostles made Bishops by the Law of God, because Acts 22.
it is said, In quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit. Nevertheless I think if
Christian Princes had been then, they should have named by Right, and appointed
the said Bishops to their places.


Rochester. I think that the Apostles made Bishops by authority given them from
God.


Carlisle. That Christ made his Apostles Priests and Bishops, and that he gave
them power to make others, it seems to be the very Trade of SS.


Dr. Robertson. I think the Apostles made Bishops and Presbyters by divine
authority, where the public Magistrate did permit it.


Dr. Cox. Although the Apostles had no authority to force any man to be
Priests, yet (they moved by the Holy Ghost) had authority of God to exhort and
induce men to set forth God's honor, and so to make them Priests.


Dr. Day. The Apostles ordained Bishops by authority given them by God. Joh.
20. Sicut misit me, etc. Item Joh. ult. and Acts 20. and 1 Timothy 4. Paulus
ordinavit Timotheum and Titum, and prescribit quales ille debeant ordinare, 1 Timothy 1. Tit. 1.


Dr. Oglethorp. The Apostles by authority and command of God, did ordain and
institute Bishops, leave being desired and obtained from the Prince or
Magistrate who was then chief. As I suppose.


Dr. Redman. Christ gave his Apostles authority to make Bishops and Ministers
in his Church, as he had received authority of the Father to make them Bishops.
But if any Christian Prince had then been, the Apostles had been and ought to
have been obedient Subjects, and would have attempted nothing but under the
permission and assent of their earthly Governors. Yet was it meet that they
which were special and elect Servants of our Savior Christ, and were sent by
him to convert the World, and having most abundantly the Holy Ghost in them,
should have special ordering of such Ministry as pertained to the planting and
increasing of the Faith: whereunto I doubt not but a Christian Prince of his
godly mind would most lovingly have condescended. And it is to be considered in
this Question, with other like, this word making a Bishop or Priest, may be
taken two ways: for understanding the word to ordain or consecrate, so it is a
thing which pertains to the Apostles and their Successors only; but but if
by this word (making) be understood the appointing or naming to the Office, so
it pertains specially to the supreme Heads and Governors of the Church,
which be Princes.


Dr. Edgworth. The Apostles made Bishops and Priests by authority given them of
God, and not for lack of any higher power: notwithstanding, where there is a
Christian King or Prince, the Election, Deputation, and Assignation of them
that shall be Priests and Bishops, belongs to the King or Prince, so that he
may forbid any Bishop within his Kingdom that he give no Orders, for
considerations moving him; and may assign him a time when he shall give Orders,
and to whom: Example of King David, 1 Chronicles. 24. dividing the Levites into
twenty four Orders, deputing over every Order one chief Bishop; prescribing an
Ordinal and Rule how they should do their duties and courses; and what
Sacrifices, Rites and Ceremonies they should use every day, as the day and time
required. And his Son King Solomon diligently executed and commanded the same
usages to be observed in the Temple, after he had erected and finished it, 2 Chronicles. 8.


Dr. Symmons. The Aposties made Bishops and Priests by authority given them of
God.


Dr. Tresham. The Apostles had authority of God to make Bishops: yet if there
had been a Christian King in any place where they made Bishops, they would and
ought to have desired authority of him for the executing of such Godly acts;
which no Christian King would have denied.


Dr. Leighton. The Apostles, as I suppose, made Bishops by authority given to
them of Christ: howbeit I think they would and should have required the
Christian Princes consent and license thereto, if there had been any Christian
Kings or Princes.


Dr. Coren. The Apostles made Bishops and Priests by authority given them of
God: Notwithstanding, if there had been a Christian King at that time, it had
been their duties to have had his license and permission thereto.


Here you see they all affirm that the Apostles, by authority from God, did
make Bishops as well as Priests and Deacons; and that there needs no other
authority for their Successors to do the like, but what is given them of God.
Now that they were distinct Orders, will appear by the next Question.

Quest. 10. Whether Bishops or Priests were first? and if the Priest were
first, then the Priest made the Bishop?

The Bishop of St. David's, my Lord elect of Westminster, Dr. Cox, and Dr.
Redman say, That at the beginning they were all One. The Bishops of York,
London, Rechester, Carlisle, Doctors, Day, Tresham, Symmons, Oglethorp, be in
other contrary Opinions. The Bishop of York and Dr. Tresham think that the
Apostles first were Priests, and after were made Bishops, when the overseeing
of other Priests was committed to them. My Lords of London, Duresm, Carlisle,
and Rochester, Drs. Symmonds and Grayford, think that the Apostles were first
Bishops, and they after made other Bishops and Priests. Drs. Coren and
Oglethorp say, That the Apostles were made Bishops, and the seventy two were
after made Priests. Dr. Day thinks that Bishops, as they are now called, were
before Priests. My Lord of London, Drs. Edgworth and Robertson, think it no
inconvenience if a Priest made a Bishop in that time.

Quest. 11. Whether a Bishop has Authority to make a Priest by the SS. or no?
and whether any other but only a Bishop may make a Priest?

To the former part of the Question the Bishop of St. David's does answer, That
Bishops have no authority to make Priests, unless they be authorized of the
Christian Prince. The others do all say, That they be authorized of God. Yet
some of them add, That they cannot use their Authority, without their Christian
Prince does permit them. To the second part, the Answer of the Bishop of St.
David's is, That Laymen have otherwhile made Priests. So does Drs. Edgworth and
Redman say, That Moses, by a privilege given him of God, made Aaron his
Brother Priest. Drs. Tresham, Grayford, and Cox, say, That Laymen may make
Priests in time of necessity. The Bishops of York, Duresm, Rochester, Carlisle,
Elect of Westminster, Drs. Coren, Leighton, Symmonds, seem to deny this thing:
for they say, They find not nor read not any such Example.

Quest. 12. Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of a
Pishop and Priest, or only appointing to the Office be sufficient?

The Bishop of St. David's says, That only the appointing. And Dr. Cox, That
only the appointing cum manuum impositione is sufficient, without
Consecration. The Bishops of York, London, Duresm, Carlisle, Drs. Day, Coren,
Leighton, Tresham, Edgworth, Oglethorp, say, That Consecration is requisite.
Dr. Redman says, That Consecration has been from the Apostles time, and
instituted of the Holy Ghost, to confer Grace. My Lord of Rochester, Drs. Day
and Symmons say, The Priesthood is given per manuum impositionem, and that by
Scripture; and that Consecration has of long time been received in the Church.

So that in this Paper, which contains a previous Consultation (some years
before) to the things published in the Necessary Erudition, they did generally
agree, That the Office of Bishops is mentioned in Scripture; That they were of
a superior Order to Priests; That the Apostles made Bishops by authority from
God, and left their Successors power to do the like. And to this they all
subscribed in the Necessary Erudition.

Much more might be added from some public Writings of that Age, of which I
shall name but one or two; as first, the Book called Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum; a design first begun by King Henry the Eighth, prosecuted by
Edward the Sixth, as by their two Orders prefixed to that Book, does appear;
and committed to the care of thirty two Divines and Civilians, the Archbishop
being the chief; wherein it is ordered, That to the Bishop all are to give
Obedience according to the Word of God, p. 98. Episcope qui Ecclesiae
praeficitur, non solum Decanus, Archidiaconus, Archipresbyter, and reliqui
Ministri parebunt, etc. And cap. 10. Episcopi, quoniam inter caeteros Ecclesiae
Ministros, locum principem tenent, ideo sana Doctrina gravi authoritate atque
provido consilio debent inferiores Ordines Cleri regere ac pascere. Dr. Burnet,
p. 71. of the second part, says, It is plain that Cranmer had quite laid aside
those singular Opinions which he formerly held of the Ecclesiastical Functions:
for now in a Work of his own, without the concurrence of any other (speaking of
his Catechism) he fully sets forth their Divine Institution.

And now I shall consider how agreeable their Design is to the Ancient
Constitution of our Government about matters Ecclesiastical, which (as they
say) is very excellently described in (the Book called) The necessary Doctrine
and Erudition of a Christian-man, composed by several Bishops and other great
Doctors, and approved by Authority in the days of King Henry the Eighth. The
Dissenters cannot have a greater Reverence for that Book than the Conformists
have, as to the Constitution of our Church. And to corroborate this Authority,
they add that of another excellent Book (viz.) Dr. Burnet 's History of the
Reformation; for which, as they observe, the whole Kingdom have given the
Doctor thanks: And I shall think the worse of these Dissenters, if they will
not do the same. P. 16. From these Books they attempt to prove, that the
establishing a Parochial or Congregational Church Discipline (the great thing
which the Dissenters desire) may be done consistently with the Ancient
Constitution of the Government of this Realm, to the fixing the desired, firm,
and lasting Union. P. 11. If this appear, the Dissenters may well boast that
they are the Genuine Sons of the Church of England, as it was settled by the
first Reformers; and that they have been (as they complain) misrepresented as
Enemies both to Church and State; as if the adhering to old Protestant
Principles about Church Discipline had been the Overt Act of a Spirit seditious
and phanatical, p. 17. To these two they have appealed for the truth of their
Assertion; and I hope they will not show themselves such double-minded men, as
to be unstable in all their ways, and not stand to the Evidence and Arbitration
of these two Authorities produced by themselves. And if the reducing of us to
the Ancient Constitution of Church Government and Discipline in this Realm, may
fix the desired, firm, and lasting Union, it will be still the Dissenters fault
that we are not all agreed.

In that Judicious Tract it is manifest (say the Dissenters, p. 2.)

1. That Church Government is Jure Divino. Be it so. 2. That to the
constituting such a Church Government, those Church Officers only are
necessary who are mentioned in the New Testament. This is also granted. 3. That
in the New Testament there is mention made of no other Church Officers but
Priests and Deacons. This is sub judice. 4. That Bishops or Priests, the sole
Governors of the Church, are of one and the same Order. This also is to be
determined.
To all this I shall oppose a short Syllogism, viz.

That Church Government which is mentioned in the New Testament (by the
Compilers of the Necessary Erudition) is Jure Divino.

But the Church Government mentioned, etc. is by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

Ergo, the Church Government by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, is Jure Divino,
according to the Necessary Erudition.

It chanced that on reading this Preface, I had at hand that ancient Book,
printed in English 1543. and set forth by the King's Authority, as appears by
the Preface. I had also a Translation of the same Book into elegant Latin,
printed the following year, viz. 1544. This Latin Book has a Preface more
than I find in the English, which seems to be compiled by the Archbishop and
the rest of the Reforming Clergy, who give us this reason of the translating it
into Latin: Quam Institutionem (Lector Carissime) Illustrissimi simul and
Religiosissimi Principis industria primum vernaculo sermon editam, nos nunc in
Latinum versam in lucem damus; Quod indignum duximus ut hoc pacificandae
Ecclesiae studium, and exemplum quo Regia Majestas immortalem sibi gloriam
promerita est in obscuro lateret, ac non potius orbi universo, quo caeteri
Principes ad similem componendae Religionis zelum excitentur innotesceret: (i.
e.) Which Erudition first published in English by the Industry of our most
Illustrious and Religious Prince, we now publish in Latin; as thinking it an
unworthy thing, that the care and good Example of pacifying the Church, whereby
His Majesty has deserved immortal Glory, should lie hid, and not be known to
the World, to stir up other Princes to the like Zeal.

From whence I desire the Reader to observe, that this Book being set forth a
year after the English one, and being somewhat explained and enlarged, as
intended to inform the Foreign Churches with the matter and order of our
Reformation, is of the two the more exact and perfect, as containing their
second Thoughts and final Resolutions. The place quoted out of that Book, is
that which concerns The Sacrament of Orders; which (say they) are given of God
to Christian men by the Consecration and Imposition of the Bishops hands. And
doubtless King Henry would have been very much in wrath with any that should
have denied the Order of Bishops to be Sacramental, when by their hands, and by
a power given them of God, as is their asserted, other Orders were to be
conveyed.

But secondly, I observe, that whereas that Book names Bishops And Priests as
two distinct Orders, these Dissenters, by a little trick (learnt of the
Jesuits) of changing a small syllable, would alter the sense of the whole
Chapter: for four or five times in the second and third pages, the Dissenters
name Bishops Or Priests, making them one and the same thing; which the
Reformers in that Chapter of Orders do distinguish as two distinct Orders; and
eight times at least read Bishops And (not Or) Priests in sensu diviso. In the
first place it is said, that St. Paul did consecrate and order Priests and
Bishops; for which they quote 1 Timothy 4. (i. e.) Jure Divino. And again, as the
Apostles themselves did order Priests and Bishops, so they appointed and willed
other Bishops after them to do the like; for which they quote Titus 1. and 1 Timothy 5. which is another Proof out of the New Testament. In another place they
say, that the Priests and Bishops in the execution of their Office and
Ministration, do use and exercise the power and authority of God committed unto
them. And to name but one place more (for I shall quote those only which in
the sense of those Reformers (and our Dissenters too) prove the Order of
Bishops to be distinct from that of Priests, and of Divine Institution)
speaking of the power of the Prince over Bishops and Priests, they say, that
the Prince is to oversee and cause the said Bishops and Priests to execute
their Pastoral Office truly and faithfully, and specially in those points which
by Christ and his Apostles were given and committed to them. So that it is
undeniable that Bishops are mentioned as Church Officers in the New Testament
by this excellent Book, and consequently are necessary to such a
Church Government as is Jure Divino, according to the first and second
Assertion of the Dissenters.

Let us inquire therefore how they derive their third Assertion from this Book;
which is, That in the New Testament there is mention made of no other
Church Officers but Priests and Deacons. (To which words they immediately add)
That no other Government is of Divine Right, but what is under the conduct of
Bishops or Priests, and that the New Testament mentions no other: Which
grants that Bishops are mentioned in the New Testament as well as Priests. But
the Dissenters will not grant them to be mentioned in the sense of the
Reformers (that is) as a distinct Office, and having a Superiority over Priests
and Deacons: for in the

Fourth Assertion they say, That Bishops or Priests, the sole Governors of the
Church, are of one and the same Order. For proof whereof, they quote these
words out of the Necessary Erudition, (viz.) That Bishops, or Priests and
Deacons, are the only Orders mentioned in the New Testament -- And that of
these two Orders only, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes express
mention. To which I answer, That it is nowhere said in the Necessary
Erudition, That Bishops or Priests, the sole Governors of the Church, are of
one and the same Order: And that this Assertion is contradicted by the
following Quotation upon which they ground it, (viz.) That Bishops, or Priests
and Deacons are the only Orders mentioned in the New Testament. For throughout
that whole Chapter, the Reformers make as plain a distinction between Bishops
and Priests, as between Priests and Deacons.

I do therefore reject the first Assertion as a Fiction of their own, not to be
found in the Necessary Erudition, nor in the practice of the Authors of it,
which could best expound their meaning, viz. That Bishops or Priests are of one
and the same Order.

As to the second, viz. That of these two Orders only (i. e.) of Priests and
Deacons, the Scripture makes mention; I hope to give such a plain and genuine
sense of the Authors, as our Dissenters (notwithstanding all their Prejudices
and Evasions) shall not be able to deny. And (because, Qui been distinguit,
been docet) I desire them to observe this distinction of the word Order, which
signifies either the Power and Faculty conferred by the Apostles hands; or the
Modus, the Rite and Ceremony of Imposition of Hands and Prayer, by which it was
conferred. The first is properly Order, and the second, as they term it,
Ordering or Ordination. Now I will not dispute in which sense our Reformers use
the word Order in this place; the Context will show that: But let the
Dissenters take it in which sense they will, it will be so far from
establishing, that it will overthrow their Propositions, That Bishops and
Priests are one and the same Order; and that of these two only Scripture
makes express mention.

I grant therefore, that this second sentence is found entire in that Book,
(viz.) Of these two Orders only, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes
express mention. But had these men been so ingenuous as to quote the whole
Paragraph, or to judge of the sense of this Expression, which is somewhat dark,
by those which were more plain, whereof some go before, and others follow that
sentence, and all declare Bishops to be a distinct Order, and to be mentioned
in the New Testament; they would never have had the confidence so to expose
these learned Reformers, as if they had contradicted themselves in the same
breath, and professed their Judgment to be contrary to their Practice, in a
Book of that importance, written with great Advice and Deliberation, and
published to give the World an account of the Reformation. Could their Popish
Adversaries of that Age have fixed such an Opinion and Contradiction on them,
they should have heard of it as loudly as we have of the Nags head Fable: but
they had not the confidence to feign them guilty of that Opinion which these
Dissenters would force on them whether they will or no. For the Papists of that
Age knew that Lex currit cum praxi, and that the Reformers exercising Episcopal
Authority over the Presbyters within their several Diocesses, was a clear proof
that they judged their Order to be superior to that of Priests, and that by
Divine Institution (as in the four places abovementioned does appear.)

But to clear this Objection, I shall first examine the place quoted as it is
entire. Secondly, I shall show the sense of it from the Latin Translation,
which is the best Commentary. And thirdly, from the received Opinion of other
Divines of that Age. And fourthly, I shall give you Dr. Burnet's Opinion of the
whole matter.

First, The place quoted says thus: Of these two Orders only (i. e.) Priests
and Deacons, Scripture makes express mention, and how they were conferred of
the Apostles by Prayer and Imposition of their Hands: and to these two the
Primitive Church did add and conjoyn certain other inferior and lower degrees,
as Subdeacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, with diverse other, of the which mention is
made both of the most Ancient Writers that we have in the Church of Christ
after the Aposties; as also in diverse old Councils, and namely, in the fourth
Council of Africa, in which St. Augustine was present; where all the kinds of
Orders which were then in the Church be rehearsed. Now though what has been
observed from the Context, might be enough to satisfy all Persons that were
not maliciously disposed to quarrel with those Reformers, as if they
contradicted themselves, and overthrew that Episcopal Order in Thesi, which
they maintained in Praxi; yet this Paragraph is so clear by its own light, that
they must needs wink with both eyes that could not see the sense of the
Reformers in it.

First then, the scope of the Paragraph ought to have been considered, which is
to speak of such Orders as were inferior to the Apostles and Bishops in
Scripture-times; of which they say that express mention is made in Scripture
only of these two, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons: To which two, though the
Church added other inferior and lower degrees mentioned in Ancient Writers
(yet there is no mention of them in the Scripture, but) in some old Councils,
and namely, in the four African, where all the kinds of Orders be rehearsed.
Now in that Council you may find the several Rites of Ordaining. 1. Bishops, 2.
Presbyters, 3. Deacons, 4. Subdeacons, 5. Acolythi, 6. Exorcists, etc. And
Canon 27. Vt Episcopus de loco ignobile ad nobilem non transeat, nec quisquam
inferioris ordinis Clericus: Inferioris vero gradus Sacerdotes possunt
concessione suorum Episcoporum ad alias Ecclesias migrare. So that in the
Judgment of that Council, Priests were an inferior Order to Bishops; and
consequently they were so in the Judgment of our Reformers, who quote it to
that end. See Binius, Tom. 1. p. 728.

This also appears from the Milevitan Council, which is also quoted by the
Reformers, in which St. Augustine was also present; wherein a Canon was made,
Quo prohibiter ne Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici in causis
suis ulla extra Africam adeant judicia. So that by both these Councils, Priests
as well as Deacons are proved to be inferior to Bishops: which was the thing
intended by our Reformers in that Paragraph.

So that when these Dissenters (from this passage, (viz,) that of these two
Orders only, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes express mention) do
in the words immediately following infer, That all others (meaning particularly
that of Bishops) were afterward added by the Church, p. 2. and name this
inference as if it were the very words of that excellent Book, is no less a
sin, than the bearing false witness against them; for they treat only of other
inferior and lower degrees. So that if the word Order be taken in the first
sense, for the power or faculty of administering holy things conferred by the
Bishops, it is their plain sense, That the Scripture makes express mention of
these two inferior Orders only, (i. e.) Priests and Deacons, and not of
Subdeacons, Acolytes, etc.

Moreover, two things especially seem designed by the Reformers concerning the
Sacrament of Orders: The first is to show that Bishops are of Divine
Institution, and had not their dependence on the Pope, whom his Favorites made
the only Bishop, and all the rest deriving their power and authority from him.
The second was to show, that of all those seven Orders which were made
Sacramental, only those of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons had foundation in
Scripture; the rest were added in aftertimes. And to confirm both these, they
describe the manner of ordaining both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Holy
Scripture, to discharge it from those superstitious Ceremonies introduced by
the Pope, and made necessary to their Ordination. As for the Superiority of
Bishops to Priests, there is no question made, much less of their Identity or
sameness of Office.

For the Divine Right of Bishops, they assert it in four several places, that
they have it from Christ; and prove it by Scripture, and from thence infer this
Conclusion, That whereas the Bishop of Rome has heretofore claimed and usurped
to be Head and Governor of all Bishops and Priests of the Catholic Church, by
the Laws of God; it is evident that his Power is utterly feigned and untrue,
and was neither given him by God in Holy Scripture, nor allowed by the Fathers
in Ancient General Councils, nor by consent of the Cotholick Church. And they
declare, That the Authorities, Powers, and Jurisdictions of Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops; and Metropolitans, were given them by the positive Laws
of men only, and not by any Ordinance of God in Holy Scripture. And the power
usurped by any one Bishop over another, (not given him by the Consent of men)
is no lawful Power, but plain Usurpation and Tyranny: Which they prove from the
Ancient Councils and Fathers against the Pope. Secondly, They show, that of
those seven Orders owned by the Church of Rome as Sacramental, only Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, had their Institution in the Holy Scripture; and that
Subdeacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, etc. were added by the Church, as also the
Rites and Ceremonies by which they were conferred. And thirdly, to confirm what
they had said, they describe the manner of ordaining Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, to clear it from those superstitious Ceremonies brought in by the
Church of Rome; as the Ring and Crosier-staff, several Unctions and Garments,
some of which must come from Rome; whereas the Scripture mentions only the
imposition of Hands and Prayers. In these words, Of these two Orders only, (i.
e.) Priests and Deacons, the Scripture makes express mention; and how they
were conferred of the Apostles by Prayer and imposition of their Hands. And
evident it is to me, that by the word Orders they intended only the manner of
Ordaining, not the distinction of Orders: for they all held the Superiority of
Bishops to Priests. And this will appear, first, from the word used by the
Latin Translation, which is, De his tantum Ordinationibus, of these
Ordinations only, not of these two Orders only, the Scripture makes mention,
and describes the manner of conferring them. And doubtless those learned men
did not confound the words Ordo and Ordinatio. For the understanding whereof, I
shall explain the English Edition by the Latin.

Thus in the beginning they say, That these Orders were given by the
Consecration and Imposition of the Bishops hands: [Per Consecrationem and
Impositionem manum Episcopi.] And as the Apostles themselves in the beginning
of the Church did order Priests and Bishops; so they willed the other Bishops
to the like. Thus the Latin Book: Et Quemadmodum Apostoli ipsi Episcopos and
Presbyteros Ordinaverunt, ita, eosdem etiam instituisse ut in posterum
succedentes Episcopi eundem ordinandi morem in Ecclesia servarent. Again, Here
is to be noted, That although this Form before declared is to be observed in
giving Orders, etc. in the Latin, Quanquam autem hunc in modum Scriptura
Ordinationes fieri instituit. Again, Thus we have briefly touched the Ordering,
not the Orders of Priests and Bishops. The Latin, Hactonus quidem de
Ordinatione Presbyterorum. Neither speak of the Order, but Ordering. Moreover,
touching the Order of Deacons, we read Acts 6. that they were ordered and
instituted by the same Apostles by Prayer and Imposition of their hands. The
Latin, Jam vero praeter Episcopos and Sacerdotes, Diaconorum etiam Scriptura
meminit, traditque hos ab Apostolis per Orationem and manuum impositionem
ordinatos and institutos fuisse. After all which it follows, Of these two
Orders only, (which I cannot understand (the premises being considered) in any
other sense than as the Latin renders it) Of these Ordinations only, and how
they were conferred, the Scripture makes mention, That they were conferred by
Prayer and Imposition of hands. Nor can it be thought that by the mentioning
the manner of ordaining Bishops and Priests to be the same, that therefore the
Reformers thought the Order to be the same; because the Deacons were ordained
in the same manner, and yet it is granted that they were distinct Orders And
for the distinction of the Orders of Priests and Bishops, enough had been
spoken before, and their present practice did demonstrate what their Opinions
were.

If any desire farther satisfaction in these things, let him read the Casuists
de Sacramento Ordinis, where this distinction is obvious: Ordo significat vel
ipsam potestatem, vel Ordinationem qua potestas datur. And they may find that
Bellarmine, and generally the Jesuits, reckon Bishops and Priests to be but one
Order, as our Dissenters would have it: and among the later Schoolmen it was
made a Question, An Episcopatus sit Ordo a Presbyteratu distinctus; and they
generally hold that they are one in Genere Sacerdotis, but are distinct in
Specie, the Episcopal Character including that of a Priest; and so they hold
that Solum Sacerdotium est Ordo and Sacramentum. So they dispute against the
Imposition of hands in Ordination of Priests; and the usual form was by
delivering the Patine and Chalice, with Bread and Wine, with these words:
Accipe potestatem offerendi Sacrificia pro vivis and mortuis, In nomine Patris,
etc. And they affirm, That the Pope can create a Bishop or Priest, only by
saying, Be thou a Bishop or Priest -- A Deacon is ordained by delivering of the
Gospels into his hands, and the Subdeacon by delivery of an empty Patine and
Chalice: Which superstitious uses our Reformers would destroy, and reduce to
the Apostolical Practice.

One Argument more these Dissenters mention from the Necessary Erudition, as
good as the rest, p. 3. The Order of a Bishop or Priest is one and the same,
whose Office is not only to preach and administer Sacraments, but moreover to
exercise Discipline, namely, in assoyling and loosing from sin such as be truly
penitent, and in excommunicating the obstinately vicious; where from the
Community of some Offices, they would argue to the equality of the Orders:
though nothing is more evident, than that the Bishops of this Age reserved the
power of Confirmation, Ordination, and Diocesan Jurisdiction to themselves, as
their Right Jure Divino, as will yet further appear. But nowhere does the
Necessary Erudition say, That the Order of a Bishop or Priest is one and the
same, as they sophistically infer: And they may as well affirm it to be the
sense of the Council of Trent, as of our Reformers, who use almost the same
words, Non solum Sacerdotibus, sed and de Diaconis, Sacrae Literae apertam
mentionem faciunt.

I cannot conceive what ground these Dissenters had to fix this Error of
theirs upon, unless an unwary Expression of Dr. Burnet's; who perhaps
considering the Archbishop's Judgment, more than the Judgments of the rest,
does assert the same as the Dissenters do: But if they had it from him, they
had also in him a correction of this Error; and it was far from the ingenuity
of true Protestant Divines, to publish the Error, and conceal the Confutation
of it. Thus then Dr. Burnet discovers the whole Intrigue, Dr. Burnet, p. 336.
of the first part, That both in this Writing ( i.e. Dr. Stillingfleet's
Manuscript) and in the Necessary Erudition of a Christian man, Bishops and
Priests are spoken of as one and the same Office. But Dr. Burnet adds, In the
ancient Church they knew none of those subtilties which were found out in the
later Ages; it was then thought enough that a Bishop was to be dedicated to his
Function by a new Imposition of hands, and that several Offices could not be
performed without a Bishop, such as Ordination, Confirmation, etc. But they did
not refine in these matters so much as to enquire whether Bishops and Priests
differed in Order and Office, or only in degree: But after the Schoolmen fell
to examine matters of Dignity with logical and unintelligible Niceties, the
Canonists began to comment upon the Rules of the Ancient Church, they studied
to make Bishops and Priests seem very near one to another, so that the
difference was but small. They did it with different designs: The Schoolmen
having set up the grand Mystery of Transubstantiation, were to exalt the
Priestly Office as much as was possible; for the turning of the Host into God,
was so great an action, that they reckoned there could be no Office higher than
that which qualified a man to so mighty a performance. Therefore as they
changed the form of Ordination from what it was anciently believed to consist
in, (viz.) Imposition of hands, to a delivering of Sacred Vessels; and held
that a Priest had his Orders by that Rite, not by the Imposition of hands: So
they raised their Order or Office so high, as to make it equal with the Order
of a Bishop. But as they designed to extol the Order of Priesthood, so the
Canonists had as great a mind to depress the Episcopal Order; they generally
wrote for preferment, and the way to it, was to extol the Papacy: Nothing could
do that so effectually, as to bring down the power of Bishops; this only could
justify the Exemptions of the Monks and Friars, the Popes setting up Legantine
Courts, and receiving at first Appeals, and then Original Causes before them,
together with many other Encroachments on the Jurisdiction of Bishops; all
which were unlawful, if the Bishops had by Divine Right Jurisdiction in their
Diocesses: Therefore it was necessary to lay them as low as could be, and to
make them think that the power they held was rather as delegates of the
Apostolic See, than by a Commission from Christ or his Aposties. So that they
looked on the declaring Episcopal Authority to be of Divine Right, as a blow
that would be fatal to the Court of Rome; therefore they did after this at
Trent, use all possible endeavors to hinder any such Decision: it having been
then the common Style of that Age, to reckon Bishops and Priests as the same
Office, it is no wonder if at this time the Clergy of this Church, the greatest
part of them being still leavened with the old Superstition, and the rest of
them not having enough of spare time to examine lesser matters, retain still
the former Phrases in this particular.

This might have been sufficient to correct the forwardness of our Dissenters
to comply with the Papists in this new Notion of Bishops or Priests as one
Order; but because they abated nothing of their confidence by this, I shall
mind them of that severer Reprimand of the Doctor's, for which in their behalf
I give him hearty thanks, for I think he shall have none from them. It is in
these words (N. B.)

On this I have insisted the more, that it may appear how little they have
considered things, who are so far carried with their Zeal against the
established Government of this Church, as to make much use of some passages of
the Schoolmen and Canonists that deny them to be distinct Orders: for these are
the very dregs of Popery (N. B.) the one raising the Priests higher for the
sake of Transubstantiation, the other pulling the Bishops lower for the sake of
the Popes Supremacy, and by such means bringing them almost to an equality. So
partial are some men to their particular Conceits, that they make use of the
most mischievous Topics when they can serve their turn, not considering how
much farther these Arguments will run if they ever admit them.

So that although the Phrase of Priests or Bishops. might have been used in
former times, as it was in a Paper printed among the Addenda to the first part
of the Doctor's History, p. 324. which Paper was written about six years before
the Necessary Erudition, as is proved, p. 365. of the first part: Yet when our
Dissenters read (as no doubt they did) these Remarks of the Doctor's concerning
the rise and mischievous tendences of it, their presumption in urging it from
that Paper where it is so shamefully condemned, is as unpardonable as their
endeavor to fasten it on the Necessary Erudition, where the contrary is
evidently asserted.

And is this the great Reverence that our Dissenters have for the first
Reformers, thus to wrest and abuse their Writings, by altering their Words,
curtailing their Sentences, and representing them as contradicting themselves,
as well as the Universal Church in all Ages before them, in such an excellent
Book, and to object that against them, which their Adversaries, who watched for
such an advantage, could never find? This is no otherwise to honor them, than
to call them to a second Martyrdom, more inglorious and hateful to them than
the first. And yet these Dissenters could not but know, that all they who had a
hand in compiling that Book, were either Diocesan Bishops, or such Divines as
lived in a willing submission to them. And these things are sufficient to show
that the Dissenters are more genuine Sons of some other Church, than of the
Church of England according to its Primitive Constitution.

And thus the Declaration mentioned by our Author to be subscribed by Tho.
Cromwell, etc. which says, That in the New Testament there is no mention made
of any degrees or distinctions in Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers,
Priests or Bishops; as also the Opinions of Tindal, Lambert, and Dr. Barnes,
must be submitted to the more mature and authorized Judgment of the State,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, expressed in the Necessary Erudition. And the private
Sentiments of such Divines as have written from the days of Edward VI. until
now, must be adjudged to be conformable to the Judgment and Determination of
the Church, which has been established by Law in their days, to which also
they generally subscribed; and then I need say no more, but that the Forms of
Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, will determine the
Question; whether from the beginning of our Reformation, the Church of England
has acknowledged three Orders, viz. of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or two
only; And whether the Church Government established by Law ever since the days
of Edward VI. has not been by Diocesan Bishops.

But I would ask these men, Could they have conformed to Episcopacy and Liturgy
under King Henry the Eighth, or Edward the Sixth, and can they not now? Was not
Episcopacy the same then as it is now; and the Liturgy much better now than it
was then? Could you conform to Henry the Eighth's Primer, to his six Articles
and seven Sacraments? Or to the Liturgy established by King Edward the Sixth,
wherein were many things that were deservedly accounted Ineptias? As in the
Communion-Office, where they commend to the mercy of God all his Servants
departed hence from us; And that God would command our Prayers and
Supplications by the ministry of his holy Angels to be brought up into his holy
Tabernacle: The commending Auricular and Secret Confession to the Priest: And
in the Office of Baptism, enjoining a great part of that Office to be performed
the people standing at the Churchdoor; and then to take the Child by the right
hand, and lead it toward the Font: To sign it with the sign of the Cross on
the Breast, as well as the Forehead. The use of Exorcism, in these words: I
command thee, thou unclean Spirit, in the Name of the Father, etc. to come out
and depart from this Infant. The dipping the Child three times in the Water,
(except in case of weakness) first on the right side, then on the left, and
then with the Face toward the Water. Then to put on it the Crysom, saying,
Take thou this white Vesture for a Token of the Innocence, etc. Then to anoint
the Infant on the head, praying God to anoint him with the Unction of the
Spirit. And (to omit many other things) anointing the sick, and signing his
breast with the sign of the Cross. Commending at the time of Burial into the
hands of God's mercy the Souls of the departed.

As for the Book of consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, it was added to
the Liturgy by King Edward, as it is received now, with some few alterations
(mentioned by Dr. Burnet) for the better, p. 144.

His Articles, and Acts for Uniformity, were as severe as any that are now. And
all these were established in Archbishop Cranmer's time, and with his good
Approbation.

In the Articles of Religion, printed 1552. one concerning the Liturgy declares
thus. The Book (of Prayers) which of very late time was given to the Church of
England by the Authority of Parliament, containing the Manner and Form of
praying, and ministering the Sacraments; and the Book of ordering Ministers of
the Church, set forth by the before said Authority, are godly, and in no point
repugnant to the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, but agreeing thereunto,
furthering and beautifying the same not a little; and therefore of all faithful
Ministers of the Church of England, and chiefly of the Ministers of the Lord,
ought to be received and allowed with all readiness of mind and thanksgiving,
and to be commended to the people of God. Besides the Discourse concerning
Ceremonies retained in our Book, was then set forth; as also a Proclamation
against those that innovate, alter, or leave down any Rite or Ceremony in the
Church, and that preach without License; printed in the second year of Edward
the Sixth, (to which the Form for Bidding of Prayers may be added.) See p. 128.
of Dr. Burnet's second part. All which notwithstanding, Bucer and Peter Martyr
approved of Conformity.

And Mr. Calvin himself both persuaded and approved all that was done in the
second Liturgy of King Edward, in an Epistle of his to the then Protector,
being the forty first Epistle in the Edition at Amsterdam, 1667. to this
effect: Let there be published a Summary of Doctrine to be received by all,
which all may conform to in their preaching; for the observance of which, let
all Bishops and Parish Priests be obliged by Oath; and let none be admitted to
Ecclesiastical Function, unless he promise to observe that consent of Doctrine
inviolate. Let there be also a common form of Catechism for the use of
Children: I also greatly approve that there be a certain Form of Prayers and
Ecclesiastical Rites, from which it should not be lawful for the Pastors to
recede in their Function; as well to provide for the simplicity and
unskilfulness of some, as also that thereby the consent of all the Churches may
more certainly appear; and lastly, that the desultory levity of some men, who
affect Novelties, may be prevented. So that there ought to be an established
Catechism, an established Administration of the Sacraments, and public Form of
Prayers.

Did not Dr. Tailor, a learned Martyr, declare of the Liturgy as it stood in
Edward the Sixth's days, that according to the Rules of our Christian Religion
in every behalf, no Christian Conscience could be offended with any thing
therein contained? And is it well done to fill the Consciences of the People
now with Scruples against almost every part of it? How these men would have
demeaned themselves under the Impositions and Bishops in the days of Henry the
Eighth, and Edward the Sixth, I cannot divine, Uniformity being as strictly
enjoined then, as it is now. For such as did officiate in any other manner than
was prescribed by the Liturgy, were for the first Offense to suffer six months
Imprisonment; for the second, to be imprisoned during life: and if any should
print in defamation of it, or threaten Clergy men for using of it, he was to be
fined 10 l. for the first Offense, 20 l. for the second, and for the third to
forfeit all his Goods, and suffer Imprisonment during life.

And as for the Reign of Queen Mary, let the Book of Martyrs be viewed, and it
will appear that they who bore Testimony to the Truths of Christ, and truly
deserved the name of Martyrdom, were such as were eminent Assertors of the
established Episcopacy and Liturgy; such as Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper,
Tailor.

Lest I should lead my Reader into an Error, while I follow the Method of these
Men, I thought fit to inform the Reader, That the Erudition of a Christian Man
was printed in the Year 1543. and the Resolution of the Questions mentioned in
the Papeer by Dr. Stillingfleet, in the days of King Edward the Sixth; which
whether they were consulted of before (viz.) in the days of Henry the Eighth,
is not material to enquire into: but the Method Mr. H. and Mr. Lobb used in the
Reply to the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in the Preface, saying, in Henry the
Eighth's time, Cranmer, in Answer to that Question, Whether Bishops or Priests
were first? did assert, etc. And that he did not vary from that Opinion, the
same being by him asserted in the Necessary Erudition.

As to the Opinion of those three Divines which are mentioned in this Chapter,
viz. Tindal, Lambert, and Barnes, the first says, That the Apostles ordained
two Officers (viz.) Bishop or Overseer, and Deacon or Minister; and adds, That
Deacons crept not into Orders till the Church grew Rich.

Lambert he says was of the same Opinion, which he took from St. Hierome, who
held Bishops and Priests to be one and the same (of which we shall speak
hereafter). This Lambert was a stranger, come from Avignon, and would that
every Parish should have his proper Bishop, and in every City there ought to be
many Bishops: This Mr. Barnes denies, and quotes St. Paul, who said, I have
left thee behind me to set in every City a Bishop. And the Article against Mr.
Barnes was, That he held, that one Man might not by the Law of God be a Bishop
of Two or Three Cities, or of a whole Country; he denied not one Bishop in a
City, but thought that an Apostolical Institution: His Opinion was, That there
ought not to be such Bishops as the Cardinal that examined him was: Who told
Mr. Barnes, That this Article touched him. And it seems evident, that this Man
spoke against such Usurpations as the Pope and Cardinals exercised; wherein he
agreed to the Sentiments of all those that subscribed the necessary Erudition.

And now there remains little too be said of Chapter 2. for that which he says from
a Statute primo Edw. 6. was brought in by a Parenthesis, as not part of the
intention of the Statute, which was to be learnt from the Preamble, (viz.) That
the Election of Bishops should not be in the Deans and Chapters, to prevent
Delays and Expenses, but in the King: So that it respects only the External
Government of the Church, which is still acknowledged to be in the
determination of the Magistrate, who is Supreme in all Causes, and over all
Persons. And therefore it needed not that Reflection of Dr. Heylin, which our
Author mentions, viz. That it did weaken the Authority of the Episcopal
Order: Which, (as has been proved from the Erudition, and the Judgment of the
Divines mentioned in Dr. Stillingfleet's Paper) was from Christ.

As to Bishop Poynet, the sum of what he says is this, Who knows not that the
Name Bishop has been so abused, that when it was spoken the People understood
no other thing but a great Lord, -- (Where he seems to describe a Cardinal, or
Popish Bishop) that went in a white Rochet, with a wide shaven Crown, and that
carried an Oil-Box with him, wherewith he uses once in Seven Years, Riding
about, to Confirm Children. Certainly, he could not mean this of Diocesan
Protestant Bishops, he being then Bishop of Winchester; and the Name of Bishop
being thus abused, he thought it not amiss, if another word were used in its
place, till the abused word were restored to its right Signification; and then
adds: O how the Papists would triumph over us, if they had like proof for the
Names of Pope, Cardinal, etc. as we have for the maintenance of the Names
Superintendent, (i. e.) in his sense, Bishop, Minister, and suchlike by us
used.

Chapter 3. He says, That Aley Bishop of Exeter, Pilkington of Durham, Jewel of
Salisbury, Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury were of the same Opinion with
Tindal, Lambert, and Barnes, and the Reformers in King Edward's time, and what
that was has been considered; I only observe in general, that all these were
Diocesan Bishops, and therefore probably would write nothing to destroy their
own Order, That which Bishop Aley says, is a Quotation from St. Hierome, That a
Presbyter and Bishop are the same, etc. But, says Bishop Aley, it grew by
little and little, that the whole charge and care should be appointed to one
Bishop within his Precinct. Our Author mentions another Quotation from the
Bishop out of St. Hierome, viz. That Bishops are greater than Priests, rather
by Custom than by Dispensation from the Lord; of which hereafter. To the same
effect he quotes Pilkington Bishop of Durham, arguing against a Popish Author,
and therefore probably against Popish Bishops; and he says, That God's
Commission is alike to all, Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, and Prelate; for which
he quotes St. Hierome, ad Evagrium, That a Bishop wherever he be, is of the
same Power and Priesthood, which he urged against those that still claimed
their Bishop of Rome, usurped Power above Princes, and other Bishops; who as
this Bishop says, had no Authority to Suspend, Deprive, and Interdict any
Priest that paid not his Subsidies, but from the Parliament: I cannot see what
inference the Author can make from this to favor his Opinion.

The sum of what Bishop Jewel says, is that of St. Hierome, That all Priests
are of the same Power; that the Names of Metropolitans, Archbishops,
Archdeacons, etc. are not found in the SS. That St. Hierome says, Sciant
Episcopi; that they are in Authority over Priests more by Custom, than by
Order of God's Truth: And against Harding he says, What meant Mr. Harding to
come in with the difference between Priests and Bishops, thinks he that
Priests and Bishops hold only by Tradition; or is it so humble a Heresy to
say, that by the SS of God, a Bishop and a Priest are all one: He grants also,
That it is by the favor of Princes, that a Priest being found negligent, etc.
he may be punished by the discretion of the Bishop. That the Matters of
Government must be taken out of the Word of God: (viz) That the Word be truly
taught, the Sacraments rightly administered, Virtue furthered, Vice repressed,
and the Church kept in Quietness and Order: That the Officers whereby this
Government is wrought, be not namely and particularly expressed in SS. but left
to the discretion of the Church, according to the state of Times, Places, and
Persons; and therefore no certain and perfect kind of Government being
prescribed in SS, as necessary to the Salvation of the Church, the same may be
altered: For which he quotes Gualter -- Let every Church follow the manner of
Discipline which does most agree with the people, and most fit for the time and
place; and let no Man rashly prescribe to others, and bind all Churches to one
Form: It is well known, that the Manner and Form of Government in the Apostles
times, and expressed in the SS, neither is now, nor can, nor ought to be
observed. This he wrote against Cartwright, pleading for his Government, as if
prescribed in SS, and thus he applies it to the then Dissenters: If you will
have the Queen Rule as Monarch in her own Dominions, you must give her leave to
use one kind and form of Government, in all, and every part, and so to Govern
the Church in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as in Civil. I wish they would follow his
Example and Advice, that so seem to recommend his Judgment.

Chapter 4. begins with Dr. Willet's Opinion, who says, That of the difference
between Bishops and Priests there are Three Opinions; the first of Arrius, who
held that all Ministers should be equal; and that a Bishop was not, nor ought
to be superior to a Priest; nor was there any difference at all between them.
Which Opinion was counted an Heresy. N. B.

The Second in the other extreme is of the Papists, That would have not only a
difference, but a Princely Pre-eminence of their Bishops over the Clergy, and
that by the Word of God.

The Third Opinion between both, is: That although this distinction of Bishops
and Priests, as now received, cannot be directly proved out of SS, yet it is
very good for the Polity of the Church, to avoid Schism and to preserve it in
Unity: And he concludes. So then here is a difference between our Adversaries
the Papists, and us; they say, It is of necessity to Salvation to be subject to
the Pope, and to Bishops, and Archbishops under him, as necessarily prescribed
in the Word: But so do not our Bishops and Archbishops, which is a notable
difference between the Bishops of the Popish Church, and the Reformed Churches.

Let every Church use the Form which best fitteth their State in External
Matters. N. B. Every Church is free, not one bound to the Prescription of
another: So they measure themselves by the Rule of the Word. This then (he
says) may without any contradiction be affirmed, that in this distinction of
the Ministers of the Church, there is somewhat Apostolical, somewhat also
Political: First, in the calling of Bishops, as now ordained in some Reformed
Church, it cannot be denied but that we have Order in the Church; and to have
diversity of Degrees and Ministrations, to avoid Confusion, proceeds from an
Institution of Christ, that there should not be a popular Equality, but a
convenient Superiority, and Priority in the Ministers of the Gospel; as St.
Paul also shows: First Apostles, second Prophets, etc. Secondly, There is
somewhat Politic, and that of two sorts, as touching the Polity Ecclesiastical
and Civil. To the Ecclesiastical, in advancing the Dignity of Bishops these
things appertain: 1. St. Hierome says of Confirmation, That it is committed
only to Bishops; that it is rather for the honor of the Priesthood, then by
necessity of any Law. 2. The Council of Aquisgrane, chapter 8, says, That the
Ordination and Consecration of Ministers is now reserved to the chief Minister
only for Authority's-sake, lest that the Discipline of the Church being changed
by many, should break the Peace of the Church. 3. The Author of the Book under
Hierome's Name, De Septem Ordinibus, says, That the Consecration of Virgins,
which is not now in use in the Reformed Churches, was reserved to the Bishop
for Concord's sake. 4. The Jurisdiction of the Church, which in times past (
Hierome says) was committed to the College of Presbyters, was afterward, to
avoid Schism, devolved to the Bishop. Among other Inferences from Dr. Willet,
he concludes, That Willet indeed says, that for the sake of Order, the
Presidence of one above the rest is Divine and Apostolical: And at the latter
end of Queen Eligabeth, the Episcopal Government is affirmed to be Apostolical,
and a Divine Institution. And as to Saravia, our Author gives his Judgment in
these two particulars, differing from Whitgift: 1. That not only the Ministry
of the Word and Sacraments, but the Form of Government instituted by the Lord
himself, delivered by the Apostles, confirmed by the Fathers, ought to be
continued forever. 2. The Superiority in degree of a Bishop, above a Presbyter,
is a Divine Institution; and that St. Hierome was in the same Error with
Arrius: Dico privatam fuisse Hieronimi Opinionem consentaneam cum Arrio and Dei
verbo contrariam. The last that he mentions in this Chapter is Bishop Bancroft,
who says, We have a Church Government, which in my Conscience is truly
Apostolical, and far to be preferred before any other received this day in any
Reformed Church in Christendom. And after the Death of the Apostles, who did
oversee both Churches, Pastors, and Bishops, or Superintendents, Ecclesiastical
Histories, and ancient Fathers have kept a Register of their Names, who
Succeeded and Ruled the Churches after them. -- And this inequality has been
approved and honored by all the Ancient Fathers, none excepted, and by all the
General Councils, and by all other Men of Learning, for many hundred Years
after the Apostles time, saving Arrius the Heretic, who missing of a
Bishopric that he shed for, first broached the Opinion, That there ought to be
no difference between a Bishop and a Priest. N. B.

That which Bishop Bancroft notes from Dr. Robinson, is this: I have maintained
that the Titles of Honor given to our Bishops, are no more repugnant to the
Word, than for us to be called Wardens or Presidents of Colleges, and in my
Judgment they may with as good Conscience be Governors of their Diocese, as we
being Ministers may Govern Colleges of Mrnisters. Nor do I think this was a
late devised Polity; for I am persuaded, that the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, to whom St. John writes, was one Minister set over the rest; for why,
seeing there were many Pastors there, should St. John write to the Angel, and
not to the Angels, if there had been no difference among them; neither if this
Presidency had had that fault which is reproved in Diotrephes, would our
Savior, who reproves those Disorders which he found in the Seven Churches,
have passed over this great fault in silence; therefore as Titus was left in
Greet to reform the Churches in that whole Island, so I am persuaded, that in
other Places some of that Order, and of Pastors and Teachers, which is
perpetual in the Church, even in the time of the Apostles, and had a Prelacy
among their Brethren, and that this Pre-eminence is approved by our Savior.
And to come lower, though the word Episcopus signifies, that care which is
required of all, and be in SS required of all that have care of Souls; yet I do
not remember any one Ecclesiastical Writer wherein that word does not import a
greater Dignity than is common to all Ministers; neither do I think that any
old Writer did under the Name of Bishop mean the Pastor of every Parish: Thus
Dr. Robinson, with whom, if Dr. Raynolds do agree, I see not (says he) whether
the Factioners will turn them; for this Doctor in his Book against Heart says,
That in the Church of Ephesus, though it had sundry Elders and Pastors to guide
it, yet among those was there one Chief, whom our Savior calls the Angel of
the Church; and this is he, whom after, in the Primitive Church, the Fathers
called Bishop: For, etc. He proceeds thus:

The Name of Bishop, common before to all Elders and Pastors of the Church, was
then, by the usual Language of the Fathers, appropriated to him who had the
Presidentship over the Elders. Thus are certain Elders reproved by St. Cyprian
Bishop of Carthage, for receiving to the Communion them who had fallen in time
of Persecution, before the Bishop had advised with them, and others. These Two
are for Oxford, touching the Language of the Ancient Fathers, speaking of
Bishops. Now you shall have a Cambridge Man's Opinion, Dr. Fulke, who in
confutation of the Rbemish Testament, says: Among the Clergy for Order and
seemly Government, there was always one Principal, to whom, by long use of the
Church, the Name of Bishop, or Superintendant has been applied; which room
Titus exercised in Creet, Timothy in Ephesus, and others in other places;
therefore, although in SS a Bishop and an Elder is of one Order and Authority in
Preacling the Word, and Administering the Sacraments, as Hierome does often
confess; yet in Government, by ancient use of Speech, he is only called a
Bishop, which is in SS so called, Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7. (...):
Chief in Government, to whom the Ordination, or Consecration, by Imposition of
Hands was always principally committed; which most Ancient Form of Government,
when Arrius would take away, it was noted among his other Errors. So I hereby
trust it may appear to Mr. Cartwright's reproach, and to all their shames, that
shall pretend any Authority from the Ancient Fathers, to impugn the Right
Honorable and Lawful Calling of Bishops, not Parsons in every Parish, but
Bishops in their Diocese and Province, appointed in the Apostles times, for the
right Order and Government of the Church of Christ. As to Bishop Spotwood's
History of Scotland, p. 514, concerning the Ordination of the Three Scots
Bishops in King James's time, Bishop Andrews urged, That it might not be done,
because they were not duly made Presbyters, (i. e.) by Bishops; but the
Archbishop considering that this might reflect on the Reformed Churches that
had no Bishops, which was the condition also of Scotland, where Episcopal
Ordination could not be had, it was dispensed with. But this is not the Case of
our Dissenters, who refuse Episcopal Ordination where it may be had, and set up
the Presbyterian against it.

Chapter 5. Begins with the Judicious Mr. Hooker, from whom, after a long
Quotation, he infers, p. 37. That the Polity in general be necessary to the
Church; yet it is not necessary that any one Temporal Polity be in the SS: This
being the Position of the Non-Cons, Mr. Hooker makes this use of it: -- You
cannot so much as pretend to this ground, that all the parts of your Discipline
are in SS; and your Mouths are stopped, when you plead against all other Forms,
seeing their Polity may be agreeable to the general Axioms of SS, as well as
yours: And therefore, he says, The best way for our Cause, and the strongest
against them, is to hold, (as the Non-Cons do) that in SS there must needs be
found some particular Form of Church Government which God has instituted, and
belongs to all Churches at all times; but by partiality and cunning, to make
those things truest which are fittest to serve our purpose, is what we neither
like, nor mean to follow. In p. 38. Mr. Hooker says:

First, That in the Clergy there have ever been, and ought to be some
subordinate to others, as the Apostles in the beginnig, and to Bishops ever
since; as in SS, and all Ecclesiastical Records other Ministers have been.

Secondly, That a solemn admittance ( viz. of Ministers into the Church) is of
such necessity, that without it there can be no Church Polity. These he says
are the perpetual and principal parts in Ecclesiastical Polity: And this is all
that Mr. J. H. has noted out of those Books of Mr. Hooker, which are generally
allowed to be genuine; which being not much for his purpose, he goes to the
Seventh Book, and there he finds this description of a Bishop: A Bishop is a
Minister of God, to whom with permanent continuance, not only a Power of
Administering the Word and Sacraments is given, (which other Presbyters have)
but a farther Power to Ordain Ecclesiastical Persons, and a Power of Chiefty in
Government over Presbyters as well as Laymen, a Power to be by way of
Jurisdiction a Pastor, even to Pastors themselves. And the things which
properly belong to a Bishop, cannot be common to other Pastors; and of Bishops
restrained to some definite local compass he says, their Regiment we hold to be
a thing most Divine and Holy in the Church of Christ: In two things J. H. notes
that Hooker differs from the Non-Cons, p. 40. 1. They make the Superiority or
Priority of Order to be but Temporary; he makes it permanent. 2. They deny the
Bishops have any Power over other Pastors, that is Mandatory, Judicial, and
Coercive, Mr. Hooker affirms it: Then he shows: how Mr. Hooker resolves a
Sentence of St. Hierome, which seems inconsistent with itself: viz. How the
Apostles should be the Authors of that Government, (i. e.) Episcopacy, and yet
the Custom of the Church be accounted the chief Prop of it. To which the
substance of his Answer is, That what Laws the Universal Church might change,
and does not, St. Hierome ascribes the continuance of such Laws, though
instituted by God himself, to the Judgment of the Church, for they which may
abrogate a Law, and do not, may be said to establish it; and seeing the whole
Church receiving it for a Custom, which was established by them, on whom the
Holy Ghost was in an abundant manner poured out for ordering of Christ's
Church, it had either Divine appointment beforehand, or Divine approbation
afterward. Now how Mr. J. H. could from these premises draw this following
conclusion, I cannot perceive, p. 44. Let there be, says he, as many
Bishoprics, as there are considerable Personages, and a Provision made for the
Presbyters which are to assist the Bishops in the Government of the Churches;
and then a Superiority of the Bishop above the Presbyters, will be no longer a
Bone of Contention. The Sense whereof seems to me to be this: Let the
Presbyters in every Parish have all the Power that belongs to Bishops, and
then, and not else, they will be pleased. But the Judicious Hooker would not
have been so pleased with them that should have inferred this conclusion from
any premises of his. That which follows our of Mr. Hooker's maimed Book, is,
1. That the Church Visible has not ordinarily allowed any but Bishops alone to
Ordain; howbeit, in some necessary Cases, we may decline from the ordinary
ways. 2. That Confirmation has not always belonged to the Bishops, but in some
places, in the absence of the Bishop, the Presbyter might Ordain. 3. That the
Presbyters are for the most part mentioned as Counselors and Assistants to the
Bishop.

The last Bishop whom he would constrain to help on his New Model, is Bishop
Bilson, who says, That to prevent Dissension and Confusion, there must needs,
even by God's Ordinance, be a President, or Ruler of every Presbytery; but that
in the Apostles times the Presidentship should go round to every Presbyter by
course; this is the main point between us. Then he says, There are Four Things
must be perpetual in the Church. 1. The Dispensing of the Word. And 2.
Sacraments. 3. Imposing of Hands. 4. Guiding the Keys to shut or open the
Kingdom of God. The first Two belong to all Pastors or Presbyters, but it
belongs to some selected persons who succeed in the Apostles places, to
moderate the Presbyters of each Church, and to take the special Charge of
Imposition of Hands. And this singularity in succeeding, and superiority in
ordaining, has been observed from the Apostles times, as the peculiar and
subsiantial Marks of Episcopal Power and Calling.

As to the Power of the Keys, the private use of them in appointing Offenders,
upon the acknowledgement of their sins, to for bear the Lord's Table for a
time, we deny not to Presbyters; but the Bishop is by Christ's own mouth,
pronounced to be the Angel of the Church, the chief Steward of his Household, to
hear and determine Grievances, with whom the Presbyters sat at first as
Assessors; but when Councils began, only as Beholders and Advisers of his
Judgment; and he adds, that the right by imposing Hands to Ordain Presbyters
and Bishops, was at first derived from the Apostles to Bishops, and not to
Presbyters. N. B. And for 1500 Years without instance or example to the
contrary, till this our Age, remained in Bishops, and not in Presbyters; for
which he quotes St. Hierome: Quid faecit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod non
facit Presbyter. J. H. observes, that whereas it is objected, That Imposition
of Hands was by the Presbytery; he answers out of St. Chrysostom, that by the
word Presbytery in SS, must be understood Bishops not Presbyters; because
Presbyters in the Apostles time did not impose Hands on a Bishop. And from this
Bishop he adds, All that we can say for Bishops above Presbyters out of SS is,
that the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of St. Paul, has given the Bishop of each
place Authority to Ordain the worthy, to examine such as be faulty, to reprove
and discharge such as be guilty, either of unsound Teaching, or offensive
Living; and this he says belongs to all Bishops of Christ's Church forever. I
have transcribed so much of these Quotations, because the very repetition of
them is a confutation of that Design, which Mr. H. attempts, and will show it
to be not a healing, but a very hurtful Attempt, as precluding that way of
Peace and Reconciliation which is generally intended, if the unreasonable
Demands of some unquiet Men do not put a bar to it.

Thus says Mr. J. H. I have gone through the principal Writers about Church
Government in Queen Elizabeth 's Reign: And indeed he has culled out such
Foundations on which he would build his Hay and Stubble, as will no way suit
with them. I shall not prepossess the Reader with the inferences which J. H.
would force from them; but leave every Man to consider, whether he can fix his
Half-sheet Model on these Concessions; and now briefly inform the Reader of the
Judgment of some of these Divines, and some Statesmen, what Qualifications he
and such Master Builders are endowed with, for the Building of a Temple fit for
the Public Worship of God and our Savior: And I shall begin with,

The Speech of the Lord Keeper Puckering to the House of Lords, by Order of
Queen Elizabeth.
ESpecially you are commanded by Her Majesty, to take heed that no ear be
given, nor time afforded to the wearisome Solicitations of those that are
commonly called Puritans, wherewithal the late Parliament have been exceedingly
importuned; which sort of Men, while in the giddiness of their Spirits they
labor and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing else but distract
the good Repose of the Church and Commonwealth, which is as well grounded for
the body of Religion it self; and as well guided for the Discipline, as any
Realm that professes the Truth; and as the present case stands, it may be
doubted, whether they or the Jesuits offer more danger, or are to be more
speedily suppressed; for albeit the Jesuits do poison the Hearts of Her Majesty's
Subjects, under a pretense of Conscience, they do it but closely, and only in
corners, but these Men do both publish in their printed Books, and teach in all
their Conventicles, sundry Opinions, not only dangerous to the well-setled
State and Policy of the Realm, by putting a Pique between the Clergy and the
Laity, but also much derogatory to her Sacred Majesty and her Crown, as well by
the diminution of her Ancient and Lawful Revenues, and by denying her
Highness's Prerogative and Supremacy, as by offering Peril to Her Majesty's
Safety in her own Kingdom; in all which things (however in many other points)
they pretend to be at War with the Popish Jesuits, yet by the separation of
themselves from the Unity of their Fellow Subjects, and by abusing the Sacred
Authority and Majesty of their Prince, they do both join and concur with the
Jesuits in opening the Door, and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion that
is threatened against the Realm.

And in the Year 1588, as Cambden observes in his Annals, the King of Spain
being thereto encouraged by an Information of the great Divisions and
Animosities among us, by Reason whereof he expected either a greater Party to
join with him, or a less Opposition, sent his Invincible Armado upon our
Coasts; at which time the Protestant Dissenters, instead of Arming in Defense
of the Queen and themselves, did with greater Importunity and Confidence
assault her with Petitions and Libels, taking advantage of the Times, as if
they were more ready to assist the Spaniards than Her Majesty, in case their
unreasonable Requests were not granted. As for Bishop Jewel, if he said any
thing in their favor, they ill requited him, for on his Preaching a Sermon at
St. Paul's Cross, in defense of the Orders of the Church, and Obedience to
them, he was so spitefully used by them, that in his own Vindication, he made a
Solemn Protestation on his Deathbed, that what he then said, was neither to
please some, nor displease others, but to promote Peace and Unity among
Brethren; of which Archbishop Whitgift in his Defense, p. 433. says, It is the
manner, except you please their Humor in all things, though you otherwise
deserve never so well, all is nothing with them, but they will deprave you,
rail on you, back-bite you, invent lies of you, and spread false rumors, as
though you were the vilest persons on Earth. By these insolent proceedings of
the Sectaries and Papists in Confederacy, the Queen was necessitated to pass
those Acts of the 23 and 35 of her Reign, to retain Her Majesty's Subjects in
due Obedience. And this also gave occasion to that Proclamation of the Queen
1588. against Seditious and Schismatical Books and Libels.

By the QUEEN. A Proclamation against certain Seditious and Schismatical Books
and Libels, etc.
THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, considering how within these few years
past, and now of late, certain seditious and evil-disposed persons toward her
Majesty, and the Government established for causes Ecclesiastical within her
Majesty's Dominions, have devised, written, printed, or caused to be
seditiously and secretly published and dispersed, sundry schismatical and
seditious Books, diffamatory Libels, and other Phanatical Writings amongst her
Majesty's Subjects, containing in them Doctrine very erroneous, and other
matters notoriously untrue, and slanderous to the State, and against the Godly
Reformation of Religion and Government Ecclesiastical established by Law, and
so quietly of long time continued, and also against the persons of Bishops, and
others placed in Authority Ecclesiastical under her Highness by her Authority,
in railing sort, and beyond the bounds of all good humanity: All which Books,
Libels, and Writings, tend by their scope to persuade and bring in a monstrous
and apparent dangerous Innovation within her Dominions and Countries, of all
manner of Ecclesiastical Government now in use, and to the abridging, or rather
to the overthrow of her Highness lawful Prerogative, allowed by God's Law, and
established by the Laws of the Realm, and consequently to reverse, dissolve,
and set at liberty the present Government of the Church, and to make a
dangerous change of the form of Doctrine, and use of Divine Service of God, and
the Ministration of the Sacraments now also in use, with a rash and malicious
purpose also to dissolve the Estate of the Prelacy, being one of the three
ancient Estates of this Realm under her Highness, whereof her Majesty minds
to have such a reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and
Commonwealth appertains. All which said lewd and seditious practices, do
directly tend to the manifest wilful breach of great number of good Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, inconveniences nothing regarded by such Innovations.

In-consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide some good
and speedy Remedy to withstand such notable, dangerous, and ungodly Attempts,
and for that purpose to have such enormous Malefactors discovered and condignly
punished, does signify this her Highness misliking and indignation of such
dangerous and wicked Enterprises; and for that purpose does hereby will and
also straightly charge and command, that all persons whatsoever, within any her
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, who have or hereafter shall have any of the
said seditious Books, Pamphlets, Libels, or Writings, or any of like nature
already published, or hereafter to be published, in his or their custody,
containing such matters as above are mentioned, against the present Order and
Government of the Church of England, or the Lawful Ministers thereof, or
against the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Church, and allowed by the Laws of
the Realm: That they and every of them do presently after, with convenient
speed, bring in, and deliver up the same unto the Ordinary of the Diocese, or
of the place where they inhabit, to the intent they may be utterly defaced by
the said Ordinary, or otherwise used by them. And that from henceforth no
person or persons whatsoever be so hardy as to write, contrive, print, or cause
to be published or distributed or to keep any of the same, or any other Books,
Libels, or Writings of like nature and quality, contrary to the true meaning
and intent of this her Majesty's Proclamation. And likewise that no man
hereafter give any instruction, direction, favor, or assistance to the
contriving, writing, printing, publishing, or dispersing of the same, or such
like Books, Libels, or Writings whatsoever, as they tender her Majesty's good
favor, will avoid her high displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary
at their utmost perils: and upon such pains and penalties, as by the Law any
way may be inflicted upon the offenders, in any of these behalfs, as persons
maintaining such seditious actions, which her Majesty minds to have severely
executed. And if any person have had knowledge of the Authors, Writers,
Printers, or Dispersers thereof, which shall within one Month after the
publication hereof, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place where he had
such knowledge, or to any of her Majesty's Privy Council: the same person shall
not for his former concealment be hereafter molested or troubled. Given at her
Majesty's Palace at Westminster, the thirteenth of February, 1588. In the One
and thirtieth Year of her Highness Reign.

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
Archbishop Grindall expressed in a Letter of his, his great fear of two things
(viz.) Atheism and Popery, and both arising out of our needless Divisions; by
these means the Enemies of our Religion gain this, that nothing can be
established by Law in the Protestant Religion, whose every part is not opposed
by one or other of her own Professors; so that things continuing loose and
confused, the Papists have their Opportunity to urge their way, which is
attended with Order and Government. And our Religion continuing thus distracted
and divided, some vile wretches lay hold on the Argument on one side to confute
the other, and so at last to destroy all. And it is observed in the Life of Mr.
Hooker, p. 9. they persuaded men to believe that the Bishops were Antichrist,
and Antichrist was to be destroyed by the Sword; and beginning with Petitions,
they proceeded to Admonitions, then to Remostrances, then to numbering their
Party, then to that boldness, that one told the Queen in a Sermon, She was like
an untamed Heifer, that would not be ruled by God's people, but obstructed his
Discipline. And we have heard and seen worse things in our days.

Archbishop Whitgift in his Defense of the Answer to T. C. p. 605. tells the
Puritans, That the Papists could not have met with better Proctors than they.
And 55. That they did the Pope very good Service, and that he would not miss
them for any thing: for what is his desire, but to have this Church of England,
which he has accursed, utterly defaced and discredited, to have it by any
means overthrown, if not by Foreign means, yet by Domestical Dissension. And
what fitter Instruments could he have had for that purpose, who under pretense
of Zeal overthrow that which other men have builded; under color of Purity,
seek to bring in Deformity; and under the Cloak of Equality and Humility, would
usurp as great Tyranny and lofty Lordliness over their Parishes, as ever the
Pope did over the whole Church, and that they were made the Engines of the
Roman Conclave, whereby they intend to overthrow this Church even by these men's
Folly, which they could not compass by all their Policy. The Epistle of the
Archbishop to the Reader, before his Defense of the Answer to T. C's
Admonition, is worth pernsal.

As for Bishop Bancroft, the whole design of his Book is to manifest what
disturbance the endeavors of the Presbyterians to establish their Eldership,
did create in the Nation by such dangerous Positions and Practices, as were in
his time with equal violence and malice carried on for the destruction of the
Church, as it was then established. There are some other of the mentioned
Divines, whose Writings I have not, nor is there need to enquire farther into
them, seeing there is nothing alleged from them by Mr. J. H. but what being
compared with their other sayings and practices does fully frustrate his
designs. And when the Bishops of our Church do so ingenuously mention all that
may be said for their Adversaries, with so much Veracity, Candor, and
Moderation, what a Reproach is it to their Opponents, to deal with them with so
much Scorn and Contempt, such Bitterness and Passion, such Slanders and
Falsehoods, as too many do, and as T. C. did with the Archbishop Whitgift, whom
Queen Elizabeth called her black Husband, and upheld him against the
Contrivances and contrary Designs of Lechester, and those Conformists whom he
favored, to promote his own Sacrilegious ends.

As for Mr. Hooker, whom Bishop King calls Malleum Hereticorum, who was as meek
and modest a man, as well as judicious, as any in his Generation, he did
profess to the Archbishop, See p. 17. of his Life, That he believed his
Adversary, Mr. Travers. to be a good man, and that occasioned him to examine
his own Conscience concerning his Opinions, and to satisfy that, he consulted
the Holy Scripture and other Laws Humane and Divine, whether the Conscience of
him, and others of his judgment, ought so far to be complied with, as to alter
the frame of Church Government, and manner of Worship and Ceremonies as often as
their tender Consciences shall require it; in which examination he had not only
satisfied himself, but begun his Ecclesiastical Polity for the satisfaction of
others, which he justly calls, a Demonstration of the Reasonableness of our
Ecclesiastical Laws, and a hopeful Foundation for the Churches Peace, and not
to provoke either Mr. T. C. the Archbishop's Adversary, nor Mr. Travers, whom,
says Mr. Hooker, I take to be mine (not mine Enemy) God knows this to be my
meaning. Yet his Adversaries that could not answer his Arguments, contrived to
blot his Reputation, and accused him of Incontinency, which by a Trepan, as the
Author of his Life relates, p. 22. they endeavored to fasten on him; he kept
this Grief to himself many Months, with great anxiety, until he revealed it to
Mr. Edwin Sands and George Cranmer, who had been his Pupils, who enquiring into
the Imposture, so followed it, that they brought his Accusers to open
Confession and Punishment, which Punishment he endeavored to prevent, but was
denied; at which he replied, That however he would Fast and Pray, that God
would give them Repentance, and Patience to undergo their Punishment; and the
first part was granted, if we may believe, says my Author, the penitent
Behavior, and open Confession of his Accuser.

How his Adversaries dealt with his Books after his Death, is thus related.
That one Mr. Clark and another Minister desired of his Widow a Month after his
Death to search his Study for some Papers, whereof they burnt some, and tore
others; but Dr. Jackson having transcribed some draught of his three last
Books, they were completed by Dr. Spencer, who was acquainted with the Design
of those Books. The Doctor left them with Dr. King, Bishop of Londo, and he to
his Son, Bishop of Chichester, he to Dr. Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
whose Library they continued till the Death of Archbishop Laud, and then the
Library was given to Hugh Peter's for his good Services, and then many
alterations and additions were made in them, to make them speak for the power
of the People above the King, for which, when the Lord Say quoted Hooker's
Authority to King Charles the First, he replied, That the Books were not
Hooker's; but however he would consent to what was proposed out of those
doubted Books, if that Lord would consent to Mr. Hooker 's Judgment in those
Books which were undoubted. The same may I say concerning the Judgment of such
Divines as Mr. J. H. has quoted, we will stand to what is but weakly and
impertinently quoted from those Divines, if they will stand to what is more
maturely and pertinently by them alleged and proved, agreeably also to their
own practice for Diocesan Episcopacy, as established in the Church of England.

If those Dissenters who were so importunate and industrious to advance their
Discipline on the ruins of the established Church, had proceeded on the
Principles laid down by the Divines abovementioned, whereof this is one that
they lay hold on (viz.) That the forms of Government not being plainly expressed
in Scripture, are alterable, and may by the Authority of the Civil Magistrate
be determined to this or that species (which yet they will not grant of their
own Discipline) they ought then to acquiesce in that Government which was
established, and to which all those Divines most willingly submitted, as the
best in all the Christian World; and though by reason of their dissent from it,
they had drawn on themselves the execution of some moderate Penalties, yet if
they had been fully persuaded that they did suffer for a good Conscience, and
for Righteousness sake, they ought like good Christians to have taken it
patiently, and not by Railing, by Sedition, by forming Schisms, and meditating
Rebellions, seek to avenge themselves, and return evil for evil, but contrarily
blessing, being thereto called by the Example and Precepts of their great
Master; but when they returned evil for good, and hatred for good will, and
thought themselves persecuted, because they could not grasp a Power to
persecute their Superiors; this was not agreeable to that wisdom that comes
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated. And if our present Dissenters be satisfied of the purity of our
Doctrine, they may by the Principles which are laid down, submit to that
Discipline and Government that Authority does establish, there being nothing in
it contrary to the Word of God, but wholly agreeable to the constant practice
of the Universal Church.

I think it sufficient to solve all that has been alleged out of our Divines
to clear these two things.

1. What kind of Government was settled by the Apostles. 2. What Answer may be
given to the Objections so often mentioned from St. Hierom.
As to the first, it is evident, that there was a Superiority in the Apostles
to those to whom they committed the care of the several Churches, whether they
were Bishops or Presbyters; and as the Apostles dyed, their Successors in
Ecclesiastical Power, who in all Ages were the Bishops, were the Subjects of
that Superiority; such as Timothy, Titus, Clemen, Linus, etc. and their
Successors as they stand recorded in Ecclesiastical History; for what the
Apostles did for the perpetual Order and Government of the Church, was
agreeable to our Savior's Institution, and all Antiquity bears proof to this
Truth, that from the Apostles days there were settled in the most eminent
Churches of Jerusalem, Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, several Bishops that had
a Superiority over the Presbyters, in their respective Churches, and that the
three Orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, were established in those
Churches in those purest and most Primitive times; insomuch that they who will
not admit those Testimonies, will be to seek for one of the best Proofs for the
Canon of the Scripture. As therefore we believe the Succession of Roman
Emperors from the Writings of such Historians as lived near their times, so
may we believe the truth of such Orders of Men, and of their Successions, as it
is delivered by Men of good Credit and Honesty, that lived near those times,
and have handed down in undoubted written Records, from Age to Age, St.
Polycarp, Ignatius, Clemens, who conversed with the Apostles; Ireneus, Justin
Martyr, and others, that lived with them; then Origin, Clem. Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, who succeeded them, and many others, who lived within two hundred
years after the Apostles, from whom Eusebius had the Materials of his History,
and refers to them for the truth of his Relations.

He had the Acts of the Martyrs, and the Books of Hegesippus, concerning the
Acts of the Church; from which, and other helps, from the very Persecutors of
the Christians, he compiled his History, and particularly the Succession of
Bishops. Clemens Romans in his Epistle to the Corinthians, speaks of the Officers
of the Church in his time, alluding to those under the Law: The High Priest
has his Office, the Priest his Station, and the Levite his Ministry, the
Layman his Office; let every one worship God in his Order. Ignatius mentions
these Three Orders in his Epistles so plainly, that the Enemies of those Orders
have martyred him again in his Reputation, denying his Epistles to be genuine,
which the Learned Bishop Pearson has irrefragably asserted; and so has Dr.
Beveridge the Authority of Apostolical Canons, which have been owned by the
Councils, and expressly assert the Three Orders; so that though while the Apostles
lived the Names might be confounded, yet immediately on their deaths, all
Ancient Writers have distinguished them; because such as succeeded to their
Power were Bishops; and yet all the Minister's or Elders were not so, for a
Parity is usually the Parent of Confusion; and if such a Parity had been settled
by Christ or his Apostles, how could it be, that as St. Hierom says, The whole
World should agree for prevention of Schism, to alter what Christ had
established: Was the whole World (i. e.) every particular Church (which are it
seems agreed on setting up a Bishop above Presbyters) wiser than our Savior;
or had they Authority so to do? And if they did so by sufficient Authority, why
will the Presbyters as generally agree to pull them down now, as their Ancients
did to set them up? So that I see no shadow of Reason, why we may not subscribe
to that which is said before the Book of Consecration, That it is evident to
all Men diligently reading the Holy Scripture, and Ancient Authors, that from
the Apostles time, there have been ever these Orders of Ministers in the
Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

2. As to St. Hierom's Testimony, the import of it is this, That though the
Apostles had a Superiority over Presbyters, yet when they died they did not
bequeath that Power to others, but left it in common to the Presbyters, whose
management of it was such, as it begat Schisms and Animosities; for suppression
of which it was thought fit through the whole World, to choose out of the body
of the Presbyters, one that should have a Presidency over the rest; so that
this Presidency was not an Apostolical Institution, but Ecclesiastical and
Prudential Constitution, wherein St. Hierom does not only contradict the Joint
Suffrage of all the Ancients, but his own Testimony. Against this Opinion of
St. Hierom some affirm, that what he said was in a Discourse against some proud
Deacons, that would equal themselves with the Presbyters, which was as great a
presumption as to invade the Office of the Bishops, seeing in most things (as
St. Hierom says) the Bishops and Presbyters were of the same Power; for, Quis
patiatur, says St. Hierom, etc. Who can endure that they whose Office it was
to attend on Tables and Widows, should equal themselves to those, at whose
Prayers the Body and Blood of Christ is consecrated. But to let this pass, I
say, 2. This Opinion of his reflects on our Savior and his Apostles, as if
they had not sufficiently provided for the future Peace of the Church; and that
if the Presbyters in after-Ages had not been more provident, the Church would
have wanted a Remedy against Schisms: And if such a Remedy were thought
necessary by the whole World, (of Presbyters) then is the Office of a Bishop
founded on Natural Reason, for it is most true that the Peace of the Church
(which consists of a great number of the Clergy, which are as subject to
Passions as other Men) cannot be secured in St. Hierom's Opinion, without a
Superior Power over them: Cui si non exors and ab omnibus eminens detur
potestas tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata quot Sacerdotes: To which, if
all the rest of the Clergy do not yield Obedience, there may be as many Schisms
in the Church as there are Priests. And thus it would follow, that neither
Christ nor his Apostles did provide so well for the Churches Peace, as common
Prudence, and Natural Reason would direct.

3. It being granted there was a Superiority in the Apostles, it is alleged,
That after their Deaths, the Government, for a long time, fell to the several
Presbyters, until the inconveniency of it appeared by the increase of Schisms;
and then it was agreed, Toto orb, through the whole World, to advance one
Presbyter with Power over the rest. But when the Succession of Bishops is
apparently recorded in most of the eminent Churches, immediately after the
decease of the Apostles, it is an incredible story to tell us, that the Power
of Governing the Church was in the Body of the Presbyters, of which there is
not the least Testimony in Antiquity for any one Church, nor any for the Time,
Place, or Persons, when this Toto orb decretum, this new alteration should be
made; nor is it probable that all the World would agree at once to make an
alteration in Church Government; so that the result is this: There was a
Superiority in the Apostles days, which ceased for a while, and then the
Presbyters raised in common; but that Rule or Government was found to be the
occasion of many Schisms, and then the Apostolical Superiority was decreed by
all to be Re-established. 4. St. Hierom's words do not consist with themselves;
for when he says these Presbyters did exalt one chosen from among themselves,
to a higher degree, whom they named a Bishop, how can that consist with what
immediately follows: That a Presbyter had not the Power of Ordaining. Quid enim
facit excepta Ordinatione Episcopus quod non faciat Presbiter: It seems by this
the ancient Presbyters did first for necessary Causes, first set up Bishops,
and then it will sound ill if our new Presbyters should put them down,
unnecessarily. So that the most of what has been alleged from the Divines of
the Church of England in favor of Mr. J. H's New Model, depending on the
Testimony of St. Hierom, and that being proved to be a single and slender
Opinion, contrary to the Practice of all Churches, and not consistent with
itself: I suppose the Reader will not be of Mr. H's mind, to destroy the
established Constitution, for a new, dangerous, and impracticable Invention,
which indeed was no elder then Socinus, the first Inventer of Independent
Churches, granting to every Congregation a Power to Elect their Church Officers
for Governing their Affairs, and deciding of Controversies. And by this Design
I perceive Mr. J. H. is of the same Judgment with Dr. Owen, as well in
Church Discipline, as in Doctrine, whose Treatise of The In-dwelling of the
Spirit, and Praying by the Spirit, (not without a Contempt of our Lord's
Prayer) Mr. J. H. in his peaceable Disquisitions and Animadversions on a
Discourse writ against Dr. Owen's book of the Holy Spirit, he attempts to
reconcile to the Truth, as now he does the Independent Principles and Practices
with the Church of England.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 2. after the word Controversy, add the Less is blessed of the
Greater. P. 4. l. 35, for of read or.


