Dr. Walker's True, Modest, and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE Author of 'EIKON
ASILIK, Strictly Examined, and Demonstrated TO BE False, Impudent, and
Deceitful.

In Two PARTS, The first disproving it to be Dr. Gauden's. The second proving
it to be King CHARLES the First's.

By THOMAS LONG, B. D. and Prebendary of St. PETER's EXON.

His Majesty's Meditation on his Letters taken and divulged after Naseby Fight:
The taking away of my Credit is but a necessary Preparation to the taking away
my Life and my Kingdoms; first I must seem neither fit to live, nor worthy to
reign: By exquisite Methods of Cunning and Cruelty I must be compelled first to
follow the Funerals of my Honor, and then be destroyed

Matthew. 18.16. Take with thee one or two witnesses more, that in the mouth of
two or three every word may be established. IMPRIMATUR,

Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Lon. d Sacris Domesticis.
Sept. 22, 1692.


London: Printed and are to be sold by R Talor, near Stationers' Hall, 1693.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, JONATHAN Lord Bishop of Exon, The
Reverend the Dean and Chapter of Exon, And my Brethren of the CLERGY.
HAving been chosen by your Suffrage a fourth time to serve as one of your
Clerks in the Convocation, I have endeavored on all Occasions, as my great Age
and mean Abilities permitted, and God's Blessing, enabled me, to defend the
Church as by Law established, against all its Adversaries: and being
unexpectedly invited by the Worthy Dr. Charles Goodall to declare what I had
observed concerning the Author of the (...), who was pleased to send me Dr.
Walker's Libel, wherein he affirms, That Dr. Gauden was the Author of that
Book. Among other Remarks which I sent to Dr. Goodall, upon Dr. W.'s Book, I
sent him my own Testimony in these words: I had the hap to be acquainted with
Bp. Gauden as long as he was our Diocesan, and I have often heard him affirm,
that he was fully convinced that the (...) was entirely that King's Work. How
this Testimony of mine came to the knowledge of Dr. Hollingworth who was then
writing against Dr. Walker, is not material, but I received a Letter from him
desiring that I would communicate my Testimony to him, for which I referred him
to Dr. Goodall, from whom I suppose he received a Copy of my Testimony, Shortly
after this, there came forth a third Letter of Ludlow's, and in p. 16. of a
Preface to that Book, I found my Testimony repeated, and my Person reflected
on, which I accounted a great Honor, as being defamed by a Regicide in Defense
of our Royal Martyr, this was one Motive to engage me for the farther
Confirmation of my Testimony, which how well I have performed, I submit to your
Judgments. This Testimony was so acceptable to both the Doctors, that they
solicited me for my farther Assistance in this Business; and Dr. Goodal who
mostly encouraged me by several Testimonies which were very material, pressed on
me the Prosecution of this Subject, because Dr. Walker's Pamphlet by his
frequent and solemn Appeals to God had altered the Opinions of many of our own
Church, and Multitudes of Dissenters; and that as well Dr. Walker's as Ludlow's
Libels did equally tend to Subversion of Monarchy and Episcopacy, as now by Law
established; these things prevailed with me to Review Dr. Walker's true
Account, as he calls it, and finding it to be false, scandalous, inconsistent,
and contradictory to itself, and to have no Foundation besides the bare
Assertion of a Vain Person, I resolved to join Issue with him on his own
Proposal, in the last Page of his Libel, That if any Man can produce stronger
Reasons for the negative part, viz that Dr. Gauden was not the Author, than he
has for the affirmative, he says, he not only will, but must believe that
contrary part. The Case therefore is devolved on the Determination of the
Reader, whom I only desire to consider the Arguments and Authorities which I
have produced for stopping of that false and malicious Rumor, which has been a
long time muttered in every Corner, but now is proclaimed on the Housetop, and
like Pestilential Diseases on crazy Bodies, has seized Men of weak Heads and
corrupt Hearts; which being warmly applied to the infected Party, who with
Jannes and Jambres withstand Moses, and resist the Truth, shall proceed no
farther, for their Folly shall be manifest to all Men, by

My most Honored Lord, Fathers, and Brethren, Your most Devoted SERVANT, THO.
LONG.

THE PREFACE.
IT is an unaccountable Piece of Malice that in twelve Years after the
Barbarous Murder of CHARLES the First, wherein his bloody Enemies wanted
neither Power nor Diligence to destroy that Monument which he had erected in
his Lifetime, stood still firm and inviolable; and after more than thirty
Years, wherein the Church and Royal Family were restored to a quiet Enjoyment
of their Ancient Rights and Splendour, and both Church and State acknowledged
their Preservation due to the Unconquerable Fortitude and Patience of the Royal
Martyr; in witness whereof they ordained, (as bound in Duty and Gratitude) that
the Memorial of that Just Man might be blessed, by recording Him in their
Rubric as their Royal Martyr, and appointed a Day of Humiliation and Prayer
for the Aversion of those Judgments which the Guilt of shedding his Innocent
Blood, from which we are not cleansed to this Day; that there should be found
such Monsters of Men as should endeavor to Murder Him a second time, and
charge Him again in the sight of the Nation, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer,
and (what His most Unrighteous Judges durst not charge Him with, as) a Papist.
All which Calumnies have been lately spread through the Nation, in several
Libels, under the name of that Impious Regicide Ludlow, who because Judgment
was not speedily executed on him, has set his heart upon doing more Mischief;
nor does that Son of Belial want the Assistance and Applause of too many, who
such up his venomous Poison, and become professed Enemies to Episcopacy in the
Church, and Monarchy in the State; and because their Predecessors prevailed so
far against the most Pious and Innocent of Kings, and the best of the Reformed
Churches, as to kill and take possession of their Inheritances; having now, as
Milton says, lost their Paradise, they attempt to regain it, by the same
Methods as were used in 1640: The Government being now established in the Hands
of the most Heroic and Religious King and Queen in all Christendom, and under
them the Church consisting of such a Learned and Pious Clergy, as maintain
their Renown of being Stupor Mundi. He sticks not to justify them whose Deeds
testify that they are the Offspring of those who destroyed the Lord's
Anointed, and killed his Prophets; and commends Regicide, Sacrilege, and
Murdering of Vicegerents, and those that God had sent as his Ambassadors among
them, and persuades them, that they did God service in those Barbarities. What
Prince, or what Church can be safe, if they should (which God forbid) fall
under the Power of Men of such Principles, who sought to destroy Monarchy; with
the best of Monarchs, and with Him the best Reformed Church.

The Reign of Charles the First for seventeen Years together, was such as the
Prophet describes, Psalm. 144. When our sons grew up as young plants, and our
daughters were as the polished corners of the temple; when there was no leading
into captivity, no breaking or invasion of the land, no decay of our stores,
our sheep or oxen. And yet what Murmuring and Complaining was there in all our
Streets? There was no Blood shed in all that time, until this Generation of Men
grew intoslerable by affronting, and publishing Factious and Seditious Libels
against both the King and Church; and then a few Marks of such as openly began
our Divisions, were set on some of them, that others might avoid their
pernicious Ways, such as Prin, Burton, and Baltwick, the first of which
confessed, That if his Head had been cut off when his Ears were cropped, he had
deserved it. The Archbishops Speech has truly set forth their Attempts and
Deeds. And as for the Condition of the Church, the Care of the Governors was,
that we might worship God in Holiness and Beauty too, so that the King's
Daughter might not only be glorious within, but her Garments might be of Needle
work.

Such by the Blessing of God is our present Condition; but that we may cease to
wonder at these Men, Dr. Walker, that was a Member of our Church, one that
admired the Parts and Piety of the Holy Martyr, after forty three Years, should
seek to deface the Portraicture of that Glorious King, and deprive the People
of that precious Depositum, than which we have not a more sacred Relick of any
of the Martyrs and Fathers, since the Aposties days, is matter of Wonder and
Astonishment: He tells us, that the (...) is an Impostor, framed by Dr. Gauden,
and imposed on the Nation by him, without the Knowledge and Consent of the
King; and so deprives Him of the best Evidence of his Wisdom and Innocence, and
lays him open to all the odious Reproaches contained in the Livels of the
Regicide Ludlow, and his Fellows, for those being the false Reports of professed
Enemies, were confuted by the King in his Lifetime, in answer to their
Undutiful Remonstrances, which may be seen in the Reliquiae Carolinae, and
particularly in the Regal Apology: but the Confident Assertions of an avowed
Friend, upon a Motive of a troubled Conscience, a Doctor of Divinity, a Member
of that Church that Yearly Celebrates His Memory as their Martyr, lays a Claim
to, and commands the Belief of the vulgar People; and if the Prejudice be not
speedily removed, may be of dangerous Consequence, for who would willingly be a
Subject to such a Prince as shall publicly, and without any Contradiction,
pass for a Traitor, a Tyrant, and Murderer, or be a Member of that Church
which shall Canonize such a Prince, and Celebrate His Memory in a Yearly
Solemnity as their Royal Martyr? And if Charles the First be still represented
as such, and His Murder openly justified, what Monarch can be secure?
espectally when such as Dr. W. shall assure the World, That the best Defense
that ever was, or could be made in His behalf, the (...), is a Sham and
Imposture, and at most a Pious Fraud; and this done by one that professes a
great Love and Veneration for the King, by one that reveals it as a Secret, the
concealing whereof had been a great Trouble to his Conscience, and one that
makes solemn Appeals to God the Searcher of Hearts, and Avenger of Wrong, that
what he says is Matter of Fact, seen with his own eyes: Hoc ithacus velit and
magne merchantur atridae; This is such a Spark of Wild fire as will put all the
combustible Provision which the Commonwealth's Men have heaped together into a
Flame; an Engine like the Trojan Horse, out of which Armies of Antimonarchical
Men, not yet discovered, may in a short time appear, for the subverting of our
yet flourishing Monarchy: It is therefore a necessary Duty for all that love
the present Establishment, to extinguish those Sparks, which being wrapped up in
a multitude of Libels, are scattered through the Nation, and spread like Fire
among Thorns. The Reverend Dr. Hollingworth has with great Courage opposed
this growing Mischief, and has got many Hands for his Assistance; but the
inflamed Party rage the more, and as Water cast on the Smith's Forge, where the
Bellows are still blowing, it increases and prolongs the Heat, so that there
needs the addition of more Help, as of many Waters to extinguish such Fires;
every Man is concerned when the Fire is got into his Neighbor's House; among
others I willingly offered my helping Hand, and resolve, by God^s assistance,
not to recede for any Opposition that I have or shall meet with: the Province
which I have undertaken, is to quench that Fire brand which Dr. Walker has
thrown upon the Portraicture of King Charles the First, the most magnificent
Monument that any Prince has left behind him, the fall whereof would shake
Monarchy itself; his Attempt is furious, but his main Strength is like the
French Valor, which is spent in a single Charge, and that being already
sustained, as I doubt not of a complete Victory over this daring Enemy, and
utterly exting uishing his Firebrand: So I hope my Success may encourage those
Statesmen or Soldiers, whose more peculiar Province it is to dissipate those
Libels of Ludlow and his Accomplices, who by their Subterranean Fires and Ignes
Fatui seek to mislead the Ignorant and Credulous Mobile into their destructive
Snares. There are still among us combustible Materials, and such credulous or
malicious Fools, who as Solomon says, make it their sport to cast abroad such
Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death; and the Flame is broken out among the
Cameronians in our Neighbor-kingdom; and too many in this Nation warm
themselves by the Sparks which they have kindled: And St. James advises us to
behold, (i. e.) to consider how great a matter a little Fire kindles; of which
the Experience we have had in that single Spark of the Scottish Covenant since
the Year 1643, of which Dr. Gauden observes, p. 182. of his Anti-Baal, That it
was so far like that from Mount Sina, with Fire and Smoke, Earthquakes and
Burning, and loud Noise of Trumpets, attended with infinite Mischief, Fury,
Misery, and Confusion on King and Parliament, Priest and People.

And what less is designed by that proscribed Regicide Ludlow, who with an
unheard of Insolence defied the Laws and Justice of the whole Nation, directing
his Traiterous Libel to the hands of Sir Edward Seymour, a chief Counselor of
Estate, and that Juncto of Republicans that Abet his Design in many such
rebellious Libels as are scattered through the Nation, to set it into a Flame.
And they have not the Understanding of Children, that having been often burnt,
do not dread the Smoke of such Fires: It Is not for his sake alone that such
Libels are divulged, but to show their Antipathy to Monarchy itself, even in
the Persons of such as God by a Series of Miracles has raised to make us a
happy People. And certainly there is some Fire under that Smoke where the
King's Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Assemblies, is exploded, and Episcopal
Ordination is accounted a Transgression. And where King Charles the First is
dealt with in Effigy, as he was in Person, as a Tyrant, Traitor, and Murderer,
of whom the World was not worthy.

Dr. WALKER's True, Modest, and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR of 'EIKON
ASILIK, Strictly Examined, and Demonstrated TO BE False, Impudent, and
Deceitful.
The First PART.
WHether the King's Portraicture were drawn by his own or another Hand, as it
is no Diminution of his known Virtues, whereof those Meditations are but a
Reflection, that cannot express the Perfection of his Devout Soul and Innocent
Life; so neither can it be any Extenuation of their Guilt who so barbarously
murdered his Person, and after so long a time do now disturb his Ashes to rob
him of this precious Jewel. To what end this Impotent Piece of Malice is now
attempted, I cannot Divine, unless it be by the just Judgment of God to
perpetuate their Infamy who glory in that which all the World besides
themselves know to be their abominable Sin and Shame.

Had there been any Probability that the Regicides could have found any other
Author of those Incomparable Meditations, they would more industriously have
pursued that Method, but finding b^ the Examination of Royston the Printer, Mr.
Levet testifies, That Royston told him, that he was imprisoned because he would
not declare, that the King was not the Author of that Book. Dr. Holling. p. 9.
before several Committees, that this course would destroy their Design, they
resolve to deal with his Book as they had done with his Person, to Defame it by
scandalous Reflections, ^oud Calumnies, and false Glosses and
Misinterpretations; And they found a fit Instrument to attempt their Design, a
Person that was a Compendium of all the Villainies and Impieties of the Age, who
had been a professed Enemy to Monarchy, a Pleader for Divorces on Trivial
Occasions, and against Tithes and the Clergy, which he has left in several
printed Tracts, as his Portraicture: this is that Infamous Milton whom the
Regicides hired by the Price of three hundred Pounds to Deface that Royal
Monument; but all in vain, for by his over-doing he has quite undone the
Design, for first he takes it pro confesso, that it is the King's Book, and
says, That the King left it behind him as the best Advocate and Interpreter of
his own Actions, p. 3. of his Preface. And says, That because the King co^ed at
the Bar, that his Reasons could not be heard, neither he nor his Friends should
have cause to find fault, being met and debated with in that open Court of his
own erecting. But his Proceedings against this Book, were like those of his
Fellow-Regicides against his Person: For, p. 2. of his Preface, He accuses the
Book as having nothing of Solidity in it, being stuffed with naught else but the
common Grounds of Tyranny and Popery. And, p. 6. That the King used more
running Fetches to Undermine our Liberties, and put Tyranny into an Art, than
any British King before him. Which are such palpable Falsities as the Father of
Lies would not own; and of which he gives the Reader a plain Confutation, p. 8.
in these words, That they who before hated him for his high Misgovernment, (as
he miscals it) nay, fought against him with displayed Banners in the Field, now
(after the printing of his Book) applaud and extol him as the Wisest and most
Religious Prince that lived. And the Reformer turned Regicide, they saw the
Truth of the King's Declarations made manifest, and all their Slanders of the
King confuted: And Milton's great Objection against him for ever silenced,
which was, That the Testimony of one Man in his own Cause affirming, cannot be
of any moment, to bring in doubt the Authority of a Parliament, denying the
Allegation. Which is as if the Testimony of those that had robbed and slain an
innocent Man in the face of the Sun, deserved more Credit than his dying
Testimony against his Murderers, and the Matter of Fact attested by more than
a thousand Witnesses. They saw the Mask taken off, and the Rebel appear where
the Reformer was represented.

As for that Impudent Calumny, That the KING's BOOK is stuffed with Grounds of
POPERY, it is what his Masters durst not accuse Him of; and from which the whole
Course of his Life, so well known to the Nation, would acquit him; particularly
some of those private Letters of his which the Parliament published, wherein he
declared to the Queen, That he differed from her in nothing but her Religion.
His Dispute with the Marquess of Worcester, yet in print, though by a partial
Hand, that relates it to the King's Disadvantage; his constant Devotion at our
Prayers and Sacrament; his Solemn Protestations at York in the head of his
Army, at Oxford when he sealed the Truth of his Profession by receiving the
Sacrament at the hands of the Archbishop of Armagh, as he did also in the
Cathedral of Exeter, after he had defeated Essex's Army in Cornwall: And which
is the best Confirmation, his declaring at the last instant of his Life, that
he died a Christian according to the Profession of the Church of England, as it
was left him from his Father; the farther Proof of this, would be but as some
Apologies, the calling that in question which was not doubted of before, and
raising a Suspicion of it: Therefore I leave this (...), and pursue that
Sacrilegious Milton, who in p. 4. relating how some Men by Polity have
accomplished after Death, that Revenge upon their Enemies, which in Life they
were not able. He to this Book applies the Example of Caesar, whose last Will
and Testament being read to the People, and what bounteous Legacies he had
bequeathed them, it wrought more to the avenging of his Death, than all the Art
he could ever use to win their Favor in his Life time. Which the Royal Martyr
foretold in that most Christian Sentence wherewith he closed his Book, Vota
dabunt quae bella negarunt. The true meaning whereof his Majesty gives in the
Chapter concerning the Uxbridge Treaty, viz. What we could not get by our
Treaties, we may gain by our Prayers. Out of which Flower that venemons Spider
would extract Poison.

But the Book shines throughout with such Beams of Light as evidently display
the Innocence and Piety of that incomparable Prince, and the Impiety and
Perfidy of his Enemies; and hence it is that they so hate it. But what
Temptation has prevailed with some Persons in this Age, to revive their
Calumnies against the Royal Martyr, and to justify his Murder; it is hard to
guess, unless it be, that there is a Commonwealth at the bottom, for whoever
will defend a Rebellion against so good a Prince, will not stick to oppose the
best that shall succeed him, their Principles being Antimonarchical: But this
is not my present business; the Question which I am to discuss is, Whether King
Charles the First, or Bishop Gauden were the Author of the (...)? Dr. Walker in
a late Book has peremptorily affirmed, That it was composed by Bishop Gauden,
and sent to the Press by him.

That it was penned by the King, and printed by his Order, I shall endeavor to
demonstrate, as far as a Matter of Fact done so long since will admit: And that
the Reader may not think me a Pragmatical Person, as meddling with a Business
wherein I am not concerned, and which has been undertaken by a more Eminent
Person, I shall briefly acquaint him with the Occasion of my being engaged in
this Dispute:

I were importuned by two Eminent Doctors to declare what I knew concerning the
Book in question, and accordingly I subscribed my Name to that Testimony
printed in Dr. Hollingworth's Answer to a Libel that goes under the Name of
Ludlow, in these words, I had the hap to be acquainted with Bishop Gauden as
long as he was our Diocesan, and I have heard him often affirm, That he was
fully convinced, that the (...) was entirely that King's Work.

Tho. Long.

In answer to Dr. Hollingworth's Book there comes forth another Libel under the
same Name of Ludlow, to which there is a Preface prefixed subscribed by one
Joseph Wilson of Yarmouth; though I am so credibly informed, that I believe
there is no such Person, and that neither Ludlow nor Wilson wrote any of those
Books, but a Juncto of Republicans; whoever the Authors be, it appears that
they are deeply immerged in the Guilt of Regicide, which they endeavor to
justify, and in the very words of Milton, not only Defame the Book, affirming,
That it begins with Falsehood, and ends with Fraud; but also Blaspheme his
Person in the same words of that profligate Person, p. 4. of his Iconoclastes,
viz. That the King never loved, never fulfilled, never promoted the true Ends
of Parliament. If there were such a thing as a Metempsychosis, I should think
thac the Souls of Bradshaw, Milton, and other Regicides had a Transmigration
into the Souls of this Juncto of Republicans.

Wherefore as I account it my bounden Duty to Vindicate the Royal Martyr to the
best of my Knowledge, and the utmost of my Power; so I shall still esteem it as
a Point of Honor rather than of Reproach, to be evil spoken of by such a
Juncto of Men, as were so far from sparing the Reputation of the Royal Martyr,
that in a most barbarous manner they deprived him of his Life; nor is it more
evident, that he or they who have most impudently published those Libels
against that best of Kings, do strike at Monarchy in general, as well as at
that most Innocent and yet most Defamed Monarch, and lay a Foundation for a
Commonwealth; for it is most rational to conclude, that they who sought, and
where they could not find a just Cause for their Rebellion, made their own
Groundless Fears and Jealousies an Occasion for the most Unnatural and Bloody
Civil War that so Rent three Flourishing Kingdoms, will ever acquiesce or rest
satisfied with the Administration of the Government by any that shall succeed
to the Crown, though they shall excel that Royal Martyr in Wisdom, Clemency,
Temperance, and other Virtues, as much as he excelled any of his Cotemporary
Monarchs: I say, it is not more evident that they will be Seditious in the
State, than that they will be as Troublesome and Factious in the Church, whose
Principles lead them against the Doctrine and Discipline by Law established,
and for that cause hate the Persons of the Legislators; all which has been
practiced by their Predecessors, and is designed by the present Managers of the
late Libels, who if the present Governors in Church and State were as much in
their Power, as in the Year 48, and had but one Ne^k, they would not stick to
destroy all at one Blow, as their Predecessors thought they had done.

Now as in the Preface before mentioned, there is no Author to be found, so
neither is their any Proof in the whole Libel produced, to Invalidate the
Testimonies so clearly alleged by Dr. Hollingworth, after a most exact Enquiry
concerning the Author of the (...), which will be demonstrated hereafter, it is
my business now only to confirm my own, in order to which, I shall not urge to
prove Bishop Gauden's Kindness to me, (though I may truly) as Dr. Walker does
the Parliament's Favor to Bishop Gauden, by presenting him with a Piece of
Plate; it being well known that he collated on me one of the first Prebends of
his Church, in his first Year; and I should be very injurious to his Memory, to
attest any Untruth concerning him; the Occasion on which I ground my Evidence
(I well remember) was this: On the 30th of January, in the Bishop's first Year,
the Bishop preached in the Cathedral in the Forenoon, on Jonah 1.14. We beseech
thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life; and lay
not on us innocent blood, for thou Lord have done as it pleased thee.

By the Bishop's order I preached in the Afternoon, my Text was the Evangelical
Promise, Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy nursing-fathers, and their Queens thy
nursing-mothers. Whereon as occasion offered, I aggravated that detestable
Parricide perpetrated on the Person of the Royal Martyr; and among other
Arguments I urged the Piety and Clemency of that most excellent Prince, reading
out of his Book several Paragraphs to that purpose: and one other from a Speech
to the Commissioners at Newport, against some that thought him Revengeful, That
he was so far from seeking Revenge, that if a Straw lay in their way to hurt
them, he would stoop and take it up to prevent it. (Adding,) God forgive them,
for I do. The Duties of the Fast being over, I was invited to sup with the
Bishop, and standing with him by the Fireside, he gave me Thanks for my
Sermon, and then declared to me what I have attested.

And now that I may not appear to be a single Witness in this Evidence, I
subjoyn these following Attestations, first that quoted by Dr. Holling. p. 10.
That Mrs Gauden told a Lady of good Quality, That she had a great concern for
the eternal State of her Husband, because he pretended he was the Author of
that Book, when to her knowledge he never wrote it. This Dr. Hollingworth had
from a Minister in London. To this I shall subjoyn the agreeing Testimony of
Mr. Gifford, who lived with Dr. Gauden, and as Dr. Walker intimates, did
Transcribe the Book; which Testimony I had from the mouth of the Reverend Dr.
Edw. Lake, Archdeacon of Exeter, being then on his Visitation, about Easter
last, who declared, in the presence of another judicious Friend, That he well
knew Mr. Gifford, and that discoursing with him occasionally concerning the
King's Book, Mr. Gifford thought it next to the Holy Scripture, to be one of
the most Divine Books that had been written: And that Mr. Gifford preaching on
the 30th of January, and urging to Charity, he quoted this Passage out of that
Book, as being the King's Book, It is all that is now left me, a Power to
Forgive those that deprived me of all; and I thank God I have a Heart to do it.
This Testimony being given by Mr. Gifford (to an intimate Friend) who was much
better acquainted with the Transactions concerning the Author and Publishers of
that Book, and for ought I ever heard of, a clearer Reputation than Dr. Walker,
who owned that he never read the Book in Manuscript, but intimates, that Mr.
Gifford transcribed it, who had he been conscious that the Copy which he
transcribed had been of Dr. Gauden's compiling; yea, I may say, had he not
known (as he had the best opportunity to inform himself,) that it was the
King's, he would never have quoted it as his, on so solemn an Occasion: So that
I need nor desire any other Evidence to confirm my Testimony, but leave it to
the indifferent Reader to judge, whether the single Report of Dr. Walker, or
the joint and agreeing Testimony of Mr. Gifford, and Mr. Long, and Mrs. Gauden,
are most credible. And if any Reader be yet doubtful, I entreat 'em for his
full Conviction, to suspend his Censure till he has considered what follows.

As for the impertinent and false Reflections made on the Author of the Vox
Cleri, which he calls a Virulent Book, let it speak for itself; and he that
has an ear to hear, must needs apprehend, that he wrote only in behalf of the
Church, as by Law established, to which he had given his hearty Assent and
Consent; to which the Churches Enemies being of another mind, account all that
shall be written on its behalf to be Venomous Invectives, and to deserve alike
Remark, as he makes on the Royal Martyr. That he who acted so tragically over
us should leave the World with such a ridiculous Exit; for which wretched
Invention the Libeller is beholding to that long since exploded, and by a
miraculous Providence confuted Motto of Bradshaw and his Fellow-Regicides, viz.
Exit Tirannus Regum Ultimus.

I shall not follow Dr. Walker in his Excursions, but keep close to his
Arguments for the Proof of his Assertion, which he delivers in these words: P.
3. I know, and believe the Book whose Author is enquired after, was written by
Dr. Gauden ( except two Chapters writ by Bp. Duppa,) so far as the subjoyned
means may produce such Knowledge, and the Reasons may induce such Belief. In p.
2. He solemnly appeals to the Searcher of Hearts, Avenger of Falsehood, and
Revealer of Secrets, that he wrote nothing of the Truth of which he was not
thoroughly persuaded by as full Evidence as he judged such a Matter of Fact
needed, and at such distance of Time was capable of. Yet after this solemn
Appeal, and Declaration of his Knowledge and Belief, in the same Page he begs
leave to retain his Opinion, Till Means of Knowledge, Reasons of Belief,
Arguments for thinking otherwise be produced; and then promises to yield. So
that notwithstanding his Knowledge and Belief, and his being thoroughly
persuaded by full Evidence, he is still in a Suspense, and doubts that such
Arguments may be produced as may alter his Opinion. And in p. 3. he talks of
such probable Arguments as may confirm himself, and satisfy others; among
which Arguments, that which he mentions p. 8. he judges to carry the fairest
and highest Probability to confirm what he had before declared, viz. The
reasonable Belief that he, (i. e.) Dr. Gauden was the Composer of it. The
Argument is p. 8. n. 5. in these words: I am as sure as I can be of any thing,
that Dr. Gauden made the Extract out of this Book called, (I think)
Apophthegmata Carolina; the thing is most notorious that there was such a Book
came out in a very short time after, printed by Mr. Dugard. Now why should Dr.
Gauden concern himself so much more than any other of the King's Friends, and
dispatch it with such Expedition, had he had no more concern in it than other
Men?

Ans. Let the Reader judge how probable the rest of his Arguments are, when in
his own Judgment this is the fairest and highest Probability to confirm what he
has declared; for what force is there in the Argument, because Dr. Gauden
collected the Apophthegmata Carolina, therefore he made the (...), as if the
Abbreviating of any Book were an Argument that the Abbreviator were the Author
of it. Indeed the very Argument is a scandalous Reflection on his Friend's
Memory, as if it had not been enough to sham the World with a Book in the
King's Name, but he must Extract his own Apothegms, or Wise Sayings out of it,
and charge his Prince with what he never said, nor thought of: It had been a
pretty way of trumpetting his own Praise, and setting his own Military,
Political, and Theological Abilities on a Level with those of the wisest Prince
in Christendom. I think Antiquity gives us no Instance of any Man publishing
his own Apothegms; however Dr. W.'s unfortunate in this, since the Collector
and Publisher of the Apophthegmata Carolina was not Dr. Gauden, but Dr. Hooker,
a Person still living in White-Lion-Court, against Virginia-street, in Wapping.
It would have concluded more rationally, if Dr. Gauden had defended it against
Milton and some others that wrote against it, as Dr. Earl did; yet none will
infer, that Dr. Earl was the Author, though he took the Pains also to
Translate it into Latin: And it is a more Logical Inference to say, Dr. Gauden
published an Extract of weighty Sentences out of that Book, therefore he was
not the Author of it. Dr. Earle's Testimony given by Mr. Beck, p. 28. of Dr.
Holling. is very convincing, That he being sent by his Lord Vicount Hereford to
Dr. Earl, then at the Hague, to ask what he knew of the King's being Author of
that Book, the Doctor told him, As sure as he knew himself to be the Translator
of that Book into Latin, so certain he was King Charles was the Author of the
Original in English. And he adds, For my part I am apt to believe no Person was
able to frame that Book, but a Suffering King, and no Suffering King, but King
Charles the Martyr.

Dr. Walker in p. 4. declares what he knew of this Book, and by what means: Dr.
Gauden (says he) sometime before the whole was finished, was pleased to
acquaint me with his Design, and showed me the Heads of diverse Chapters, and
some of the Discourses written of them; and after some time spent in the
Perusal, he vouchsaft to ask my Opinion concerning it; and after some
Consideration, I told him, I supposed it would be much for the King's
Reputation, Honor, and Safety, etc.

Ans. I have another Testimony of Dr. Walker's (which the Reader shall have at
large,) which is dated March 23d, 1690, where he declares, That he is uncertain
whether he ever read this Book in Manuscript, or only saw it with its Title of
the Chapters. Now as the growth of a Testimony by material Additions and
Alterations is accounted a Prejudice against it, so much more when something is
affirmed in the later which was denied in the former Testimony; for in p. 4. he
says, He perfectly remembers, that in the second Chapter of the Earl of
Strafford, where it is said, He only has been least vexed by them who
counseled me not to consent against the Vote of my own Conscience; Dr. Gauden
told him, that Dr. Juxon was meant by that Passage. Which was common Discourse,
shortly after the Earl's Death, though Dr. Walker makes it a Secret: There were
printed some Reflections shortly after the Book was published, and in the
Frontispiece Bp. Juxton described behind a Curtain dictating the Book.

Dr. Walker's Testimony concerning the (...), March 23, 1690, was as follows:

Bp. Gauden wrote that whole Book, two Chapters only excepted, the one about
Liturgies, the other of Refusing the King the Attendance of his Chaplains;
which two Chapters were written by Bp. Duppa: Dr. Walker well remembering that
Bp. Gauden told him, That Bp. Duppa upon the Perusal of this Book, told Bp.
Gauden, that the two forementioned Heads were fit to be writ upon, and
therefore desired him to draw up two Chapters on the same; but after farther
Consideration, he told him, That he would write those two Chapters himself. Dr.
Walker farther observed, That considering Dr. Gauden's Circumstances, it was
very obvious why Dr. Gauden should not think of writing on those Heads, because
the Doctor disused the Liturgy, and had never been one of the King's Chaplains;
and so not so sensible of writing on those two Chapters.

The bigger part of the Copy of this Book was delivered by Bp. Gauden to Mr.
Simmons, as Dr. Walker conjectures.

One Peacock, Bp. Gauden's Steward's Brother, received part of those Papers
from Dr. Walker, particularly the Picture sealed up: these were put up in a
Trunk between the Lady Warwick's Points. Peacock delivered these Papers to
another Person unknown to Dr. Walker.

One Lieutenant Arraker seized Mr. Simmons's Papers in Carterlane, on a Sunday,
among which the Proof-sheets of this Book were, which were restored to Mr.
Simmonds on Monday, by order of Col. Rich, upon the Intercession of Dr. W. Some
of the Proof-sheets, having the Greek Title on the outward Leaf, were scattered
in Carter-lane, and gathered up by Simmonds's Son, or some of the Family, as
soon as the Troopers were gone.

Bp. Gauden told Dr. Walker, that he delivered a Copy of this Book to the
Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, and
desired him to deliver it to the King, if he could find an Opportunity, and
know his Majesty's Pleasure, whether he would give leave that it might be
published; but whether the King did ever receive the Papers, the Bishop could
not tell, he received no account of the same, as he told Dr. Walker a little
before his Death.

Dr. Walker enquired of the Bishop, how he could satisfy himself in imposing
this Book on the World? The Bishop replied, Consider the Title, being the
King's Portraicture, and no Man uses to draw his own Picture.

Dr. Walker and Mr. Gifford were both privy to these Affairs, living together
in the Bishop's House, though the Doctor is uncertain whether he ever read this
Book in Manuscript, or only saw it with its Title of the Chapters, though he
thinks that Mr. Gifford might Copy it out.

Dr. Walker discoursed Major Huntington at Tunbridge, about the King's Papers,
who told him, That he had been under Examination about that Affair before
several Committees of Parliament, and all that ever he said was, That he had
seen several Manuscripts of the King's whilst he attended him, which he
conjectured might be those; but never affirmed them to be so, because he never
read one word of them. Of this Testimony we shall have occasion to make use
hereafter.

P. 4. Dr. Walker says, Dr. Gauden showed me the Heads, and some of the
Discourses, and after some time spent in Perusal, I expressly added, I stuck at
the Lawfulness of it; and modestly asked him, How he satisfied himself so to
impose upon the World? In p. 35. Dr. Walker makes his Apology for discovering
this Secret, after he had suppressed the knowledge of it for forty Years; and
complains how hard measure it would be not to suffer a Man to reveal that, by
concealing of which he fears God is displeased, and he necessitated to labor
under a continued Uneasiness and Dissatisfaction of his own Mind: And he
confesses, he had many cogent Reasons to persuade him that God was not well
pleased with Dr. Gauden, others, and himself, for what we contributed to it.
This is well considered, but it is very inconsiderately added, what he says in
a few Lines after, That he suffered this Discovery to be wrung and wrested from
him, by some Body's impertinent Affectation to meddle with what he understood
not; for if he had been really troubled in Conscience for concealing that
Secret, which he there gives for the revealing of it, i. e. Because as we must
not speak wickedly for God, nor talk deceitfully for him, neither may we do so
for any Man. And as St. Augustine says, An officious Lie ought not to be told
to save the whole World. And that there was more than Appearance of Pious Fraud
in this Affair, which by his Silence he contributed to the maintaining of; a
Person truly conscientious would have timely, freely, and ingenuously have made
the Discovery, and not suffered the Wound to rankle and disquiet him for forty
Years together, and not seek ease by discovering of it till he was forced to it
in his own Defense.

Dr. Walker adds, p. 4. That he dining sometime after with Dr. Gauden in
London, he went with him after Dinner to Bp. Duppa; and Dr. Gauden having had
some discourse with the Bishop, Dr. Gauden told Dr. Walker, That the substance
of their discourse was to this effect: That the Bishop told Dr. Gauden, there
were two Subjects more which he propounded to the Doctor to write on, (viz) The
Ordinance against the Common Prayer, and the denying the Attenaance of his
Majesty's Chaplains; but on second Thoughts the Bishop desired the Doctor to
leave the writing on those two Heads to him; which accordingly he did, as Dr.
Gauden owned to Dr. Walker, and others who were privy to the whole.

Ans. I am fully persuaded by the little Knowledge that I had of Bp. Duppa,
that all the Art that Bp. Gauden had, could never have drawn Bp. Duppa to
consent with, and assist him in what Dr. Walker accounts a Pious Fraud, more
than appearance of Evil; the very concealing of which was a Trouble to Dr.
Walker's Conscience forty Years together; or if he had done such a thing, he
would have hazarded his Majesty's Favor, whose Judgment was, as he declares,
in the last of his Meditations, on the Reformation of the Times, That as good
Ends cannot justify evil Means, so nor will evil Beginning^s ever bring forth
good Conclusions. And if Dr. Gauden had written that Period, he had been Self
condemned, as well as by the Apostle those are who say, Let us do evil that
good may come of it.

Now if others (how many Dr. Walker says not, and perhaps he might not know
all that) were privy to the whole, it is probable some of them before their
Deaths might have revealed this Secret, or if any of them were living would
have been produced to confirm the Doctor's Testimony, but we must take all on
his word: Though if Bp. Duppa had written on those two Heads, there might be
some difference observed in the Style; which appears to Dr. Walker himself to
be exactly of the same Thread; and hugely differing both from the Bishop's and
the Doctor's manner of writing, as will appear hereafter. But the reason which
he gives why it was unlikely that Dr. Gauden neither thought nor wrote on these
Subjects, seems very infirm, p. 7. he says, Dr. Gauden was less concerned to
think on them. What? less than to think of writing on the Covenant; which Dr.
Walker says he had taken, p. 7. and against which not long after he wrote a
large Treatise. Or was he less concerned to write of the Common Preyer Book,
which was made the Apple of Contention? especially when that Dr. Walker
observes a little before, p. 7. That when Dr. Gauden discovered his Error he
endeavored to redeem it by an (...), by bending to the contrary Extreme. Or
was he less concerned to write of the necessary Usefulness of his Majesty's
Chaplains in his great Distress, when the Doctor himself had the Attendance of
two such as Dr. Walker and Mr. Gifford? Doubtless the Doctor could not but
apprehend it to be a most Unchristian Rigor, to have the Attendance of his
Spiritual Monitors and Comforters denied to him when he was in Extremity, and
appointed as a Sheep for the Slaughter: Dr. Gauden knew better, and was more
concerned to write on this Subject, than to give Rules to the Prince how to
Govern the Kingdoms.

P. 5. Dr. Walker asking Dr. Gauden, Whether the King had ever seen the Book?
Answered, I know it certainly no more than you, but I sent a Copy of it by the
Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Isle of Wight, entreating him on a
private Opportunity to deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly desire to know his
Majesty's Pleasure concerning it; but the Violence which threatened the King
hastening so fast, he ventured to print it, and never knew what was the Issue of
sending it.

Ans. It looks very odly, that Dr. Gauden having committed so great a Business
to the Marquess's Management, should never (having many Opportunities after his
return from the Isle of Wight,) enquire, Whether the King had seen the Book,
and how he approved of the Design? And no less strange, that Dr. Gauden should
presume to print such a Volume in the King's Name, and make such Appeals and
Protestations as if he had been made his Majesty's Proxy, and were authorized,
Jurare in Animam suam. And what great Hopes could the Doctor conceive, that the
publishing of the Book could stop the current of Violence which threatened the
King, when it had born down all the Mediation used by foreign Ambassadors, all
the Opposition made by the then Parliament voting his Majesty's Concessions a
sufficient Ground for a Treaty of Peace, the many Insurrections and Revolts of
the People by Land, and of the Navy by Sea, and the Scots Remonstrances, and
Arming on his Majesty's behalf? What hopes, I say, could Dr. Gauden conceive
that his Book should be a Charm sufficient to calm that impetuous Torrent,
which grew the more rapid for all those Oppositions? This, and the Doctor's
Neglect to enquire of the Marquess, whether the King did approve of the Pious
Fraud, may induce the considering Reader to believe, that the Doctor did not
convey any such Book of his to his Majesty by the Marquess, for which we have
no Evidence besides Dr. Walker's bare Word: and in the first Testimony Dr.
Walker says, That Dr. Gauden had no account of it a little before his Death.
Though the Marquess and the Doctor lived somewhile after the Restoration. And
Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden being asked, Whether K. Charles the Second knew
that he wrote the Book? answered, That he could not certainly say he did,
because he never took notice of it to him; but he took it for granted, because
the Duke of York knew it, and spoke of it to him, and owned it as a seasonable
and acceptable Service; and he knowing it, I question not but the King does
also.

Ans. For all this we have only Dr. Walker's bare Word, and that imports not
that the King knew it, but upon a Presumption that the Duke did. Now to this
Dr. Hollingworth replies, p. 4. It is strange that if the King, Charles the
Second knew of it, and the Marquess of Hartford, and Bp. Duppa, who could have
informed the King of the great Merit of Dr. Gauden in writing and publishing
that Book, that Dr. Gauden should have no Preferment but the Bishopric of
Exeter for the present; and that when (as Dr. Walker says,) he had a Promise of
Winchester, he failed of it. And as Dr. Gauden says, The King seemed averse
from giving it to him; which was to fail of his Word. And as Dr. Gauden
confesses, he was not certain that the King knew of it, a little before his
Translation from Exeter to Worcester: I say it is strange, that the King should
deny him any Kindness, especially that which he had promised, when he gave Dr.
Reynolds the Bishopric of Norwich, and offered others to Persons that had
deserved Rewards of another kind.

Dr. Walker says, That Mrs. Gauden, his Wife, Mr. Gifford, who he thinks
transcribed a Copy of it, and himself, believed it, as much as they could any
Matter of Fact.

Ans. As to Mrs. Gauden I have had a Report, (as from Dr. Walker,) That she
being interrogated on the Sacrament, Whether her Husband was the Author of this
Book? She declared upon her taking the Sacrament, That he told her that he was.
This is confronted by Dr. Hollingworth p. 10. who was assured by a Reverend and
Learned Minister in London, that a Lady of good Quality told him, That she
being in company with Mrs. Gauden, she told her, That she had a great concern
for the eternal State of her Husband, because he pretended to be the Author of
that Book, when to her knowledge he never writ it. Both these Testimonies
cannot be true, if Mrs. Gauden spoke them; and this makes me think one of them
was Dr. Walker's; for this is so material a Proof, that if Dr. Walker knew the
truth of it, I wonder why he omitted it in his printed Book; it is a shrewd
Presumption against a Witness, when he so varieth in his Testimony, as to add a
material Evidence at one time, and to omit another at another time; when a
Person is unconstant and inconsistent with himhimself in a Matter of great
importance, it is an Argument of Unfaithfulness. Again, by this Solemnity of
Mrs. Gauden's discovering her Husband to be the Author of that Book, upon her
taking the Sacrament, the Intent seems to be, that this Secret might be laid
open, and made notorious; and to that end that the Communicants were made
acquainted with it, and if it were at a public Sacrament, there was likely a
full Congregation, if it were a private Sacrament, desired by Mrs. Gauden for
the Ease of her Conscience, (as Dr. Walker found the concealing it to be a
Trouble to his,) yet we suppose there must be at least three Communicants by
whose Testimony Mrs. Gauden's Declaration might be confirmed, and the Notoriety
of the thing be perpetuated: How comes it to pass after all this, the thing
should remain a Secret still, and not known (for ought we yet hear of,) to any
one but Dr. Walker.

As to Mr. Gifford, whom Dr. Walker supposes to have been the Transcriber of
the Copy, and to have believed it as much as himself, I have opposed the
Testimony of Dr. Edw. Lake, Archdeacon of Exeter, wno was well acquainted with
Mr. Gifford, and his single Testimony far more Credible than Dr. Walker's.

Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden delivered to him what was last sent up,
giving strict Caution with what Wariness to carry and deliver it; See his
Account of March 23d, 1690.
and accordingly he delivered it, Saturday, December 23d, 48, to one Peacock,
who was instructed by what Hands to transmit it to Mr. Royston.

This the Doctor says, to show his great Care to discharge his Trust; who
notwithstanding the strict Caution with what Wariness to carry and deliver it,
he committed it to one Peacock, a Brother to Dr. Gauden's Bailiff, with new
Instructions by what other Hands he should transmit it to Mr. Roston; whereas
he acknowledges that the bigger part of this Book was delivered by Dr. Gauden
to Mr. Simmonds. He wanted a good Memory, as he says of Dr. Hollingworth.

The Reader cannot but observe, that in all this tedious Narrative, he meets
with no other Evidence but Dr. Walker's bare Word, which will not amount to a
single Testimony, being invalidated by his own Relation of Matters of Fact,
very inconsistent with each other, and unsatisfactory to himself, and wanting a
further Confirmation, is forced to find out probable Reasons, such as they be
in,

SECT. III. Of his probable Arguments to Confirm himself, and help to Convince
others, etc.

The first probable Argument is, That Dr. Gauden in the beginning of the Long
Parliament, which carried on the War against the King, preached before them on
Zach. 8.19. which Sermon is printed; and the House of Commons presented him
with a large Silver Tankard, with this Inscription, Donum Honorarium Populi
Anglicani in Parliamento congregati Johanni Gauden, etc. which constantly went
about his House; and he had been inclinable to the Parliament Interest, till he
found they went beyond their first Pretentions, and the Expectations of himself
and other good Men: When he discovered that, he endeavored to redeem his Error
by bending to the contrary Extreme. And I am persuaded it was this that put him
on the designing and finishing of this Book.

This Argument is so far from being probable, and fit for Conviction, that it
is more like to move Laughter, for it may conclude thus for Dr. Walker as well
as for Dr. Gauden, Dr. Walker had been of the Parliament Party against the
King, was a Favorite of the Party, and a Chaplain to them, but when they went
beyond his Expectation, he bended to the contrary Extreme, therefore Dr. Walker
wrote the (...). But though the Argument does not make this probable, yet it
shows a great Probability, that Dr. Gauden has bended to contrary Extremes;
but Dr. Walker is more constant to his first Principles.

Dr. Walker's second probable Argument is drawn from the fourteenth Chapter,
(i. e.) of the Covenant; and p. 6. he relates it at large to this effect: That
being privy to the truth of this Affair, out of Curiosity he asked Dr. Barwick,
Dean of St. Paul 's, What he thought of this Book? for the thing being
doubtfully spoken of, he made bold to ask his Judgment of it. The Dean pressed
him with this Argument, If it were written by any but the King, it must be a
Friend, or an Enemy; not by an Enemy, for no Enemy of the King would have
represented him so much to his Advantage; not by a Friend, for no Friend of his
would write as he does of the Covenant, etc. Meaning so favorably.

Ans. It is highly improbable that Dr. Barwick, who doubtless had considered
that Chapter against the Covenant, would have chosen such an Argument, when
there is as much said in that Chapter to condemn the Covenant, as could
rationally be expected; for in the first Paragraph he says, That it was a
pawning of their Souls to the Presbyterian Scots by a Solemn League and
Covenant. In the second he calls it, An Engine intended chiefly to batter down
Episcopacy; and compares it to a Charm and Exorcism. In the third, That it
contained many dubious and dangerous Limitations; referring to himself, and
things very disputable, which could not be sworn to with Judgment and Certainty
to a Man's self, or Charity and Candor to others. P. 4. That imposing Oaths on
People must needs in things doubtful be dangerous, and in things unlawful (as
he had proved this to be by his Proclamation, and the irrefragrable Arguments
of the University of Oxford had determined,) was damnable. P. 5. That it was
not only superfluous, but irreconcilable to former Oaths, and the Protestation
so lately taken to maintain the Religion established in the Church of England,
since they account Discipline so great a part of Religion. P. 6. That it was
laid as a Snare and Engine by Men of ambitious Minds to catch and hold vulgar
Credulity, under the Terror of Perjury. P. 7. That such After-contracts imposed
without and against the King's Consent, or any Power or President from the Laws
of God or Man, could not absolve the Subjects from those Moral Bonds of Duty
which lay on their Consciences both to God and the King; and calls it a mocking
of God. Now what Friend of the King's needed to reflect more severely upon the
Covenant, than the King himself has done? I can therefore hardly think that
Dr. Barwick would use this as an Argument that it was written by the King
himself, because no Friend of his would have written so favorably of it. It
rather seems a contrived Argument of one that would solve his own Hypothesis:
That Dr. Gauden wrote that Book, because in the Chapter of the Covenant there
are some things spoken in favor of it, which best became Dr. Gauden, who
speaks the more favorably because he had taken it, than any of the King's
Friends or himself would have done. That which seems most in favor of the
Covenant, is this: That the Imposers of it were content to make it like Manna
(not that it came from Heaven as Manna did,) agreeable to every Man's palate
who would swallow it; they admit any Man's senses of it, though diverse or
contrary, with any Salvo's, Cautions, and Reservations, so as they cross not
their chief Design laid against the Church and me; (i. e.) the King. Now this
is as sharp a Reprimand as could be conceived, where the King shows how the
Covenanters mocked God by Salvo's, Cautions, and Reservations, used as Baits to
draw the People into their Snares; he was far enough from approving such
shusting Cautions in a Solemn Covenant which was to be taken in Judgment, in
Truth, and in Righteousness, Jer. 4.2. The King adds, That in such Latitudes of
Senses, he believes many that loved Him and the Church, might take the
Covenant, who were not so taken by it as to act clearly against both Piety and
Loyalty; and that many yielded to it more to prevent imminent Violence and
Ruin, which in case of dental hung over their heads, than for any Value of it,
or Devotion to it. He adds, That the Latitude of some general Clauses may
perhaps serve somewhat to relieve them, as of doing and endeavoring what
lawfully they may in their Places and Callings, and according to the Word of
God, for these carry no Man beyond those Bounds of good Conscience, which are
certain and fixed either to God's Laws, as to the general, or the Laws of the
Kingdom as to the particular Exercise of Men's Duties. And therefore he desires
such as glory most in the Name of Covenanters, to keep themselves within those
lawful Bounds. In all which there appears such Charity and Prudent and Pious
Advice as becomes the best of Kings: And therefore the mature Consideration of
this Chapter is a more propable Argument that it was penned by the King rather
than by Dr. Gauden, or any other, who could not add as the King does, I
willingly forgive such Men's taking the Covenant, who keep within such Bounds of
Piety, Law, and Loyalty.

This Discourse which he pretends to have had with Dr. Barwick, who he says was
his Tutor, gave him a fair Opportunity (if the concealing of his Secret had
been a real Trouble to him,) to acquaint his Tutor, as he voluntarily offered
to inform the Archbishop Sandcroft, how much he and the World were deceived, as
to the Author of that Book, whom he knew to be Bp. Gauden; and that his
handling the Covenant so gently, was because he had taken the Covenant. But
this probable Argument might have been turned to a plain Confutation of his
Fiction, from what is repeated out of that Chapter; which without doubt Dr.
Barwick had read and considered better, than to conclude that it spoke in
favor of the Covenant.

The Doctor's third probable Argumentis as the former, his single Affirmation,
That Dr. Gauden told him, that Bp. Duppa wrote the two Chapters concerning the
Liturgy and Chaplains; and his free declaring that he neither thought nor wrote
of these Subjects; and that (as Dr. Walker says) it was unlikely he should,
renders it very probable he spoke the truth in declaring that he wrote the rest.

Ans. That the King had great reason both to think and write of those Subjects,
is very obvious; and as evident, that Dr. Gauden had more reason to think and
write of them then of several other Heads, particularly that which reflects so
much on his Reputation, having been a Covenanter; and that other of prescribing
Rules to the Prince for the Government of his Kingdoms. But of this I have said
enough before; I only add, It was very improper to call the Prince his Son, and
the Queen his Wife, etc.

The fourth probable Argument is, That Dr. Walker met with Expressions in the
Devotional Part, very frequently used by Dr. Gauden in his Prayers; which he
never heard from any other Man, and most Men in their Prayers especially have
peculiar Phrases and Modes of expressing themselves: And where such occur, it is
a probable Evidence they proceed from him to whom they were peculiar.

Ans. I wish the Doctor had given us some of those Phrases and Modes; I have
compared the Style and several Expressions of the Doctor's in a Treatise of
his, which the Reader shall find hereafter, as much differing from the Phrases
and Expressions in the King's Book, as the Waters of Siloah, which go softly,
from the rapid Falls of Nile, which keep within no Bounds, and abound with Mud
and Monsters: The King's Expressions are mostly in Scripture Phrase, which
though other Men do use, yet few do apply more pertinently and affectionately;
and what Meditations are properly his own, few Men of his Age could imitate,
for the Matter or Style: And Dr. Gauden is as far from it as most Writers of
that Age. But to talk of peculiar Expressions, etc. and not to give one
Instance, is but to beat the Air.

The fifth Argument concerning the Apophthegmata Carolina is already answered;
now when all these five probable Arguments are (as he says) joined together,
and the Reader has considered that they are only Dr. Walker's Affirmations,
they will rather conclude that his Knowledge was very imperfect that needed
such Proofs to confirm it, which as Dr. Walker acknowledges, do more harm than
good. And I think that no Impartial Reader will be convinced by them; for if,
as Dr. Walker says, that believing or not believing depends upon the Clearness
or Cogency of the Motives of Credibility, or the Weakness and Insufficiency of
them, no Man will build his Belief on such a sandy Foundation: And, as Dr.
Walker says, we may suppose that House is likely to fall that is supported by
such Props.

The Testimony which I mentioned before, Dr. Charles Goodal assures me he had
from Dr. Walker's own mouth, March 23d, 1690, and it requires a few Remarks, As
first, where it says, that the bigger part of the Book was delivered by Dr.
Gauden to Mr. Simmonds:

Remark 1. Then Dr. Gauden and Mr. Simmonds were no such Strangers (as Dr.
Walker represents them,) when the Book was preparing for the Press, and
probably Mr. Simmonds well knew who the Author was, and whatever Dr. Walker
did, Mr. Simmonds would not have consented to the publishing of it in the
King's Name, if it were Dr. Gauden's; for if the Fraud had been found out, it
would have more disparaged the King and his Cause, than the concealing of it
could have advantaged it; the King's great Abilities and Innocence being better
known and believed than to need such Props and Fallacious Means to support it,
which I believe his pious Soul would have abhorred, if it had been proposed to
him.

Rem. 2. If the bigger part of the Book was delivered by Dr. Gauden to Mr.
Simmonds, that delivery might be only a return of what the Doctor had received
before from Mr. Simmonds, for he was chiefly entrusted with the printing of it,
as appears by the returning of the Proof-sheets to him to Correct them; and if
Dr. Gauden had been the Author, he had better means to send it to the Press,
and was more fit to correct his own Copy, than to commit this Work, and the
Secret of Dr. Gauden's being the Author of it, to a Sequestered Man, who as the
Event shows, was suspected, and hardly escaped a full Discovery, whereas both
Dr. Gauden and Walker were Favorites of the Times.

Rem. 3. Whereas he says, that he and Mr. Gifford, who both lived in Dr.
Gauden's House, knew this Secret; I have shown that Mr. Gifford was of a
contrary Persuasion to that of Dr. Walker's, for Mr. Gifford spoke of it, and
quoted it in his Sermon as the King's Book, and he being the Transcriber of it,
as Dr. Walker intimates, had more opportunity and means to inform himself who
was the Author.

Rem. 4. Dr. Walker says, He was uncertain whether he ever read the Book in
Manuscript, but only saw it with the Titles of the Chapters. This is contrary
to what he had more than once affirmed, That he had read it, and particularly
that Chapter concerning the Earl of Strafford; whereupon he discoursed with Dr.
Gauden, and questioned, How he could satisfy himself to impose such a Book on
the World in the King's Name? P. 4. He says, Dr. Gauden showed me the Heads of
diverse Chapters, and some of the Discourses written of them, and after sometime
spent in the Perusal, he asked my Opinion of it; which amounts to a
Contradiction, scarcely to be excused by the Uncertainty of his Memory: But if
he never read the Book in Manuscript, how could he be so certain that the Book
was of Dr. Gauden's Compiling? And indeed the Intenion of doing the King
Service by such an Imposture, was in Dr. Gauden such a Sin as the making of a
Practical Lie, and in Dr. Walker who concealed it, and by Silence gave Consent,
a making himself a Party, which Dr. Walker from St. Augustine condemns as a
thing not to be practiced for the saving of the World.

Rem. 5. Whereas Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden being asked, How he could
satisfy himself in writing such a Book in the King's Name? That he replied,
Look on the Title; and said, no Man uses to draw his own Picture. This is
overthrown by Mr. Clifford's Testimony, p. 4. of Dr. Holling. where it is
affirmed, That Mr. Royston showed the first Proof-sheet to Dr. Tailor, the
Title whereof was, The Royal Plea, which the Doctor said would betray the Book,
there being two Informers, Cheltenham and Jones, who would discover the Book by
the Title, and therefore Dr. Tailor wrote to the King to have it changed, and
had leave to call it (...), which those Informers could not understand being
Greek. This Testimony concerning the Title, seems more rational than that which
Dr. Walker reports from Dr. Gauden, who, as Dr. Walker reports, would excuse
himself for imposing his Book on the World as if it were the King's, because no
Man uses to draw his own Picture. When I consider Dr. Walker's subjoyning
these probable Arguments to confirm his positive Assertion, and to convince his
Reader; it minded me of the frequent Salvo's used by our News-writers, who
having related a fictitious Story to fill up their Papers, are wont to add, But
this needs a Confirmation; and then it is an hundred to one but they have made a
false Relation. When we see a Man constantly using Crutches, we conclude he is
an infirm Person; and we may guess at the strength of the Doctor's Persuasion
and Affirmation by the Cogency of his probable Arguments.

So that if this Relation was taken from Dr. Walker's own mouth, as Dr. Goodal
assures me, and I am induced to believe, because Dr. Walker says, Sect. 5. p.
34. That he had occasionally, and when he had been desired, declared the
Substance of what he now has written. And I have been credibly informed, That
Dr. Walker had often spoken too freely of this Affair in Coffe-houses and to
several Companies, not without much Variation in the Circumstances from what he
says he is now forced to write; and it has been observed, that some Men have
so long divulged their own Fancies, that at last they have believed them to be
true; and to save their Reputation from being accounted vain Persons, are ready
to swear to what they have said: In which I wish the Reader could find cause to
excuse the Doctor, and believe that what he has reported is a true Story, and
not a strong Imagination, because he testifies of himself, That it is both
naturally and morally next to impossible that it should be so, p. 17. to which
he would persuade his Reader, because his Story is so self-consistent in all
its parts; which he says the Aldgate Doctor's is not.

Ans. I think it as possible for Dr. Walker to tell a false Story after another
Man, as for Dr. Hollingworth, and seeing they relate such different Stories as
cannot both be true, it is more likely that he that grounds his Confidence on
the Relation of a single Person, and tells the Story with many Imperfections,
Inconsistencies, and Contradictions, though he make his Appeals to God for the
Truth of it, as too many do in every Court, should be adjudged to tell an
Untruth, rather than he who proves the Veracity of his Relation by a much more
considerable number of Men of good Reputation, than the Laws of God or Man
require for the ending of Controversies. And whereas he complains, p. 35. That
it is hard measure not to suffer a Man to reveal that, by concealing which he
fears God is displeased, and he necessitated to labor under a continued
Dissatisfaction of Mind. I wonder what Necessity forced him against his mind to
conceal this Secret, when he being a Chaplain at Warwick-house, was under a
great Temptation of being highly preferred by his Patrons, if at that time he
had freely discovered it, and therewithal eased his Conscience from that which
kept him uneasy forty Years together. He concludes after all his confident
Affirmations and probable Arguments, as a Sceptick, p. 37. If any Man can
produce stronger Reasons for the Negative part, I do not say only I will, but
that I must believe that contrary part. How vainly therefore does he beseech
him that shall write against him to write nothing for the Truth of which he
does not make the like Appeals to God which he has done, which I think no good
Man will do upon such uncertain Hearsays and probable Arguments, as Dr. Walker
makes his Appeals; from doing whereof the Advertisement of the Printer may be a
Discouragement, (viz.) That the Author coming to London to publish this
Treatise, it pleased God before it was finished at the Press, to take him to
himself. However, this Point we have gained by Dr. Walker's Concession, That if
any Man can produce more probable Arguments for the contrary Opinion, he must
be of that Persuasion, as Dr. Walker said he would and must. Which I doubt not
to perform, to the full Satisfaction of the Reader.

SECT. IV. p. 8. Contains an Answer to Dr. Hollingworth 's Postscript.

This Section which fills up fourteen or fifteen Pages, contains an insolent
and supercillious Contest with a far better Man than himself. P. 8. Dr.
Holling. says, Some Men have with Industry endeavored to persuade the World,
that the Book was a Forgery, and not of the King's Compiling; and names the
Essex Doctor. This Dr. Walker, the Essex Doctor, says, is an unlucky Omen, to
stumble so at the Threshold, because he calls it an Objection against the King.

Reply. If the writing of the Book gained great Honor and Reputation to the
King, then those Objectors that denied the King to be the Author, did
scandalously reflect upon his Majesty: Dr. Walker grants the Antecedent, and
therefore the Conclusion will follow.

P. 10. Dr. Hollingworth, I could not believe that any Man could write at that
Divine rate, but he that felt the Miseries which suggest such Thoughts and
Heavenly Meditations.

Dr. Walker instead of an Answer, says only, That this is borrowed from Sir W.
Dugdale, who agreed in the same Sentiment with Dr. Hollingworth, in these
words: The unlikelihood that any such Expressions could flow from a Heart not
oppressed and grieved with such a weight of Sorrow as his was, etc.

I believe that most judicious Persons do herein agree with Dr. H. and Sir W.
D. And Dr. W. grants it p. 11. That our Affections are kindied by our present
Circumstances, and surprising Mercies or Calamities are Springs of such Joy or
Sorrow as sharpen or set an edge on our Expressions, and instill such an Air,
Energy, and suitable Eloquence, which the same Person could not reach at another
time. Dr. Earl agreed with Sir W. Dugdale, That no afflicted prince, but K.
Charles could pen such Meditations.

Dr. Walker, When a Man designs to personate another, he adapts his Words and
Expressions with second and third Thoughts, takes a great deal of Pains, uses
a studious Industry to fit every Thought to such a Condition, every Affection
to such a Thought, and every Expression to be a lively (...) of such a Pasion
or Affection.

Ans. Now supposing that Dr. Gauden wrote that Book, he used a studious
Industry to imitate the King's usual Words and Expressions, so that in Dr.
Gauden's Opinion the King had a very excellent Train of Thoughts, and fit Words
to express them, not to be imitated without second and third Thoughts, and
great Pains and Industry. And whoever shall diligently compare the King's
undoubted Writings with those of Dr. Gauden's, will be fully convinced that
neither for the Excellency of Thoughts or Elegancy of expressing them, the
Doctor has in any measure imitated the Style of the King's Book; in which, as
Dr. W. observes, p. 12. the Evenness of the Thought and Expression, that
Equality of the Style and Affection, and the same Thread running quite through
from first to last, may persuade the Reader that it was not compiled by two
such different Men as Bp. Duppa and Dr. Gauden, but by that Great King, of whom
Dr. W. says, p. 1. That his Honor is secured by his acknowledged Wisdom,
celebrated Virtues, exemplary Patience, and Christian Magnanimity in his
Sufferings. Now for Dr. W. to infer from the King's Sufferings, that he was not
the Author of that Book, because the Hurry of Miseries which attended him, (as
Dr. W. thinks) must distract and alter the Temper of his Mind, is an
irreparable Injury to the Memory of that Good King, who as he was observed to
be of an equal Temper of Mind, under various Conditions, so his Sufferings gave
him Opportunity and Vacancy for sedate and deliberate Thoughts: And (as the
King acknowledged) occasioned great Improvement both of his Parts and Pious
Devotions; which all that knew him could testify, neither his Victories nor
his Overthrows could at any time cause him to intermit. Of which we have this
remarkable Instance, That twenty Years before his death, the News of the
Assassination of his great Favorite the Duke of Buckingham, being brought him
while he was at Prayer, he took no other notice of it, than to apply himself
more earnestly to his Devotions. Nor was he more disturbed at that ugly
Sentence for his death: And when the Commissioners at the Treaty in Newport
insisted on their Unreasonable Demands, he told them, He could with more
comfort cast himself on his Savior's Goodness to support and defend him from
all Afflictions that might befall him, rather then for any Politic
Considerations which might seem to be a Means of restoring him, to deprive
himself of the Tranquillity of his Mind.

P. 13. Dr. Walker objects against Dr. Hollingworth, that he says in that
Page, That the Book was sent by a trusty Messenger to Mr. Simmonds from the
King. This Dr. W. confessed March 23, 1690.
But p. 39. That he desired Bp. Juxon to get some trusty Friend to look it
over, and put it into exact Order: And hereupon he insults over Dr.
Hollingworth as having a bad Memory, and publishing things inconsistent, etc.
Whereas he that shall observe how Dr. Hollingworth distinguishes the time,
viz. That in the Year 1647, the King sent the most considerable part of his
Book, which was in loose Papers, to Bp. Juxton to get it put into good Order;
the Bishop sent it to Sir J. Brttle 's Father, who having digested and
transcribed it, was conveyed back to the King; and being perfected by the
addition of more Chapters, and made ready for the Press in the Year 48, was
sent to Mr. Simmonds to publish it. These Relations agree so well, and Sir J.
Brattle's Testimony was so authentic, that Dr. W. was well aware it would be
too hot for his Fingers.

It is highly probable that more Copies than one were transcribed from the
Original written by the King's hand, 1. Because of the great Esteem the King
had for it. 2. The great Fear lest one or two Copies might fall into the hands
of his Enemies, as his Cabinet did at Naseby. 3. Because the King was adding to
or altering of some parts in the Original a little before his close
Imprisonment. I have showed Reasons to induce the Reader to believe that, Dr.
Symonds had a perfect Copy by which it was printed, and by it he was enabled to
correct the Proof-sheets: And it is possible, that Dr. Gauden might cause a
Copy of this to be transcribed by Mr. Gifford, as Dr. Walker thinks. Mr.
Clifford declares, That the King for fear the Original should be lost, ordered
Mr. Odert, Secretary to Sir Edw. Nicholas, Principal Secretary of State, to
transcribe it, and lodged the Original in the Marquess of Hartford's hands. And
by the Copy of Mr. Odert he (i. e.) Mr. Clifford and Mr. Milbourne did print
the Book. And further he says, That he never heard, nay, that he was sure that
Dr. Gauden was never concerned in that Book by which Mr. Milbourne and Mr.
Clifford printed it: And Mr. milbourne the Printer, and Mr. Clifford who were
concerned in the printing of it, say, That the Copy by which it was printed
came to his hands all at once.

Sect. 5. p. 23. Is an Answer to a Treatise entitled, Restitution to the Royal
Author, wherein is set down this Memorandum of the E. of Anglesey, on a printed
Copy of the King's Book: K. Charles the Second and the Duke of York, did both (
in the last Sessions of Parliament 1675, when I showed them, in the Lord's
House, the written Copy of this Book, wherein are some Corrections and
Alterations, written with the late K. Charles the First's own hand,) assure me,
that this was none of the said King's Compiling, but made by Dr. Gauden, Bishop
of Exon; which I here insert for the Undeceiving others in this Point, by
attesting so much under my Hand, Anglesey.

Ans. Whether the whole, or any part of this Memorandum were the Hand writing
of the E. of Anglesey, is not proved, and therefore the Author of the
Restitution might more freely reflect on it, supposing it not to be the Earl's;
and that, First, by the Impropriety of the Expressions, as calling his then
Royal Highness, which was the proper Court-phrase ( the D. of York;) but what
is more material, is that both the King and Duke should assure him, That this
was none of K. C. 1st's Compiling, but made by Dr. Gauden, Bp. of Exeter, which
is a greater Impropriety to call him that dyed Bp. of Worcester, Bp. of Exeter;
which Charles the 2d must needs know, having had so great a Contest with him
when he granted him the Bishopric of Worcester, who had a Promise of
Winchester; of which Dr. Walker gives a large account, p. 15, 16, 17, 18. And
whereas the Earl says, they both did assure him, etc. Quere what Arguments they
used; Dr. W. himself would not have taken their bare Words for an Assurance,
seeing that he still reserved a liberty to dissent from what he says, He was so
well persuaded of, as of any matter of Fact, if more probable Arguments were
produced.

But against the bare Word of this Royal Pair, the Author observes the public
Acts of Charles the 2d, who Anno 1660, gave Mr. Royston (as a Requital of
printing his Father's Book,) the sole Privilege of printing all the Works of
K. C. 1st, among which this Book has a particular Character of Recommendation;
the substance of the Privilege is in these words, Charles the Second, etc.
whereas we have received sufficient Testimony of the Fidelity and Loyalty of
our Servant Richard Royston, and of the great Losses and Troubles he sustained
for his Faithfulness to our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, and Our self, in
printing and publishing many Messages and Papers of our said Blessed Father,
especially those most excellent Discourses and Soliloquies by the Name of
(...); Know ye, that it is our Royal Will and Pleasure, and we do by these
Presents grant to the said Richard Royston, etc. the sole printing and
publishing of the said Messages, Papers, and Discourses contained in the Book
entitled, Reliqiuae Sacrae Carolinae, with other Papers and Declarations
concerning our said Royal Father etc.

The same Privilege was granted to Mr. Royston by K. James the Second, Anno
1685, whence the Author of the Restitution leaves it to the Readers to judge,
whether these public Declarations of both the Kings, made with all the
Circumstance of Advantage, are to be believed before a blind Manuscript written
by a doubtful Hand, and grounded on a private Relation, to which may be added,
that K. James the Second in a Letter from Rochester before his Departure,
quoted a Passage out of his Father's Book, viz. There is but little between the
Prisons and the Graves of Princes.

To this Dr. W. answers, That Kings are not so Critical as to inspect the
Particulars of their Royal Grants.

To which it may be replied, That if they had been well informed, that this
Book was written by Bp. Gauden, (as the Memorandum says they did affirm,) it
was a Crime, Laesae Majestatis, to say they publicly and personally attested
that to be their Father's, when they believed the contrary.

To this Dr. Walker rejoyns an Answer by a Parallel Case, Of a Printer's having
a License to print K. David 's Psalms, containing in number 150; Would this
(says he) prove that David was the Penman of them all? No, say I, because the
Titles prefixed to many of the Psams declare that some of them were penned by
other Authors, as Moses who lived long before David, Heman, Asaph, etc. who
lived after him; and yet the Denomination may be taken from the greater part of
the Psalms, which are acknowledged to be David 's.

But how could that King give a Privilege to print his Father's Works, if he
knew that the (...), which is especially recommended, and for the sake of which
the Collection was made, were not his Father's? But as if this Objection had
been foreseen, it is sufficiently confuted by the Distinction made by both the
Kings, between the (...), which they own to be their Royal Father's, and other
Papers and Declarations concerning their Royal Father; for the drawing up of
which, they conceived he made use of his Ministers and Secretaries, though it
be well-known, that his Majesty of Blessed Memory, was wont not only with great
Deliberation to review the first Draughts, but taking his Pen in hand, to tell
them merrily, That he was a pretty good Cobbler; and made such Additions and
Alterations as he thought fit; insomuch as they who knew him most intimately,
affirmed, That if he had been a Secretary to any other Prince, he would have
been esteemed as an Oracle.

But here it may be enquired, How the two Kings were so well assured
themselves, that the Book was written by Bp. Gauden, as to assure others of it?
Whereas Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden himself knew not to his dying day,
whether Charles the Second ever knew it, but by Conjecture, because the Duke of
York knew it. It seems then the King must have the certainty from the Duke; and
he that considers the Circumstances in which the Duke was, and what Dependence
for Certainty might be grounded on his solemn Words, especially when the Cause
of his espoused Church of Rome was interposed, will not be easily persuaded,
Jurare in verba; It is too evident how little he regarded either the Reputation
or the Desire and Charge of his dying Father, p. 138. of that Book, viz. I
entreat and require you, as your Father and King, That you never suffer your
Heart to receive the least Check against, or Disaffection from the true
Religion established in the Church of England, etc.

But the Author of the Restitution urges a more considerable Objection, p. 24.
of Dr. Walker, That in the written Copy of this Book (the Memorandum says,)
there were some Corrections and Alterations written by K. Charles 's own hand;
which the Author of the Restitution presses as an Argument, that the King was
the Author, or otherwise there could be no reason given for his Majesty's
correcting the Manuscript, and suffering it to pass as a Book of his own
Composure; for without question the King knew of the printing of it, having
sent to Royston to prepare his Press for something that he would send him to be
printed, four Months before. And the whole Book, as Dr. Walker owns, was in the
Printer's hands in December, and the Copies published about the end of January;
of which the King most probably was certified, it being his great Concern.

Yet Dr. Walker answers, That what the Corrections by the King's own hand
seemed to his Adversary to be a Reason of, seems to Dr. Walker to be quite
contrary; and says, That he assuredly believes this corrected Copy was that
sent by the Marquess of Hartford, from Dr. Gauden.

To which it may be replied, That as Dr. Walker says, it is not certain that
Dr. Gauden's Book was ever delivered to the King; of which as has been
acknowledged by him, the Doctor had never any notice. Nor, secondly, that the
King had leisure at that important Season, being worried by the Divines that
were sent to him, in a tedious Dispute concerning Church Government, which he
so well defended against them, as in the Account printed in his Reliquiae
Carolina, which no Man did ever question to be the King's own, but also by the
Commissioners who were limited to a certain day, and by Delays and Unreasonable
Demands against both his Honor and Conscience, so perplexed him, that he had
but little time or heart either to View or Correct another Man's Writings. But,
thirdly, if Dr. Gauden's Copy sent by the Marquess, was the Copy that was
corrected by the King's own hand, as Dr. Walker says he verily believes; then
do I assuredly believe, that it was not that Copy by which the Book was
printed, 1. Because Dr. Walker says that Dr. Gauden having no return from the
King concerning his Approbation and Publishing of the Book, sent the last parts
of it to the Press by Dr. Walker, in December, see p. 33. whereas he
acknowledges, that Mr. Herbert and Mr. Levet might see the corrected Copy at
the Isle of Wight, as Sir W. Dugdale affirms they did, and they attending his
Majesty till he was made a close Prisoner, and by a Vote of the then Parliament
for Non-addresses, and the imprisoning his Sacred Person in Hurst-Castle, by
order from the Army; which was, as Whitlock in his Memoirs notes, to be on the
4th of December: The King had no opportunity after that to send Dr. Gauden's
Book to the Press. And Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden would not write for a
return of that Copy, but sent another. So that the Premises considered, it is
most probable that the whole Book was long before finished by the King, with
the Corrections viewed and brought into order, and fairly transcribed by Sir
John Brattle and his Father, as Sir John has attested; and then the Original
returned to the King, who had it by him at the Isle of Wight: But the Copy
written by Sir J. Brattle and his Father, or which is more probable, by Mr.
Odert, (for it was transcribed more than once, for fear of miscarrying.) Was
the Copy recommended to Mr. Simmonds to fit it for the Press? who most probably
did procure the printing of it, because the Proof-sheets were sent back to him
as they were printed off, as Dr. Walker confesses in a memorable Scory, p. 30.
And this answers those two Objections made by Dr. Walker p. 25. If the King
himself had been the Author, why was not the Book in his own Handwriting, as
well as the Corrections and Alterations? And why any Corrections of a fair
Copy, if he had finished the Original himself before it was copied? Or why if
he sent it to be printed, did he not send the corrected Copy rather than an
imperfect one which needed his Correction and Alteration? All these Questions
are briefly answered thus: The King's Book which was both written and corrected
by his own hand, as Mr. Levet affirms, was transcribed fairly by another hand,
and the Transcript sent to the Press, the Original being returned to the King
at the Isle of Wight; and this is the Reason why the corrected Copy was not
sent to the Press. P. 20. Dr. Walker says, That in more than forty Years there
may be some Mistake in Sir J. B. of other Papers for these, or some other lapse
of Memory, etc. Reply, And why might not Dr. Walker in forty Years be guilty of
a Mistake or Lapse of Memory about a Matter in which he was less concerned than
Sir John, for Dr. Walker says, He never read the Book in Manuscript, which Sir
John transcribed, and affirms it still to have been the King's own hand. And
why might he not mistake Dr. Gauden's declaring it to be his Book, when he
declared only that he published the King's Book; though I see no ground to
believe either. As for the corrected Copy, it will appear that the whole Book
as well as the Corrections was the King's Handwriting, by this following
Testimony under Mr. Richard Duke's hand communicated to me: Sir, I confess that
I heard Major Huntington to say more than once, That whilst he guarded Charles
the First at Holmeby-house, (as I remember) he saw several Chapters or Leaves
of that Great King's Meditations, lying on the Table, several Mornings, with a
Pen and Ink, with which the King scratched out or blotted some Lines or Words
of some of them. Upon which I must also confess, that I concluded they were
originally from the King: but others have drawn a contrary Argument from the
King's correcting the Papers; yet I put this under my hand, that the Major told
me, That he did suppose them originally from that Learned Prince. Which is the
Totum that can be intimated from, Sir, your humble Servant, Richard Duke. This
was written to Dr. Charles Goodall, June 15, 1692, from whom I received it.

This shows that the King was wont to correct his Meditations shortly after his
penning of them; and the whole was his Handwriting, as well as the Corrections
from the beginning.

The Author of the Memorandum says, That he inserted it there (that is, in the
void Leaf of a small printed Copy,) for the Undeceiving others in this Point.

Ans. I should guess that the Earl was scarcely undeceived himself in this
Point, by the little heed and care which he took for the undeceiving of others:
For first, It is likely, says Dr. Walker, that no Eye had seen it from the time
of the writing of it. Anne 1675
Nor did I ever hear that he declared to any other, though I presumed to ask
the Reverend Doctor Richard Ansley, the Earl's Son, and Dean of Exeter,
concerning it: and I agree with Dr. Walker in this, That if Mr. Millington had
not casually opened it, it might have fallen into the hands of one that either
had not regarded it, or would have concealed it. p. 31. If the Earl had been
fully convinced of the King's Relation, and intended to Undeceive others, as by
the Memorandum it seems he intended to do, what should hinder him to have made
a more public Declaration of a Truth, for which he had the Authority both of
the King and Duke, not only to secure him, but to gratify him for publishing
what they were so willing should be known: And if this thing was done in the
House of Lords, (as the Memorandum says) and where so great a Concourse was,
and a Matter fit to be known, was offered the King, (viz.) the sight of his
Father's Book wherein were the Corrections and Alterations written with the
King's own hand, it is probable it was shown to some of the Nobles, who also
might hear the Discourse, and yet it was not spoken or dreamt of until this
Memorandum was by chance opened some Years after.

Lastly, I shall believe, unless the sight of that Book convince me of the
contrary, that it was wholly written with his Majesty's own hand, as well as
the Corrections, because I have the Testimonies of many competent Witnesses to
induce me so to believe, viz. Mr. Levet, Mr. Herbert, Major Huntington, and
that Captain who was converted by it, when the King was even ready to die on
his Cross. Nor can I believe that the Noble Earl did write that Memorandum, as
we have it; there are many in London can counterfeit any Man's Writing: We know
how his Majesty was abused by counterfeiting his Broad-Seal; but neither does
the Memorandum say, That the Book was not of the King's Writing, only that the
Corrections were, which excludes not the other; and though that particular Book
were not, yet one there was written wholly by the King, as is irrefragably
proved. I desire the Reader therefore to take notice, that I reflect not on the
Earl's hand, for which we have no Proof, and because we hear not of any thing
spoken or done by the Earl to Undeceive the People in that Point, which if he
had been willing to do, he could never have a better opportunity than then when
the King, the Duke, and as we may believe, a great number of the Lords, the
highest Judicature of the Nation were in the House; then, I say, was the
fittest time (if the Earl had been as willing to Undeceive the Nation, as the
King and Duke were,) and the fairest opportunity to do it, by showing them the
Book, many of the Lords then present knowing the King's Hand, and not to leave
it in a void Leaf of a Twelve-peny Book, left undiscovered to the day of his
death: I may also presume that that Learned Earl (who was as great a Lover of
Truth as of Books,) having such a Book sometime (how long I know not,) in his
hands, would either before or after it had been shown to the King and Duke,
have compared the Print with the Copy; and then if he had found any
considerable Alterations, he would have mentioned them in his Memorandum, as
the Ground of being undeceived himself, and a farther Means to Undeceive the
Nation. And thus much for the Memorandum, which I think never did Undeceive any
except Dr. Walker.

P. 6 and 7. Dr. Walker affirms, That Dr. Gauden had taken the Covenant; If
this be true, I see no cause why he should have a Promise of the best
Bishopric in England, though he might be prefered to that of Exeter for other
good Services which he did after he became a Convert, and wrote against the
Covenant; for when Dr. Reynolds that had taken the Covenant, and as some say
the Engagement, was preferred to Norwich, which is much better than Exeter, and
other Bishoprics were offered to others that were less deserving. And, p. 129.
of his Anti-Baal Berith, he calls God to witness, that Exeter was granted him
by the King's Favor, and the general Desire of the City and Diocese of Exeter,
without any his own or others ambitious procuring or soliciting in his behalf,
I cannot persuade myself, that if Bp. Duppa and those other great Men to whom
the dispose of the Bishoprics was committed, had known that Dr. Gauden bad
written the King's Book, would have set him below Dr. Reynolds, and diverse
others that had done less Service, if there had been no other reason for it but
to engage him to Silence in so important a Secret.

But what if Dr. Walker do slander his Patron Dr. Gauden, and it should appear
that he never did take the Covenant, no not in any sense? I have so much
Deference to the Worth of that Bishop, as well as Gratitude, as he was my
Patron, that I shall propose the Reasons why I think Dr. Walker has injured
him in this particular; and if it appear to the Reader that Dr. Walker is
injurious in this, he will be induced to believe, that he is not to be credited
in his other Relation, viz. That Dr. Gauden told him, that he wrote the King's
Book. P. 275. of the Anti-Baal, The same Objection was made and answered as
follows: That Dr. Gauden had taken the Covenant.
For Dr. Gauden 's making one of the Number of his Covenanters, as Mr. Crofton
reckons without his Host. To satisfy Mr. Crofton and the Libeller's
Curiosity, who go by Hearsay, Dr. Gauden assures the World, That he never took
any Oaths but those appointed by the Law, no Protestation nor Engagement, no
League, Vow, or Negative Oath; and for this Covenant he offered freely to some
principle Authors of it, his many just Scruples and Objections against it, both
as to its Matter and Authority: He had some of their Answers under their Hands,
agreeable to that Sense his Charity was, and is willing to interpret the
meaning of the Covenant, to reform, not ruin Episcopacy; then he declared
publicly his Judgment for Bishops and Episcopacy, to be such as now it is,
That he neither could, nor ever would assent to the Covenant in any Sense, but
such as was in his Freedom to refuse, and consistent with his former Oaths, the
Laws of the Land, and the Preservation of Episcopal Government in its just
Rights and Enjoyments, in Piety, Loyalty, and in those Duties of Equity and
Charity, which he owed to God and Man. Further than this, Dr. Gauden never
approved nor owned the Covenant, nor ever shall any part of it: How good soever
it shall seem in some things and Expressions, yet an evil Sense must not be
covered under good Words, nor any Godly Expressions be afterward wrested to
abet Ungodly Actions; the whole Mass of the Covenant seemed to be sweetened by
those general Salvo's and Restrictions put into it, Of having Regard in all
things to the Word of GOD, to the Duties of Men's Places and Callings, and to
the Power of Godliness. Let Mr. Crofton keep to these, and so keep his
Covenant, for surely these can bind no Man to any thing injurious to any honest
Man, or honest Office in Church or State. Of Dr. Gauden 's free and public
Declaration of his Judgment as to the Covenant in general and particular,
Hundreds besides God and his own Conscience, are Witnesses; and if such a
Declaration of his Sense, what ought to be the meaning of it in Conscience and
Honesty, will add any strength to Mr. Crofton 's Sense of it, or the Design of
making it Sacred not Sacrilegious, much good do them: I believe they will
sooner be drawn to Dr. Gauden 's sober Episcopacy, than to their Presbyterian
Exorbitancy, which he ever openly abhorred, and never secretly complied with;
if he had, it had been as much against his Conscience as against Reason, Law,
Justice, Charity, and Religion; and he must have had no Peace till he had
publicly repented, and recanted such Dissimulation, which he abhors as Hell.

Now though some Men might expect that the Doctor should have positively
declared, that he never took the Covenant, and think these large
Circumlocutions to be but an Evasion, and raising of Dust to blind Men's eyes,
let the Reader reflect, That in the first place he writes this to assure the
World that he never took any Oaths but those appointed by Law, which he
expressly denies the Covenant to have been: And the Doctor knew that Oaths are
generally to be taken in the usual sense of the words in which it is penned,
and according to the meaning of those who impose it. 2ly, That he expressly
mentions any Engagement, League, or Vow, under which Terms the Covenant must
be comprehended. 3ly, That he declared publicly his Judgment for Bishops and
Episcopacy, as by Law was established in England, p. 277. which the Covenant
diametrically opposed. 4ly, That he never would nor could assent to the
Covenant in any Sense, but such as was consistent with his former Oaths, the
Laws of the Land, and Preservation of Episcopal Government in its just Rights
and Enjoyments, etc. all which the taking of the Covenant directly opposed.
5ly, That his Compliance with the Presbyterian Exorbitance would have been such
a Dissimulation as he abhorred as Hell. And after all this published to assure
the World against that Objection, viz. That he was one of the Number of
Covenanters; which he says Mr. Crofton reckoned him without his Host. I should
think it a very strong Argument (that though he should have told Dr. Walker
that he wrote the King's Book,) he were not to be believed being Testis sihi
inconsistens.

If there be any Faith or Honesty in Men, these Reasons which Dr. Gauden gives
may satisfy the Reader that he never took the Covenant, for Page 178, he
declares, That if the Parliament had been full, they had not any power to make,
take, or impose any Oath contrary to the Laws of England, which they were
entrusted to observe, not to break, abrogate, or change without the K.'s
Consent. And in the same Page he says, He is confident he does those Men no
Injury, who were the chief Engines and Charioteers, to say, they did all things
more out of Polity than Piety; and by this Covenant they intended the advance
of a Party, not of the Public Interest, and our Laws, Ad quas evertendas nemo
sobrius accessit: Which he thus Englisheth, To the Subversion of which by
popular Combinations and Covenantings without the Prince's or Supreme Power's
Consent, no Man comes but drunk with Pride, or Passion, Ambition, Covetousness,
or Superstition. And in p. 279. he says, It is Perjury to take a false and
unjust Oath, as well as to break a true and lawful Oath. Now who will believe
Dr. Walker, so as to think Dr. Gauden to be guilty of all these horrid Crimes,
which he condemns in others. In Page the 69th, he says, That in the intended
Sense it was execrable, and that every such Covenanter must be so to GOD and
Man -- nothwithstanding the remaining Lords and Commons in the two Houses, and
the Scottish Commissioners, and the Assembly (all Sacred no doubt,) did take
the Covenant, Sept. 11th, 1643: Which he scoffs at in p. 70, and in p. 71. he
declares what he means by the words Oath, Vow, and League, saying, That no Vow,
Oath, League, or Sacred Covenant can bind contrary to our Duty to God, the
King, the Country, the Church and Laws under which we live. In p. 80. That the
Authority imposing it was not Legal. And in p. 81. That such Vows bind to
nothing but the breaking of them. And in p. 111. That we read not of any
Covenant ever so imposed, or taken by any Subjects without or against the
Consent of their Sovereign's Power; but it proved a bloody Issue, hardly cured
with a Miracle, and that after the Effusion of much Civil Blood. P. 184 He
tells his Reader how the Covenant was blasted by the Oxford Reasons. And p.
185. That this Combination against Episcopacy without doubt first damnified and
destroyed the former King: Of which (says he) I have greater grounds than it
is fit to tell all the World. That it was contrary to the Oaths of Allegiance,
Supremacy, and Canonical Obedience, he proves at large, p. 189, 195, 197.

Now what a Monster of Men must he be, that knowing all these things before,
should take such a Covenant in any sense whatsoever, or having taken it, should
expect so great a Preferment as the Bishopric of Winchester? Here then we have
Dr. W. brought to this Dilemma, If Dr. Gauden did take the Covenant, he was
guilty of all that he condemned in others, (ut supra;) and then that Argument
which Dr. Walker urged to his Tutor, whereby he says he could have silenced
him, viz. That Dr. Gauden wrote the Chapter against the Covenant, because he
spoke so much in favor of it; is very weak: And if he wrote not that, then
probably no other of that Book. And if he did not take it, (as I am in Charity
convinced he did not,) how Criminal was Dr. Walker to publish to the World, to
the Defamation of his good Patron, that communicated his Secrets to him, that
he was so vile a Man as to make himself guilty of all those horrid Crimes
abovementioned: and then also it is very probable, that he that durst raise so
evil a Report of Dr. Gauden as to the Covenant, might presume to six this
Phantome of his own on the Doctor, That the Doctor told him, that he made the
K.'s Book. And whether Dr. Gauden did affirm it to Dr. Walker, or Dr. Walker
misreported Dr. Gauden, both, these Testimonies are very infirm, and cannot
stand against the opposite Reasons and Authorities.

P. 32. Dr. Walker answers to four things objected by Sir W. Dugdale, The most
material, he says, is concerning Major Huntington, from whose mouth, he says
he will in the Faith of a Christian declare, without diminution or wresting of
it, (which he says was this,) p. 33. When that Book was published, and so
confidently reported to be the King's, then surely, or I believe (here
something is wanting, or his hand trembled,) these are the Papers I see him so
usually take out of his Cabinet; but this was but my Conjecture, and I never
declared it to be otherwise, for I assure you, I never read one Line or Word of
the Papers in the King's hand; and I cannot say there was one Passage in these
Papers which is this printed Book, for how should I never having looked into
them. This Account of Major Huntington he says he faithfully relates as in the
sight of God.

Now if Dr. Walker be proved by several Witnesses of good Credit, to have
reported a Relation greatly different from that which the Major gave to several
Friends and Relations at several times, concerning the Matter in question: I
suppose the agreeing Testimony of several such competent Witnesses, will
greatly invalidate Dr. Walker's Relation; and if the Reader shall be convinced
that Dr. Walker has misreported Major Huntington's Testimony, it may be a
Prejudice to his Report of Dr. Gauden's: Now first Dr. Walker confesses, p.
32. That he often heard Major Huntington's Testimony to be this, That whilst he
attended his Majesty, or had the guarding of him, he saw the King frequently
take these Papers out of his Cabinet, and sometimes read them, sometimes wrote
more; and that when he saw the Book, he declared, Those Chapters in it were
those very Papers he had so seen. Which two Relations are contradictory. Now it
is very probable, that what Dr Walker affirms he so often heard alleged as
Major Huntington's Testimony, might come to the Major's ears in his Lifetime,
and had he disliked it, would have contradicted it to such Friends as inquired
the Truth of that Business, whose Testimonies I shall now set down; And first,
the Testimony of the Learned Dr. Robert Hall, Son of the Famous Joseph Hall,
Bishop of Exeter, who was Treasurer of the Church of St. Peter's Exon, to whom
the Major was near related by his Marriage, and with whom he sojourned sometime
at Clist-hidon, the Doctor's Benefice: this Reverend Dr. Hall has told me and
others, That Major Huntington waiting on his Majesty at Holmeby, assured him,
that he had seen the King writing some of those Papers, which the Major had
opportunity to read, and knew that such as he did then read, were the same as
are now printed. To this of Dr. Hall, I add that of Richard Duke, Esquire and
Justice of the Peace in Devon, who lately declared to me and another Judicious
Divine, That he heard the Major affirm the same, almost in the same words.

And Sir Will. Courtney, a Person of great Honor, (as I am credibly informed)
when this Relation was read or told to him, as Dr. W. reported it, was pleased
immediately to say, That he well knew the Major, and had heard him aver the
like Report as Mr. Duke and others have declared.

These Evidences confirm what Dr. Hollingworth relates, p. 21. of his Defense,
That a Nonconforming Minister told him, (viz.) That Major Huntington told him
with his own mouth, That he procured some Papers that made up part of this
Royal Book from the hands of Fairfax the Parliament General, which were taken
after Nazby Fight, and kept by the Lord Fairfax; and that afterward the said
Major presented them to the King with his own hand. Dr. Hollingworth adds, I
spare the Man's Name for particular Reasons; but if I am called to do it, I
will depose the Truth of his Saying so upon Oath. But I hope the Testimonies
now following will prevent that labor; the first is that of the Reverend Mr.
Will. Read, Archdeacon of Barnstable, in these words: I do hereby Certify,
That I dining with Bp. Lamphlugh at his Palace in Exon, some Years since, there
happening some discourse concerning K. Charles the First his (...), and some said
there was a Doubt made, Whether the said King were the Author of the said Book
or no? I told the Company, then at the Table, That I had heard from several
Persons of good Credit, many Years ago, that one Major Huntington did affirm,
That after Nazby Fight he took that King's Cabinet, wherein several Meditations
of the said Book were, written with his own hand; and that he afterward
delivered them into the King's own hands, which he received with very much Joy,
and gave him many Thanks for restoring them to him. And I do farther Certify,
That one Rich. Duke, of Otterton, in the County of Devon, Esquire, being then
at the Bishop's Table, did positively affirm, That what I had reported
concerning Major Huntington was true, he knowing well the said Major, and
having heard him with his own mouth affirming to him, that what I have above
set down was true: In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand this 18th day
of July, A. D. 1692. Will. Read, Archdeacon of Barum.

This is confirmed by that of Mr. Cave Beck, p. 27. of Dr. Hollingworth's
Character of Charles the First, in these words: That some Years after the
King's Trial, Major Huntington at Ipswich assured me, That so much of his
Majesty's Book as contained his Meditations before Nazby Fight, was taken in
the King's Cabinet, and that Sir T. Fairfax delivered the said Papers unto him,
and ordered him to carry them to the King: And the Major affirmed, that he read
them over before he delivered them, and that they were the same for Matter and
Form with those Meditations in the printed Book, and that he was much affected
with them, and from that time became a Proselite to the Royal Cause. He also
told me, That when he delivered them to the King, his Majesty appeared very
joyful, and said, He esteemed them more than all the Jewels he had lost in the
Cabinet.

P. 10. of Dr. H.'s Defense, he repeats this Passage, That Dr. Meriton dining
with Sir T. Pilkington, the late Lord Mayor, he happened to meet with Dr. Walker
at that Table, where Dr. Walker with his usual Confidence asserted Dr. Gauden
to be the Author of the King's Book: On which Dr. Meriton turned upon him with
the Story of Mr. Simmonds's communicating the whole business to Dr. Gauden.
Upon which he was so confounded that he had nothing to say for himself; which
being seconded by Mr. Marriot, then Chaplain to the Lord Mayor, who heard the
whole Discourse, and withal the Silence that he put Dr. Walker to; Dr.
Hollingworth ventured to give the World an account of it in Print, This, says
Dr. Hollingworth, p. 5. of the Character of Charles the First, is so true, and
will upon just occasion be attested by others as well as myself, that I do here
in the face of the World, challenge Dr. Meriton or Mr. Marriot to deny one
Syllable of the Substance of it, either as to the one in telling his Success in
the Dispute, or the other justifying it as really true.

In p. 11 of Dr. H.'s Defense, he says, That Mrs. Simmonds being asked by him,
How far her Husband was concerned in the King's Book? And what she knew of it?
She answered, That going into her Husband's Study, she saw on the Table a Book
in Writing, which she knew not to be her Husband's Writing, she asked him whose
it was; which he turning her off with bidding her mind her own business, she
desisted from further Enquiry. The King's Murder following quickly after, she
told me her Husband never joyed himself, but fell sick, and died the 29th of
March following; and throughout his whole Sickness he declared the Book was the
King's Book. And p. 26. Dr. Hollingworth says, That Mrs. Simmonds dining some
Years since at a Citizen's House who aspersed K. Charles the First, he told
her, If she would confess the Truth, that her Husband made the Book, there were
some hundred of Pounds at her Service. She knowing her Husband's Honesty in his
Deathbed Assertions, scorned, and told him, She was not to be bribed by never
so much to so great a Lie.

I have also an Authentic Testimony communicated to me by Dr. Charles Goodall,
That Dr. Walker had often waited on his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
was wont to ask his Grace, Whether he desired to be informed concerning the
true Author of the (...)? affirming, that not the King but Dr. Gauden was the
Author of it: adding this as a Reason, That Dr. Gauden had a Copy before it was
published. This only Argument he alleged to his Grace; but as for all those
other Assertions which are since vented in his Book, Dr. Walker at no time made
use of them to confirm what he had delivered. Further, my Lord told me, That
Mr. Levet, the Author of the Letter printed in Restittuion to the Royal Author,
had often, and many Years successively waited on him, and entering into
discourse on this matter, did as often constantly aver, (as related in the
printed Letter,) That he waiting on his Majesty in Prison, had seen the several
Sheets of the Book written with the King's own hand, and interlined by him.

To this I shall join the Testimony of another Archbishop, lately sent in a
Sermon preached in Dublin by the R. R. Henry Lord Bishop of Mead, at the
Funeral of James Margetson, D. D. Archbishop of Armagh, which was printed at
London for Nath. Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1679. in
the 28th Page of that Book, the Bishop of Mead tells us the following Passage
was attested by the Archbishop, whose Words by all that knew him, past as
unquestionable, (viz.) That the Archbish. being in London after the Death of
the Royal Martyr, did administer the last Offices of the Church to a Gentleman
on his Deathbed, (whose Name he mentions not) but says, That a dying Person
told him, that he had been one sometimes near in Attendance on that Sacred
Martyr in his Solitude, and that to him were committed by the King those
Papers, which he said he knew to have been written by the King's own hand, and
which were after published with the Title of (...). Which the Bishop of Mead
observed for obviating malicious Speeches detracting from that excellent Work
breathing Piety and Devotion, and vindicating the Sincerity of that Great Soul
in all his Actings and Occurrencies therein mentioned; Malice suggesting to the
World that although that Work carried the King's Name, yet it was not his own,
but composed by some of his Chaplains; intending thereby to lessen his
Majesty's great and excellent Parts, and to render that most excellent Piece
less regarded, and their own Wickedness less observed. By this Testimony (says
the Bishop of Mead,) that false Assertion appears, and the Royal Author of
that precious Work found to be the King himself, it being declared by such a
Person dying, and so could hope for no Advantage by it. This Sermon was printed
about thirteen Years since.

To these may be added the Testimony of the Archbishop of Armagh, who was often
heard to affirm, That after the Fight at Nazby, the King being much troubled
for the loss of his Papers taken in his Cabinet, commanded him to endeavor the
Recovery of them, which he did to the King's great Satisfaction.

And that of Col. Hammond who was the King's Keeper in the Isle of Wight, who
attested, That he saw those Papers in the King's hand, heard him reading them,
and saw him correcting them. As Dr. Perinsheiff in the Life of Charles the
First, p. 95.

To these may be added that of Dr. Dillingham, p. 22. of Dr. Holling.'s
Defense, That he waiting on the King after that he was seized by the Army, saw
and read in the King's Bedchamber a whole Chapter of the King's Book fresh
written with his own hand, in the Year 1647.

Dr. Fowler's Testimony, the present Bishop of Gloucester, is another
Confirmation, p. 23. of Dr. H.'s Defense, (viz.) That Mrs. Keightly of
Albrohatch, in Barking Parish, in Essex, gave him this Account about twenty
eight Years since, That she had a Servant who was made a Parliament Captain,
and a little before the King's death, told her he had laid down his Commission;
and she asking him the reason, he replied, That whereas he had been told, that
the King was a very bad Man, he was now abundantly assured that he is an
excellent good Man. And being asked what induced him to judge so; told her, That
he was appointed to stand every Morning at his Majesty's Bed-Chamber-door, when
he was a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, observing for several days, that the
King went into his Closet quickly after he was dressed, and there stayed a
considerable time, and then went down into the Garden; and perceiving that he
left the Key in the Closet-door, he adventured to go in, and found that he had
been penning most devout and pious Meditations and Prayers, which he fell to
reading, till he saw the King return to the Walk that lead to his Chamber: And
thus the Captain did for several Mornings, and read the King's Morning-works,
till he came to a Resolution no longer to be such a Prince's Jaybor. Mrs.
Keighley told me further, That he gave such an account of those Meditations and
Prayers, that she was confident they were printed in (...), after she came to
read that Book. This Mrs. Keighly was a very Religious and Pious Gentlewoman,
and as Discreet and Prudent. This I attest, Edward Fowler, D. D. June 25th,
1691.

Now let the Reader judge, who are likely to declare in the Faith of a
Christian, what they had from the mouth of Major Huntington, whether the
talkative Dr. Walker, who is Singularis Testis, or those many Persons of great
Note whose agreeing Testimonies I have produced.

P. 34. he answers Mr. William Levet's Testimony, which says, That he could
depose, that the Book was his, (i. e.) the King's own, having oftentimes
observed his Majesty writing his Royal Resentments of the Bold and Insolent
Behavior of the Soldiers that had him in their Custody; and that he had the
Happiness oftentimes to read the same in Manuscript, under his Majesty's own
hand, he being pleased to leave the same in the Window of his Bedchamber.

Dr. Walker's Answer is, That there is no such Chapter in all that Book.

Reply. Neither did Mr. Levet affirm there was; but he that shall read the 23d
Chapter of the Scots delivering him up to the English, and his Captivity at
Holmeby; and Chap. 26. of the Army's surprising him at Holmeby, and in the
following Chapters, he may find too much both of the Insolency of his
Rebellious Subjects, and the Barbarous Demeanor of the Soldiers, from whom he
feared Assassination. Dr. Walker grants that Mr. Levet might read it in the
Isle of Wight, but will not believe it was the King's writing, unless it be
understood of the Corrections only, which he supposes the King made in the
Book sent by Dr. Gauden, or else that his Majesty had transcribed it. But Mr.
Levet says he often read it in Manuscript, under the King's own hand; and what
a strange Fancy is it of Dr. Walker, that the King in that Hurry of Business
should transcribe so large a Book with his hand, when he had so little time to
dispatch more urgent Affairs.

Mr. Levet's Testimony is as follows, p. 8 and 9. of Dr. Holling.'s Character
of K. Charles the First, If any one desire to know the true Author of a Book
entitled, (...), I, one of the Servants of K. Charles the First's, in his
Bedchamber, do declare, That when his Majesty was a Prisoner in the Isle of
Wight, that I read over the said Book, which was long before the Book was
printed, in his Bedchamber, writ with his Majesty's own hand, with several
Interlinings. Moreover, his Majesty, Charles the First, told me, Sure Levet,
you do design to get this Book by heart; (having often seen me reading of it.)
I can testify also, That Royston the Printer, told me, that he was imprisoned
by O. Cromwell, because he would not declare, that King Charles the First was
not the Author of the said Book. Signed and Sealed October. 16th, 1690.

To which add this Testimony, I Robert Herne, formerly Servant to Sir Philip
Warwick, do attest, That I have often heard Sir Philip Warwick, as also Mr.
Odert, and Mr. Whitaker, declare, That they had transcribed Copies of the
King's Book written with his own hand. Witness my hand, Robert Herne.

Sect. 6. p. 34. Dr. Walker gives the Reasons for publishing his Book, p. 34
and 35. 1st, It was imposed on him by Dr. H. for his own Vindication, and to
wipe off a false Accusation, That he was guilty of a false Story by a free
owning of what he forced me to write. And p. 35. says, It was wrung and wrested
from him by some Body's impertinent Affectation to meddle with what he
understands not.

Ans. It was was no impertinent Employment for any Member of that Church which
honors that King as their Royal Martyr, to undertake the necessary
Vindication of his being Author of that Book, which as Dr. W. observes, did
render the Murder of so good a King to be more abhorred. 2. Did awaken many to
Repentance, who had contributed to it. 3. Did dispose the Nation to recall the
Royal Family, and many more good Effects; which if the Nation were imposed on,
and it should pass as Dr. Walker would have it, that Dr. Gauden was the Author
of it, would be accounted as a Sham, not only to the Infamy of Dr. Gauden, the
Contriver, and Dr. Walker the Concealer, but to the Diminution of the King's
deserved Honor, and revive their old Calumnies of covering foul Deeds with
fair Pretenses.

And as for Dr. Walker's Negative Reasons in p. 35. That he intended not by
this Discovery to rob that excellent King of any Honor properly due to him,
will appear to be no Reasons, nor will the Station in which he then was, (viz.)
A Chaplain at Warwick-House, persuade the Reader to believe, that no Man of his
Rank loved the King better, honored him more while he lived, or more abhorred
his Murder, bewailed his Death, giving more open Testimony against it, or
sustaining greater Loss for so doing.

2. Dr. Walker gives us his Positive Reasons drawn from two signal Providence,
the one serving as an Apology why he did not reveal this Secret sooner, and the
other why he did it now: It much amuseth me, that a Doctor of Divinity should
make Providence a Party with himself, to cross itself, and justify two such
contrary Ends, and declare, That whatever others may think, he judges it a
sign that God would have that which he calls a pious Fraud, an officious Lie, a
talking deceitfully for Man, to the maintaing of which he thinks he contributed
by his Silence, and for which he was persuaded by many cogent Reasons, that God
was not well pleased with Dr. Gauden, himself, and others. And then for what
Reason he knows not, p. 35. as he confesses, but only thinks that Providence
may have other Reasons now to serve, by suffering this Discovery to be wrested
and wrung from him by some Body's impertinent Affectation to meddle in what
they understood not.

The sense of which is this: God's Providence in recovering the King's Paper's,
(which Arwaker had seized (as in p. 30, 31. he shows in a large Harangue,) and
suffering them to be printed, was Dr. W.'s Reason why he did for about forty
three Years conceal an Imposture put on the whole Nation, such as was a Trouble
to his Conscience, and displeasing to God: And the same Providence by suffering
Dr. Hollingworth to wring and wrest from him this Discovery, (which if his
Conscience had been really grieved for concealing it, he should have revealed
freely and meekly as a Penitent,) should force him afterward to publish to
salve his own Reputation.

Dr. Walker p. 31. mentions another signal Providence for his Discovery, viz.
The Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum, found in a void Leaf of the King's Book,
which if it had not been casually opened by Mr. Millington, but fallen into
some hand that either might not regard it, or would have concealed it, then Dr.
Hollingworth would not so unseasonably have provoked Dr. Walker, and Dr. Walker
would have been as silent as Providence in this matter.

To shut up this Part, If all those Imperfections which may Invalidate an
Evidence, do meet in this of Dr. Walker's, and there are the joint Testimonies
of several Unexceptionable Persons against his Evidence, the Case may easily be
determined: First then, Dr. Walk.'s Evidence is but the single Testimony of
what he heard from Dr. Gauden; and Mascard in his 1361 Conclusion de
Probationibus says, Testis unicus de Auditis nil probat; and in his 1360
Conclusion, N. 5. Testis unicus ut faciat semiplenum probationem debet esse
omni exceptione major. Which they that consider the Premises will hardly
believe of Dr. Walker.

2. A Witness that deposes things very unlikely, does not prove them because
very similitudine is the ground of Truth; so Conclus. 1364. Testis non very
similia deponens non probat; and, Testimonii fundamentum est fides.

3. Because the King's Book had past for his own above forty Years, and ad
reprobandum instrumentum Testes omni exceptione majores requiruntur. Conclus.
1360. N. 3.

4. He that producing another to confirm what he had witnessed, and finds his
Fellow-witness to affirm what he denied, or deny what he affirmed, renders his
Evidence suspected; this the Doctor has often done, particularly in Major
Hnntington's Evidence produced for him. Conclus. 1368.

5. A Witness that without a Call offers himself to give Testimony, as Dr.
Walker did to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and in several Companies, is not
approved by Conclus. 1358. Nor he that prosecutes his Testimony with Eagerness
and Animosity, for, Animose deponens suspectus redditur. Conclus. 1368.

Testis sibi contrarius non probat: D. W. has not only varied in his Testimony
by increasing his Evidence, but often contradicting of it.

So that we may conclude with that Great Civilian, That Dr. Walker's Testimony
ought not to prevail against the Testimony of so many competent Witnesses,
because he labors under so many Defects.

The Result of what I have written will be this: That Dr. Walker's single and
incoherent Evidence of what he pretends to have heard from Dr. Gauden, cannot
deserve any Credit against the Testimonies of so many Authentic Witnesses of
the Matter of Fact, as have given their Evidence for the King's being Author of
the (...), nor consequently of what he pretends he had from Major Huntington,
1. Major Huntington. 2. Dr. Dillingham. 3. Mr. Herbert. 4. Mr. Levet. 5. Sir
John Brattle. 6. Mr. Woitaker. 7. Mr. Gafford. 8. Mr. Clifford. 9. Mr. Royston.
10. Mr. Simmonds and his Wife. 11. Mr. Robert Hearne. 12. Mrs. Gauden. 13. Mr.
Odert. 14. Dr. Jer. Tailor. 15. Dr. Earl. 16. Two Archbishops of armagh. 17.
Sir William Dugdale. 18. Mr. Milbourne. 19. Mrs. Keilegh, produced by the
Bishop of Gloucester; besides those collateral Witnesses that corroorate their
Testimonies: And I suppose the single Evidence of one of these may outweigh
that of Dr. Walker, how much more the Verdict of so many Worthy and Reverend
Persons, in the Judgment of any Person, but such as with Ludlow, have the Guilt
of that Royal Blood crying for Vengeance against them, and will not be
convinced that Regicide is a Sin? And though he be the only Survivor of that
Barbarous Crew, and has escaped the Justice of Men, and glories in his
Impenitency, shall receive the greater Condemnation, for the Royal Martyr's
Sentence is most certain, That the severest Vengeances of God are then most
accomplished, when Men are suffered to complete their wicked Purposes. See his
Meditations on Death.

If Dr Walker who professed so much Love to the Royal Martyr for his Wisdom and
Piety, a Member of that Church for the Preservation of which in pursuance of
his pious Resolution to defend it or make it his Tombstone, the King
sacrificed his Life, has so shamelesly martyred him a second time in his
Essigies or Portraicture, what wonder is it if his professed Enemies that hated
him as a King, to divide his Inheritance among them, should perpetuate their
immortal Hatred against him, in hope to regain that part of his and the
Church's Inheritance which by the Hire of their Rebellion, they had
sacrilegiously purchased. And if the consident Reports of Dr. Walker be found
so faulty, how incredible is it that the late Libels written under the Name of
Ludlow, a Regicide, should have so much appearance of Truth or shadow of
Honesty as to deserve any other Confutation, than what was long since due to
their Authors: Sure I am a few such Accountants as the Doctor and Ludlow would
soon make the Kingdom become Bankrupt.

Dr. WALKER's True, Modest, and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR of 'EIKON
ASILIK, Strictly Examined, and Demonstrated TO BE False, Impudent, and
Deceitful.
The Second PART.
NOW suppose all that has hitherto been spoken to prove that the King, and not
Dr. Gauden was the Author of the Book, be laid aside, and taken as non dictum,
yet I suppose what may be produced, 1st, From consideration of the K.'s
Abilities to write such a Book. 2ly, From his Declaration, that he designed to
write it. 3ly, From his Testimony that he had done it. 4ly, From the Characters
which may be observed in that Book of the Royal Author, which appear as plain
as his Image and Superscription on his Coin, and do as naturally own each
other, as the Ewe does the Lamb, will abundantly convince the Reader that it
was the King's, and not Dr. Gauden's Work, for though he be dead, yet he speaks
very intelligibly to any that have had any knowledge of his Royal Eloquence:
And this I shall prove, First from his known Abilities to write such a Book;
that his Majesty was from his Childhood devoted to his Studies, and being of a
quick Apprehension, did lay up a great Stock of Humane and Divine Knowledge.

That you may not read the Testimonies of his Friends with Prejudice, I shall
first show you what Opinion his Adversaries had of him, one of the most bitter
I account Cook, who solicited against him at his Trial, who in his Apology for
their Proceeding against him, p. 35. says, He was well known to be a hard
Student in his younger days: He had more Learning and dexterity in
State Affairs undoubtedly, than all the Kings in Christendom; and for his
Parts, if they had been sanctified, he was another Soloman.

The second Testimony is that of Lilly, who in his Discourse of Monarchy, or no
Monarchy, (whom I mention not as an Astrologer, but as a Man of Sense, that was
an Observer of the Persons and Actions of the Times,) he says, That he had
singular Skill in Limning and Pictures, a good Mathematician, not unskilful in
Music, well read in Divinity, excellently in History, and no less in the Laws
and Statutes of the Nation, of a quick and sharp Conception, would write his
Mind singularly well, in good Language and Style; he would apprehend a
Difference between Parties with great Readiness, and Methodize a long Matter in
few Lines; insomuch that I have heard Sir Robert Holborn often say, He had a
quicker Conception, and easier understood a Cause in Law, and with more
Sharpness drove the Matter to a Head, than any of the Privy Council; and when
the King was not there, Sir Robert cared not to be there. He had also among
other special Gifts, the Gift of Patience, so that he would hear out a long
Discourse without Interruption or Distaste; he had a discerning Eye to judge of
Men, and honored the Virtuous; he was not at all given to Luxury, but extreme
temperate in his Food and Apparel; he would Argue Logically, and frame his
Arguments Artificially, etc.

For which I may give an Instance in his Discourse with Henderson, who has at
large declared his Judgment of the King, after his Disputation with him, it is
at large in the Character of Charles the First, in Dr. Hollingworth, to this
effect: I do declare to God and the World, That since I had the Honor and
Happiness to Converse and Consult with his Majesty, especially in Matters of
Religion, that I found him the most Intelligent Man that ever I spoke with, as
far beyond my Expression as Expectation: I profess that I was oft-times
astonished with the Quickness and Solidity of his Reasons and Replys, w^ndring
how among his Sports and Recreations he attained so great Knowledge. I confess
ingeniously, that I was convinced in Conscience, and know not how to give him
any reasonable Satisfaction; yet the Sweetness of his Disposition is such, that
whatever I said was well taken: I must say that I never met with any Disputant
let be a King, and in Matters of so high Concernment, of that mild and calm
Temper, which convinced me more to think that such Wisdom and Moderation could
not be without extraordinary measure of Divine Grace. I had heard much of his
Carriage toward the Priests in Spain, and that K. James told the D. of
Buckingham, That he durst venture his Son Charles against all the Jesuits, he
knowing him to be so well grounded in the Protestant Religion; but could never
believe it before I observed particularly his Devotion, which I must truly say
was more than ordinary, and was observed by him before his Troubles; twice a
Day constantly Morning and Evening for an Hour's space in private, twice a Day
before Dinner and Supper in public, besides Preachings twice on the Sundays,
on Tuesdays, and other extraordinary Times. I dare say, that if his Advice had
been followed, all the Blood that is shed, and all the Rapine committed, might
have been prevented.

The whole Confession of Mr. Henderson, is confirmed in few words by Mr. Vines,
who heard him disputing a whole Day with fifteen Commissioners and Counselors,
and four Divines, especially concerning Church Affairs, on the Propositions
sent him, to their Conviction, who coming prejudiced against him as a Man of
slender Parts, went away admiring how he became so Learned, and prevailed with
their Masters, that his Concessions might be voted a Ground for a Treaty, which
was voted to be with his Majesty's Honor, Safety, and Freedom; the Success
whereof Cromwell feared, and foresaw, for he charged such of the Commissioners
that he could best confide in, to be careful what Concessions they made, for he
feared the King would be too subtle for them. But Mr. Vines, the most able of
the Divines, repented of his being deluded to such unworthy Thoughts of the
King, and gave him great Reverence, and persuaded others to do so, saying, He
was sorry the King was no better understood, for he thought him the best Divine
of any Layman in England. And the Dispute with Henderson, and this of the Isle
of Wight, do sufficiently manifest his great Abilities and Virtues; which were
such, that when a Dispute arose in favor of Cromwell, Whether a King or no
King? Henry Martyn told the House, If we must have a King, we had rather have
kept him, (i. e.) King Charles, than any Gentleman in the Nation. And others
said, If he had not been born to be a King, no Man deserved it better. So that
by the Confession of his Enemies, his greatest Fault was, that he was born to
be a King, and that God had anointed him above his Fellows.

These great and good Qualities of his Majesty made his Enemies so averse from
embracing his often renewed Solicitations for Treaties of Peace, especially
when he desired a Personal Treaty, for they could not but observe, how by
strength of Reason, and Meekness, and Piety of Conversation: He made Proselites
of such as had the Happiness to converse with him, whose Prejudices and
Prepossessions he quite extinguished, and made them more real Friends than they
had been Enemies.

Dr. Gauden his Letter to the Army on the behalf of the King, urges, That the
King was renowned by some of themselves for the Greatness of his Understanding,
and many other Princely Virtues and Incomparable Endowments.

Here I might enquire, 1. How well Dr. Gauden was qualified for this Work. And,
2. At what time he may be supposed to have begun and finished it, for he must
be a Man of extraordinary Abilities, of great Experience, and diligent
Inspection into the Polity and Intrigues of the Times, and one that wrote
Memorials of them while they were fresh in Memory, one that was deeply
concerned in them, and after long and mature Deliberation, digested them: And
who but the King was sufficient for these things? Dr. Gauden probably might
have heard, as many did, that the King had begun such Meditations; and having
such an Opinion of his great Abilities, could not with any good Manners take
the Work out of his hands. But suppose the Doctor had been competently
qualified for such a Work, what time might be allowed for completing of such
an incomparable Work? Dr. Walker says, He that would imitate another's Style,
ought to be well acquainted with it, and bestow first, second and third
Thoughts. And this ought to be done with greater Deliberation where the Work is
more difficult to be imitated by reason of its Excellency and Perfection, and
the Undertaker of a Genius agreeable to the Work: And if Dr. Gauden were a
Covenanter, as Dr. Walker says, if his Style and Genius were such in 48 as it
was in 61, if we hear not of any Correspondence between him and the Royalists
until the time that the Book was ordered for the Press by the King himself, if
after that it is supposed to be written by Dr. Gauden, it was transcribed by
Mr. Gifford, and sent to the King by the E. of Hertford, in November 48, after
which some things were added by the King, it will appear that such a Book as
this which for one that was a Stranger to the Subject must be more than the
Work of one Year, especially for a Man not duly qualified for it, as the King
himself was confessed to be by Friends and Foes, for his Pen was incomparably
the most Princely and best polished in his time, in the Council none reasoned
more like a Senator, among the Lawyers as an Oracle, in the Camp like Coesar,
among the Bishops as a Constantine, in the Temple as a Saint, on the Scaffold
as an undanted Martyr, who by his Arguments was more than Conqueror over them
who overcame him by their brutish Valor and Arms; in a word, one of his
greatest Failings was the excess of his Clemency, distrust of his own Judgment,
and his easy Concessions to his subtle Adversaries, to whose Importunity he
granted so much till they had no more to ask, nor he to give, and some of them
were not ashamed to provoke him the more because they knew he had Charity
enough to forgive them all; and indeed he forgave them that could not forgive
themselves, such as God has said he will not forgive, who continue to offend
out of malicious Wickedness: Being asked of C. Hammond his Jailer, What Regret
his Spirit had against his Enemies; he answered, I can forgive them, Colonel,
with as good an Appetite, as ever I eat my Meat after Hunting, and that I Will
assure thee was no small one. In his Meditations on Death, he prays not so much
that the bitter Cup of a violent Death may pass from him, as that of God's
Wrath may pass from all those whose hands by deserting him were sprinkled, or
by acting or consenting to his Death were embrued with his Blood.

After these Acknowledgements of his Enemies, it were as needless as it is
endless to sum up the Testimonies of such of his Friends as best knew him, and
his Conversation, As, first, of his Father, who could well judge of his
Proficiency in Learning and Piety; of which I have given an account. Secondly,
His Virtuous Brother Prince Henry, who perceiving how studious and reserved his
Brother was, took the Archbishop's Cap and put it on his head, saying, If I
live Charles, I will make thee Archbishop of Canterbury.

At the Age of Thirteen, on Easter-Munday 1613, he was strictly examined in
order to his Confirmation, by two Bishops, in Presence of Dr. Hackwell his
Tutor, to the great satisfaction of them all.

He read and noted several good Authors, and contracted their Arguments into a
narrow but clear compass, such as Hooker, Bp. Andrews, and Archbishop Laud's
Arguments against Fisher the Jesuit, of which he made excellent use in his
Dispute with Henderson at Newcastle, and the Divines sent to worry him at the
Isle of Wight. But they that will not be persuaded by what has been already
said, neither will they believe though one should rise from the Dead, no nor
then neither will these Infidels be persuaded, for although as his Majesty both
prayed, and foretold God has in great Mercy granted the Royal Family and the
Church which died with the Father and rose again with the Son, a Restoration
most like to a Resurrection from the Dead, yet will they not be persuaded. But
to prevent their seducing of others, I proceed, 2ly, to show that the King did
design this Work, for although Dr. Walker pretends that Dr. Gauden would excuse
his imposing this Book on the World, by showing the Title, and saying, No Man
uses to draw his own Picture; yet we know that Coesar did, and none but Coesar
could write his own Commentaries; so did that great Emperor and Philosopher
Antoninus in that excellent Book De Seipso, which Dr. Merike Casaubon in his
Englishing that Book calls his Meditations. And how usual is it for great Men
to keep Diaries of their special Actions and Concerns, as Archbishop Laud did.

After which Examples the King may be presumed to have done the like; and that
he did design so to do has been shown by the undoubted Evidences which have
been manifested, concerning some Chapters of that Book taken at Naseby, and
restored by Major Huntington to the King at Holmeby; to which I may add, that
he began it while he was besieged in Oxford, and more yet when confined at
Holmeby, and that the whole was finished by his own hand at the Isle of Wight,
where they were seen both by Friends and Enemies even by Col. Hammond himself,
and that Captain of whom Bp. Fowler produces a sufficient Testimony that he
was convinced of his Majesty's Piety and Innocence, by reading his Meditations,
which made him lay down his Commission, and become a Convert, as Major
Huntington had done before.

In a Book called the Princely Pelican, printed 1649, the Author gives us (as
he affirms in the Title Page) satisfactory Reasons that his Sacred Majesty was
the sole Author of the Book in question, which he wrote at the instance of
several Persons of Quality, who knew him to have been a constant Attender on
his Majesty's Person, against such Reflection as had been published against
those Divine Essays, and first he tells, us that the occasion of them was, that
the Parliament had misrepresented him to his People, of which he complained in
these words, O that my Subjects knew the Integrity of my Heart toward them,
and that as they could not see his Heart, so neither would the Parliament
permit his Presence to plead his own Cause. But many odious, scurrilous, and
treacherous Libels were published against him, which yet he perused with a
modest Smile, saying, I intend to wipe off these with a Sponge of Truth; it
shall be my Task at spare hours, and many such it seems my Parliament will
admit me, to undeceive my People, and to rectify their misguided Judgments.
These were the grounds, says that Author, which induced his Majesty to this
Work: After this the King in his Garden at Theobalds communicated this Design
to some of his Gentlemen of whose Abilities he was most confident, particularly
that he would show the Reason of his Receding from the Parliament, which he
hoped would be to the full Satisfaction of his Subjects, and of which he said,
That not one Line had fallen from his Pen which he might not confirm with
Honor, were it racked by never so rigid and uncharitable Construction. Then he
told us, that another Subject of his writing should be, The most Faithful
Servant and Incomparable Statesman that any Christian Prince could rely upon;
one (said he) whom I cannot without a pious and religious Sorrow remember,
condemning myself in nothing more than suffering my Hand to thwart the
Resolution of my Heart, having so expressly delivered my Thoughts, and in so
public a manner as besides my own conscientious Fears which incessantly
awakened me, the Relation of so ungrateful an Action cannot but in succeeding
Times succeed highly to my Dishonor. To which a Gentleman of his Privy Chamber
made answer, That this could not be imputed to his Majesty, but to their
Doctrinal Assurance, who maintained the Convenience of it. To which, with a
deep Sigh, the King replied, It is not safe for Princes to pin their Faith on
Timing Prelates sleeves, their future account shall neither lessen my Guilt nor
solve my Honor. And when another Gentleman said, Sir, If the sense of that
Action have so strong an influence on your Thoughts, I hold it a more Princely
Act rather to close then to lay open such a Wound to your Fame. Oh no! in no
cases, (Ned) said his Majesty, the way to cure Wounds is not to close but to
discover them, they rankle by being closed before they be cured: As for
Princely Policy, I hold none better than sincere Piety, it is my constant
Resolve, and shall be my daily Prayer, that my Sins may be ever before me, for
there is such precious Eye Salve in a pious Tear that it allays the Distemper
of an afflicted Spirit. The next thing the King reflected on was, how contrary
the Actings of the Parliament were to their Promises in making him a most
glorious King, on which he said, It should be his most supreme Care to rely on
God's sacred Providence, which I am confident will never fail me, but full of
Deceit is the Heart of Man. In this manner says the Author, frequently and
fervently did the King deliver his Mind, and return to his Study. The Author
also gives the reason why his Majesty concluded every Section with a distinct
Psalmody, It was observed (says he) by his Majesty's Chaplains, and by us that
waited on him, that though he spoke occasionally of all parts of Scripture, yet
he took such Comfort in the Psalms of David, that he would usually repeat whole
Psalms: Mentioning that of St. Augustine, In every part of Scripture I find
something useful, but in the Book of Psalms I find a Storehouse of all things;
and if David a Man after God's own Heart, were so afflicted, that not only his
Enemies but his familiar Friends who fed at his Table, made that a Snare to
ketch him, what may I expect in these evil days? He acknowledged God's Kindness
to him in afflicting him, which he thus expressed, I have seen, says he, and
applied it to myself, and found Comfort in the Application, how when many
Children were playing the Wags in the Street, one amongst the rest was taken
hold of and corrected, and I found it to be by the Father of that Child, and
that 'twas his Affection that caused him to correct it; this is my Heavenly
Father's course with me, and I kiss his Rod, his Afflictions has gained me a
Tongue for Passion, (said the King) which made my Tongue inarticulate, and the
long course of Sufferings has so lessened my Opinion of Sufferings, that
Passion is now a Stranger to me, and I think myself happy in the cheerful
embracing of my Unhappiness, and the Distaste of the Public has made me my
own private Secretary. Then he mentions with what Comfort the King received
these Papers after Naseby Fight, saying, I see that the gracious Eye of Heaven
would not suffer me to be deprived of all Comfort: Posterity shall see by these
Papers that I know how to subdue my own Passion, and solace myself with Divine
Comforts in the height of my Affliction; though the Enemy gain the Field, a
composed Patience shall crown me with a braver Victory; I know no Triumph more
Absolute than a Self-Conquest. The Author adds, That his Majesty's Idiom was so
well known not only to his Attendants and Enemies, but to foreign Kings and
States, that none but such as were guilty of Weakness or Perverseness, could
question his Ability for such a Work. His own Testimony at his Trial that he
knew the Laws of the Kingdom as well as any Gentleman that did not make
Profession of them, is an Authentic Proof of his Ability.

Another Argument I shall urge is, the vast difference between the Kings Style
not only in his Portraicture, but in many other Writings, as may be seen first
in several of those Letters and Papers which were taken at Naseby, and set
forth by the Parliament as the King's, of which tho they intended to make an
ill use, yet as his Majesty observes on that Subject, His Enemies might be
convinced by them he could both mind and act his own and his Kingdom's Affairs,
so as becomes a Prince, which my Enemies are loath should be believed of me, as
if I were wholly confined to the Dictates and Directions of others whom they
brand with the name of Evil Counselors. He that believes the Disputations
that past between his Majesty and Henderson at Newcastle, and these between him
and the Commissioners in the Isle of Wight, which his Enemies knew to be his,
being personally and viva voce managed, and were admired by his Opponents, must
own the King's Ability, and see the same strength and nerves in the Chapter of
Church Government, though in the one he urges them as a Disputant, in the
other as an Orator, but like himself in all: Both Disputes are to be seen among
his other Works. I shall choose to commend such Works as are best known to be
his Majesty's, and recommend those which he wrote during his strict Confinement
in Carisbrook after the Vote of Non-addresses, which may be seen p. 279. of his
Works, to 295, which will show a great Identity both in his way of Arguing, and
in the Style.

After this to recompense my Reader's pains, (if at least he account it so) I
shall compare Dr. Gauden's Style with the King's; I choose a Book which the
Doctor wrote concerning the Covenant, to see whether he did imitate his Majesty
in writing on that Subject, because Dr. Walker affirms that Chapter was written
by Dr. Gauden, defend himself against some that said he wrote Nonsense, whom he
answers in these words, p. 19. of his Anti-Baal, He tells his Reader how the
City of London were affected with Dr. Gauden's Pious Nonsense and Honest
Blasphemy, when preaching at St. Paul's before the Lord Mayor and General
Monk, he did so Anatomize those cruel Medicasters and crafty Empiricks of the
Times, the slight Healers who made their Profit and Pleasure out of the
Diseases, Pain, and Miseries of their Country; How did the Rumpers then rage
and tremble at the Truth and Courage of Dr. Gauden's Nonsense? How were the
Regicides astonished at the Sword of his Mouth, that Word of God? How were the
Sacrilegious Merchants of Church Lands appaled before that Blasphemy, which
being like Thunder and Lightning by Dr. Gauden's Tongue and Pen quite blasted,
all the Glory of their Purchases, of which so seasonable Sermons and Writings,
especially that of the Tears of the Church of England, the Libeller expresses
a deep sense, for from that time the bloody Babel fell, and could rise no more
from that day: Many wicked Men began to look what Rocks and Mountains might
cover them; and by this time they may have a quicker sense of Dr. Gauden's
Nonsense, notwithstanding they have thick Skins, brawny Hearts, and cauterized
Consciences.

You shall seldom find the Genius of two Authors more differing than these of
the King and the Doctor; his Majesty's Discourses were exceeding rational and
curt, but very convincing, and the Meekness of his Expressions insinuated as
Oil to mollify the hardest Temper: By your Favor Sir, was his usual
Condescension in his Disputes; yea, even at his Trial to Bradshaw: In every
Paragraph of his there is as (...) and a (...), a great height of Reason and
Contemplation to entertain the learned, and a great Plainness and Facility of
Sense and Expression; so that as some say of the Scripture, The Elephant may
swim, and the Lamb wade through. Dr. Walker talked of peculiar Expressions used
by Dr. Gauden in his private Devotion, but names not one. I beg the Reader's
Patience therefore to repeat a few of them in the Book lately quoted, p. 10. he
says, His Adversary struts in his Rhodomontade Titles of Defiance, in his
prodigious Railings, in his sarcastical Ironies, in his sophistical Sophisms,
in his dull Argumentations, in his specious Pretenses of Zeal, and Clamors for
Reformation. And p. 13. speaking of his Analisis of the Covenant, he talks of
the solid weight and Divine Truth of that free and rational Analisis void of
Obscurity, Popularity, Partiality, Sophistry, or Flattery. P. 16. he tells his
Adversaries of their Cacotomy, their Idolized Sacrilegious Sectors and Pasquil
Oratory, the Atrocity of their Facts and Impudicities, a By-blow of Devotion,
the Gorgon's Head, and Devil of Mascow, the Spirit of Asmodeus, Leopardike
Presbyters, Talismanik Charms; he calls them Medicasters and crafty Empyricks,
compares his two Opponents to Sancho Pancho and Don Quixot, with their Pickvant
Darts and Lippient Eyes, Herds of good Words, and Flooks of Figures. It is a
wonder, as others have observed, that if Dr. Gauden had penned that Book, that
no such Expressions are found in it, no not one, when his Writings are stuffed
with Bombast, and Greek Words, and Latin Sentences, yea, with some of his
Peculiarities Dr. W. calls them, such as his Analeptist, Cacotomy, Impostarage,
Borborites, Grassant, Traculent, Brontes, Fanto, Farrago, Paradoe, Sempervive,
Corbonist, Ecobolian, Antisectical, Symoniack, Privado, Offa and Buccoone,
Cordolium, Ephialta, Parrhesy, Caecinnations, Diaboletto's; and many such other
Expressions which may deserve an Explanation when Blunt's or Chamberlain's
Dictionary of hard Words are next printed. How one small Book should abound
with such Words and Phrases, and not one of them in the King's Book,
considering how fond the Doctor seems to be of them, is a probable Argument
that the Doctor had no hand in that Book. Besides it is a wonder to think, how
Dr. Gauden at or before 48 should be Master of so grave, significant and polite
Style, and in the Year 61, should when he was a Bishop, use such an Exotic,
Verbose and almost Barbarous Style; this is another Argument to convince that
not Dr. Gauden but the King was the Author of that Book.

If I should trace all the Footsteps and Characters of the King's Image and
Superscription, I must transcribe the whole, which is an express Image of his
Royal Soul, which as the Philosophers say of the Souls informing the Body is,
Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part; His humble Confessions, his solemn
Appeals to God, his Vows and Resolutions to persevere in suffering any
Affliction rather than to break the Peace of his Conscience, or be guilty of
deserting the Church, which he showed to be dearer than his Life. He that will
find a Parallel to the Life and Writings of our Royal Martyr, must ascend to
the Apostolical and Primitive Times, for among all our Modern Examples if there
may be any one found that may be compared with him in any one Grace or Virtue,
yet there is none that comes near him for all those Graces which shined in him,
as illustriously as the Sun does above the other Luminaries: Where is there
such an instance of Condescension and Charity to Enemies, of greater Love and
Constancy to his Friends, of Patience and Submission in Affliction, of Humility
and Devotion to God, of the Contempt of Death in its most terrible Approaches,
and dreadful Aspect? That which would have astonished and stupefied the Spirits
of other Men, comforted and elevated his Passage from a Crown of Thorns to a
Crown of Glory.

The next Argument to prove that the King was the Author of this Book, is the
Testimony of those several Persons which were concerned in the Printing and
Publishing of his Majesty's Book; and first I have this Testimony from Mr. John
Norman, who was well acquainted with Mr. Royston, when the Book was first
published, who had it from Mr. Royson's own mouth, viz. That there was
Information given that such a Book was to be printed, and great Endeavors were
used to prevent it, but that he had removed a Press at some distance from the
City to secure the Impression; which he did, and speedily finished it, not
without some Hazard, there being diligent Search made in all the known Printers
Houses for it: but in one night he caused several Hawkers to come to a certain
place where the Books were delivered them, and they sold above two thousand
Copies for the price of 15 s. each: That the Care and Chargewhich he used for
concealing the Impression, cost him some hundreds of Pounds, which
notwithstanding he was taken up on Suspicion, and made a Prisoner, till after
some time he had his Liberty on giving 500 l. Bail. Now what caused this great
Care and Expense in Mr. Royston, but the Letter which he had formerly received
from the King to prepare a Press for some Papers which should be sent him? What
caused so great Endeavors to suppress them, but because they were truly
informed that the King had of a long time been writing somewhat in Vindication
of himself, and they had a hint that it was then in the Press. Mr. Norman is an
aged Person well known in the City of Exon, and County of Devon.

It will be too tedious to recite all the Testimonies of those several Persons
who had a hand in Methodizing the loose Papers, in Transcribing, and Publishing
them in Print, as Sir John Brattle and his Father, Mr. Odert, Mr. Gifford, the
Transcribers, Mr. Royston, Mr. Simmonds, and others concerned in the Printing,
whose Testimonies have been produced, and are above all Exception: And yet his
Majesty's own Testimony, though he bore Witness of himself, is most material,
for in that Letter to the Prince from the Isle of Wight, which I presume none
could be so daring to write in his Majesty's Name, and publish it while he was
living, and might have survived much longer, and call the Queen his Wife, and
the Prince his Son, and prescribe Rules to him, he thus begins, Son if those
Papers, with some others wherein I have set down the private Reflections of my
Conscience, and my most Impartial Thoughts touching the chief Passages which
have been most remarkable or disputed in my late Troubles, come to your hands,
to whom they are chiefly designed, they may be so far useful to you as to state
your Judgment aright, as to what is past, whereof a pious is the best use that
can be made: And they may also give you some Directions how to remedy the
present Distempers, and prevent (if GOD will) the like for the time to come. It
is some kind of lessening and deceiving the Injury of my long Restraint, when I
find my Laeisure and Solitude have produced something worthy of myself, and
useful to you, that neither you nor any other may hereafter measure my Cause by
the Success, nor my Judgment of Things by my Misfortune, etc. I cannot think
that any but the King could be the Author of this Letter, 1st, Because it is
affirmed by many that it was delivered to Bishop Juxton to be conveyed to the
Prince. 2ly, Because as K. James, his Father, had left large Instructions to
his Son, with a Charge to observe them, which he called (...), so in Imitation
of him, King Charles would not leave the World without giving his Son whom he
left in a Sea of Troubles, without some Directions, which he had learned by
long Experience, how to steer his Course: And if this Letter be the King's, we
have an Assurance that the rest of his Meditations were so too, to which the
King refers the Prince for further Direction. One instance I cannot omit,
because I think that this being joined with that of the Letter to the Prince,
may, if well considered, put an end to the Controversy, it is the Answer which
the King made to the Commissioners in the Isle of Wight, when they pressed him to
yield to their Desires for the Abrogating of Episcopacy in England. To which
Dr. Gauden says the King answered, That he had granted all he could to save his
Life, which might consist with the saving of his Soul. And being urged again,
That his Majesty had abolished Episcopacy in Scotland. He answered, That it is
no Plea to sin again because he had once sinned in this kind, but rather to
repent and do so no more. This Answer of the King's Dr. Gauden might have known
in the Year 1661, when he quoted it in Anti-Baal, p. 134. but he could not know
it so early as to place it in the middle of the (...), if he had written that
Book, the Chapter being the 17th of that Book, was in all probability written
by the King some Years before, which was not known to the Bishop before that
Book was printed: But the King had opportunity after the Treaty to correct,
alter, and add what he thought fit, till his close Imprisonment; so that he had
either written the Answer which we have in that Chapter before, (which the
Doctor had not seen so long ago as to write it in that place) or inserted it
after the Treaty was over; the King's Answer is this: If any shall impute my
yielding to them ( the Scots) as my Failing and Sin, I can easily acknowledge
it; but that is no Argument to do so again, or much worse, being now more
convinced in that Point; nor indeed has my yielding to them been so Happy and
Successful as to encourage me to grant the like to others.

Nor is it so likely that the Bishop would accuse the King of Sin, (though he
does it himself,) which might have put a better Argument into his Enemies
mouths than any the had invented against him, (viz.) His Obstinacy to grant
that to the English which he had granted to the Scots.

More Instances may be collected from almost every Chapter by the Judicious, to
convince him that not Dr. Gauden but the King was the Author of that Book: I
suppose therefore that the King might insert that Answer after he had given it
to the Commissioners at the Treaty, for evident it is, that the Title was
altered after the Book was in the Press by the King's order, on Dr. Taylor's
Letter, which is another good Argument. That Dr. Gauden's showing the Title
((...)) to evade the Fault of imposing a Book of his own on the Nation in the
King's Name, was a mere Fiction of Dr. Walker's; for the Book which was sent to
the Press had another Title, viz. Suspiria Regalia: or, The Royal Defense; and
was not altered until the Book was begun to be printed.

I am loath to defile my hands again by meddling with Milton, but I must to stop
the foul Mouths of some People whom he has taught to object, that his Majesty
made use of a Prayer made by a Heathen to a false God or Goddess in time of
Captivity. To which I answer, 1st, By denying what Milton says, That the King
had unhallowed and unchristned Christianism, by borrowing to a Christian use
Prayers offered to a Heathen God. To which Dr. Earle's Answer to Milton says,
Did St. Paul by applying to a Christian use the Words of a Heathen Philosopher
and Poet, unhallow the Scripture? Does not Milton confess that Book of Sir
Philip Sidney's is full of Wit and Worth? And why might not a Christian Prince
collect what is good out of a worthy Book of such a Religious Author, for Sir
Philip Sidney was known to be a Man of great Piety and Wisdom, as well as of
Courage and Wit: I have heard that the King for his Recreation did divert
himself by reading that Book, the best of its kind then extant; and he did it
with great Observation and good Improvement. Now which is more commendable, the
King who made his very Recreations subservient to his Devotion, or those
Adversaries of his that profaned the Scriptures and their Prayers with
preaching up Rebellion, Cursing the King, and venting their Malice and bitter
Passions against their Brethren? The King had great Examples for what he did,
no less than of our Savior, who in the Institution of both Sacraments, and in
composing the Form of Prayer for his Disciples, made use both of the Matter and
Words which were used by the Jews, adapting them to his Sacred Ordinances, that
are to continue till the World's end: And when Celsus objected to St. Origin,
That he could parallel most of our Savior's Precepts with the Saying of some
of his Heathens; Origin thought it a great Recommendation of the Evangelical
Precepts, that they so well accorded with the Moral and Natural Truths which
the Reason of Mankind did approve of. Were the Jews ever blamed for Adorning
the Temple with the Riches and Spoil of Egypt? Did not Solomon borrow
Materials and Architecks from an Idolatrous King, to build the Temple of the
True God? God permitted his own People to do what the King (if he did it) has
done: They might marry a Moabitish Woman that was a Captive, after her
Purification by paring her Nails and shaving her Hair, and so she became a
Daughter of Sion. It is easy to collect from such Heathen as Seneca, M.
Antonius Epictetus, M. Tyrias, etc. such Petitions to their Unknown Gods, as
might shame the hasty Harangues of many who profess a more perfect Knowledge
than others of the True God.

Dr. Patrick in his Parable of the Pilgrim, written after the manner of a
Romance, has said more to insinuate Piety and Devotion to the Hearts of his
Readers, than can be found in all the Sermons writ by Cromwell's and the
Army-Chaplains, whose Preaching and Prayers were of Cursing and Lies, as David
expresses it.

The PRAYER objected is in these Words: O Powerful and Eternal GOD, to whom
nothing is so great that it may resist, or so small that it is contemned, look
upon my Misery with Thine Eye of Mercy, and let Thy infinite Power vouchsafe to
limit out some Proportion of Deliverance unto me, as to Thee shall seem most
convenient: Let not Injury, O Lord, triumph over me; Let my Faults by Thy Hand
be corrected, and make not my unjust Enemies the Ministers of Thy Justice; but
yet, my GOD, if in Thy Wisdom this be the aptest Chastisement for my
Unexcusable Trangressions, if this ungrateful Bondage be fittest for my
over-high Desires; if the Pride of my (not enough humble) Heart be thus to be
broken: O Lord, I yield unto thy Will, and cheerfully embrace what Sorrow thou will have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of thee, (let my craving, O
Lord, be accepted of, since it even proceeds from thee,) That by thy Goodness,
which is thyself, thou will suffer some Beam of thy Majesty so to shine in my
Mind, that I who acknowledge it my noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still
in my greatest Afflictions, depend considerably on thee, let Calamity be the
Exercise but not the Overthrow of my Virtue: O let not their prevailing Power
be to my Destruction; and if it be thy Will that they more and more weaken me
with Punishment, yet, O Lord, never let their Wickedness have such a hand but
that I may still carry a pure Mind and steadfast Resolution ever to serve thee
without Fear or Presumption, yet with that humble Confidence which may please
thee, so that at the last I may come to thy Eternal Kingdom, through the Merits
of thy Son, our alone Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.



Now who could find such a Jewel, though lying in a Dunghill, and not think it
worthy to be taken up and set in Gold? Yet be it known, that this Prayer was
not the Conception of a Heathen to a Pagan God, but of a serious and eminent
Christian to direct others how to Address themselves to the True GOD in time of
Extremity; for as it was the Business even of Heathen Poets and Satyrists to
expose Vice and commend Virtue in their Satyrs and Interludes; so and much more
was it intended by that noble Person throughout his Arcadia. It Is an excellent
Directory for Prayer, which Persius, none of the best Poets, has given, Demus
superis jus fasque animi sanctosque recesus,
Meant is and incoctum generoso pectore honestum,
Haec codo ut admoveam templis and far lisabo.
Now who can wonder that the King is blamed for using this Prayer by them that
reject our Lord's Prayer. This yet I observe for the Honor of his Majesty,
that what his Enemies would account a Virtue in others, they impute as a Fault
to him, his most innocent Actions are charged with transcendent Guilt, their
transcendent Guilt represented as pious Actions, for thus that Miscreant
discants on the finding this Prayer printed among the King's Papers, Who would
have imagined so little Rear in him of the True Allseeing Deity, so little
Reverence of the Holy Ghost, whose Office it is to dictate and present our
Christian Prayers, so little Care of Truth in his last Words, or Honor to
himself or to his Friends, or Sense of his Afflictions, or of that sad Hour
which was upon him, as immediately before his Death to pop into the hand of
that grave Bishop who attended him, as a special Relic of his Family
Exercise, a Prayer stolen out, etc.

The ground of this Devilish Invective he makes that which he calls the stolen
Prayer; But what one Sentence or Word in all that Prayer may not become a
Christian in his deepest Affliction? Do all that pray by set Forms despise the
Office of the Holy Ghost? What shall become then of all those Primitive
Christians, and the Reformed Churches that pray by Forms? And how can be fix
that Hellish Accusation of his Majesty on a false Conceit, that this was the
Prayer used by him in his last Words? This is a Suggestion of his own Malice
and Delusion.

Lastly, This Prayer was not heard of until a considerable time after the
King's Death: I have seen his Majesty's Book printed and reprinted, one of
which I can produce where there is no Footstep of this Prayer, it might perhaps
be found among some other loose Papers of his Majesty, which the Printer for
his Benefit, finding how great Esteem the People had of his Majesty's
Devotions, clapped in with his Book, as we are wont to bind up the Apocripha with
the Canonical Scriptures. This therefore is the Malice of a Rebel, and the
Scoff of an Atheist, of one that exceeds the Grand Regicide Bradshaw, who when
Mr. Royston told him on his Oath, That he knew no other but that it was the
King's Book; Asked him, How he could believe that so ill a Man could make so
good a Book? And how, say I, could so good a Book be made by an ill Man? The
whole Book was but a Transcript of his Life, which answer each other as Face to
Face; as Philo in the Life of Moses, such as his Words were such were his
Deeds; as in a Musical Instrument all was Harmonious and Uniform, his Heart and
Mind was seen in his Actions, and his Actions expressed in lively, charming,
pious, and powerful Words.

Thus lived this Glorious King, and thus he died as another Moses, though of a
stammering Tongue, yet Mighty in Words and Deeds; his whole Life, as Philo
says, was a Martyrdom to God, being worried by the Contradiction of a
Rebellious People, who chose Idols to go before them, a Chorah, Dathan, and
Abiram, rather than Moses and Aaron; he was the meekest Man on the Earth, when
a rude Soldier spit in his Face, he wiped it off with a pious Thought, My
Savior (says he) endured this and more for my sake. He was not appaled when
he saw the Red Sea before him, and Armies of Egyptian Soldiers on every side,
he did not as Moses, exceedingly quake and fear, being more concerned for his
Murderers than for himself: And as Philo says of Moses, Non calligavit oculus
nec mutatus est splendour gratiae ejus; As Majestic on the Scaffold as on the
Throne; which he ascended as more than Conqueror from an Egypt to Canaan,
whereof he had a full Prospect from his Mount Pisgah; there he Blessed the
Tribes of Israel, and Prophesied of their future Prosperity, as in Deuteronomy. 33.
There God promised to go up with him and give him Rest, Exodus 33.14. There he
could converse with God as a Man with his Friend, face to face: And having
prayed to see the Glory of God, it was wonderfully displayed before him, as in
Exodus 34.6, 7. in Grace and Mercy to him, and in Terror to his Enemies, that
were guilty of his Death. And so he died as the Rabbis say, With a Kiss of
GOD's Mouth.

But the Malice of his Enemies is not yet dead, for the Devil and his Angels
are still disputing with Michael and his Angels about his Book, as they did
about the Body of Moses, (i. e.) as some interpret it the Book of his Law and
Instructions for the Service of God; the reason is the same as is given why the
Apostate Julian removed the Bones of Babylas the Martyr, because as long as the
Relics of the Martyr were so nigh, the Devil's Oracles could not assist him;
nor will the Consults of Papists, Republicans, or Regicides have any Operation
upon us, as long as the Reliquiae Carolina have their due Respect and Influence
upon us.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books written by the Reverend Mr. Long. one of the Prebends of
St. Peter's Exon.
A Resolution of certain Queries concerning Submission to the Present
Government. The QUERIES.
I. Concerning the Original of Government. II. What is the Constitution of the
Government of England? III. What Obligation lies on the King by the Coronation
Oath? IV. What Obligation lies on the Subject by the Oaths of Supremacy? etc.
V. Whether if the King Violate his Oath, and actually Destroys the Ends of it,
the Subjects are freed from their Obligation to him? VI. Whether the King has
Renounced or Deserted the Government? VII. Whether on such Desertion, the
People, to preserve themselves from Confusion, may admit another, and what
Method is to be used in such Admission? VIII. Whether the Settlement now made,
is a Lawful Est ablishment and such at with a good Conscience may be Submitted
to?
Restections upon a late Book, entitled, The Case of Allegiance conder'd;
wherein is shown, that the Church of England's Doctrine of Non-Resistance and
Passive Obedience, is not inconsistent with Taking the New Oaths to their
present Majesty's. The Historian Unmasked: or, some Reflections on the late
History of Passive Obedience; wherein the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance is truly stated and asserted. The Case of Persecution, charged
on the Church of England, considered and discharged, in order to Her
Justification, and a desired Union of Protestant Dissenters. An Answer to a
Socinian Treatise, called, The Naked Gospel, which was decreed by the
University of Oxford, in Convocation, Aug. 19th, Anno Dom. 1690. to be
publicly Burnt, as containing diverse Heretical Propositions: With a
Postscript, in Answer to what is added by Dr. Bury, in the Second Edition.

