ADVERTISEMENT OF Two Books lately Printed for Thomas Bennet.
TWelve Sermons Preached upon several Occasions, by R. South, D. D. Never
before Printed. The Second Volume.

The Lives of all the Princes of Orange, from William the Great, Founder of the
Commonwealth of the United Provinces. Written in French by the Baron Maurier,
in 1682: whose Father was Twenty Years Ambassador ar the Hague. And Published
at Paris by Order of the French King. To which is added the Life of His Present
Majesty, King William the Third. By Mr. Thomas Brown. Together with each
Prince's Head before his Life. Done from Original Draughts, by Mr. Robert White.

THE INSPIRATION OF THE New Testament Asserted and Explained. IN ANSWER TO SOME
MODERN WRITERS.

By C. G. LAMOTHE, DIVINE.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1694.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE State and Importance of the Question, and Division of the Book.
CHAP. II. The first Proof of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New
Testament, drawn from the mann^r after which the Ancients speak of it. CHAP.
III. The second Proof, drawn from hence, that the Ancients have equaled the
Writings of the Apostles to the Oracles of the Old Testament. CHAP. IV. The
third Proof drawn from the Distinction which the Ancients made between the
Canonical and Apocryphal Books. CHAP. V. The Fourth Proof drawn from the Honor
which the Ancients paid to the Sacred Books of the New Testament. CHAP. VI. The
Fifth Proof drawn from hence, that the Ancients positively asserted the Books
of the New Testament to be inspired. CHAP. VII. Wherein the Objections that may
be brought against the Testimony of Antiquity are answered. CHAP. VIII. Wherein
we begin to prove by the Books of the New Testament, that they are inspired,
and particularly by the Intention which God had in giving them to the World.
CHAP. IX. Wherein the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament is
demonstrated by the manner of their Composition. CHAP. X. Wherein the
Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament is made out from the Nature of
the Covenant of which they are the Writings. CHAP. XI. Wherein the Inspiration
of the Books of the New Testament is made out by the Prerogatives of the
Apostles. CHAP. XII. Wherein the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament
is made out by the Promise which Christ Jesus mad^ of his Spirit to the Authors
of it. CHAP. XIII. Wherein the Inspiration of the New Testament is made out by
the fulfilling of the Promise of Jesus Christ. CHAP. XIV. Wherein are produced
several Passages of Scripture, which show that the Sacred Writers of the New
Testament have declared, that they were Inspired in their Writings. CHAP. XV.
Wherein is drawn from the Gift of Discerning of Spirits granted to the
Primitive Christians, a Proof very much in Favor of the Sacred Books which the
Apostles have left us.
The Second Part.
CHAP. I. Wherein is shown, that it is not the Common Belief that the Sacred
Books of the New Testament were dictated word for word by the immediate
Suggestion of the Holy Ghost. CHAP. II. Wherein is explained the Nature of the
Inspiration of the New Testament, in respect of Revelatious. CHAP. III. Wherein
is Explained the Nature of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New
Testament, in reference to things which the Apostles had heard and seen. CHAP.
IV. Wherein is Explained the Nature of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of
the New Testament, in reference to the Progress which the Apostles might be
able to make, in reasoning upon the Truths suggested by the Holy Ghost, and
upon those which they had learned by the way of Sense. CHAP. V. Wherein are set
down Four Consequences, that arise from the Manner of Explaining the Manner of
the Inspiration of the New Testament. CHAP. VI. Wherein is Considered the
Nature of the Infallibility which springs from the Infallibility of the Holy
Ghost; and in particular, touching the Manner how the Apostles obeyed it. CHAP.
VII. Wherein is considered the Nature of the Infallibility which arises from
the Direction of the Holy Ghost, with reference to the Things wherein the
Apostles were directed, and whether they were in particular deceived in their
Opinion of the near Approach of the End of the World. CHAP. VIII. Wherein is
Examined What Influence the Direction of the Holy Ghost had over those Things
that were only Concomitants of the Doctrine. CHAP. IX. Wherein it appears what
ought to be the Extent of the signification of the words which the Sacred
Writers have made use of in the Writings of the New Testament. CHAP. X. Wherein
some Objections are answered, which have no Relation to the Apostelick
Writings. CHAP. XI. Wherein some Objections are Answered, which are directly
made against the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament.
THE PREFACE.
THEY who have a Reverence for the Holy Scripture will never be offended to see
the number of the Champions of it increase. It Is known that in the Primitive
Ages, when Religion was continually attacqu'd, the Church was never disgusted
at the Apologies which the Christians so frequently set forth. All those that
knew how to write, made it a part of their Duty to uphold Christianity. And
there is no question but that this was one of the most Potent means that
Providence made use of, to advance the Triumphs of the Religion of Jesus
Christ. We are in an Age wherein the Scripture is dishonored, sometimes after
one manner, sometimes after another: So that I cannot believe when Libertinism
exerts it self so boldly, that Christians will grow weary of seeing the Number
of Apologists increase, who take upon them to defend that Scripture which made
them Christians.

We dare not presume to say, that all who have shaken the Authority of
Scripture were professed Libertines, in regard that some Persons of worth have
upheld Propositions, which being carried a little too far, do great mischief to
that Book, for which in other respects they declare that they have an esteem
even to Veneration. It Is not possible to dive into the secret intentions of
Authors, so as to know whether it be out of Impudence, or through a hankering
after Libertinism, that they suffer these bold and dangerous strokes to escape
their Pens. The Libertine counterfeits himself sometimes to be Orthodox, and a
lover of Truth; and he proposes his doubts with a seeming Ingenuity, and
vigorously asserts the Truth for fear of being suspected. Sometimes also a
faithful disciple of the Truth expresses himself in a feeble and trembling
manner; and by his doubts and scruples gives an advantage to his Enemies. God
alone knows the bottom of the Heart, and it is our Duty to leave it to him to
decide the intentions of Authors; and to endeavor to defend the Truth against
all manner of Onsets, on what side soever they are made.

There appeared within these few Years a certain Treatise which attacqu'd the
inspiration of the Sacred Scripture. I shall not go about to inform my self of
the real Design which the Author had in composing a Work so injurious to
Scripture; but I thought it necessary to prevent the evil Consequences of such
a dangerous Book. Monsieur Witsius of Holland, and Mr. Lowth, a Divine of
Oxford, Father Simon, and Father Le Vassour have set forth Answers to it which
I have read. But in regard it was their only Design to trace their Adversary
step by step, and not to handle this matter thoroughly; there is therefore still
room left for a new management of it. The English Divine indeed in my Opinion
has gone somewhat farther than the rest; but I shall take the liberty to say,
that he might have built the Inspiration of the Holy Writings upon better
foundations: that he has not so sufficiently explained the nature of it as he
might have done, and that he has ventured to advance some things, which in my
judgment, need a great deal of softning. I hope he will be pleased to pardon me
the Expression, without which I could not be able to justify my Design of
writing after him. In his Preface he acknowledges that the matter is nice and
new; and after he has besought the Readers not to censure him, as if he
intended to betray the cause which he defends, he invites them to uphold it
themselves. According to this Invitation, I shall make some steps in order to
it. If my Example should excite some other more Learned Pen to write upon the
same Subject, the Public will be obliged to me for it. I shall be well
satisfied with my weak endeavors, provided they may give occasion to the
publishing any Treatise, that shall maintain the Inspiration of the Holy
Writings, as effectually as the truth of them has been asserted.

It will be found that I have tied my self to consider only the Writings of the
New Testament: there was no meddling with the Books of the Old Testament,
without cutting out too much work for my self; in a time when the Public
receives not well any but small Treatises, especially in matter of Divinity.
Therefore, that I might accommodate my self to the Palate of the Age, I was
enforced to shorten my Subject. After I had taken this Resolution, it was no
difficult thing for me to choose which of the two Parts of Scripture it behooved
me to handle: So that I determind in favor of the New Testament; as being that
Part upon which there has least been said. We have several Books in defense of
the Inspiration of the Prophets and their Writings, because they have been so
often attacqu'd. But the Writers of the New Testament having peaceably enjoyed
the Honor paid them by the uninterrupted belief of their Inspiration, Authors
have not made it so much their Business to examine the nature of it; or if any
Libertine has attempted to contest it with them, they have altogether relied
upon the belief which the Church has had of it from time to time.

Besides this I may say, that by maintaining the New Testament I defend the
Old: The Apostles have given such honorable Testimonials of the Writings of
the Prophets, that no Man can better maintain their honor than by
demonstrating that Men inspired by the Holy Ghost, have given Testimony to them.

But the chief Reason which made me choose to defend the Writings of the New
Testament is this; because it is properly the Book that makes us Christians. It
is our Duty indeed to read the Writings of the Prophets: there are to be seen
those Oracles, the Accomplishment of which is of glorious Consequence to the
Gospel; there we are informed of a great number of Actions, wherein God appears
magnificent in his Works; and thence may be drawn Instructions effectual for
the Sanctification of the Heart: all these things were written for our
Instruction: but still a Christian must chiefly repair to the Writings to the
New Covenant: there it is, that he ought to be most intent and steadfast: from
thence it is, that he is chiefly obliged to receive his Faith and his
Instructions, in order to put himself into a state of Salvation. The New
Testament is that Book which God delivered as a Legacy to Mankind, in these
later times. It Is our Duty to cherish, as much as in us lies, the Respect which
is due to that Sacred Book; and to prevent it from being reckoned in the
Catalogue of Common Writings; for fear the Religion which it teaches us, should
be looked upon as a Piece of Human Invention?

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES Inspired, etc.
CHAP. I.
The State and Importance of the Question, and Division of the Work.

IT being my design to treat of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New
Testament, I cannot forbear exactly to set down the state of the Question.
Which being done, it will be found that all my Arguments aim at the same Mark;
and that I have made it my business not to amuse my Reader with any
unprofitable Digression.

In the first place then, the Reader is to be admonished that the Dispute is
not here, which are Canonical Books, and which Apocryphal. We suppose that
those with whom we Contend, agree that there is no contradiction to be made
against the Canonical Authority of the New Testament, according as we enjoy it
at this day; but that those Sacred Books were actually written or dictated by
the Authors, whose Names are affixed to 'em. It Is agreed that these Holy Men
both saw and heard the matters of Fact which they relate, and which they have
written with extraordinary Fidelity and Sincerity. Which being granted, the
Work begun is already in so great a forwardness, that there is no need at all
of entering into the discussion of several Difficulties which concern the
Question relating to the Apocryphal Books. By this means also we are freed from
the trouble of proving that the Sacred Books were written by Men who were
Witnesses of all the matters of Fact which are contained in the History of
Jesus Christ, or who themselves wrought great Miracles, by which it appeared
that their Mission was Celestial. In a word, we are agreed upon the truth of
these Books; so that nothing remains farther to be known, but whither they are
inspired. The Verity and the Inspiration make two different Questions, of which
the first is decided: the Sacred Books of the New Testament are steadfastly and
undeniably true; at least so far as concerns Essential Things. The main dispute
is, whether they are inspired or no? So that there are some who let 'em alone
with the Honor of being true, but ravish from them that of Inspiration. It Is
against these Innovators that I undertake the defense of the New Testament, of
which I maintained alike, and equally assert both the Inspiration and the
Truth, even to the meanest Circumstances.

I could wish with all my heart, that I might be able to handle this Question
without choosing any certain Adversary. My aim was to examine this important
Matter, without having any particular Author in view. But I found that the
Error which I oppose, is so little known, that if they did not see it supported
by some one or other, Men would believe I broached some Chimera of my own, for
the exercise of my Fancy. Besides, that the State of a Question is never better
understood, then when it is taken out of some Book, wherein it has been already
discussed.

First of all, M. N. Author of a Treatise published in Holland, presented
himself to my thoughts. I know no body that has more formally assailed the
Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament. Spinosa led the way of
the same Undertaking; but there was little heed given to that Author, because
all Men knew he had no Religion; and that moreover the obscurity and negligence
that appear in all his Works, have rendered them less formidable; for that such
Adversaries are not much to be feared. But M. N. has given a more subtle and
more dangerous Air to Spinosa's Notions and has digested them into a System, of
which I shall quote a brief Abstract, as near as I can, P. 281. Sentiments of
some Divines, etc.
in his own words I begin, says he, with the New Testament, which is the
principal foundation of our Faith.

1. Jesus Christ was absolutely infallible; it behooves us blindly to believe
whatever he tells us, because he said it; and for that God gave us his
Testimony, that he said nothing but the Truth. 2. In regard we have no Writings
that ever Jesus Christ himself wrote, we ought to believe what his Apostles
have delivered to us concerning his Life and Doctrine, because God has given us
his Testimonial of of them by means of the Miracles which he wrought in their
Favor, and for that they have sealed the Truth with their own Blood. It might
be that in some Circumstance of little Importance, they might relate some
things not altogether so exactly as they past; but there is no reason that they
should agree precisely in every thing to the Minutest Tittle. 3. It behooves us
to distinguish two Things in the Epistles of the Disciples of Jesus Christ:
282. Ibid.
there are the same Doctrines there, which we find in the Evangelists; and the
Apostles frequently assure us that they learnt them from Jesus Christ. There
are others which the Apostles utter of their own Heads, or which they infer
from the Old Testament by diverse Consequences. We must believe the first for
the same reason, that we ought to admit the Gospels; that is to say, because of
the Authority of Christ, who preached them to the Jews. We must admit the
Second, because they contain nothing but what is most conformable to the
Doctrines of Jesus Christ, or which is not founded upon good sense. We must
also observe, that in regard they had not extraordinary Inspiration to write
their Epistles, they intermix several things that relate to their own Designs,
and their particular Affairs, wherein it behooves us to be careful how we search
for Mysteries. Such are the Salutations at the end of the Epistles; St. Paul 's
Orders to Timothy to take Mark along with him in his return to him: the Advice
which he gave him to drink Wine sparingly for his Stomach's sake, and by reason
of his frequent Distempers. 4. There are several Prophecies scattered up and
down in those Epistles, and the Apocalypse is absolutely Prophetical. It behooves
us to give Credit to these Revelations, because it was God who sent them
immediately to his Apostles. It is also easy to distinguish some other Things,
which the Apostles never propounded but only as Conjectures.
After M. N has Epitomized his System, he believes he has levelled the way to
Heaven, P. 284.
and insults over our Divines, in saying, That it seems evident, that in regard
the new Opinions introduced into Religion since the death of the Apostles, are
not to be maintained; instead of being advantageous to the Christian Religion,
they are extremely prejudicial to it. There is that Inspiration attributed to
the Apostles, which they never pretended to have, and of which there is not any
footstep to be seen in their Writings.

This is only an applauding of himself: but I hope, the Author will meet with
but few Men that judge as he does, of his new Theology. For so far is it from
being advantageous to Christianity, that it is evident, and very evident too,
that it sets it upon the brink of a Precipice. We understand from a Friend of
M. N's, that this pretended Discovery has been looked upon by several, as a
Defense of the Sentiments, etc. P. 218.
Step that leads directly to Deism; and the Author likewise is accused of
favoring that abominable Opinion.

It Is not for me to judge of Monsieur N's Intention; I know not whether he
inclines toward Deism or no; besides that I am willing to believe he does not;
for why should I attribute to an Author a Sentiment which he seems to detest;
especially when a man is brought in question who conceals himself, and who is
not exactly known but only by venting his Opinions among us. I keep close to
his Writing. That gives me sufficient reason to say, that if he be not a Deist,
he has done the Deists a very great kindness, as also all those Libertines that
could wish there were no Christian Religion at all. They find very near what
they look for in the New System, which delivers them out of several streights,
and which reduces Christianity to nothing, or within a little of nothing. Is
not this to favor Deism?

Since I am now upon the Point of the weight of this new Religion, the Vanity
of which I shall in the Series of this Discourse endeavor to show; I must
needs say, that a man may observe how that this new Religion allows the
Christians almost nothing of Inspired: It supposes indeed that Jesus Christ was
infallible; but that signifies little, because Jesus Christ does not speak to
us either viva voce, or in writing. We must have recourse to the Evangelists
who were persons of Credit, and who have faithfully related to us what they
both saw and heard. Some Body perhaps will add, that they have been good men
who have left behind them in their Histories several marks of their Simplicity;
their Logic was false, they had not very good Memories, notwithstanding all
their Sincerity, so that they have assuredly but marred the Doctrine of their
Master. We must acknowledge that these Suppositions which agree very well with
M. N's System, create very great Scruples about the Gospels. Besides, they open
a passage for several Niceties, that may be very inconvenient for Christians
that are desirous to ground their Faith upon that part of the New Testament.

What say they of those other Writings which Providence has joined to the
Gospels? They are Works entirely Human, except the Apocalypse, to which they pay
the Honor of Believing that it is absolutely Prophetic. In the other Books
they also discern some glimmerings of Light, some Prophetic Flights. Were it
not for that, they are to be looked upon as no other than little Books of
Devotion, or as short Commentaries upon the Gospel, in the Composition of
which, the Holy Ghost never in any manner of way concerned himself. When men
are arrived at such a Point, as to put aside the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
S. James, S. Peter, S. John, and S. Jude must be looked upon as Doctors that
only explain Religion as well as they can: they must be only simple Artists
who, without Education or Learning, took all their Instruction from their
Piety, after they had run through a slender Course in Theology with Jesus
Christ. As for S. Paul, who had something a better Education than the rest,
they will say he had this disadvantage, that he was not an Eyewitness, as they
were, of the Principal matters of Fact in the Gospel, and that what he learnt
from Revelation could not be so evident, as if like his Companions, he had seen
and felt. It will be said, that at most, he understood but as much as they did,
and that he ought not to be believed, but in such Parts where he confirms the
History of the Gospel. Therefore in regard S. Paul does not pretend to the
Office of an Historian, he is not to be credited but in some few Places. His
Principal Character is that of a Doctor, who explains and argues. Upon those
occasions, that is to say, quite throughout all his Epistles, it shall be
lawful to appeal from S. Paul to the Tribunal of Human Logic: Since that
Apostle is to be looked upon as no other than a person of good ability to hold
an Argument, seeing he was no way inspired. If such a System should get footing
in the World, what would remain of Inspired among Christians? Very little: for
by that means they take from us three fourth parts of the New Testament. There
would no longer be one Book of it inspired: it might indeed contain something
inspired; but it would be no more inspired in the composition of it, than any
other Book, wherein an ordinary Author should have inserted Doctrines which
Heaven had formerly revealed. For as those inserted Doctrines would not make
the Book to be inspired, so neither would some Oracles scattered here and there
in the New Testament, appropriate Inspiration to that Book. From whence I
conclude, that when the Primitive and the New Christians professed to believe
that the Sacred Books of the New Testament were inspired, they never pretended
barely to say, that the Apostles knew by Inspiration certain things which they
had inserted therein, but that it was their Opinion, that the Book it self, or
to explain my self more clearly, the Composition of the Book was the work of
the Holy Ghost. This is a Reflection which I desire the Reader to remember,
when I come to discourse of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books in General.

In that sense that M. N. would have us conceive what the New Testament is, it
contains many human things about which it is lawful to dispute, whenever S.
Paul or any other Apostle shall hold any Argument which is not conformable to
M. N's Principles, He shall answer, This is no more than the Argument of a mere
man; let us see whether his Argument agrees with Aristotle's Logic: If the
Apostle has not followed the Rules of Consequences, we may imagine that we have
no reason to hearken to him. He Is an Apostle -- that is no matter -- when an
Apostle wanders out of the way, I am not bound to follow him. St. Paul applies
to Jesus Christ several Prophecies which the Holy Ghost appropriates to God in
the Old Testament. And from thence a very strong Argument is drawn to prove the
Divinity of Jesus Christ. See the Racov. Cat. p. 47. If to two Interpretations
of a very difficult place, we add a third.
The Socinians judge it a very hard matter to answer some parts of the first
Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Henceforward there will be no longer any
difficulty about any of all those Oracles, if M. N. may be believed. There
needs no more than to say, that St. Paul understood not the Oracles of the Old
Testament; and therefore it shall be lawful to examine that Apostle by the
Rules of Grammar and Logic. The Socinians are extremely obliged to M. N. for
helping them to a way to rid themselves of all their perplexing Doubts, Vozog.
Prolegom. in N. T. c. 4. Wherefore the Authority of these Books is as great as
that of God himself. So that when we read this Sacred Volume, or hear it read,
we ought to think, that we hear God himself speaking from Heaven. Id. in c. 1.
Matthew. v. 22. For though all the holy Scripture be inspired by God, and that
all the sacred Writers were as it were the Amanuenses of the Holy Ghost. Vid.
ibid. Prolegom. in N. T. c 4. toward the end, and in 2. Matthew. v. 6.
if they are hardy enough to adopt him. Several among them have testified a
great respect for the Scripture at the same time that they dishonor it by
wrested Interpretations: they profess however to believe that it is the Work of
God; that it is inspired in all the parts of it; that it contains no
Contradiction, and that there is no receding from this Principle, without
endangering the Christian Religion. Now while they hold such Maxims as these,
it is impossible but that the Socinians must meet with great difficulties in
the Scripture. But if they embrace M. N's Opinion, they will find a large
Fountain of ready Answers; and in truth it may be said, that there are no
Errors which may not be upheld by this new Method.

Though it should be said, that this new Method tends to annihilate the Use of
the New Testament, and to bring men back to natural Reason, as the only Light
which they ought to follow in Religion, it seems to me that they would say no
more than what is just and right. It Is true, M. N.'s Method does not speak
altogether so plainly, but it aims that way. That Author, to make use of a
Comparison which a great Writer furnishes me withal, Hooker, Eccles. Pol.
is like a sort of people who never leave whetting a Knife, till they have worn
it to nothing. They cannot be content to clean off the Rust that sticks to it,
and restoring the blade to the natural Brightness that first adorned it. Let us
keep the middle way, without bringing back the Abuses with which men at other
times had loaded Religion: Let us leave it a Body, to the end it may prove a
support to our Souls.

It may be seen by what I have said, of what Consequence it is, to oppose the
Career of M. N's System, and more and more to confirm and settle Christians in
their persuasion, that the Books of the New Testament were inspired. This is
that which I pretend to make out clearly in this Treatise, which I divide into
two parts. First, I shall show in General that the Sacred Books of the New
Testament were inspired; and while I demonstrate what the nature of that
Inspiration is, I shall produce Principles, whereby to resolve all difficulties
that are already, or may be, raised upon this Subject.

We have but two sorts of Proofs to satisfy a Christian about matters which
have no dependence upon the first Principles of Reason: the unanimous consent
of those Doctors that lived in the Primitive times of the Church; and the Holy
Scripture when it speaks after a plain and decisive manner. These are the two
sorts of Proofs which I shall make use of, to show that the Sacred Books are
inspired.

I begin with the Belief of the Primitive Church, after I have given the Reader
two Admonitions; the one, that I do not undertake to drain all the Proofs that
are to be found in this Fountain; it being my design to confine my self to what
may bring the matter to a point of Demonstration, and to derive my Proofs from
the first or most Primitive Ages of the Church.

My second Advertisement is, that as M. N. assails the Body of the Sacred Books
of the New Testament in gross, I am not bound to defend them otherwise than in
the same manner. That Author believes, that they are no way inspired, that is
to say, that the Holy Ghost was never concerned in the Composition of them. For
the repelling of this Attacque, it is not requisite to follow the Sacred Books
one after another, by showing upon the Subject of every one of them, that they
were effectually inspired. I shall therefore consider the several Sacred Books
as one single Book; and I shall produce to the advantage of all together, all
the Testimonies which I shall find favorable to any one in particular. It Is
according to this Method that M. N. attacques them: for when he thought he had
observed in any one of the Sacred Books any slip of human weakness, he infers
from thence an Argument against all the rest. Let him in like manner be pleased
to permit me to extend to all the Sacred Books whatever I shall meet with
advantageous to any one, which ought to be allowed me so much the rather,
because there is not any one single, where there is not something to be met
withal, which M. N. takes for a good Objection. If only one of the Sacred Books
proves to be inspired, the Inspiration of that single Book secures the rest
from the Objection which are made against them.

Though I speak in this manner, it is not that I am in fear for any one Sacred
Book of the New Testament: the whole is safe, if men will but take the pains to
consider the Testimonies of the Primitive Church in favor of the Inspiration
of the Sacred Books; they will not find any one, for which there is not the
Testimony of the Ancients: or if any one be more remiss than the rest, that
negligence will be repaired by the General Proofs that relate to all the parts
of the New Testament.

CHAP. II.
The first Proof of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament,
drawn from the manner after which the Ancients speak of it.

IT IS known how the Christians speak at this day of the Holy Scripture of the
New Testament. According to their Style it is called The Scripture, by way of
Excellency; the Sacred Oracles, the Word of God; when the Preacher takes his
Text, he says, as it is written in the word of God; and the People for that
Reason believe themselves obliged to hearken with a devout Attention.

This Language no way agrees with M. N's System, who looks upon the Sacred
Books as a work purely Human, and wherein there are faults which he would not
pardon Livy, or any other profane Historian. Were I of this Authors Opinion, I
should be dreadfully troubled to hear the Christians speak as they do of the
Holy Scripture; I should cry out Blasphemy; I should never endure that they
should say of the Voice of a mortal man, it is the Voice of God and not of man.

It Is to be suspected that M. N. says to himself, that it is one of those
pieces of Superstition which are so rooted in the minds of the People, that it
is not safe to decry them. But let him think what he pleases, the language of
the Christians is the same at this day, as it has been all along: in that
particular there has been no variation. In the purest Ages they expressed
themselves in reference to the Scripture as we do now. I defy the most Zealous
Disciples of M. N. to deny it. They cannot do it without speaking against their
Consciences; or without showing that they are altogether strangers to Antiquity.

To fortify this Proof which I draw from the Appellations that the Ancients
gave the Scripture, I think my self bound to make two Observations. The first
is, that the Language cannot proceed from any superstitious Aggravation. It was
in use in the very first times when Christians spoke according to the
simplicity of their Hearts, and when they had no leisure to corrupt the Truth
by Rhetoric or Superstition. In that same Age of Innocence, they called the
Writings of the New Testament the Oracles of Heaven, the Word of God, the Holy
Scripture. Nor can this language be accused to have sprung up from the
Corruption of after Ages, when Superstition extended her Empire. I love to
speak, as they spoke at a time when the Church was a Virgin; if I may be
allowed to make use of the words of an Ancient Author.

My second Observation is this; that the Ancients, when they thus expressed
themselves, honored the New Testament, as the New Testament had honored the
Ancient. I explain my self thus; when the Old Testament is cited by the
Apostles, they usually call it the Scripture, without any addition; that is,
the Scripture by way of Excellency; as when St. Paul, speaking of an Oracle
dictated by the Mouth of God himself, says, For what says the Scripture, Gal.
4.30.
cast out the Bondwoman and her Son. And in another place, Gal. 3.8.
And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through
faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed. I made choice of these two Passages on purpose, wherein St.
Paul cites certain Oracles, that M. N. would not himself deny, but that it was
God who spoke them. The Apostle calls them Scripture. As he phrases it, The
Scripture says this, or God spoke This, comes all to one sense This is so
true, that having said to the Romans, Romans 11.32.
That God had concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all: He speaks the same thing to the Galathians in these words, Gal. 3.22.
But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, etc. By which it appears that
the Voice of God, and Scripture signify the same thing.

Thus then I argue upon the whole. The Apostles when they cited the Oracles of
the Old Testament, comprehended them all under the Name of Scripture, as if
they would have said, the Scripture of God. Now I find that immediately after
the Apostles, the Saints also quoted the Writings of the Apostles under the
Name of Scripture: they have paid the same Honor to the Writings of the
Apostles, as the Apostles did to the Old Testament. Have I not reason then to
conclude from thence, that it was the judgment of the Saints of the Primitive
Church, that the Writings of the Apostles were no less the Scripture of God,
than the Prophetic Writings wherein are recorded the Oracles of God?

CHAP. III.
The second Proof, drawn from hence, that the Ancients have equaled the
Writings of the Apostles to the Oracles of the Old Testament.

IF what M. N. has asserted touching the writings of the Prophets were examined
according to the Belief which the Primitive Church had of them, it would be
soon acknowledged that this New System is not to be maintained by dint of
Argument. The Proofs of which are every where to be found: For the Primitive
Writers of the Christian Religion, being obliged to fetch from the Prophetic
writings their Arguments to convince the Jews, or to confirm the Christians who
acknowledged their Authority, this was the reason that they had frequent
occasion to speak of the Inspiration of those Sacred Writings. So that we
plainly see, that they are hardly ever cited by the Ancients without some
Elogie drawn from the Sanctity of their Original. Sometimes it is the Word of
God, sometimes it is the Holy Scripture, sometimes the Oracles of the Holy
Ghost, and sometimes the Scripture divinely inspired. When the Primitive
Christians quoted any passage of the Old Testament, it was as they phrased it
the Mouth of the Lord that spoke. But I do not speak this to divert me from
alleging some Proofs.

Clemens Romanus who, as it is well known was contemporary with the Apostles,
speaking of the Prophets, says, That the Ministers of the Grace of God,
instigated by the Holy Spirit, spoke of Repentance. A little after
that-reciting a Maxim drawn from the Old Testament, he assures us, that 'twas
no more than what the Holy Spirit recommended to us. Quod vaticinantes non
alio, quam verbo divino afflati agantur, vos quoque ipsos dicturos reor. Dial.
cum Triph. Jud. p. 8.
Justin Martyr speaks of the Inspiration of the Prophets, as of a Truth common
to the Jews and Christians. Descendens in eos spiritus Sanctus, Religionem
veram discere volentes, per illos docendos esse statuit. Id. ad Graec. Cohort.
p. 32.
And in another place he says, that the Holy Spirit descended upon the
Prophets, to the end they might teach all those that desired to be instructed
in the true Religion. Caeterum Dei homines pleni spiriu Sancto, and a Deo
inspirati, institutique Prophetae ordinati sunt; proinde fuere a Deo docti
Theophil. ad Autol. lib. 2. p. 87.
Theophilus of Antiochia, asserts that the Prophets were men filled with the
Holy Spirit and inspired by God. Clemens of Alexandria is full of Passages,
wherein he affirms the same thing. I shall cite no more than one, which is to
be found at the beginning of his Protreptic. Ipse est Dominus loquens in Isaia,
ipse in Elia, ipse in ore Prophetarum. All the Primitive Authors honor the
Prophets and their VVritings, as being inspired by God. Origin alone would
furnish me with several passages; of which to be convinced, ^here needs no more
than only to read his ^hilocatia.

But to what purpose will some Body say, ^o I quote all these Proofs? The
dispute is about the New Testament, not the Old one. (...) will not say, that I
had any desire of ma^ing it my Business to let the World know ^he Character of
M. N. by showing that in ^he judgment of the Ancients, he does an ^nfinite
injury to the prophetic Writings, by ^he liberty of writing which he assumes to
himself. That was never my Design; for (...) confine my self exactly to my
Subject. My ^im is still to make out, that the writings of ^he New Testament
are inspired by the Holy Ghost. And is not the confirming the high Opinion
which the Ancients had of the Prophets and their Writings, a keeping close to
that Design? If at the same time I show that ^he Ancients have equaled the
Apostles and their writings to the Prophets and their Prophesies, without
proceeding any farther, that cannot be called a Deviation. For to be convinced
that it is a Truth, Iren. adver. heret. lib. 3. c. 11. Because first the
Apostles, secondly the Prophets, but all from one and the fame God. Commentaria
Apostolorum and scripta Prophetarum sequuntur. p. 98. Just. Martyr. Quia
utrumque Testamenti Ministri. uno eodemque spiritu inspirati, locuti sunt.
Theophii. ad Autol. l. 30 p. 125. Deus Ae^ernus and Vnigenitus and verbum
incarnatum predicatum, and a Prophetis omnibus and Apostolis, and ab ipso
spiritu. Iren. adv. Eereticos. l. 3. c. 21. Vnus e^^m and idem spiritus Dei
quae in prophetis praeconavit, etc. Ipse in Apostolis Annunciavit. ib. c 35.
there needs no more than to read the Passages which I have quoted in the
Margin, the number of which I might have easily augmented; more especially
would I have cited the Fathers who lived after the Council of Nice.

CHAP. IV.
The third Proof drawn from the Distinction which the Ancients made between the
Canonical and Apocryphal Books.

THis Distinction takes place in respect of both Testaments. There are joined
to the Canonical Books of the Old Testament several Pieces purely Human, as the
Books of Tobit, Judith, Baruc, Macabee's, etc. which are called by the name of
Apocrypha. A word, of which the true Original is very uncertain. But whether it
signify concealed or obscure, or whether it have any other sense, certain it
is that those Books which are added to the Scripture, though they are not of
divine Authority, are called Apocrypha.

If the Books which are added to the Old Testament are not admitted to be
Canonical, it is not because they are defective in their matter. There are some
of them whose Doctrine is sound, and their Instructions pure, so that there has
been no scruple made to read them publicly in the Church. I dare presume to
say there is such a Portion of Apocryphal Books which is more Instructive and
more edifying, than such a portion of books we call Canonical. Wherefore then
are they rejected as Apocryphal? I know very well that several Marks of human
Frailty are to be discovered in them; but the chief Ground of their being
rejected is, because they are Books which the Holy Ghost has not inspired, the
Finger of God appears not in them: the good things which are there to be found,
flow not immediately from the Spring. Moreover we have reason to examine and
suspect them, because they are not recommended to us by Persons actuated by the
infallible Spirit of God.

This Reason is expressed by the Ancients in other terms: for they say, that
the Apocryphal Books added to the Old Testament, want Canonical Authority,
because they were written by persons who were no Prophets, and who lived after
Malachi, the last of the Prophets. Wherein they followed Josephus, who has
derived from thence the grand Character of the difference which we ought to
make between the Canonical Books and the Apocryphal. The words of the Author
are so remarkable as not to be omitted. Answer to Appion. l. 1. c. 2.
There can be nothing more certain, than the Writings authorized among us;
because they cannot be subject to any Contradiction; in regard that there is
nothing approved but what the Prophets wrote some Ages ago; according to the
purity of Truth, by the Inspiration and Agitation of the Spirit of God.

They have also written all that passed from the time of Artaxerxes to our
Time. But by reason there has not been, as formerly, a successive Series of the
Prophets, there is not the same Credit given to the Books which I have
mentioned. The Books written after the Prophet Malachi have been constantly
rejected, in regard he was the last Writer whom the Holy Ghost inspired, under
the Old Testament. Eusebius. l. 8. De monst. Evangel. Quod ab illo tempore
servatoris nullum extet Sacrum Vo^umen.


What I have said in respect of the Old Testament, takes place in relation to
the New. Several Books of Piety were composed in the Primitive Church; the
Authors were Persons of Worth, and the Books were so useful, that the Reading
of them was not only recommended to private Persons, but they made no scruple
to read them in public. For example, the Epistle of Saint Clement had the same
Honor. Wherefore was it that those Books were not put into the number of
Canonical; that is to say, of those Books that are the constant Rule of our
Faith and Manners? It was not always because they were in some things
erroneous, but by reason they were not inspired by the Holy Ghost: that was
sufficient to hinder them from being received for Canonical. The Question that
was put, when there was a Dispute about any Book of which they doubted, was to
know, whether or no it were written by a Person inspired. Thence it came to
pass, that in the History of Eusebius we find that Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, pronouncing his Sentence upon the Apocalypse, said, that he
acknowledged it to be the work of some Holy Man inspired by the Spirit of God.
It Is known also that Origin speaking of the Book written by Hermas, Reor enim
sancti cujusdam, and divino spiritu afflati viri id opus esse. Eusebius. h. e. l.
7. c. 21. Quae Scriptura valde mihi utilis videtur, Et ut puto, divinitus
inspirata. Origin. l. 10. reptam Epist. ad Romans c. 16. Com. 14.
said, That he believed it to be a Writing divinely inspired; a certain proof
that they believed those Books which the Church has admitted as Canonical, were
inspired by the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. V.
The Fourth Proof drawn from the honor which the Ancients paid to the Sacred
Books of the New Testament.

WE may draw a very strong Argument to prove that the Primitive Church believed
that the Sacred Books of the New Testament were inspired, from the Honor and
Reverence which they paid them. I shall begin with that Holy awe which kept the
Ancients from attempting any alterations in the Sacred Writings. Addenti aut
d^trahenti poena non modica. Iren. adv. Here Is. l 5. c. 30.
It was a piece of rashness and Sacrilege to adulterate them either by adding
or diminishing. They were laden with Anathemas who were so bold as to lay their
mending Hands upon those Sacred VVritings.

We find in the Ecclesiastical History that the Heretics who denied the
Divinity of our Lord, had the confidence to falsify the Scripture, to
accommodate the Text to their Opinions. Upon which an Author of the Primitive
Ages says, that it was not likely that the Heretics were ignorant how criminal
an Enterprise of that nature was; For, says he, Quantae porro audaciae sit
ejusmodi facinus ne ipsos quidem ignorare credibile est, aut enim sacras
scripturas a spiritu sancto dictatas esse non credunt, ac proinde infideles
sunt, aut semet ipso spiritu sancto sapientiores esse existimant; ac proinde
quid aliud sunt quam Demoniaci. Eusebius. h. e. l. 5. c. ult.
either they believe not that the Sacred Scriptures were dictated by the Holy
Ghost; and so are Infidels; or they imagine themselves to be wiser than the
Holy Ghost, and then what are they other then Demoniacs.

They had an inviolable Veneration for the Sacred Scripture. Tatianus, for
having only presumed to put the Epistles of St. Paul into more elegant
Language, incurred the Censure, which may be seen in the Historian last cited.
Eusebius. l. 4.29.
If the Church were so jealous of the words of the Scripture, we may easily
judge of the Indignation of the Christians when they saw that any body durst
presume to violate the Text it self, either by addition or diminution.

It Is clear, that the Christians would never have been so sensible of injury
done to the Scripture, if they had not believed it to be the work of the Holy
Spirit. Some small fragment of Piety affixed to human Works would never have
been a crime of Sacrilege. For example, I see not what great harm it could be,
to sow to S. Paul's Epistle to Philemon, some little Discourse upon that
Indulgence, which is due from Christian Masters to their Servants, were it
true, that the Epistle to Philemon is a Piece, wherein the Holy Spirit had no
Share. It Is true, there may be something said, in dislike of such an Act, in
regard that Sincerity requires, that other Men's Works should be let alone in
their natural Dress. Nevertheless the Miscarriage deserves not to be treated
with the Penalties of Sacrilege: there is no reason to make such a noise about
it, as the Primitive Christians did upon the Alterations that were made in the
Writings of the New Testament.

Nothing more clearly shows the Opinion which the Ancients had of the
Inspiration of the Sacred Books, than the Honor which they paid 'em in looking
upon 'em as Sovereign Decrees in Matters of Religion. For which Reason it was,
that in several Councils they were placed upon a Throne, as they would have
seated Jesus Christ himself had he come visibly to preside in those Holy
Assemblies. There was the same Honor paid to his Word, as they would have done
to his Person. Which clearly shows with what an Eye of Veneration they looked
upon the Sacred Writings of the New Testament.

This Honor also no less visibly appears in the use which the Ancients made of
Scripture to confirm the Faith of the Christians. The Doctors of the Primitive
Church allow a Sovereign Rank to the New Testament There is no longer any
Hesitation, after the Voice of these Oracles has been once heard. These are the
Urims and Thummims of the New Covenant; after they once had seen their
Decision, it was a Crime to appeal.

When we seriously consider, that this is a Submission and Compliance in
Religion it self, we ought to acknowledge, that this Honor was not paid to the
Sacred Books, but because they were, or at least because they were thought to
be the Books of God, who is the only Lord of the Conscience. And the Truth of
this Reflection will be agreed to, whenever it shall be called to mind, that we
speak of a time when the Christians perfectly understood this privilege of the
Almighty. They were very nice in this particular. Wherefore did they not obey
those Emperors that opposed the Course of Christianity? It was the Lord had
spoken. Wherefore did they not believe so many Philosophers whose Example and
Illusions so strongly supported Paganism? It was the Lord had said it.
Wherefore did they forsake the Synagogue, that Synagogue which Divine Mercy had
appointed to be the Guardian of the ancient Oracles? It was the Lord had
spoken. The Scripture of the New Testament was more powerful than the Emperors,
and triumphed over the Reputation which the great Doctors had enjoyed so long
in all the Schools of the World. The Reason is, because that in comparison of
God, Man is nothing: when God speaks, no Body else is to be heard. Therefore
the Christians being convinced that the Almighty spoke in the Writings of the
New Testament, they yielded with an awful Submission to the Decisions which
they found therein.

This was never contradicted by Heretics; they durst not appeal from the Words
of an Apostle, because they were persuaded, that they were the Words of the
Holy Spirit. The Method which they usually made use of to avoid the Weight of
that Authority was to mutilate the Scriptures, or to corrupt the Sense by
wrested Explanations. But when it could be proved, that such a Writing was
Apostolical, or that such a Sense was the meaning of the Apostle, the most
obstinate Heretics would submit, at least they had nothing to say. It is
needless to cite Authors upon a Subject for which Proofs may be found almost in
every Page of the Writings of the Primitive Church. Moreover there have been so
many Occasions to show, that she has always looked upon the Scripture as the
Rule of Faith, that these Proofs are become common. There needs no more for a
Man to do, but cast his Eye upon our Books of Controversy, to see what have
been the Opinions of the Fathers upon this Subject.

CHAP. VI.
The Fifth Proof drawn from hence, that the Ancients positively asserted the
Books of the New Testament to be inspired.

THus far I have proved the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament, by
Arguments drawn from Antiquity. It Is now high time to produce something more
express and absolute. So I call the express Declarations of the Ancients upon
this Subject. My Design, as I have already said, is to tie my self particularly
to those who lived before the Nicene Council that is to say at a time which the
greatest Enemies of Antiquity mention with some kind of Veneration. I am apt to
think they will pardon me, if here I produce a Crowd of ancient Testimonies.
It Is a Collection that may prove serviceable; for I believe there has not as
yet been any made upon this Subject. Thereby it will be the better understood,
that we teach nothing new concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the
New Testament; and that M. N. has no reason to insinuate from time to time,
that the Ancients are of his side. If he be willing that the Question shall be
decided by Antiquity, that which I am going to say, tho I only pick and choose,
would quickly show where the Innovation l^es.

Clemens Romanus is very express in the Epistle which he wrote to the
Corinthians; Clem. 1. Ep. ad Cor. Certe divinitus inspiratus, de se, de Cepha,
and Apollo per Epistolam vos monuit. According to Junius 's Version.
for he affirms, that S. Paul, writing to the same Church, concerning the
Schisms that rent it to pieces, was divinely inspired.

Justin Martyr, is no less express in his Conference with Tryphon the Jew,
where he says, Assistenti namgue tibi, and auscultanti probabo, non vanis nos
sidem habuisse fabulis, neque Demonsrratioonis exportibus, sed Spiritu Divino
plenis. Just. Martin Dial. cum Tryph. p. 226.
that he would under take to prove, that the Christians did not build their
Faith upon Fables, nor upon vain Arguments, but upon Demonstations full of the
Holy Ghost.

Theophilus, Bishop of Antiochia, citing the Authors of the Old and New
Testament, says, Theoph. ad Antol. l. 3. p. 125. Quia utriusque Testamenti
Ministri, uno eodemque spiritu inspirati, locuti sunt. Quapropter hoc spiritu
impulsi consona, and nullo modo pugnantia praedixere. Ibid. p. 128.
that both the one and the other spoke, as being inspired with one and the same
Spirit. Who is that Spirit? To which he answers a little after, That it was the
Spirit of God, Divino Spiritu afflati.

The Testimony of Irenaeus is very positive in one place where he goes about to
prove, Iren. l. 2. p. 47. Credero autem haec talia debemus Deo qui and nos
fecit; rectissime' scientes, qu^a Scripturae perfectae sunt, quippe a verbo Dei
and Spiritu ejus dictae.
that we ought not to dispute against the Decisions of the Holy Scripture.
Wherefore? Because it is the Word of God, and of his Spirit.

For thus we explain what the same Author says in another Place of the Word
which was preached by the Spirit. Ibid. l. 3. c. 21. Verbum incarratum
praedisatum and a Prophetis and Apostolis, and ^b ipso Spiritu.
The Word made Flesh, says he, which was Preached by the Prophets, by the
Apostles, and by the Spirit: as if he had said, by the Spirit which inspired
both the one and the other. This is the Explanation of Ireneus himself: for he
says in another place, Vnus enim and idem Spiritus Dei, qui in Prophet is
quidem praeconavit, etc. ipse and in Apostolis annunciavit. Id. l. 3.25.
That the Spirit of God that spoke by the Prophets, Preached the Gospel also by
the Apostles.

In a Word, it is the steadfast Doctrine of that ancient Author, Omnis Scriptura
nobis data, consonans nobis invenietur. Id. p. 203.
that the whole Scripture proceeded from God. Clement of Alexandria is of the
same Opinion when he speaks in his Stromata of the equivocal Words which we
meet with in Scripture. At men's Prophetici and loquentis spiritus occulte I
quens. Secure enim noverant illarum sensum Prophetae and spiritus discipu^i.
Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 1.292.
The Spirit of God, says he, spoke occultly to the Prophets and Apostles, and
those Holy Men were the Disciples of the Spirit. In another place, the same
Author assures us, that the Authority of the Scripture distinctly and clearly
makes out the Holy Spirit; Qui divinis ergo credidit Scripturis, firmum habens
judicium cui contradic^ nequit, demonstraticnem, ejus qui Scripturas dedit
vocem accipit. Id. l. 2. p. 362.
and that they who have that Authority have a Demonstration from the Spirit
that the Scriptures proceed from an Omnipotent Authority; and that it was meant
of the whole Scripture of the Christians, (...) Ib. l. 4. p. 475.
what the Psalmist speaks, when he said, Aperte itaque de tota Soriptura nostra
in Psalmis scriptum est, audite Populus meus Legem meam. Ibid. Strom. l. 5. p.
557.
My people hear my Law.

In this Sense Tertullian calls the Scripture the Voice of God: by which it may
be seen what Opinion that Author had of the Scripture. He attributes it in
several other Passages, to the Spirit of God. I shall choose out some of 'em. In
his Treatise of Prescriptions, he cites the Words where S. Paul ad monishes the
Colossians not to suffer themselves to be seduced by Human Traditions, and adds
this Expression, Praeter Providentiam Spiritus Sancti; visibly intimating
thereby, that it was the Holy Ghost who had set down the Measures of our Faith
in the Scriptures. It is more express in other parts, disputing against
Hermogenes; It was, the Holy Spirit, says he, Atque adeo Spiritus Sanctus hane
Scripturae sunt rationem constituit -- Si tantam curam instructionis nostrae
resumpsit Spiritus Sanctus -- Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem. Ter. adv. Hermog.
c. 22.
that methodiz'd the Scripture in that Form as we now behold it: That the Holy
Spirit took care of our Instruction in the Holy Scripture -- and after that
glorifies the Author of that Sacred Book with an Expression, that would be
profane, were it made use of in Applause of any other Book. I adore, says he,
the Fullness of the Scripture. Thus it is, that we find Tertullian speaking of
the Scripture in general, tho the Subject of his Discourse was only Genesis,
where he treats of the Creation of the Matter, the Eternity of which Hermogenes
asserted. But here is something yet more positive. If you ask Tertullian who it
is that speaks in the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, he will answer, Et
ideo Majestas Spiritus Sancti perspicax ejusmodi sensunm, and in ipsa ad
Thessalonicenses Epistolas suggerit. De Resur. Carnis. c. 24.
It Is the Majesty of the Holy Ghost. When the same Author discourses of the
Rules that S. Paul gives the Bishops, after what manner to carry themselves,
The Holy Ghost, says he, foresaw, that some would say, Prospiciebat Spiritus
Sanctus, dicturos quosdam, omnia licent Episcopis. Tert. de Monog. c. 12.
That it was lawful for the Bishops to do what they pleased. By which it
appears, that Tertullian believed those Rules to be derived from the Holy
Spirit, who deemed 'em to be necessary.

Origin has explained himself in so many Places, upon the Inspiration of the
whole Scripture, that I should have contented my self with only naming him, if
M. N. had not borrowed the Authority of that ancient Doctor, in saying, That be
did not acknowledge a continued Inspiration, Sent. p. 262. The Author applies
to Origin what he had said of S. Jerome.
by the Impulse of which the Apostles were constantly and steadfastly moved to
write what they wrote. But I need no more to show the true Sen^^ments of
Origin, than to make choice of some parts of the Philocalia, which is a Piece
that S. Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzen composed out of Passages which they took
out of Origin. Persuasum habent sacros libros, non hominum esse Commentarios,
sed ex Sancti Spiritus afflatu, voluntate Dei, per Jesum Christum, Parentis
universcrum descriptis. Philoc. c. 1. ex lib. 4. De principiis.
He says, That the Christians were convinced, that the Sacred Books were not
Human Commentaries, but that they were inspired by the Holy Spirit. He had also
said a little before, Postquam in discursu, divinitus inspiratas esse
Scripturas Sacras probavimus Idem, ibid.
that he had proved that the Scriptures were divinely inspired.

In the same Chapter we find, that Origin affirms, that the Prophets and
Apostles were illuminated by the same Spirit while they composed the
Scriptures. Ac principio demonstrandum est spiritui Divinae Providentiae per
verbum quod in principio erat apud Deum, Ministros veritatis, Prophetas and
Apostolos illuminanti, etc. Id. p. 11.


Nor has Origin only explained himself upon the Inspiration of the Sacred Books
in general, but he takes 'em separately, Vnius and ejusdem Dei Spiritus idem in
Evangeliis and Apostolorum scriptis fecit. Id. ib. p. 12.
and has explained himself so clearly, that it is not to be conceived how M. N.
could cite, in favor of his Opinion, an Author which has condemned it in
express Terms. In the Chapter already quoted, he shows, that the Obscurity of
some Words which are to be found in Scripture, no way prejudices the Divinity
of it. To that purpose he makes use of a Comparison drawn from Providence, of
which there is no manner of Question made, tho there be several Occasions
wherein the Conduct of it may seem to be obscure. So neither is any thing
abstracted from the Divinity of the Scripture diffused through every part of
it, because that in every particular word our Imbecility cannot reach the
hidden Splendor of the Doctrine that lies latent, in an ordinary and seemingly
contemptible Phrase, for we have that Treasure in Earthern Vessels, to the end
the Exuberance and Excellency of the Power of God might shine forth. Origin
expressed himself so vehemently, that he declares, that the smallest Letter of
the Scripture was placed there by the Divine Wisdom, and that for that Reason
it was perhaps that our Lord and Savior said, that the least Iota of it should
not pass away. Exquisitissima cura and studio Spiritus Sanctus per Ministros
Verbi illa subjecit, ne unquam nos latere posset ratio secundum quam Divina
Sapientia omnem Scripturam Divinitus datam, vel ad usque unam Literulam
attigit; and propterea forsan servator, Iota, inquit, unum, vel Apex unus, etc.
After this, Origin shows, that as the Care of God appeared in the smallest
Insects, and the Seeds of the smallest Plants, in like manner we ought to
believe, that the Holy Ghost has dispersed the Traces of his Wisdom in every
Letter of the Scripture. I do not believe that M. N. could have cited an Author
less favorable to his Opinion. Every Body knows that Origin would have a
Mystery concealed in every part of Scripture, pretending, that God had infused
something considerable into every Letter of the Scripture. Quod sacrae Literae
ne unum quidem Apicem habeant vacuum sapientia Dei. Origin. in Jerem. Ita nos
censemus de omnibus ex afflatu divino scriptis, tanquam illa quae sapientiam
humana superiorem tradit. Magna Providentia per divinas Literas hominum generi
salutaria Dooumenta inseruerit, and ut ita dicam Literis, quo ad unaquaeque
potest capere, vestigia sapientia impresserit. Id. ib. ex Tom. 1. in Psalm.


I have cited a sufficient Number of Authors of the three first Ages, to prove,
that at that very time the Christians were convinced, as at this day, that the
Sacred Books of both Testaments were inspired by the Holy Ghost. Therefore I
thought it needless to extend the Chain of my Citations any farther; because no
Body can deny, but after the Nicene Council (when they had more Occasion to
explain themselves upon this Subject) the universal Voice of the Church was for
the Inspiration of the New Testament.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein the Objections that may be brought against the Testimony of Antiquity
are answered.

M. N. does not so far despise Antiquity, but that he makes use of it when he
believes it never so little favorable to him. He omits nothing that may give
an advantageous Air to his Opinion. Had he found in his way any lucky Fragment
to his purpose, he would not have failed to have made the best of it. I
remember what he says in one place; Sentiments, Lect. 12. p. 262.
Thus you see that the most able and subtle Interpreters of Scripture which
Christian Antiquity produced, have been of the same Opinion as my self: that is
to say, as it is apparent by some Lines before, that they did not acknowledge
any Inspiration that continually and steadfastly impuls'd the Apostles to write
what they wrote. It might be thought that this Conclusion was the product of a
crowd of Citations; after which there was no question to be made but that the
Ancients were of M. N's Opinion. But it was no small wonder to us, that the
beginning of the Conclusion should be reduced to these two or three words; It
behooves us to join with St. Jerome, Origin, from whom he had drawn this Opinion
touching the Dispensation which he attributes to these two Apostles, and
several other Greek Fathers. Should I say, that neither St. Jerome, nor Origin,
nor any of the other Greek Fathers ever contradicted the Inspiration of the
Apostles, such as we affirm it to be, permanent and constant, M. N. has an
answer ready, and will tell us, that he did not cite those Ancients, but to
show, how they believed that St. Peter and St. Paul conmade use of Dispensation
at what time Saint Paul contradicted St Peter. Certain it is that no other use
can be made of that Quotation; but it is placed so cunningly after these words,
It appears from thence that they did not acknowledge a continual Inspiration,
etc. That it is easy to be perceived that the Author had a desire to dazzle
those people who have any respect for Antiquity, but who are not acquainted
with it but at a distance.

However, it is to be seen by the Passages which I have cited out of Origin,
that he is positive in the Point of Inspiration of the Sacred Books. Nor does
St. Jerome speak less expressly; neither shall I consult any other Part but that
which M. N. has marked out for me; See, says he, the Preface of St. Jerome to
his Comment upon the Epistle to Philemon. Would not any Man who read that
Reference believe, that it would be infallibly found in that Preface, that St.
Jerome proves by the little Things which are to be met with in Scripture, that
he did not believe the Holy Ghost concerned in the Composition of all the
Sacred Books. I have read the Preface very seriously, and I am confident that
M. N. has read it also; for the Persons which he there mentions, spoke much
after the rate as he does. Wherefore then had he not so much sincerlty as to
acknowledge, that the Objection drawn from the Minute things in Scripture (give
me leave to make use of the expression) is like the rest in the mouths of those
Adversaries which St. Jerome undertakes to refute. He declares at first that he
speaks of those who refused to admit the Epistle of St. Paul to Philemon, and
who said exactly the same thing as M. N. and Spinosa say, Non semper Apostolum,
nec omnia, Christo in se loquente, dixisse. They alleged what St. Paul says of
the Cloak which he left at Troas; that the Prophets were wont expressly to tell
the people when they spoke in the Name of the Lord, because they were not
always Prophets. These are exactly M. N's scruples. But St. Jerome supports
them no manner of way; quite the contrary, he declares that they are in the
wrong for not admitting the Epistle to Philemon, under pretense that it
contains several things of little moment, and makes use of a Comparison which
Origin has made use of upon the same Subject. If, says he, they have a mind to
deny that the great and the little Things come from one and the same hand, then
let them admit two Creators; one Creator of the Insects, and another of Heaven
and Earth. Is this any satisfaction for a Man that would favor the Opinion of
M. N.

It seems by the Preface of St. Jerome upon Philemon, that from that very time,
there have been anonymous Persons who thought as M. N. does. I will also grant
him that we find in Epiphanius, that the Anomeans explained themselves much
after the same manner. Haeres. 76. which the Anomaean.
Aetius corrupted them sufficiently, to the persuading them to defame the
Prophets and Apostles. Did any man cite the Prophets? These Sectaries cried
out, What d' ye tell us of the Old Testament? Did ye press hard upon them any
Argument taken from any of the Apostles. Quid tu mihi vetus Testamentum objicis?
The Apostle, say they in that part spoke like a Man.

Ista inquiunt, Apostolus tanquam Homo dixit. Were I not precisely confined to
the three first Ages, I could show how Epiphanius maintained the Honor and
Inspiration of the Apostolical Writings. For there is not any one of the
Fathers from whence there might be drawn more express Passages for the Belief
which I defend. Epiph. Here Is. 51.
However it behooves me to quote some few, to show that I do not talk at Random,
disputing against the Alogians who rejected the Apocalypse, he takes an occasion
to set forth the true original of the four Evangils, which he pretends to be
divinely inspired. He says, that Mark full of the Holy Ghost, Marcus spiritu
sancto completus, conscribendi Evangelii munus accepit.
received a Commission to write his Gospel.

That Luke was excited and constrained by the secret impulses and instigations
of the Holy Ghost.. 7. Spiritus Sanctus B. Lucam occultis quibusdam stimulis
cogit and excitat.


That the Holy Ghost enforced St. John to write his Gospel against his will..
6. Spiritus Sanctus Joannem invitum licet ad scibendum Evangelium impulit,. 9.
Quae cum Apostolus ex sancti spiritus afflatu pronunciaret, necesse non habuit
spiritus sancti mentionem facere. Cum igitur Apostolus, vel potius spiritus
sanctus per Apostolum loqueretur. ibid. quippe Apostolus sancto spiritu
impulsus. ibid. de quibus adeo mihi videtur in Epistola Judae commotus
spiritus, hoc est in Catholica ejus Epistola -- in qua per Apostoli vocem
sanctus, inquam, spiritus and Haeres. 26. which is the Gnostic.. 11.
That St. John has related all things faithfully under the Conduct of the Holy
Ghost, Spiritu sancto Gubernant (an expression that ought to be born in mind,
for the better understanding of the nature of the Inspiration of the sacred
Writings) that the Holy Ghost spoke by Saint Paul. That the Holy Ghost spoke by
the mouth of Saint Jude in his General Epistle. Thus it is, that the Fathers
generally express themselves after the Nicene Council. But I have laid an
Injunction upon my self not to descend too low: and I have only spoken of
Epiphanius, by reason of Aetius who professed the same Opinion with M. N.

Nor do I find that that same Arian was able, any more than his Disciples to
interrupt the Series of Tradition, or to hinder the common Belief of the
Universal Church from being altogether for the Inspiration of the Sacred Books
of the New Testament. As for Saint Jerome's anonymous Persons, and Epiphanias's
Anomeans. they make not a part of the Church considerable enough, for any man
whatever to produce them as Testimonies. But in regard it has been all along my
aim to confine my self to the three first Ages of the Church, I shall say no
more than this, that it is apparent that these Innovators who appeared not till
the Ages following, cannot hinder me from concluding, that I have on my side
the Universal testimony of the Church truly Primitive.

This Testimony is of great moment in the Minds of all men that consider those
Ages to be the most pure, at what time they had things delivered to them as it
were from the first hand. I know not what I ought to think of a Christian who
despises such Antiquity. Such a Scorn may be excused in people who are ignorant
of it, but when we find the learned neglecting a Testimony so authentic, it is
a temptation to believe that either they have not well considered the
influences which that Testimony has upon the Foundations of the Christian
Religion, or that else they would not be sorry to see that Foundation shaken.

It may be said that the Fathers which we so highly extol, were guilty of
diverse Errors. I grant it; 'twas by the permission of God, that by that means
the Writings which he has solely abandoned to human Wisdom, should be
distinguished from those which he infallibly directed by his Spirit. But we
ought to know what those Errors are, before we draw an argument against what
the Fathers have said for the Inspiration of the Sacred Books. First I observe
that those Errors are not universal among the Fathers: now that wherein they
contradict themselves can never be said to be the unanimous Voice of Antiquity.
This is the Character of the Errors with which the first Authors of
Christianity were upbraided. Some deviated after one manner, others after
another: but they were not found in company under the same deviation. Such
Errors have nothing common with the truths which they teach both constantly and
without variation, of which nature is the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of
the New Testament.

I add to this consideration, that it is requisite to examine well the nature
of the Errors of which the Fathers are accused, before an argument be raised
from thence against their unanimous Testimonies for the inspiration of the
Scripture. Sometimes they mistake in speaking of something to come which never
was revealed to them; as when they discourse with too much confidence, how near
at hand the end of the World is. Sometimes they err in matters of Fact which
they have admitted with too much Credulity, as when they tell the Story of a
Phoenix rising again out of her ashes. But nothing of all this does any injury
to what they have averred touching the inspiration of the Sacred Books. That is
a Truth that marches step by step with the delivery it self of those Books.
They were delivered from hand to hand with this Advertisement, that they were
inspired by the Holy Ghost. It is as certain, that the Holy Ghost directed and
ordered the Composition and structure of the Gospels, as that the Gospels were
written by St. Matthew, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, and Saint John. This is one of
those things that were essential to the Honor of the Sacred Books; and which
were every day said of them. So that 'twas impossible that this Tradition so
lively and universal as it was, should come from any other hand than the
Apostles themselves, who when they left their works behind them, acknowledged
they had been written by the enlivening inspiration of the Holy Ghost. This has
no resemblance in the least with the story of a Phoenix, nor with what the
Fathers imagined about the end of the World, while they crosly interpreted the
words of the Apostles.

There is not any more plausible Objection than that which may be drawn from
the judgment of the Fathers upon the Version of the Septuagint. Justin Martyr,
Ireneus, and Clement of Alexandria, were of Opinion that those Interpreters
were guided by the Spirit of God. However at this day, many people believe that
they were subject to Error, like the rest of the Interpreters, and by
consequence left to themselves. Upon which some may raise this argument: Since
the Fathers were deceived in their Opinion touching the inspiration of the
Greek Interpreters of the Old Testament, the testimony which those Fathers give
in relation to the Apostolic Writings ought not to be so strongly urged: it is
from thence to be seen that it is not an infallible Testimony. I have several
things to observe, by way of solid answer to this Objection.

1. There are learned Men of the first Rank, who indeed maintain that the
Seventy Interpreters were really guided by the Holy Spirit. It cannot be
denied, but that it was by a special direction of Providence, that the Sacred
Books were translated into a Language that was almost Universal. It was proper,
that at a time when God would not be known but in a small corner of the World,
the Sacred Books should be in Hebrew. But when Grace was ready to disperse them
over the Earth, was it not convenient that the Books where God had revealed
himself, should be put into the most universal Language? That Translation
prepared the way for the Messiah: and the Apostles had the advantage of quoting
a Version which the World had admired for a long time. This so well agrees
with Gods design of calling all People to the knowledge of himself; that it
cannot be denied, but that by his Providence he managed the opportunities which
produced the Version of the Septuagint.

No body can deny what I have said; but several there are who go a great way
farther, and maintain, that the Greek Interpreters, were effectually inspired.
To prove this, they quote diverse Authors. They pretend that S. Jerome was the
first, who adventured to contradict that Tradition. After they had cited the
Christians to support their Tenent, they search for it in Philo the Jew, De
vita Mosis. l. 2. sub fin. Tanquam numine correpti prophet abant, non alia
alii, sed omnes ad verbum eadem quasi quopiam dictante singulis invisibiliter
who speaks of the Version of the Septuagint as of an inspired Piece. It Is well
known that Josephus's Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 2.
Opinion was not so much in favor of it. For he says no more, than that it was
a very exact Translation, though it were completed within the space of seventy
two days according to the number of the Interpreters. It Is said, that we ought
not to draw any argument from that indifferency wherewith Josephus expresses
himself upon the Version of the Septuagint, because the Custom of that Author
is to turn aside, when he relates the Miracles believed by the Jews. They who
are willing to justify him say, that his aim was to win himself a greater
Reputation amongst the Romans for whom he wrote, and that he does not nakedly
relate those Miracles which are the best confirmed, for fear of disobliging
Foreiners by the rehearsal of actions seemingly Romantic. It Is for that reason
it is believed he did not speak all he thought of the Version of the Seventy:
but that he insinuates it sufficiently, when he writes that the High Priest,
the Interpreters and the Magistrates of the Jews desired that it might no
longer be lawful to change the least Tittle in that Version. If it be true that
the Greek Interpreters were particularly guided by the Holy Ghost, as several
learned Men assert; it is evident, that the Objection has no foundation. I add
to this that the Apostles, while they most commonly made use of the Version of
the 70 Interpreters have in some measure rendered them Canonical, and that it is
become a work of the Holy Ghost, at least by way of approbation; which in some
measure justifies what the Ancients have said of it.

2. I grant that the Fathers who believed the inspiration of the Interpreters
were deceived. But that Tradition not being to be compared in extent to that
which I have alleged in favor of the inspiration of the Apostolic Writings,
there is no consequence to be inferred from the one against the other: For the
one, they own they only cite some of the Ancients contradicted by Saint Jerome
whereas I have produced the unanimous Testimony of Antiquity.

3. Let them but a little examine the nature of the matter in Question. The act
of Inspiration of the Greek Interpreters was an Act that happened, as they
pretend, about three hundred Years before the Birth of Christ, and which was
conveyed through the Channel of a Pagan and some Jews, so that it was no such
impossible thing but that the Primitive Fathers of the Church, over credulous
in reference to that Version for which they had an esteem, should be deceived
in honoring it with a Celestial Original. But the inspiration of the Sacred
Books of the New Testament, is quite of another nature: That was a matter of
Fact, which the Ancients took, as I may so say from the Lips of the Apostles,
and which was perpetuated by a Tradition repeated every day, and that too among
Christians remote one from the other. Since then there is so great a difference
between these two matters of Fact, it is evidently apparent, that though all the
Fathers were in an Error when they spoke of the inspiration of the Greek
Interpreters, it cannot be thence concluded that they were mistaken in the
infallible Inspiration which they adscribe to the Apostolic Writings.

By searching into the Objections against the Truth which I have proved; I
imagined with my self, that one might object an ancient Custom of the Church to
honor the Gospels, by causing the People to hear them read standing, whereas
every body might sit down at the reading of the Epistles. Does not this
signify, will some body say, that the Gospels being full of things that issue
immediately from the Lips of our Savior, it was ackowledged by that reverend
Posture, that they were looked upon as infallible Oracles; but that there was
not the same Veneration paid the Epistles, in regard they were deemed to be
Pieces purely Human? However this Objection brings little advantage to M. N's
Opinion, who denies the Gospels to be any more inspired than the Epistles. He
believes the Evangelists attested the Truth no otherwise than ordinary
Historians, and that the Apostles wrote their Epistles no otherwise than like
more Doctors, who utter what comes into their Fancies, in matters of Religion.
According to this Idea, the Historian is no more considered than the Doctor; so
that the Objection will not serve M. N's turn. But if any other would make a
Benefit of it, he ought to know that the Custom which he lays hold of, is
neither so ancient, nor so universal as may be imagined. Though, were it as
ancient as the Apostles, or as universal as the Church, which it is not, there
is no conclusion to be drawn from thence, that the Epistles are the works of
Men. And to be convinced of this, there needs no more that to call to mind,
that the Custom in Dispute, was taken from the Synagogue, where the Law and the
Prophets were heard with distinguishing Marks of Veneration; not that they
believed the Prophets were not inspired, but they looked upon the Prophets as
only infallible Commentators upon the Law, and thought that they were to pay a
greater Honor to the Text than to the Commentary, to Moses than the Prophets.
A Custom which afterward slided I know not how from thence into the Christian
Church. By which they have in some measure advanced the Gospels into the place
of the Law, and the Apostles into the room of the Prophets; not that the
Apostles were thought to be less inspired than the Evangelists, but only to
give the advantage of Honor to the Gospels; whether it were because the
Gospels, as I said before, contain those things that issued immediately from
the Lips of our Savior Jesus Christ; or whether it were, as Cardinal Bona
said, to show that we are or ought to be always ready to obey the Precepts that
God has commanded us in his Gospel. Tanquam servi ante dominum, se promptos
esse and paratos ost endunt ad exequenda mandata Dei quae in Evangelio
promulgantur: Ron. de reb. lit. L. 2. c. 7. Sect. 3.
This is no Obstruction however, why the Church might not be convine'd, that
the Holy Ghost presided in the Composition of the Epistles also. Which is
apparently manifest from this, that the same Fathers and Ancients who practiced
the Custom before mentioned, unanimously affirm that the Apostolic Writings are
Inspired.

And now I suppose I have produced all that is of greatest force against the
Testimony which Antiquity gives on the behalf of Inspiration: so that having
answered all Objections, I may justly presume to conclude, that this
Attestation being unanimous, is a solid Proof for a Christian who understands
what the weight of the Attestation of that part of Antiquity is.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein we begin to prove by the Books of the New Testament, that they are
inspired, and particularly by the Intention which God had in giving them to the
World.

I Am entering into a sort of Proof that more directly opposes the System of M.
N. He pretends, that in the Writings of the New Testament, there is no Proof of
their Inspiration. We are going to show the contrary in the Choice which I have
made of those Proofs. They are of two sorts; General and Particular: The
General are Six in Number; the Design of God in his Writings; the Manner of
their Composition; the Nature of the Covenant, of which they are the Writings;
the Privilege of their Authors; the Promise of Jesus Christ; and the fulfilling
of that Promise.

Now to know by the Writings it self of the New Testament, that it was
inspired, there needs no more than to consider the Purpose of God in granting
it to Men. If his Aim be such as is not to be attained without inspiring the
Interpreters of his Will, it is clear that they were not wrote without the
assistance of his Inspiration.

Should I but go about to make a small Incursion into Antiquity, I might from
thence produce several Testimonies which assure me, that the Design of the
Almighty, in the Writings of the New Testament, was to supply the Absence of
the Apostles, and to lay us down a Rule, which might be, according to the
Expression of Ireneus, the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. This is that
which is proved by the express Declaration of the ancient Doctors, and by the
constant Use which they have made of the Scripture. But I have said enough upon
this Subject already; and therefore it is my purpose now to fetch my Proofs
from the Bottom of that Divine Scripture.

I certainly perceive two Designs of the Almighty; the one is a particular
Design with regard to certain persons, at a certain time: the other has a
Prospect, in relation to all Men and all Times. The Traces of these two Designs
appear in all the parts of Scripture. The Commencement and Birth of the Gospels
and Epistles was for the most part occasional; if I may be permitted to use the
Expression: S. Luke declares, that the Number of Gospels which ran about was
the Occasion of his. It Is also pretended, that the Heresy that began to show
it self in S. John's time, obliged him to compile his Gospel, as a Rampart, to
fortify the Faith of the Christians. The Occasions which produced the most
part of the other Writings of the New Testament, are specified distinctly
enough; or if there be any of which we know not the Occasion of their Writing,
it is not thence to be concluded, that there was no occasion given for their
being written in the Age whererein they were set forth: but Providence has
permitted an Eclipse of that Knowledge, which it deemed not necessary for our
Salvation. We may see that there is hardly any part of the New Testament, that
has not some particular and peculiar Occasion.

It Is of no advantage to my Subject, to examine whether the Apostolic Writings
had any need of being inspired to fulfill the particular Purposes of the
Almighty. I shall only say, that the Inspiration of the Scriptures was nothing
near so necessary in the Primitive Times, as it is at this day. When they for
whose sake the Scripture was first compiled found not wherewithal therein to
satisfy themselves, they needed no more than to ask the Apostles, and to enjoy
all the Advantages which the first Age afforded for their Instruction. But now
that we have nothing more than the Scripture, there is an absolute necessity,
since it is the Pleasure of God to instruct us solidly, that it should be
inspired.

I do not believe there is at this day any Christian Society, which is not
convinced, that besides the particular Occasions that have given Birth to the
Scripture, God was also willing, in composing it, to take care of after Ages.
The Christian Religion is a Gracious Favor which God causes to glide along
from one Age to another, for the Happiness of Mankind. It will last as long as
the World endures: Men will declare and publish the Death of our Lord and
Savior, till he appears again in person. The Promise belongs to us and all
those that shall come after us, as many as the Lord shall call to himself. No
Christian makes any question, but that the Christian Religion will be the
Observance of all Ages: otherwise why should he call himself a a Christian?

Having thus proved the Continuance of our Sacred Religion, would we know how
God preserves it, we see no other means by which he does it, than by the
Scripture, which after it had served for the Use of the First Age, gives Light
to us in our Turn, as it will enlighten our Posterity.

M. N. acknowledges, that indeed the Scripture is the means of the Propagation
of our Faith, but he believes, that for that purpose it is enough, that the
Sacred Authors have made a faithful Report of what they learned from our Lord,
tho their Additions and their Commentaries are absolutely the Growth of their
own Heads. However, if Men would but consider, they will find that God would
but have badly put in execution the Design which he has laid of establishing a
solid Faith, had he followed the System which I oppose.

You tell us, that the Sacred Writers have faithfully reported what they
learned from our Lord and Savior. This is certain, if you affirm that the Holy
Ghost guided their Pens. But if you believe, that they wrote of their own
Heads, you destroy their Credit. That they were honest and sincere, I agree;
but such persons may be deceived. I cannot rely upon 'em, unless I believe that
the Holy Ghost was their Guide in every Truth. I see in their Sacred Writings
several Arguments, and a great number of Applications of the Old Testament. If
I believe that the Holy Ghost was their Instructor, I willingly submit to 'em,
but without such an assistance, I cannot repose upon Commentators, who, setting
aside the Succor of the Holy Ghost, were less learned, and of less Abilities
than many Doctors at this day. Moreover, had the Apostles always distinguished
what they knew by Revelation, from what they spoke of their own Heads, there
would be less difficulty in the thing: but they present us almost all the whole
Bulk in a Mixture, where it is a hard matter to discern what is Divine from
what is not. My Conscience cannot be satisfied with this Method; I am always in
doubt whether I ought to argue after the Apostles, or whether I ought to appeal
from their Decisions to my own Reason. I can never be able to stop the Progress
of Error, if after I have found a Passage which utterly and clearly destroys
it, it shall be replied upon me, this comes from the Apostle, not from God; and
thus there will be never any thing of Certainty. But most assuredly God has not
made Choice of a Means that authorizes our Doubts, for a Rule of our Faith. Of
Necessity therefore all the Parts of Scripture must be divinely inspired, to
the end the Scripture may render the Man of God accomplished in all good Works.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament is
demonstrated by the manner of their Composition.

It is a difficult Thing to conceive, that the Sacred Books of the New
Testament should be inspired by the Holy Ghost, and yet that there should
appear no Footsteps in it of that Inspiration; and this is that which I design
to examine. I do not pretend, by any means, to prove, that every Page or every
Line of the Holy Scripture carries imprinted in it a sensible Character of the
Splendour of the Holy Ghost that inspired it. Take the best Book, if you pull it
to pieces, you lessen the Value of it. It Is only esteemed for the happy
Assemblage of Words and Things of which it is composed: After you have
destroyed the Proportion and the Symmetry, you will no longer find what caused
it to be admired. Let the whole Scripture be but duly considered, and it will
be found to be a Work worthy of Heaven. There are some Pieces of it without
question, which being considered apart, cease not however to deserve our
Admiration. But there are others, which being removed out of their proper
place, will appear very common. Let us look upon the Scripture in that Point of
Perfection, as the Holy Ghost represents it to us, and we must needs
acknowledge it to be his Work.

It were to be wished, some will say, that the Holy Ghost had manifested
himself more distinctly in the Writings of the New Testament. How! would ye
that the Holy Ghost should not have spoken the Language of Men? I confess
indeed, that he might have spoken the Language of the Third Heaven, but it
would not have been intelligible to us, who are not there as yet. Since he
spoke to Men, to the end they might understand him, 'twas necessary he should
conform his Style to human Apprehension. He was obliged to take upon him our
Manners, our Words, our Shape, and our Air to convert us. To that purpose he
made choice of Men, made as we are, after they were sufficiently instructed in
what they had to say to us; and he was to guide their Pens for fear they should
make any false step. Had the Holy Ghost either sent an Angel, or formed a Voice
in the Air, to settle the Doctrine of Heaven, such means had appeared more
extraordinary, but they were not fit for Instruction. It was the Wisdom of God
to prefer Useful before Miraculous.

The only Difficulty is to know which way to find out, that they who wrote like
other Men were guided by the Holy Ghost. There are two Ways whereby to attain
to this Knowledge; the One is the Attestation of the Apostles strengthened by
the Proofs which they have given of their Sincerity: and by the Miracles by
which they made it appear, that they were Men who were sent from God. The other
Way is to search into the Composition it self of the Sacred Books for Proofs of
their Inspiration. As to the first way, it is not our Intention at present to
call it in question.

As to the Second, I shall conclude in a few Words. It Is a strange thing to
consider the various Oppositions of human Wit. This Book wherein some behold
the Finger of God, by others is looked upon as a Piece of human Workmanship.
Let us impartially examine the Matter. The profane must acknowledge, that they
are prepossessed in their Judgments which they make of the Scripture: for when
they read another Piece, that is but a little studied according to the Rules of
Art, they are charmed with it; they cry it is all divine; they affirm, that
there is nothing great without Inspiration. Nihil magnum sine afflatu divino.
But when they come to the Scripture, they are quite of another Opinion; they
despise what they would have admired in another Book. Nevertheless, it has so
happened, that upon some Occasions the Force of Truth has extorted several
Approbations in favor of Moses, the Prophets and S. Paul. The World has found
that there was something extraordinary in those great Men. But if we would but
search into the Original of the Scripture without prepossession, we should soon
confess, that it is a Work of Heaven. This does not appear perhaps upon the
first Reading. Read it again, and the more you read that Book, the less you
will be weary of reading it; nay, it will appear more lovely the last time than
the first.

Had I to do with Christians only that with delight have read over and over
again the New Testament, I would refer 'em to their own Experience, and ask 'em
whether their Hearts ever found that Satisfaction in any other Book which they
found in this. But it behooves us to speak something which may be more generally
satisfactory. Was ever known a Doctrine more sublime, or Instructions of a
purer Extraction. It Is true, that there are in the World certain People who
have so disguised this Doctrine, as to make it appear low and mean. Now I
consider it such as it is in it self; in this Prospect I dare say, that Men
never saw any Book so much worthy of their Admiration.

This Argument, is not proper but for persons that have absolutely declared
themselves against the Christian Religion. M. N. will say, that the Question,
whether it be inspired or no, is not the Subject of the Dispute. He grants that
Jesus Christ was divinely inspired; and in regard it was by him, that his
Evangelists and Apostles were instructed, it is clear that the Religion which
they preached, bears the Character of its first Author.

I must confess, that the Question between M. N. and my self, chiefly concerns
the Manner how they published those Truths which they learned from the Lord.
Our Author believes, that in that respect, they were left to their own
Judgment, and that there is no necessity of admitting the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost into the Composition of their Writings. On the other side, I pretend
to make it out in the Series of this Discourse, that without that assistance
the Scripture is of little use. Now as the Argument upon which I insist in this
Chapter is drawn from a serious Inspection into the Sacred Books, I assert,
that if they be well considered, it will appear that their Composition is not
purely human. I shall not prove this Proposition by heaping together the noble
Passages that are to be found from time to time in the Writings of the
Apostles; I only ask who these new Authors were, that spoke so worthily of the
Religion which they preach. We find among 'em Galileans, that is to say,
homebred ignorant People, born in a Country where there was nothing of
Politeness; we find 'em to be Fishermen, that is to say, People by their
Profession rude and unpolished. By them, let us judge of the rest, since it is
agreed, that if any one of the Apostles were inspired in Writing, the Question
is decided. Where was it then, that these Authors learned to write well? Let us
grant, that their Writings are not so fine as the Books which the World
esteems. The Authors of those Books had the Help both of Study and Art, which
is all human. But where was it that the Sacred Authors learned their Manner of
Writing?

We find that the Question is not whether the Writings of the Apostles are more
eloquent than those which the World admires. Suppose an Equality as to that
matter, that is nothing to my purpose: the Business is to know where the
Apostles learned their Manner of writing those things which they deliver. Upon
the Day of the Pentecost they spoke new Languages, that other Men spoke. But
the Miracle was this, that the Apostles spoke Languages which they had never
learned before. Some will say, tho to little purpose, where was the Miracle,
seeing that others spoke as well as they? It Is true indeed, the Apostles write
as other Men; but here is the Difference not to be contested, that the Apostles
had never learned to write; and I think this may pass for a good proof of the
Inspiration of the New Testament.

CHAP. X.
Wherein the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament is made out from the
Nature of the Covenant of which they are the Writings.

IT appears by inspecting into these Books, that they belong to a Covenant
which God has manifested with much more Advantage than the Old Testament. The
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, says, that Jesus Christ was the Mediator
of a better Covenant. This Covenant is better in diverse Respects. It is not to
be contested, but that it is better in respect of Light and Certainty. I
understand from the Writings of the New Testament, that the Old one presented
nothing but Types and Shadows. S. John opposes Truth to the Law in point of
Evidence: The Law, says he, John 1.17.
was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. S. Paul insists
upon the same Opposition, in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians: But if the
Gospel be hid, says he, 2 Cor. 4.3, 6.
it is hid to those that perish. And he gives this Reason for it. For God, says
he, who commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. These Expressions are very clear, and make out as evidently as it
is possible, the Inspiration of S. Paul. It is necessary to bear it in
remembrance; but I insist at present only upon the Advantage of the New
Covenant, which is to be more full of Light and Clearness than the former.

This being granted, I consider the Degrees of Light that enlightened the Old
Covenant. I find that the Prophets, who were inspired by the Holy Ghost,
instructed the Ages they lived in; but they also transmitted that Inspiration
to the succeeding Ages by their Writings, which were consulted with as much
Religion, as they would have consulted their Authors had they been alive. Those
Sacred Monuments were read, as they would have hearkened to the Prophets
themselves. The Mouth of God spoke still in their Writings. The Nation of the
Jews was of this Opinion, except, as it is commonly thought, a Handful of
Sadducees, who, the better to defend their Errors, entrenched themselves in the
Pentateuch. However this does not hinder Josephus from saying in general.
Answer to Ap^^^ c. 2.
Moreover, there can be nothing more certain, than the Writings authorized
among us, in regard they are not liable to any Contrariety, in regard there is
nothing approved but what the Prophets wrote several Ages since, according to
the Purity of Truth, by the Inspiration, and by the Impulse of the Spirit of
God. Neither do we trouble our selves with infinite Numbers of Books that
contradict one another, as having no more than Twenty two, etc. And a little
after, We have so profound a Respect for these Books, that never any Body was
so hardy as to undertake either to add or diminish, or alter the least Tittle.
We look upon 'em as Divine: we call 'em so: we profess to observe 'em
inviolably, and joyfully to lay down our Lives, if there be occasion, in
defense of 'em.

Nothing can more clearly express the high Opinion which the Jewish Church had
of the Sacred Books that compose the Old Testament. And Josephus is more to be
believed upon this Subject, than a modern Author, who tell us, that the
Prophets had no other Assistance of the Holy Ghost, than a pious Disposition
which made 'em write like persons of Sincerity, but without any Prerogative of
Infallibility. But this was not Josephus's Opinion; this was not the Belief of
the Jewish Church; this was not the Judgment of S. Peter, who declares, that
Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Nor is there any father doubt to be made of it after the Decision of St. Paul.
The whole Scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for Instruction. I
shall not make any stop at the nice Cavil of Grotius, who would make S. Paul to
say, The whole Scripture which is divinely inspired is profitable, etc. The
Answer of Theophilact is sufficient. They are to know, says he, that the
Apostle said, thou have been bred up from thy Infancy in the Holy Scriptures.
He says, All Scripture: what Scripture does he mean? The same of which he said,
that it was Sacred. It was in truth, in all the parts of Scripture, that
Timothy had been instructed from his Infancy. St. Paul therefore exhorting him
to persevere in the things which he had learned, would not have argued rightly,
if when he urged it as a motive for his perseverance, that all Scripture was
inspired, he had not spoke of the whole Book which the Jews looked upon to be
all Scripture.

In the Main, the observation of Grotius does my argument no harm, though it
were well grounded; for the design of that Author is only to deprive the
Historical Books of the Old Testament of the Honor of Inspiration. He
acknowledges in another place, that Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, David and
Daniel were divinely Inspired. So that according to Grotius the Jewish Church
had Books wherein the Holy Ghost spoke. Had they need of the Spirit of God,
they found it in the writings of the Prophets: and this Light has constantly
endured in all Ages of the Jewish Church, even in the later times, as corrupt
as they were.

Ought we not to have a Light at least equal to it, under an Economy, wherein
it is agreed, that God has manifested himself with more advantage than under
the Law? We have no longer any Apostles; there are no longer any men inspired,
if we have not writings which repair that loss, by means of that Infallibility
with which the Holy Ghost would have invested them. To whom is it not apparent,
that our condition is worse than that of the ancient Jews? The Day shined out
to them, but it is Night with us. All the advantage is on the side of the
Carnal posterity of Abraham, even of that which is rejected. The Jews had
formerly, and still have Books wherein they find the infallible Voice of God.
But if we believe M. N. we must rely upon the Credit of Histories which some
persons of sincerity have written for the Doctrine of our Savior, and to the
arguments which only sound Reason and Judgment dictated to Authors without
Logic or Education. I cannot believe that this Hypothesis will ever be relished
by those who are never so little acquainted with the Prerogatives of the
Christian Church.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament is made out by the
Prerogatives of the Apostles.

THE best way which we have to know certainly whether the Christian Church has
not as great a share of divine Illumination as the Jewish Church, is to see
what sort of Persons the Authors of the New Testament were. The Jewish Church
had Prophets and we have Apostles: our Books, except two or three which were
made under the inspection of the Apostles, were written by the order and with
the approbation of the Apostles. There needs no more than to see whether our
Apostles were not equal in worth to the Prophets of the Old Testament. In the
Epistle to the Ephesians I find them equalled together, C. 2. v. 20.
in the work of Salvation; being built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. In this place to speak of Equality would be an injury to the
Apostles, in regard that here they are named before the Prophets.

Nor is it without good Ground that I make this observation, since St. Paul's
Custom is to put the Apostles at the head of the Ministers of the Christian
Church. She had also Prophets, and Prophets inspired like those of the Old
Testament. Would you know which are the most Excellent, the Apostles or the
Prophets? There needs no more than to see what rank they hold in the Catalogue
which St. Paul gives of the Ministers of Grace. 1 Cor. 12.28.
First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, then Teachers. Besides, that this is a
Place where the Apostle is bound to mark out to every one his Station: Chance
had no share in Ranging them under that Order. So that we find that St. Paul
observes the same Order in the sequel of his Argugument. Are all Apostles? 1
Cor. 13.29.
are all Prophets? are all Teachers? In his Epistle to the Ephesians the
Evangelists are set before the Teachers; but he is constant in the precedence
which he gives the Apostles before the Prophets. He has appointed some for
Apostles, and others for Prophets. Nevertheless, notwithstanding his humility,
he gives the first Place to his own Dignity: when he acted in his Apostleship
he gave way to no Man. If we may believe him, the Apostles of the Christian
Church were more excellent than the Prophets.

Nor do we too highly exalt the Apostleship, by adding, that it included in it
self all the advantages affixed to the inferior Degrees. The Apostles were
Prophets and Teachers; they had the Gift of working Miracles, which the Holy
Ghost divided among them. Had they all the Gift of Healing? Did they all speak
diverse Languages? Did they all Interpret? No, but the Apostles did all this;
the Grace of the Apostleship included all other Graces. We ought not slightly
to pass by the words of Saint Paul, when designing to set forth, that
subordination which Grace had established in the Primitive Church by the
variety of Gifts; he declares, that to every one is given the manifestation of
the Holy Ghost, so far as is expedient. Though St. Paul had not said it, it is a
Truth which common Sense would have given us to understand. For do we not find
that it is incumbent upon the wisdom of God to order the Means according to the
Purpose which he proposes to himself. Let us then say, that the Apostles had a
measure of the Holy Ghost proportionable to the designs of the Apostleship.
They had at least as much of the Spirit of Truth, as the Prophets had received.
We say, at least; for in regard the Apostolic Writings were to be serviceable
toward the edification of the Church at all times and in all places, it is clear
that those Writings wanted a more especial assistance than those other, of
which the primitive use was only for a particular Nation, and for a very
limited time. But it is sufficient for me to extend the force of my Argument so
far, that the Prerogative ought at least to be equal. If then the writings of
the Prophets were inspired, as I have proved, certainly the writings of the
Apostles, who were the more excellent, ought a fortiore, to be inspired.

It Is not any thing of personal Excellence which is the Business in dispute;
for the Prophets and Apostles are not to be here considered, but with reference
to the Use that they were made for. The Prophets were not Prophets for
themselves, 1 Pet. 1.12.
unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
minister the Things, etc. The Apostles were not Apostles for themselves; but it
was for our sakes that they administered. They are our Masters, we are grounded
upon their Writings. Let us compare the Prophets and the Apostles, we shall
find, that as it is certain that the Apostles were much more excellent than the
Prophets, 'twas requisite they should have a more advantageous share of the
Holy Ghost. They stood in need of a lively and durable Light which was not to
be extinguished by time, but to enlighten all Ages.

I do not believe this argument is to be eluded with the least Tittle of
Solidity. Some will say, that we ought to look upon the Writings of the
Prophets with a more awful respect, because upon some occasions we find that
they speak like Prophets, and as it were the immediate Ambassadors of God. But
this Consideration brings no advantage to the writings of the Old Testament.
For we see something of the same nature in the greatest part of those of the
New Testament; even in those, wherein according to M. N. there are the fewest
of the inspired Passages. I speak of the Epistles of St. Paul, which he begins
with a Preface wherein is to be seen, under what Quality he writes; Paul an
Apostle of Jesus Christ. He writes like an Apostle, like a man inspired by the
Spirit of God; like a man set apart to preach the Gospel. The Title is
sufficient to show that he wrote like an Apostle, and with all the advantages
of the Grace of the Apostleship. Infallibility was one of the dependencies upon
that Grace: for the Holy Ghost conferred it upon every one so far as was
expedient. Was it not expedient that the first Ministers of the Gospel should
be infallible, when they proclaimed such Mysteries to the World? It is visible
that the Grace of Infallibility was necessary in the exercise of the
Apostleship. The Question then returns to this? Did S. Paul exercise his
Apostleship in writing? Did he make use of that Grace in his VVritings?

We cannot have a better Testimony than himself, who tells us that he wrote as
an Apostle of the Lord. By virtue of that Character which he assumes in the
Prefaces of his writings, he exacts from us our Belief of all that he says. To
contradict him in any thing, is to dishonor the Apostleship, and to offend the
Holy Spirit who made the Apostles. From time to time St. Paul informs us, even
in the body of his Epistles, that it is by virtue of the Grace of God which he
has received as an Apostle that he instructs his Readers. For I say, Romans 2.3.
through the Grace given unto me, to every man among you, says he to the
Romans. He lays his Foundation according to the Grace of God, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11.
and he builds upon that Foundation according to the Grace which is given him;
that Grace which he so frequently mentions with such great Elogies. In the
first Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans he calls it Grace by way of
Excellency; Romans 1.5.
By whom we have received Grace and Apostleship, etc. In his Epistle to the
Ephesians he speaks of this Grace with a greater emphasis, whereof I was made a
Minister, according to the gift of the Grace of God given unto me, by the
effectual working of his power; to me is this Grace given, etc. The Grace of
the Apostleship was then a Gift of the first Degree; and according to that
degree it was, that St. Paul both taught and wrote. But besides the testimony
which St. Paul gives of himself, we have on his behalf the attestation of Saint
Peter, who tells us that St. Paul wrote according to the wisdom which was given
to him. This is a Talent which he had not hid in the Ground; he could not do
it: I speak thus, not only in reference to the probity of Saint Paul, who had
too much Sincerity to disguise the Counsel of God; but because the Counsel of
God was such, that the Gospel should be preserved in its Purity, by the means
of the Apostolic writings. This was the Business of the Almighty, nor could
the Apostles but obey that Sovereign Order upon which depended the Salvation of
the whole World. The Apostles wrote according to that wisdom which God had
imparted to them: which clearly enough confirms their Inspiration. Nor have the
Prophetic Writings any stronger argument on their side.

CHAP. XII.
Wherein the Inspiration of the Books of the New Testament is made out by the
Promise which Jesus Christ made of his Spirit to the Authors of it.

IT will be easy to make a Demonstration of this to Persons who are convinced
that Christ had sincerity and Power sufficient to perform his Promises. 2 John
14.26
But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, said Jesus to his Apostles, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. This Promise puts
us in hopes of two things: the one is, that the Apostles should be instructed
by the Holy Ghost in reference to their Apostleship: the second is, that the
Holy Spirit would bring distinctly to their Remembrance, whatever they had
heard their Master say.

We ought to observe that our Lord and Savior makes this Promise at a time
when he was desirous to comfort his afflicted Apostles. He had declared that he
was about to leave them. What shall we then do, said they to themselves? Thou
have established us Masters in Israel, while thou art with us, we shall acquit
our selves of our Ministry without any trouble or disquiet; if we meet with
difficulties, thou art here to resolve them; we are assured that we shall speak
the truth, while we speak after Thee. Therefore Jesus Christ, to deliver them
out of this Perplexity, promises them an Infallible Spirit that should remain
with them all along. John 4.16.
I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that be may
abide with you for ever. In the Verse which I cited before, Christ explains the
Function of this new Comforter. He shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your Remembrance, C. 15.26.
whatsoever I have said unto you. In the following Chapter, this Comforter is
for the same Reason called the Spirit of Truth; 16. v. 13.
and his Function is more particularly described in the 16th Chapter, where it
is said, that the Spirit of truth should guide the Apostles in all truth. This
was a general Promise which dissipated the disquiet of those Holy men. Luke
12.11, 12.
They had been already assured that they should never want words when they
should be called before Tribunals. And when they bring you unto the Synogogues,
and unto Magistrates and Powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall
answer, for the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye shall say.
The Repetition of this Promise was very necessary, when Christ was ready to
leave the World, and that the Apostles were upon the Point of being hauled
before Magistrates. Nor was this the only occasion wherein the Disciples of the
Lord had need of his assistance; he makes them a much larger promise; and
assures them that the Holy Ghost shall guide them in all truth, to the end they
may fulfill the Functions of their Apostleship.

A Promise so glorious fixes the Infallibility of the Apostles above all manner
of Objection. So long as our Lord and Savior shall be acknowledged for
Infallible, we must confess that his Promise has been fulfilled, and that as he
had promised, his Apostles exempt from error, were guided in all truth. Every
Christian is bound to acknowledge the Reality of this Promise, and by
consequence the infallibility of the Apostles. They were guided in all truth
and consequently they were infallible. These are expressions which carry one
and the same sense.

I do not pretend to drive the thing so far, as to maintain upon this
Foundation, that the Apostles were universally instructed in all things, even
in such things as had no relation to their Apostleship. The Holy Ghost did not
impart himself to those Holy Men, but in what they stood in need of as
Apostles, and Teachers of Mankind. What they did as such, was under the
immediate direction of the Holy Ghost. I carry their Inspiration no higher.
When they preached the Gospel, when they made their defenses before
Magistrates, when they wrote concerning Christianity, when they debated matters
of Piety. These were Apostolic Functions which they performed by the direction
of the Spirit of Truth.

Not to speak of any other then of the writings of the Apostles, ^is visible
upon that occasion, that the Promise ought to be fulfilled. For when could
there be any necessity that it should be accomplished, if not at that time,
when the Glory and Infallibility of those writings lay at stake that were to be
the perpetual Monuments of the Christian Faith? When could it be more requisite
for the Holy Ghost to appear, if it were not then, when the instruction of all
Mankind was the main matter in Question?

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein the Inspiration of the New Testament is made out by the fulfilling of
the Promise of Jesus Christ.

NOthing is more proper to explain the sense of a divine Promise than the
performance of it. I have said, that our Lord and Savior promised his Apostles
the assistance of his Spirit in all their Apostolic Functions: Let no body
mistake himself in maintaining, that by this general Promise our Savior meant
the Gifts of Miracles which never failed the Apostles in the exercise of their
Duties. If that were the whole extent of the Promise, M. N. would assert, that
the Miracles of the Apostles would be no good proofs of their Infallibility,
because several private men have had the Gift of Miracles that were not
infallible.

Though it were true that the Miracles which the Primitive Christians wrought
were no proofs of the certainty and soundness of their Faith, yet I say that
the same argument is not to be made use of in reference to the Apostles, as in
relation to other Christians. Let us always look upon the Apostles as
Instruments that God has made choice of to instruct all Mankind. Let us never
quit that Idea, to the end we may understand after a just and true manner the
nature of those Graces which the Holy Ghost imparted to them. Let it be
asserted, that the gift of working Miracles was not incompatible with the
infidelity of several bad Christians, that cannot be averred in reference to
the Apostles, because it was by their means that God instructed his whole
Church. He could not suffer them to go astray in teaching any thing that was
false, while he imparted to them the gift of Miracles. Otherwise he would have
authorized a Lie in the Apostles, and all those Swervings and Deviations,
wherein they might have engaged the Church: which was utterly opposite to his
design, which was to make them Ministers of the Truth. I have good reason
therefore to infer from the Spirit of Miracles, that our Savior promised and
granted to his Apostles, that he would continue to them that Infallibility,
which was a Prerogative necessary to their Apostleship.

I should reason thus, although our Savior had only barely promised his Spirit
of Miracles to his Apostles. But we stand upon a much more solid Foundation,
seeing that he expressly promises a Spirit of Truth; a Spirit which should teach
all things; a Spirit that should guide them in all Truth. The Truth, or
Infallibility is the principal thing which he promises. If he were so faithful
as to his promise of the Gifts of Miracles, would he have been less punctual in
a Promise upon which he much more remarkably insisted?

I shall not make any stop in discoursing of the manner how this Promise of
Infallibility was fulfilled, in any other places than in the writings of the
Apostles; to which I am only to confine my self. The only Use which I would
make of other occasions, should be to conclude, that if our Savior gave his
Spirit of Truth to the Apostles upon occasions of less importance, than when
they wrote concerning Religion, the reason is so much the stronger, that he
assisted them in their writings. For instance, I find that in the Council of
Jerusalem, where the Question was debated, Whether the Christians should submit
themselves to the Yoke of Circumcision; the Holy Ghost directs the
Consultations of the Apostles, and empowr's them to say, It has seemed meet to
us and to the Holy Spirit. How is it probable that he forsook the Apostles in
the Composition of Writings which contained the Sovereign Decision of all the
important Questions that could be put up in the Church? The Consequence is
true: for seeing the Holy Ghost presided in the Council of Jerusalem, it is not
to be conceived, that he neglected writings of much greater moment, than that
Council was.

Let us come a little nearer to the inspiration of these Sacred Writings. The
Promise of this Spirit of Truth has been fulfilled: it has enlightened the
Apostles: let us judge of all the rest by St. Paul, the last who was called. He
tells the Corinthians, that the Holy Spirit instructed him; But God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit. Now we have received not the Spirit of the
World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual
Things with spiritual. In another place, the same Apostle says, that because of
the Excellency of the Revelation wherewith he was honored, 1 Cor. 12.7.
a Thorn was given him, lest he should be exalted above measure.

He compares this Illumination to that which God wrought at the beginning of
the World when he commanded Light out of Darkness. So that there is no question
but that St. Paul was inspired; and if he, then all the rest of the Apostles
also. But to what purpose would this Inspiration have served, had it not been
transmitted into their Writings. Those Holy Men were inspired that they might
be able to instruct the Church. If the Holy Spirit, after he had imparted to
them his Light, had not taken care to diffuse it into their VVritings, it would
have been absolutely useless to us. I conclude from thence, that the Spirit of
Truth after it had illuminated their Minds, guided their Pens, to the end their
Light might be transmitted to Posterity. There are particular Passages that
positively prove the fulfilling of the Promise, as I have said already; but
they deserve a Chapter by themselves.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein are produced several Passages of Scripture, which show that the Sacred
Writers of the New Testament have declared, that they were inspired in their
Writings.

IT IS now time to pass to particular Proofs which are to be found scattered
here and there in the Writings of the New Testament. The Enemies of their
Inspiration set a high Value upon the Objection which they fetch from hence,
that the Apostles never begin their Discourses, as the Prophets do, by saying,
The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and are so daring, as to assert, that the
Sacred Writers of the New Testament never thought, nor desired it should be
thought that there Writings were inspired. I must confess, that the Apostles do
not say in express Words, The Mouth of the Lord has thus spoken. For in regard
that the Prophets did not enjoy the Benefit of Inspiration but by Intervals,
there was some kind of necessity that those Holy Men should declare, what
things those were which they had learned by Revelation. It was not the same
thing with the Apostles, in regard they were assured, that the Holy Ghost
assisted 'em always, according to the Promise of Jesus Christ, in Matters of
Religion. More especially it ought to be observed, that it is not true, that
the Prophets always began their Prophetic Writings with these Words, The Mouth
of the Lord has spoken. Let 'em read the Five Books of Moses, and they shall
find several Proofs of what I affirm. That Legislator without any more ado
begins with these Words: In the beginning God created the Heavens and the
Earth. Nor is the Book of Exodus signalized with any other better Character of
Inspiration. Nevertheless, it is known, that those Two Books are no less
inspired, than the Prophesies that command Attention with these Words at the
Beginning, The Mouth of the Lord has spoken. Let 'em not therefore have a worse
Opinion of the Writings of the New Testament, under pretense that these Words
are not there.

In the Old Testament, that which was merely Historical, was not introduced
with this Preface, The Mouth of the Lord has spoke. This is usually reserved
for parts that are purely Prophetic, wherein the Spirit of God had a singular
Concern. Now I affirm, that the New Testament, in those parts that contain some
Prophecies, marks out their Original as distinctly as if the Apostles had said,
The Spirit of the Lord has spoke it. As for the Historical Parts, and such as
undertake Argument, it is not to be thought strange, if we do not there meet
with the same Character. That is common to both Testaments; they never expressly
attribute to God any more than his Oracles. But that is no Obstruction, but
that what those Holy Men either wrote or thought under the Guidance of the Holy
Ghost, may not be in some measure inspired. I shall discourse of that more
distinctly in the Series of this Treatise. I have said enough to show, that the
Old Testament has no advantage over the New, in respect of Inspiration, and
that they are in the wrong who deny this Truth, under pretense that the
Prophets say sometimes, The Mouth of the Lord has spoken, but the Apostles
never make use of that Expression.

As to what they add, that the Apostles never pretended to Inspiration, and
that they have not mentioned any thing of it in their Writings, it is easy to
be discerned, that nothing stands upon a weaker Foundation, than this
Objection. In short, the Apostles let us know, that they had received from
Heaven what we call Prophetic Parts; sometimes it was in Vision, sometimes by
the Suggestions of the Spirit. As to other Parts, besides that I have already
observed, that the Works which compose the New Testament, are written by
Authors which the Holy Ghost had invested with Endowments necessary to make
that Book the Foundation of Truth, I could wish that something of Attention
might be given to some express Passages of the New Testament.

S. Paul assures the Corinthians, that he had the Mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16.
(...) and in another place, after he had given his Judgment upon several
Scruples that arose in point of Marriage, he says that he speaks by permission,
not by command; Chap. 7.
and that he gives his Judgment as one that has obtained Mercy of the Lord to
be faithful. Is not this of as great Force, as if he had said, all these
Instructions which I have given you were inspired into me by the Holy Ghost.

The Thing speaks it self; S. Paul affirms, that what he wrote to the
Corinthians, touching Marriage, was the Work of the Holy Ghost. For these
Words, Now I believe that I have the Spirit of God, either signify nothing
where they are placed; or else they signify, that what the holy S. Paul had
wrote, was by the Guidance of the Holy Spirit.

It Is the general Intention of this Apostle, that he should be looked upon as a
person in whom the Spirit of God resided, to render him capable to instruct
others. The good thing that was committed unto thee, 1 Timothy 1.14. 2 Cor. 13.3.
1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
says he, by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us; since ye seek a Proof of
Christ speaking in me. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God,
who has also given unto us his Holy Spirit. If any man thinks himself to be
a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto
you, are the Commandments of the Lord. All which Passages clearly show, what
Opinion it was that S. Paul desired Men should have of his Writings.

S. Peter is no less positive. This Second Epistle, beloved, I now write unto
you -- That ye may be mindful of the Words which were spoken before by the Holy
Prophets, 2 Pet. 3.1.
and of the Commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. S. Peter in
these Words designs two Things which are proper for our Subject. 1. He
parallels that Epistle with the Writings of the Prophets. 2. He puts a great
Value upon that Epistle, because it was written by an Apostle of Jesus Christ.
Will any Man say, that a person who thus expresses himself did believe that
the Writings of the Apostles were not inspired?

In the same Chapter, S. Peter gives an Authentic Testimony in favor of the
Epistles of S. Paul; Even as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the
Wisdom given unto him, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.
has also written unto you, as also in all his Epistles; speaking in them of
these Things: in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures. These
Words furnish us with two convincing Arguments in favor of the Inspiration of
the Epistles of S. Paul. 1. They were written according to the Wisdom which S.
Paul had received from Heaven: I have already touched upon this Argument. The
other is, that the Epistles of S. Paul are reckoned in the Number of the
inspired Scriptures, which the ignorant and unstable wrest as they do the other
Scriptures. Assuredly, by those other Scriptures, S. Peter means the inspired
Scriptures, of which Jesus Christ says in another place, You go astray not
knowing the Scriptures; and which the New Testament usually cites as the Work
of the Holy Ghost. The Business in Hand is about the Scriptures which the
unlearned wrest to their own destruction, which can be meant of no other than
of the Holy Scripture. S. Peter does not complain of the Unlearned for wresting
the Scriptures, but for wresting the other Scriptures. Whence it is evident,
that the Epistles of S. Paul are reckoned in the Number of the inspired
Scriptures. Can any thing be more positively expressed upon the Inspiration of
the Works that make up the New Testament?

CHAP. XV.
Wherein is drawn from the Gift of Discerning of Spirits granted to the
Primitive Christians a Proof, very much in Favor of the Sacred Books which the
Apostles have left us.

MEN dispute about the Marks whereby they might formerly know the true
Prophets. Commonly it is affirmed, that Miracles, or the Accomplishment of the
Prophecy was the true Proof of a real Prophet. But it may be said, that this is
not always certain; for it would be a difficult thing to prove, that all the
Prophets verified their Mission by Miracles, or by accomplished Prophecies.
This was not altogether so necessary but when there was something of great
Importance, that was the Subject of the Prophecy. For to what purpose was it to
make a great Noise and a stir, when there was nothing more in the Business,
than to reduce Sinners into the right Path that had been traced by a Law
supported by so many Miracles.

God never overturns the Laws of Nature, unless there be some necessary
occasion. I should have rather said, that the Miracles of a true Prophet become
serviceable to him that wrought none at all: wherein I thus explain my self.
When a Prophet had justified his Mission by some Miracles, he was acknowledged
for a Man of God. After which his Testimony was as good as a Miracle to other
Prophets, while he acknowledged that those new Prophets were sent by the same
Master. This Attestation removed all Occasion of Doubts. When we find that
certain Books of the Old Testament want these authentic Proofs of their
Divinity, which other Books have, that are looked upon in the first Order of
Canonical, we are confirmed by understanding, that those Books, about which
some Men would raise Disputes and Doubts, passed through the Hands of the last
Prophets truly inspired. I say the same thing of persons; a Prophet whose
Mission was not honored by Miracles was acknowledged upon the Inspiration of
another Prophet whose Attestation had been proved.

I apply this Argument to my Subject. They who had no good Opinion of the Works
of S. Mark and S. Luke, because they were not Apostles, ought to alter their
Sentiment, when they consider, that the Evangelists had the Approbation of the
Apostles. How shall we prove, that the Apostles were worthy to be credited? We
have their Miracles; but we have also other Proof, from the Conduct which God
observed in providing credible Testimonies among the Primitive Christians to
justify the Apostles.

It Is known, that among them, there were several to whom God had granted the
Talent of discerning Spirits. 1 Cor. 12.7, 8, 10.
S. Paul is positive in it: But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit. -- To another the
working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of Spirits.
This is no bare natural Discerning, since it is reckoned in the number of
miraculous Gifts. The Spirit of God taught several Christians how to understand
Persons, and Doctrines truly inspired. Several make no scruple to refer to this
what S. Paul says of the Spiritual Man. 1 Cor. 2.15.
But he that is spiritual, judges all things. This is to be understood of the
things of God. 14.29.
Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. Thus you see the
discerning of Spirits established. Verse 22. of the same Chapter, it is said,
The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: which is usually
explained by saying, that the Prophets of the New Covenant were Masters of
themselves to observe silence, till they had an opportunity to speak. But
nothing hinders, but that it may be meant of that same Dependence which some of
the Prophets had upon others, when the one examined the other. In which Sense,
the Prophets were subject to the Prophets.

The same Chapter furnishes me with an undeniable Proof to uphold my Argument.
Verse. 37.
If any Man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, says S. Paul, let him
acknowledge that the things which I write unto you are the commandments of the
Lord. If any one thinks himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual; that is,
according to the Phrase of Scripture, If any be a Prophet, or spiritual, let
him acknowledge, etc. Spiritual persons then might discern, if what S. Paul
wrote came from the Lord. The Epistles of that Sacred Author passed for such a
Proof which might well be called the Judgment of God, since it was God who
inspired Spiritual Men. This Consideration may serve for the Understanding of
several Places of S. Paul, he exposes his Writings to the Judgment of Spiritual
Men, Men judicious and discerning, established by Grace to corroborate the
Authority of the Apostles. By that means it was plainly discerned, that there
was nothing spurious in their Writings; and that they contained neither
Arguments nor Matters of Fact which were not exactly according to the Weights
of the Sanctuary.

Spinosa and M. N. here propose some Scruples, but my Answer will be more
intelligible, when I have considered the Nature of the Inspiration of the
Sacred Books of the New Testament. Which is that which I am going to undertake
in the Second Part of this Treatise.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
Wherein it is shown, that it is not the Common Belief that the Sacred Books of
the New Testament were dictated word for word by the immediate Suggestion of
the Holy Ghost.

WHEN we go about to disabuse the Public of an Euror, it is necessary that it
should be notoriously manifest, that it is publicly received; in which case,
the notoriousness of it supplies the Proof; or at least if the thing be not so
evidently known, it is requisite we should give our selves the trouble to prove
it. For if it so falls out that Men undertake to undeceive the Public, when it
is not deceived, 'twill be a sufficient reason to complain of the injury, and
to upbraid a misinformed Author, and not very charitable neither, with his
unprofitable pains. This M. N. ought to have considered, before he told the
World, to give some Color to his Memoir, It Is in the first place believed,
Sentiments. p. 232.
that the Things themselves were infused by Inspiration into the Sacred
Historians, and then the Terms wherein they were expressed. In short, That the
Sacred History was dictated word for word by the Holy Ghost; and that the
Authors, whose Names are affixed to it, were the Secretaries of God who wrote
as be dictated to them. This is that which M. N. calls in several places the
vulgar Opinion. What means he by Vulgar? Is it among the People? You shall
hardly meet with one of a thousand that ever thought of this Doctrine. Is it
among the Learned? Then he ought to have proved it by good Citations. Number of
Quotations commonly spoils a Book; But when it is a man's Business to prove a
matter of Fact which serves for a Foundation to a Book, and that this matter of
Fact becomes a matter of Controversy; the want of Quotations is in my Opinion
very Essential. At least M. N. ought to have repaired this defect in the
Defense of his Memoir. But since he has not done it, we have great reason to
believe he could not do it. All that he says is this. That after the death of
Grotius, there appeared a third Answer of Rivet, wherein he endeavored to
defend the Common Opinion against his Illustrious Antagonist. it is clearly to
be seen by the manner of his Answer, that he believed that the Holy Ghost
dictated the Scripture word for word, and we know that it is the most common
Opinion among the Protestants, who every moment call the Sacred Writers the
Amanuenses of the Holy Ghost. I read that part of Rivet's Piece, but could not
there find it out that this was his Opinion: and I deny it to be the Common
Opinion of our Divines.

It was not the Opinion of Burman, the Famous Professor of Utrecht. He asserts,
that the Sacred Writers wrote by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, whose
Instruments in a manner they were. These words seemed to favor M. N's
Pretension. But let us consider what Burman meant by Inspiration, and by that
means we may be able to explain several Expressions which are to be found in
our Authors. That Author seems to suppose, that the Sacred Writers were but the
Instruments by which the Holy Ghost wrote word for word whatever they left us.
However that is done, continues the same Author, with some variety: in some
things which they were taught of God, they were but bare Amanuenses. In others
they wrote like Historians according to the wisdom that was given them. Quod
tamen factum cum aliqua varietate. Quaedam enim a Deo audita aut revelata mero
Amanuensium ministerio scripserunt. Quaedam etiam historice, tum narrando tum
docendo commentati sunt secundam saptentiam fibi aatam 2 Pet. 3. Nonnulla etiam
ipsi dictarunt, tanquam minist^^ fideles and prudentes in domo Dei juxta
accepta spiritus san^^^ Dona. Burman de verse. div. and script. divinit. sect.
23.
They dictated themselves some things as faithful and prudent Stewards in the
House of God, according to the Measure of Gifts which they had received.

Monsieur Witsius a learned Prosessor in the same University, teaches the same
Doctrine. Some of the Apostles, Fuerunt quidem Apostoli Instrument a spiritus
sancti, sed ra^^^nalia: suo enim intellectu, judicio and sermon utebantur. Ita
tamen ut in little omnium usu diriger entur a spiritu sancto; Qui non adimebat
ratiocinandi facultatem, quam natura concesserat, sed eam Coelesti lumine
collustratam, and circa ponderosam hanc quastionem meditationibus suis
occupatam, arcana sua virtute, ita in judicando gubernabat, ut quod ipsis
videbatur, revera dictamen spiritus sancti esser. l. 1. c. 22. sect. 19.
says he, were the Instruments of the Holy Ghost, but Instruments endued with
Reason, who made use of their own Understanding, their Judgment, and their own
Language; yet so, that notwithstanding all this, they were directed by the Holy
Ghost. He did not take from them their natural Faculty of reasoning; but after
be had enlightened it with Celestial Illumination, he directed and governed it
by his secret virtue, that the Result of their Meditations might be the Voice
of God. Here is no such thing as Teaching that the Holy Ghost dictated word for
word (to speak properly) all those things which were written by the Apostles.
Were these two Professors ever Censured for having departed from the Common
Belief?

Not to heap up Quotations, I shall only observe two things which will supply
their number: the one is, that M. Capel, a famous Professor at Saumur, and some
other Protestant Divines were somewhat inclined to believe that the Apostles
might be deceived in some small Circumstances of matters of Fact which they
relate; as in Numbers and Names, etc. I hope to show in the following Chapters,
that it is not at all necessary to grant that for the reconciling of certain
places which give some Color to this Belief. The only thing which I have here
to observe is this, that neither M. Capel, nor those other Divines, who are so
pliable to favor the pretended Defects of the Apostles memory, did ever
believe that the Holy Ghost dictated to them the whole, word for word. For he
that could believe that, could never question the Infallibility of every
Syllable.

The other Observation which I make is this, that the Common Belief of the
Protestant Divines is, that the Apostles made use of their Reason, their
Memory, and a Language which savoured much of their Education and their natural
Genius. Let us conclude from thence, that the common Opinion is not, that the
Apostles, when they wrote, were under a perpetual Enthusiasm, and that they
only supplied the Holy Ghost with their Pens, while he dictated to them word
for word whatever they wrote. To put an end to this Observation, I may say that
I have consulted upon this Point, several Divines both English and French, and
yet could never meet with one that was of this Opinion, which M. N. calls the
Common Opinion.

I must confess, that because hitherto none of our Divines has yet dressed up
any System upon this Subject, but only that several have spoken of it by the
by, many expressions have escaped them, of which an ill use might be made to
make the World believe, that their Opinion is exactly the same which M. N.
ascribes to them. According to their Language, the Sacred Writers are the
Secretaries of the Holy Ghost; he inspires them whatever they write. But these
Expressions, and all those of the like nature may subsist without supposing
such an Inspiration as is attributed to us. I shall make out hereafter: It Is
enough for this place, to say, that all those Expressions that our Divines have
made use of in imitation of the ancient Fathers of the Church, are made good by
that share which the Holy Ghost has in the Sacred VVritings of the New
Testament. It contains several Oracles which the Holy Ghost did dictate: as for
other things, the Apostles were under the immediate direction of the Holy
Ghost, who infallibly guiding their Pens, adopted whatever they wrote. Such a
Guidance as cannot be denied, without overthrowing Fundamentals. Which being
granted, all Divines may bestow all those honorable Expressions upon the
Apostolic VVritings, and look upon them as the work of the Holy Ghost. This is
the Idea, which we have in general of the Inspiration of these Sacred Writings,
and which we are now going more particularly to explain.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is explained the nature of the Inspiration of the New Testament, in
respect of Revelations.

THat we may have a distinct Idea of the Inspiration of the Holy VVritings,
it is requisite to distinguish the Things which they contain; which I shall do
into three Orders. In the first I shall put the Revelations. The second is for
those things which the Apostles learned by the natural assistances of their
Hearing and Sight. In the third you shall see the Progress which they made by
reasoning upon the Truths of the two first Orders. This distinction presents it
self at first to the mind; so that you see the Apostles wrote things which they
knew by Revelation, by Sense, or by reasoning. I design this Chapter for the
Truths which they understood by way of Revelation.

There is no need of insisting long upon it; because there does not appear to
be any Contest between M. N. and us upon this Subject. He agrees, that the
Apostles have said several things by Inspiration. Sentim. p 240. lb. p 252.
I acknowledge, says he, that the Apostles might have certain Prophetic
Inspirations, and that they really had such. And in another place, Not but that
they had several immediate Inspirations and several Visions, as appears by the
Acts, by the Apocalypse, and by diverse other parts of their Writings. And
toward the end of the twelfth Letter, There are several Prophesies scattered in
their Writings, and the Apocalypse is altogether Prophetic: and we ought to
give Credit to those Revelations, because it was God that sent them immediately
to his Apostles. M. N. constantly maintains this Thesis in the defense of his
Sentiments; where he also advances something more to the purpose, Defense. p.
225.
since he believes that God did often dictate to the Apostles the words which
they were to make use of.

We both agree then, that there are in the VVritings of the Apostles several
things which those Holy Men learned by the way of Suggestion. There needs no
more to put the Business past all dispute but to read the Apostolic writings
themselves. There it is to be seen, that the Apostles were often instructed by
all the ways which God made use of to inspire the Prophets with his Oracles. I
understand from Grotius, that according to the Jews, this Inspiration was
performed four ways: by Visions in the day time; by Dreams in the Night; by a
Voice from Heaven: Solet Deus hominibus vo^^tatem suam, aut res fu^^^^
patefacere, visis Di^^nis, visis s^cundum quietem, v^ce and asslatu. Giot. in
(...). Matt.
and by the secret suggestion of the Holy Ghost. These four Orders of
Revelations are to be found in the Apostolic Writings. The Apocalypse contains
several Visions by Day; 'twas in the day time that S. Peter had a Vision in the
behalf of the Centurion Cornelius. The Apostles had also Visions in the Night
time. Acts 16.9.
The Macedonian appeared in the Night. That word which said, that Old men
should dream Dreams was accomplished. The Apostles heard Voices from Heaven.
The Lord said to St. Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is
made perfect in weakness. There are several instances, whereby it appears that
the Holy Ghost did secretly instruct the Apostles. When St. Peter was pondring
upon the Vision which he had seen, the Spirit told him, Behold three men seek
thee. Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, without doubting,
for I have sent them.

It Is plain, that it was not the Spirit of St. Peter which is spoken of in that
place. Which I add, to the end men may not think, that by the Spirit is meant a
bare disposition of Piety. The Question is about a Spirit, who had sent three
men to St. Peter. The same Spirit, the same Person admonished him to go and
meet them. Sometimes also the particular inclinations of the Apostles were
withstood by the inspiration of this Spirit, so true it is that it never
signified the natural inclinations of their Piety. The thing is of that
importance as deserves a Proof; and there needs no more for one to be
satisfied, than to read the sixteenth Chapter of the Acts. After they were come
into Mysia, Acts 16.7.
they assayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not. A greater
Force opposes the particular designs of St. Paul and Timothy. The Spirit of God
suggested often to the Apostles what they had to do and say.

What St. Paul says to Timothy may be ranked among the Revelations: (...), The
Spirit says distinctly and in express terms, That in the later times some shall
depart from the faith. The Apostles, as we shall find hereafter, wrote some
things wherein the Holy Ghost was no otherwise concerned than by way of
Direction; but they wrote other things which he suggested expressly to them. And
such was this his foretelling the Departure which should happen in the latter
times: (...).

But it is not enough to have proved, that the Apostles had Revelations, which
may not be denied, without opposing the Scripture. All those who desire that
Men should believe that they have any Respect for this Sacred Book, will agree
upon this for a Truth. Spinosa himself will acknowledge it. He says, That it is
beyond all Controversy, that the Apostles were Prophets. So far we are agreed.
But if we put the Question a little higher, Nemo qui novum Testamentum legit
dubitare potest Apostolos Prophetas fuisse. l. 1. c. 11. Tract. Theo^^
and ask how the Apostles have couched in writing the Revelations which they
had, we shall meet with Adversaries. M. N. says, that we ought to give Credit
to those Revelations, because it was God who sent them immediately. That is
certain, but if the Apostles have either maliciously, or for want of Memory,
corrupted their Revelations, where shall we be then? M. N. answers that they
were men of Probity, and that we ought to rely upon their Sincerity. They were
men of Probity, it is true; but it must be agreed at the same time, that it was
not an infallible Probity; and that it was not impossible but that they might
injure the Truth. It Is to be agreed also that their Memory might deceive them.
It is clear then, that if the Holy Ghost left them to their Infirmities, our
warrants for the truth of their Revelations is not over abounding. Therefore we
must of necessity admit the Guidance of the Holy Spirit.

When we seriously dive into the writings of these Gentlemen, there is a great
deal of reason to suspect that they seem to have some regard for the Apostolic
Revelations, only to make some show. They do not believe they do any injury to
their Darling Principle, which reduces all Religion to Reason purely Natural.
They know well that the number of these Revelations is not considerable. And
should we oppose against them any one that annoyed them never so little, they
would from the Infirmities of the Apostles derive an argument which should
bring their Revelations to the trial.

Their Concessions are exactly calculated for their Principles, specious
appearances which signify little. Such is their Confession of the
Infallibility of Jesus Christ. They discourse of it in pompous Terms, which
however are of no great advantage to the Christian Religion. For since he has
not written any thing, all that comes only to the infallibility of Preaching.
If a Doctrine taught viva voce with Infallibility be entrusted to Writers that
may falsify it, it is evident that their Writings can be no foundation of a
certain Belief. And therefore we have a privilege to examine what they have
written by the Rules of sound Judgment. And to this it is that they would
reduce all Religion.

But not to speak at present of any other Revelations than what the Apostles
had, it is seen, that though an Infallible Spirit suggested them, they lose the
Prerogative of their original Infallibility, when they come once to be handled
by the Apostles, in case the Holy Ghost had suffered those Revelations be
obscured by human infirmities. I say then, that the Holy Ghost acts two ways,
by relation to the truths which he has revealed by the Apostles. First he
suggested those truths which he imprinted in their Souls by some of those ways
which I have set down, wherein the Apostles were in a passive disposition. like
a piece of Cloth that receives the Colors. It Is in this manner that they were
instructed; but when they set themselves to instruct others, and communicate in
writing what the Holy Ghost had taught them, he acted after another manner; he
pushed them forward to write, he strengthened and refreshed their Memories, and
so directed their Pens, that they wrote nothing which was not to the purpose,
and according to the most exact Rules of Truth. There was then in the written
Revelations which they have left us, two sorts of Inspiration: Inspiration of
Suggestion, and Inspiration of Direction.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is Explained the Nature of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the
New Testament, in reference to things which the Apostles had heard and seen.

WE must acknowledge that we should expose our selves to very smart Objections
in maintaining that the Holy Ghost dictated all the Words and all the Things
which the Apostles wrote. The Infallibility of their VVritings does not depend
upon that Hypothesis, as we shall show hereafter. The Holy Ghost suggested to
those Holy Men, the things which they knew not. But as for those things which
they knew, they had need only of his Direction to render 'em infallible in
their VVritings.

To the end my Notion may be the better understood, I distinguish those things
which the Apostles knew by the ordinary ways of Knowledge. There were some that
had a regard to ordinary Education, and others that were the Consequences of
Instruction in Religion. I refer to common Education whatever the Apostles
might have learned from Nature and Society. There are an infinite number of
Things which enter into the Minds of the most vulgar Souls, even without study,
I do not pretend that the Apostles were learned and witty Men at the time they
were called. It Is known, that unless it were S. Paul, whose Education had been
singular; the other Apostles were very rude and unpolished; and they had reason
to make of their Ignorance a Glorious Monument to the Holy Ghost, who with such
feeble Instruments triumphed, and caused the Gospel to triumph in all Places.
However, this is no Hinderance, but that it must be agreed, that the Apostles
had replenished their Minds with several things which they had learned without
the Help of Study. They had general Ideas that are obvious to the most
illiterate; and they had other Ideas with which their Profession and common
Conversation furnished 'em.

The Instruction which they received in Religion was at two times; before, and
after their Call, to the Apostleship. Before their Call, they knew as much as
had been usually taught of the Jewish Religion to the common People, whether by
the Exposition of Scripture, or the Rehearsal of some Traditions. After their
Call, for three or four years they saw and heard what is to be read in the
Gospels.

These are those things which entered into the Minds of the Apostles by seeing
and hearing, and which have their Place in the Apostolic Writings. Common
Knowledge furnished 'em with Allusions, Metaphors, Proverbs and Maxims of
Wisdom. The Knowledge of Religion challenges the first Rank in Scripture:
there, we see the Christian ingrafted upon the Jew, the Gospel added to the
Law; the Apostles wrote concerning Christianity as People that had been Jews.

Our Business is to decide how the Holy Ghost guided the Apostles in those
things which they knew by the ways already observed. It Is clear, that a new
Suggestion was absolutely useless; and as we ought not at any time to have
Recourse to Miracles, but in a Case of Necessity, we should violate that Maxim,
by affirming, that the Holy Ghost suggested and whispered into the Ears of the
Apostles what they knew before. He was not obliged to begin, but where Nature
had ended: 'twas enough that he spoke, when she became silent.

Let us not imagine however that he was only a Spectator of the Functions of
Nature. He brought her to perfection, and hindered her from going astray. In
the Hands of this great Master the Faculties of the Soul received a new Degree
of Strength, the Senses more faithfully admitted the Images of Objects, the
Memory was refreshed and confirmed, and the Judgment found the way not to be
deceived. It Is my Opinion, that it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles
found all these Advantages in the assistance of a Spirit that in a moment
taught 'em to speak Foreign Languages; that in Answer to their Prayers, revived
the dead; but (which appears to us yet more considerable for our Purpose) who
made choice of the Apostles to make 'em Masters, whose Credit should be so
great, as that the Faith of the People might rely upon their Testimony.

We have thus seen that the Apostles learned, by the assistance of their
Senses, several things before they were called, and after they were called;
those things entered into the Composition of the Sacred Books under the
immediate Direction of the Holy Ghost. Natural Ideas, common Ideas, Ideas of
their Profession; all these became serviceable as well as the Ideas of Religion.

The share which we believe the Holy Ghost had in the writing of those things,
is, 1. That he was the Primum Mobile of that Composition; 'twas he that set the
Apostles at work, whether it were in furnishing 'em with Occasions and Subjects
to write upon, or whether it were by secretly stirring 'em up to write, I may
say he put the Pen in their Hands. 2. He presided in the Choice of the Matter
which was to be put into the Work, not suffering the Apostles to write any
thing but what was true, and to the purpose. This is an Inspiration of
Direction: nor does there need any more to be said, as to the Truths which they
had heard and seen. We shall see hereafter what sort of Infallibility arises
from this Direction.


CHAP. IV.
Wherein is Explained the Nature of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the
New Testament, in reference to the Progress which the Apostles might be able to
make, in reasoning upon the Truths suggested by the Holy Ghost, and upon those
which they had learned by the way of Sense.

THere are in the Writings of the Apostles several things which appear to
proceed from their own Brains, and which are as it were the Additions of their
Reason. This appears, both in respect to the Oracles which the Holy Ghost
suggested to 'em, and in respect of those things which they had learned by
Hearing and Seeing.

It Is known to be the usual Custom of the Apostles, to accompany the Truths
which the Spirit suggested to 'em with certain Reflections. For instance, S.
Peter joining the Vision of the Sheet, to the Vision that was seen by
Cornelius, Of a truth, says he, now I perceive, that God is no respecter of
persons, etc. S. Paul, after he had declared what the Spirit had said in
express Terms, 1 Timothy 4.1.
touching such as should depart from the Faith, makes a short Discourse upon
it. S. Peter understanding by Revelation the near approach of his Death,
concludes from thence, that it behooved him to be a good Husband of his Time,
and to inculcate the Truths of the Gospel into the Hearts of the Christians, in
such sort that they might survive him. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14.
Wherefore, says he, I will not be negligent to put you all in remembrance of
these things, tho ye know them, and be established in the present Truth. Yea, I
think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up, by putting
you in remembrance; knowing that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, even
as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.

When thus they reasoned upon the Oracles, the Apostles had no need of being
inspired; to take the Word in a Sense of Suggestion. Their Reason, fortified
and guided by the Holy Ghost, whose Instruments they were, was sufficient for
'em to find out in the revealed Propositions the Conclusions that were included
in 'em. Natural Logic would have served the Turn, here we have no recourse to
the Holy Ghost, but to warrant the Infallibility of the Reflection of the
Apostles.

The ancient Oracles, that were clear, needed no more than the ordinary
Direction of the Holy Ghost to be well understood, and to be the Foundation of
Reflections and Exhortations. But it is plain, that for the apprehending
certain Oracles which the Apostles apply to Christ, or to Matters of the
Gospel, they stood in need of an extraordinary Assistance, which was a sort of
Suggestion. It Is not enough to say, that many times the Apostles understood the
Sense of Oracles, by some Tradition which, it may be, was preserved ever since
the time of the Prophets. There will still remain some places of the Old
Testament, in reference to which we must needs say, that the Apostles had an
extraordinary Inspiration. Such, for Instance, is that which allegorizes upon
Mount Sina and Agar. Such is also that which we find in another place touching
Melchisedech. Gal. 4.
And such are several Oracles applied to Jesus Christ. The Holy Ghost
discovered upon those Occasions, what we could never have understood by the
usual Keys of Scripture. The same Spirit which had inspired the ancient
Prophets, inspired the Apostles to make 'em understand what was said by the
Prophets. He perfectly understood his own Oracles, and all the Grammatical
Cavils that can be opposed against the Explications which the Apostles make of
the Old Testament, will never be able to carry it from the Decision of the Men
of God.

The Prophets have been always looked upon as the Interpreters of Moses; but as
infallible Interpreters their Interpretations passed for new Oracles from
whence there was no Appeal. In a word the Prophets are the best Commentators
upon the Prophets, because they spoke by the same Spirit. Let us apply this to
the Apostles, who are also, according to the Confession of Spinosa, the
Prophets of the New Testament. They have explained the Old One. It Is by them
that the Holy Ghost unfolds the Oracles which he had formerly inspired.
Curcellaeus himself, with all the Liberty which he takes, cannot forbear to
attribute to the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, the Explananation which the
Apostles make of the ancient Oracles. Forsan etiam ad munus eorum attinebat
Prophetias veteris Testamenti explicare, de quibus Petrus dicit, Ep. 2. c. 1.
v. 20. Eas non fuisse (...), seu privatae Explicatioms, quia eodem spiritus
afflatu a quo fuerunt primum profectae opus est, ad eorum Arcana enucleanda.
Curcell. Tract. Eccl. c. 8. sect. 10.


I pass to the Evangelic Matters of Fact of which the Apostles were informed
after our Lord Jesus Christ had called 'em. For three or four years together
they received his Lessons, and saw his Miracles. After what manner is it, that
the Apostles have set down in writing what they learned during all that time?
Many times they have enlarged their Subject, they have reasoned the Case, they
have explained. This was done naturally under the Direction of the Holy Ghost,
as I have already made out. But there was something more; for if things had
been barely presented to their Memory, there would have been some which would
have been enigmatical to the Apostles, as they were when they received 'em from
the first Hand. We know that at that time, they understood not several
Parables; and how long was S. Peter before he understood the Calling of the
Gentiles? 'Twas requisite the Holy Ghost should make use of Visions to instruct
that Apostle. It Is true, the Explanation was not always made by Visions; for
the Holy Ghost, had other ways to remove their Prejudices: He opened the
Understanding of his Ministers, to the end they might the better apprehend the
Scriptures. After he had enlightened them, they enlightened others by the
Sacred Writings, and we are assured that we are enlightened by the Light of the
Holy Ghost when we read them.

CHAP. V.
Wherein are set down four Consequences, that arise from the manner of
Explaining the manner of the Inspiration of the New Testament.

I Have showed that the Apostolic Writings are beholding for their Inspiration,
either to the suggestion of the Holy Ghost, or to his Direction. It Is needless
to insist any longer upon the first of these two ways: For besides that the
things suggested by the Holy Ghost make the least part of the New Testament, we
find that as they were at first entrusted to the memory of the Men of God, they
fall at length under the way of Direction. Therefore since that is the
prevailing Method, it is absolutely requisite that we exactly consider the
nature of it. I shall give it a new Light, by asserting distinctly four
Consequences that arise from the manner which I have already explained.

1. The Direction of the Holy Ghost supposes that the man acts, after he has
been set to work by that Infallible Master who conducts him in the way of
Truth. We should deceive our selves extremely, should we believe that the
Apostles in writing, were as it were insensible Pipes through which the Holy
Ghost conveyed his Will. For then we ought never to say, the Gospel of St.
Matthew, the Epistle of St. Paul, but the Gospel of the Holy Ghost, the Epistle
of the Holy Ghost. According to that Hypothesis, the Holy Ghost would have done
all, and the man would have done nothing. This is not the Idea that we ought to
have of the Apostolic Writings. The Authors acted; the Faculties of the man
were in motion; their Memory, their Judgment, their Will were no less in
action than their hands in writing, or their Lips in dictating: but all this
was done under the infallible direction of the Holy Ghost.

By what I have said, it is clear that we must expect to sind in the Apostolic
Writings, several steps of the method of Nature. The man, as it is usual for
him to do, according to the common course of study, meditates, reasons, takes
advice, and by that means advances from Light to Light; seeing then that the
man acts in the Apostles under the Direction of the Holy Ghost, it follows that
they practiced all this. They considered seriously what they did; and made use
of their Reason. But this is not to be said of those Oracles which the Holy
Ghost suggests word for word: in that case the man is little or nothing. But it
is not so in these occasions wherein the Holy Spirit acts by way of Direction;
for then man acts under his Orders.

This being granted, it is no wonder that we meet with human manners of Speech
in the Apostolic Writings. How shall a man deliver himself, if he does not
speak the Language of men? Let no man then be surpised to see expressions
importing doubt and scruple in the writings of the Apostles. This would not be
proper for God to do; for God doubts of nothing: but this a man may do, though
acting under the Directions of God; in regard that God, while he directs him,
may suffer him to doubt, or let him speak after the manner of men. It Is known,
that the Apostles have intermixed in their VVritings doubtful Expressions. It
may be, says S. Paul to the Corinthians, I will abide and winter with you. 1
Cor. 16 6.
And the same Apostle, to his dear Philemon, For perhaps, says he, he therefore
departed for a season, that thou should receive him for ever. To this may be
referred the manner of the Apostles counting time, they say, when instead of
precisely marking the time about that time, about six a Clock: this is the
usual Language of Men; nor would the Holy Ghost go about to reform the common
Phrases of Human Speech.

2. It follows also from the same Principle, that the style of the Sacred
Writers has a great affinity with their Genius and their Education. This Remark
has been made a long time since upon the Style of the old Prophets. With a
little consideration we may discover in the writings of the greatest part both
their Genius and their Profession. The same Observation is to be made in the
Apostolic VVritings; wherein you may find from time to time the Character of
their Authors. This is a necessary Consequence of the Principle which I have
asserted, that man acted under the Direction of the Holy Ghost.

3. According to the Principle which I have laid down, there is no room for the
Distinction which is usually made between words and things. Nothing is more
common than to hear men say, that the Holy Ghost inspired the Things or the
Thoughts, and left the choice of the words to the Discretion of the Apostles. I
am apt to think that this Opinion is not to be maintained; at most it can have
no other Color, then in regard of the Oracles, which the Holy Ghost suggested
or dictated to the Apostles; It may be said even in that occasion, that the
Holy Ghost inspired as well the words as the things. So that the distinction is
out of doors in that respect. But it is clear that it cannot be made use of
upon those occasions wherein the Holy Ghost presides no otherwise than by way
of Direction. The words and the things depend upon one and the same sort of
Inspiration: both the one and the other proceed from the same Spring, and are
guided by the same hand: they proceed equally from human Faculties, and are
equally directed by the Spirit of God.

4. All the Footsteps of human Wit which are to be found in the Apostolic
VVritings, no way lessen the authority of them: they are never a jot the less
infallible, because their Authors were guided by an infallible Spirit which
directed their Composition. What imports their being written by Men, provided
the Holy Ghost makes the Truth appear under the dashes of the Pen? Men, whom
the Infallible was pleased to guide, were themselves infallible; He lets them
alone when they go right, and when they are about to miscarry, he brings them
back again. There needs no more to conduct them certainly to the truth, and to
make them assured Conductors of others: And this will more clearly appear after
we have considered wherein the Infallibility, which the Apostles acquired by
the Direction of the Holy Spirit, consists.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is considered the Nature of the Infallibility which springs from the
Infallibility of the Holy Ghost; and in particular, touching the manner how the
Apostles obeyed it.

In Order to the finishing my System concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred
Books of the New Testament, it is requisite that I should examine the nature of
Infallibility that springs from the Direction of the Holy Ghost, for it is
needless to assert that he directs the Authors of the New Testament, unless we
know what that Direction has produced. It Is agreed that God cannot err, and
that by Consequence the way which he shows us is the way of Truth. But if they
whom he conducts prove Rebels to his Conduct; or if we are not capable to
discern the Things wherein they are directed, or those to which they are not
guided, it will not be any great matter to us whether or no, we are assured
that the Holy Ghost was pleased to direct them. Therefore, to lay some
foundation of Christian assurance distinguish the manner how the Apostles
obeyed that Direction, and the nature of the Things wherein they were
infallibly directed.

It is essential to know the manner how the Apostles obeyed the Direction. If
it were in their power not to have obeyed, we have no assurance that they were
directed in the Composition of the Sacred Writings, and in making the Analysis
of our Faith, we shall ascend to a very dubious Point. We might put the
Question to our selves; could it be impossible that the Apostles, Fishers as
they were, should withdraw themselves from their Obedience in the same manner
as formerly Jouas did, when he was sent to Ninive? it may be that they have not
written when and how they ought to have done?

If ever this Doubt be raised, it is easy to confute it. To which purpose there
are two things to be considered, the one in reference to the Apostles, the
other in reference to God.

1. The Dispute does not lie as to one Apostle singly; there are twelve or
thirteen, who serve to be Examiners the one of the other. For they who have
wrote, and they who have not written are equally called to the trial. If among
them there was any one who through a Spirit of Rebellion was not absolutely
conformable to the direction of the Master, the rest would have been all in
Tumult, and either would have reclaimed or cried down the Mutineer. But when we
see that all the Apostles are in a perfect Harmony as to the Apostolic
Writings, and in a Union Cimented with the Blood which they have shed to seal
the Truth of their Testimony, the Doubt is disperc'd; and we are persuaded,
that it is not possible that twelve or thirteen Witnesses, known to be people
of Integrity, should concur to the steadfast maintenance of the least Lie.

2. What I have said in reference to the Apostles, receives a new Reinforcement
from what I have to say in reference to God. He had engaged himself to honor
the Ministry of the Apostles with Miracles, which were the attestation of
Heaven. Are not the Apostles fit to be Credited, while they are supported by
the Deposition of such a Testimony? As it is impossible that God should tell
Lies, there is also the same impossibility, that he should authorize a Lie. Had
the Apostles refused to obey the direction of the Holy Ghost, God would have
reassumed those Gifts of Miracles from 'em, which he never had granted them,
but to verify their Doctrine and their Mission. Let us conclude then from his
perseverance to glorify their Apostleship to the end of their Lives, that they
inserted nothing but what was true in those Writings, where they laid up our
sacred Religion, as a Trust committed to their Charge.

This Observation shows us, that in case the Apostles had gone astray, God
would have made known their deviation by a Cessation of their Miracles. But it
behooves us to add, that it was Gods design to prevent that starting aside. He
was resolved that such and such Men should be the Ministers of his Grace
throughout the Universe. Unless you will say, that God was not able to render
them fit for this great Design (which is infinitely absurd) it must be
acknowledged that he took that preventive Care that their infirmitives should
not turn them out of the right Path.

Judas might be guilty of Treachery without doing the least injury to this
Reflection. He lost himself at a time when our Savior was still upon Earth.
Though all the Apostles had then become Traitors, the Gospel would not have
suffered. Jesus Christ would have chosen Ministers more faithful: But since he
had cleans'd his Floor, and that he has solemnly confirmed his Apostles by the
Mission of his Spirit, let us fear nothing: it is for his Honor to guide 'em to
the Truth; and his Design, by their means to present us with the Riches of his
Grace, engages him to have a strict Eye upon those Ministers, to whose
Functions he has affixed the Salvation of Mankind. If the Salt loose it is
savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned. If the Holy Ghost suffers the Apostles
to fall, all men fall with them.

Provided we consider it well, we shall find that the Apostles might not be
without sin, and yet be infallible. Infirmities are as it were the Portion of
Human Nature: they are to be met with in the choicest Saints; it being the
pleasure of Providence to show that they are but men. But these Infirmities are
not Essentials. They are surprises from which they recover themselves after a
little Recollection. What has this in Common with such faults as the Apostles
might have committed in their Writings which the composed in the height of
serious Thought, and which they never recanted? The Infirmities of the Apostles
showed that they were Men; but such a constant Prevarication in the most
essential Duty of their Function, would have made 'em to have been worse than
Devils. It Is therefore no true way of arguing to say, that because the Apostles
were not altogether without sin, they might betray the Church by a voluntary
Suppression of the Council of God.

But the grand Reason which warranted their Fidelity in the Administration of
Holy Things, ought to be drawn from our Savior's Design in the Choice which he
made of the Apostles, and the Promise which rendered 'em capable of the
Apostleship. The Design was by their Preaching, or by their Writing, to publish
the Doctrine of the Gospel. Had they dealt treacherously in their Ministry,
this Design, upon which depended the Faith of the Elect, had never been put in
execution. The Promise was to guide the Apostles in all Truth. So that the
supposing they might have proved; unfaithful, involves the Lord Jesus himself
in this Accusation of Infidelity. He promises that he will guide his Apostles
to the Truth, that is to say, that he will make 'em faithful. So that if they
cease to be faithful, he ceases to be so himself: he fails of his Word, because
he does not fulfill his Promise.

To evade this Demonstration, they cry, that provided our Savior Jesus Christ
declares and shows the Truth to his Apostles, he is not to be blamed in the
least, tho they refuse either to follow or teach it. To which I answer two
things: First, that this Promise, The Spirit of Truth shall guide you in all
Truth, implies more than a bare showing of the Truth. The Holy Ghost, if he
designed to be a true Conductor of the Apostles, was to guide 'em to the Mark
which he set before 'em. Without which the Promise had been but a very small
Comfort to 'em. They had always had this to say; If thou let us alone to our
Infirmities, we shall be never the better for seeing a way, into which they
shall hinder us from entering.

In the second place, there needs no more than to consider the whole Extent of
the Promise, to be convinced that the fullfilling of it did not depend upon the
Good Will of the Apostles. It Is properly the Church to which Christ Jesus
promses to teach the Truth by their Ministry. Now the Promise being made to the
Church, their Rebellion would not have discharged Jesus Christ of his Promise.
It was absolutely necessary, that the Spirit of Truth should be Master of the
Apostles Pens, and guide 'em to the Truth, to the end the Church might enjoy
what was contained in the Promise.

If I said, that the Holy Ghost constrained the Apostles to follow his
Directions, I might countenance the Word with the Opinion of some of the
ancient Fathers. Epiphanius is positive as to this particular. He assures us
that the Gospels of S. Luke and S. John were composed by a kind of violent
Impulse and Constraint, Spiritus Sanctus B. Lucam occultis quibusdam stimulis
cogit and excitat. Epiph. l. 2. Tom. 1. Haeres. 13.
which the Holy Ghost put upon those two Evangelists. He says, that Saint Luke
was stirred up and constrained by certain secret Instigations: and that S. John
wrote in despite of himself. We also find by a Passage in the Acts, Deinde
Spiritus Sanctus Joannem, licet invitum, ac Religione quadam and animi
moderatione defugientem ad scribendum Evangelium impulit. Ibid. Sect. 12.
that when the Saints would have gone to one place, the Holy Ghost constrained
'em to go to another.

The Term therefore of Constraint is not too hard: but let us take it in a
Sense importing a more pleasing violence. For tho the Apostles had no such
Will, the Holy Ghost infused it into 'em, sometimes after one Manner, sometimes
after another. When the Objects were sufficient, he let 'em alone to act by
themselves: but when the Objects were not sufficient, he acted himself as he
thought it convenient; but always so, that it was not in the power of the
Apostles to write otherwise than according to his Directions.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is considered the Nature of the Infallibility which arises from the
Direction of the Holy Ghost, with reference to the Things wherein the Apostles
were directed, and whether they were in particular deceived in their Opinion of
the near Approach of the End of the World.

TO the end we may well know in what things the Apostles were infallibly
directed, there needs no more than to consider the Design of the Holy Ghost in
directing 'em. This Design was, beyond all Contradiction, to make 'em Teachers,
by whose Ministry the world might receive the Gospel. They were sent to
establish the Doctrine of their Master. To that purpose it was, that they were
instructed and guided by the Spirit of God.

There are several things in the Gospel which are usually distinguished. The
Doctrines, and the Matters of Fact. But if this Distinction be but never so
little considered, it will be found that it is a Distinction made of things
which ought not to be distinguished. For in the Christian Religion, Matters of
Fact are become Doctrines, and Doctrines are in the Nature of Matters of Fact.
We find, that Matters of Fact are become Doctrines; Christ was born of a
Virgin, suffered and rose again; these at the same time are all Matters of
Fact, and Doctrines; Jesus Christ is equal to God his Father; Jesus Christ has
made an Atonement for our Sins by the Sacrifice which he offered upon the
Cross: Jesus Christ promised that he would raise his faithful Disciples again
in Glory. Is it not evident, that these are Doctrines in the Nature of Matters
of Fact; seeing the Dispute is, whether the Apostles taught 'em, or rather
whether our Savior taught 'em to his Apostles? This is Matter of Fact, that he
taught such or such Doctrine. The Distinction which I have examined, can have
no room in reference to the Infallibility which I consider. Visibly the
Apostles were directed in respect of Matters of Fact, and Doctrines; else they
could never have given us the Gospel under the Direction of the Holy Ghost.

It Is much more to the purpose to admit another Distinction between the Things
which the Apostles have written; some as belonging directly to the Doctrine of
the Gospel; others, as only accompanying it. It Is manifestly seen, that it was
the Design of the Holy Ghost to direct the Apostles in reference to the First.
I shall not here distinguish between things of greater Importance, and things
of less Weight. That Distinction is of it self a Spring of Scruples. That which
is Important for one, is not so for another. Every one has his Balance wherein
he weighs his Doctrines. There are some indeed which are not of that weight, in
respect of those which we take to be Fundamentals. As to that Point the Holy
Ghost has given no certain Rule, but it may be evaded by Subtlety. Whatever
directly concerns our Religion ought to be a part of our Faith. Now we should
never have any Repose in our Minds, had not the Apostles been generally
directed in all those Doctrines which it behooves us to believe, as well of
great as less Concernment without any Exception. For as we are no way exempted
from believing what seems to us of less Importance; it is clear that in things
of this Nature, as in others, that the Authority of the Apostles must have been
supported by the Direction of the Holy Ghost.

There is a little more Difficulty in respect of those things which are only
accidental or accessory to the Evangelic Doctrine, and which do not seem to be
any part of the Constitution of our Faith. Such are Notions purely
Philosophical, Proverbial Maxims, Quotations of Authors, the Personal and
Domestic Affairs of the Apostles, or if there be any other Foreign Matters that
happen to be inserted in their Writings. We shall discourse of these things in
the following Chapter. I cannot rank amongst these Matters, certain Things that
very nearly border upon the Doctrine: as for Example, the Time of the World's
Ending. Now to make it appear, how much Error in this would be incompatible
with the Direction of the Holy Ghost, there needs no more than to make the
Apostles speak after this manner: In a little time you shall find by experience
the Truths that we have declared to ye; the World shall suddenly be at an end,
the Bodies of the Living that are among ye, shall die, and shall rise again
after some years; and we shall never die.

Had the Apostles spoken after this manner, would they not have hazarded the
Reputation of their Miracles and their Preaching: might not in this Case the
Words of Moses have been applied to 'em? When a Prophet speaks in the Name of
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22.
if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord
has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou shall not
be afraid of him.

It Is not without Cause that I have alleged the Example of the End of the
World: for that some Authors have drawn from thence an Argument, which in my
Opinion, dishonors the Infallibility of the Apostles. They have no way mistaken
upon this Subject. I do not say, that they were acquainted with the last Hour:
the Son of God himself, as he was the Son of Man, was ignorant of it.
Infallibility does not consist in knowing every thing, but in saying nothing,
but what is certainly true. So long as we either say nothing, or that we affirm
nothing touching those things of which we have no Knowledge, we cannot be
accused of Mistake. This Infallibility of the Apostles is no way wounded by the
Scandal thrown upon 'em in reference to the End of the World, A Reproach
grounded upon Passages ill-understood; the greatest part of which are to be
explained of the End of the City of Jerusalem, according to the Prediction of
Jesus Christ, or of the End of every Man, with whom, as to his own particular,
the World is at an end, when he dies.

This suffices in answer to the Objection which is made against the Apostles,
under pretense that they believed the End of the World was at hand. However, to
strengthen this Objection, they quote several of the Ancients that were under
this Mistake. But what is that to the Apostles, if what they uttered concerning
the Destruction of Jerusalem, were afterward applied by other Doctors to the
End of the World? The Mistakes of succeeding Ages ought not to reflect upon the
Apostles.

I set apart a Place wherein Grotius, and some others pretend, that S. Paul has
expressly declared, that the World was to last but a few years: his Words are
these: 1 Thessalonians. 4.
For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with 'em
in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, etc. From whence they conclude,
that S. Paul believed that the End of the World was nigh at hand: but it is an
easy thing to demonstrate, that this Interpretation is no way to be made out.

1. S. Paul himself declares in express Terms, that he was not of that Belief;
nor can we have a better Interpreter. 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.
Now we beseech ye, Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in your first
sentiments, nor be troubled, neither upon the credit of any Prophetic Spirit,
nor by Word, nor by Letter, as from us, that the day of Christ is at hand. Now
we may see by that Passage, whether S. Paul believed that the End of the World
was at hand. He denies it in express Terms, he protests that he had no such
thought, and to render this Protestation more solemn, makes use of the Name of
the Lord Jesus. We beseech you Brethren, etc. Does he tell the Thessalonians
that he was deceived in his first Epistle to them but that being better
informed, he had a mind to disabuse 'em? Nothing at all of any such thing: but
he disowns all Epistles which affirm that the End of the World is at hand. Had
we nothing more than that Protestation, it were sufficient to convince us, that
S. Paul was never of that Opinion which is imputed to him.

2. The Declaration which he makes upon it, is accompanied with some
Circumstances which present us with a new Demonstration. After he had removed
from the Minds of the Thessalomans the Error that was crept in among 'em under
his Name, he marks out the Events which are to forerun the End of the World.
Let no man, says he, deceive you by any means; Ver^. 3.
for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition. Which Man of Sin is charactered
forth soon after, as one affecting Divine Honors, and counterfeiting Miracles.
Grotius will have this to have been accomplished while S. Paul lived, in the
person of Caius Caligula; and because that was not sufficient to supply all
that S. Paul says touching the Man of Sin, that Author brings in Simon the
Magician, to complete his System. But to give some plausible Color to his
Conjecture, he must have antidated several years the Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians; which the Learned Men of both Communions have all alike disliked.

Besides this Consideration which is of great moment, I add, that Grotius goes
about to bereave S. Paul of sound Judgment, in making him argue thus. The last
day is a great way off, be you assuredly convinced of it: for it shall not
appear till you have seen Caius Caligula and Simon Magus. If those Men of Sin
were then just ready to break forth into all their Impieties, as must be
granted according to Grotius's Systeme, how could they have any share in S.
Paul's Argument, whose intention it was to show, that the Day of Judgment was
far remote.

S. Paul, had not seen yet all the Events, which according to his knowledge,
were to precede the End of the World. Did he not know that Jerusalem was to be
destroyed; that the Gentiles should receive the Gospel, and that the Jews
should recover from their lost Condition? These are Truths which are dispersed
up and down in S. Paul's Epistles. Had he had no other Lights but those of
common Sense, he would have seen that those Events and Revolutions were not at
hand, and consequently that the End of the World was not so near, before which
those Revolutions were to happen.

3. In the same Chapter we meet with Expressions which are the Ground of
another Argument, which is no less strong than the two former. I undertake to
prove by S. Paul himself, that he neither believed nor taught, that the End of
the World was at hand. Is it not a certain proof of this same Truth, that in
the same place, where the Apostle denies the End of the World to be at hand, he
engages the Thessalonians to persevere in the Doctrine that had been taught 'em
both by Writing, and by Word of Mouth? Instead of telling 'em, I was deceived
in my First Epistle, but I have received New Lights about the Time that the
World shall come to an End, therefore do not believe what I said: he speaks
quite another Language. Therefore Brethren, says he, stand fast, and hold the
Traditions which ye have been taught whether by Word or our Epistle. Is this
the Style of a Man that recants?

4. The Argument which they would have S. Paul to make, by imputing to him
about the near Approach of the World, drives on so far, as to maintain, that
this Apostle believed he should not die. Then we which are alive and remain
shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, etc. To urge home the
Literal Signification of these Words, they say, S. Paul ranks himself in the
Number of those, who, without seeing Death, shall be changed. Now how can it be
said, that he believed himself exempt from Death; he who speaks so frequently
of his Death in his Epistles. He had always Martyrdom before his Eyes. In the
Acts, And now behold, says he, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there; saving that the Holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, that Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none of these
things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my course with joy. The same Apostle thus expresses himself to the
Philippians, So now Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by Life
or by death. Philip. 1.20.
For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Could this be the Language of a
Man who thought he should not die? Since then it appears, that S. Paul knew he
should die, it must be concluded, that he never thought himself to be of the
Number of those that were personally to be changed without tasting Death. This
is an Argument of S. Jerome upon this Occasion. Neque enim fieri potest, ut qui
ad Timotheum scripserat. Egn enim jam delibor, and tempus resolutionis meae
instat 2 Timothy 4. put aret se ^in carne perpetuum, and nunquam esse moriturum,
p^^esertim cum ad Rom scribens cadem dixerit, and ad Cor. 2.5. Hieron^ad Minor.
and Alexand. exponens illud Apostoli, non omnes dorm^unt.


5. Grotius, to save S. Paul's Honor or rather his own, would fain have what S.
Paul says in the First to the Thessalonians, to pass for a bare Conjecture; and
puts it in the number of those It may be's, of which S. Paul makes use when he
speaks of some of his Journies. It Is no great wonder to see, that an Apostle,
following the Motion of his Reason, or his Desires, should hope to undertake
those Journies which he did not do. In that he tells no Untruth, he only speaks
things as he thinks; so that while he abides and hesitates in a bare
expectation under the good pleasure of God, there is nothing to be laid to his
Charge. But what is there in common with these Examples, and the Mystery which
S. Paul constantly teaches, touching the Change of those that shall be alive at
the last day?

Upon this I observe two Distinctions; the one as to the Matter, the others as
to the Manner. The Matter is on the one side a human Conjecture in reference to
the undertaking of Journies; on the other side, it is a Doctrine upon one of the
greatest Revolutions in the Gospel. We understand well enough, that the Holy
Ghost was no way obliged to hinder the Apostles from proposing their
Conjectures in point of Journeys; but it is not the same thing with a Doctrine,
wherein we have reason to expect the infallible Direction of the Holy Ghost.

The Second Distinction relates to the Manner; as to which, there only wants a
little Attention, that they do ill in this place to allege Conjectures which
might escape S. Paul in reference to Journeys only in Thought, and in order to
which, he positively says, If the Lord permit. First therefore, when he
discourses of the Change of the Living, he treats of it as a Mystery. Now what
shall the Apostles learn from the Holy Ghost, if not Mysteries? Behold, I tell
you a Mystery; all shall not sleep, but all shall be changed. This is not said
with an Air of Conjecture. Behold, I tell you a Mystery: I would not, that you
should be ignorant, says he to the Thessalonians. This is still very
affirmative. 2. We ought to observe with what great Care S. Paul handles this
Mystery. We tell you this, by the Word of the Lord. Let 'em not say then, that
this is a Conjecture sprung up in the Mind of S. Paul. He declares, that he has
no share in it, but that it is a Revelation of the Lord. If it were not so, S.
Paul imposed upon the Thessalonians, and there is not that Sincerity in him
which M.N. admits in the Apostles. The same Author also agrees, that what they
declared to have received from the Lord, was effectually the Product of divine
Revelation. It was then from that, S. Paul received what he says of the Mystery
of the Change at the last day. So that Criticisms which they raise upon this
Doctrine would fall upon our Lord himself, were they built upon any good
Foundation.

After these Five Considerations, it is impossible to impute to S. Paul any
Change of Opinion, in reference to the near approach of the World's End; or
that he denied in his Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, what he had taught
'em in his First upon this Subject. But they closely urge the manner of his
expressing himself, We which are alive and remain shall be caught up together
in the Clouds. It has manifestly appeared by what I have already set down, that
S. Paul did not believe he should abide in this World till that great
Revolution he speaks of. Why then does he say, We which are alive? It Is clear,
that it signifies no more, than They among the faithful, who shall be alive at
that time. Grotius himself quotes diverse Examples wherein S. Paul assumes to
his own Person what he would say of others; and calls this Figure (...).
Consult him upon the Seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and the
Second of the Ephesians. Why does he not admit the same Figure in this, that S.
Paul says in reference to those that shall be alive at the last Day? It Is say
they, because there is no Occasion for this Figure, but when the Dispute is
about Vices and Virtues: but it is plain, that S. Paul took an occasion to make
another use of it, and that there is a necessity that his meaning should be so.
He speaks in several places, as a Man fully convinced, that he should die:
nevertheless in 1 Cor. 15. he says, We shall not all sleep, that is to say, we
shall not all die. There is no reconciling him to himself, but by saying, that
it is by a Figure, that he puts himself in the number of those that shall not
die. They who duly consider his manner of speaking of the intimate Union of the
Faithful, make no wonder to see him attribute to himself the Advantage which
the Faithful shall receive at the last day. All the Faithful according to the
Doctrine of this Apostle make but one glorious Body under one glorious Head;
whatever befalls the one, whether Good or Evil, is the Concern of the whole
Body: we are Prisoners with the Prisoners; we are whatever the Faithful are; we
are seated in Heaven with those who are there already; we shall live in those
that shall survive at the last day. The Figure is bold, it may be for a common
Style, but it naturally agrees with those Ideas of which S. Paul was full, in
reference to the Union of the Faithful. By means of this Explanation, it is
easy to see that he never thought himself exempt from death; and that what he
says in the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, no way contradicts what he
teaches in the Second. Let it then be allowed for certain, that this Example is
no Obstruction, but that this Apostle and his Colleagues were infallibly
directed by the Holy Ghost. But it behooves us to return to those things that
are only Concomitants of the Doctrine, and see whether the Infallibility of the
Apostles went so far.

CHAP VIII. Wherein is examined what influence the Direction of the Holy Ghost
had over those things that were only Concomitants of the Doctrine.
I Call Concomitants of the Doctrine certain things, which without making any
part of the Evangelical Doctrine, are joined with it nevertheless, for
Illustration sake, or for some other Reason; as Proverbs, the particular
affairs of the Apostles, Quotations, or if there be any thing else of the same
Nature.

As for Proverbs, S. Paul cites one, to render more sensibly perspicuous what
he had spoken concerning the misery of Relapses. But it is happened unto them
according to the true Proverb, the Dog is returned to his Vomit again. Such is
that moral Maxim which S. Paul Cites in the Epistle to the Corinthians, Evil
Company corrupts good Manners. Now according to the Principles that I have
already set down, these Passages were not inspired but laid by way of
Direction. We are not to seek for any other Infallibility of the Proverbs
quoted by the Sacred Authors, than that of Aim and Design, which consists only
in the applications and Consequences. Though among these Proverbs, there should
be any one that it would be a hard matter to make good (which however I make it
not my Business to examine) the Authority of the Holy Ghost would be in no
danger for all that, provided the use made of it were good, and the Consequence
true. That suffices to keep up the Honor of the direction of the Holy Ghost.

I speak not here of Philosophic Notions: for I do not find that the Holy Ghost
permitted the Apostles to make any use of 'em; though it may be supposed that
they might have learned some by Hearsay; and for that St. Paul had studied at
Tarsus and Jerusalem; that is to say, in the Schools where Philosophy was in
request. A Spanish Author, Vales de sac. Phil.
who has diligently overrun the whole Scripture to take notice of such
Passages, wherein it asserts some Physical Truth, observes nothing in the
Apostolic Writings, unless it be what Saint Peter speaks of the dissolution of
the Elements at the last day. But this Example, wherein it is clear that the
thing in dispute is about a revealed Doctrine, has nothing in common with
natural Philosophy, neither does it hinder us from asserting, that the Apostles
religiously abstained from touching upon natural Questions. The Holy Ghost had
no design to make them Masters of Philosophy.

We find in the Writings of the Apostles that they speak sometimes of their own
particular affairs, as when S. Paul sends for his Cloak and his Parchmins. Now
upon those the Direction of the Holy Ghost is no farther concerned than to take
care that the Apostles write nothing indecent, and what is contrary to sound
Sense. When their Pens confined themselves within these Bounds, he let them
alone: but if it went astray, he took care to reduce it. We may expect from
this direction, that when these Holy men wrote any thing concerning their own
affairs, they should let nothing escape them unworthy the Gravity of the first
Ministers of the Gospel.

There is a little more scruple to be made in reference to Quotations, and some
slight Circumstances of matters of Fact, related in the New Testament. Some
think that the Apostles were sometimes mistaken in both these Cases; yet
without any injury to the infallibility of things in respect of their main and
most important Verity. I must acknowledge, that the Apostles might be mistaken
in the Quotations of Authors, or in Circumstances of little importance, and yet
that no solid argument can be drawn from thence against the Fundamental truth
of their History. But I find nothing strong enough to oblige me to agree that
these sorts of Errors are to be met with in the Apostolic Writings. I have
great reason rather to believe that the Holy Ghost, one of whose cares it was
to corroborate the Memory of the Apostles, would not suffer them to be
defective in the exercise of a Faculty which he undertook to strengthen. I
cannot imagine that a Spirit which had enriched the Apostles with such excellent
Gifts, would abandon his Ministers upon such an occasion. Such a Desertion
would have been of greater Consequence that it appears to be. For though in the
Opinion of men of Judgment, slight Faults are no way prejudicial to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, yet considering the great variety of men's Humors and
Dispositions, such slips make very untoward impressions. Let us suppose, that
the Apostles in citing the Authors of the Old Testament, should have quoted
Moses instead of Joshuah, David instead of Solomon, or that they had made a
confusion among the Names of the Prophets: Let us suppose that these Holy men
had contradicted themselves in the relation of the Circumstances of all the
Evangelical matters of Fact; would not this have imprinted into the Jews a
strange Idea of the Apostles, an Idea sufficient to have utterly ruined the
Grand design of the Gospel. Now in regard it behooves us to be convinced that it
was the intention of the Holy Ghost to labor the propagation of the Gospel by
the Ministry of the Apostles, it is no less evident in my Opinion that the wise
Director did not relinquish them to any such disorder.

These Considerations are not well weighed in the minds of some Authors, no
more than the Examples which they cite. On the other side M. N. has picked up
all the Authors he could think of to support his Sentiment touching the faults
of memory which he attributes to the Apostles. But all this Enquiry could
produce no more than three or four Authors, viz. St. Jerome, Erasmus,
Episcopius and Capel. Upon which I shall make several Observations, that
bereave M. N. of all the advantage which he reaps by the use he makes of those
Authors.

1. Let us a little examine the nature of of their Testimony. We are not to
reckon that of Saint Jerome; for M. N. acknowledges that that same Author
contradicts himself upon this Subject. He seems indeed, says he, Sentiments. p.
261.
to disapprove this Sentiment in another place; But it is his Custom to
accommodate himself to the Common Opinion, yet not to omit the producing his
own. The testimony therefore of a man that contradicts himself ought to be of
no great weight: it may be here observed, Vid. l. 3. in cap. 2 Matt. v. 6.
Putant Evangelistas and Ap^st^^^s, in Adegandis locis ^^t. Testam, noununquam
^^iv^^ne ^el insir^^^^^ memoriae lapses esse: q^ae se^^^ntiae Hyeronimo,
qua^^^^^ immerito adscri^^^ (...) s^^et. Hoc quippe (...) ^^^atteretur actum
(...), totius scri^^^^.
that M. N. goes farther than the Socinians. Wolsog. Which I have cited
already, justifies Saint Jerome, and at the same time declares, that the
Opinion which some lay to his Charge concerning defect of Memory in the
Apostles, utterly annihilates the Authority of the Scripture.

As for Erasmus I have very near the same thing to say of him that M. N.
asserts in reference to S. Jerome, and what S. Jerome says of himself; that he
frequently reported the Opinions of other men and not his own, in his
Commentaries. In like manner, might not Erasmus when he confesses that the
Apostles might be deceived for want of Memory in things of slight importance,
speak as he had heard, and not according to his own judgment. For he
acknowledges himself that he followed that very same way of Commenting upon
Scripture. For, says he, Cum viderem eam esse libertatem Commentariorum ad quam
sapenumero provocat divus Hieronimus, and hoc color causam tuetur suam,
Arbitrabar multo magis idem jus mihi tribuendum in opere quod praeter humiles
ac poene grammaticas quasdam Annotationes nihil profiteretur, praesertim cum
semel, immo non semel, sed crebro, moneam me Annotationes scribere non Dogmata.
Erasm. Apol. ad Jacob. Fabr. Stapulens
Hieronymus aliquoties and haereticorum recenset Opiniones, nec rejicit
sententias, nec indicat Authors. Hic primum in jus trahatur, si non licet
refer quid censerint alii.

Nor does it seem to me that Episcopius is more of his side than S. Jerome or
Erasmus. The Passage which M. N. takes out of Episcopius is quoted only
side-ways; we see no more than what favors the Sentiments of M. N. But that we
may show Episcopius with a whole Face, it behooves us to add what he adds; Quod
si cui tamen id videtur durum, is amplestatur, si velit. interpretationes tales
quae aptissimae dari possunt, ad vindicandum Scriptores sacros ab omni
ignorantia and memoriae lapsu, and quae piis mentibus sufficere possunt; etsi
rigidioribus ingeniis non satisfaciant. Praestat enim, rigore deposito, piam
quamlibet interpretationem, licet cavillo aut difficultati alicui obnoxiam
anplecti, quam Lapsum ullum etiam Levem, and qui circa rei narratae
circumstantiam solum versatur admitti. These words sufficiently make it
manifest that Episcopius had much ado to be of M. N's Opinion Neither does
Capel speak more affirmatively upon this Subject. And thus you see what heed we
ought to give to the Quotations that are produced against us.

2. If the Question were to be decided by Authority; M. N. knows well that it
would not turn to his account. He acknowledges that he has a Crowd of leaned
men against him, whose authority he neglects. I do not believe my self, says
he, obliged to submit to the Authority of a Crowd of learned Men, who do but
repeat the same things over and over again, without ever having examined them,
or without producing any Reason for what they say. Are we more obliged to
submit to M. N's Learned men, than he to ours? Let him but only remember as to
this particular, that his Learned men are reduced to one or two at most, and
that we have all the rest of our side. So that if the Dispute were to be
carried by Authority, the Contest would soon be at an end.

I must confess I would not absolutely renounce the advantage which we draw
from the Consent of so many learned men; but not to insist too much upon their
Testimony, I would willingly agree, that setting all Authority aside, the
Question might be examined to the very bottom. And this is that which I have
done, by showing that there is no likelihood that the Holy Ghost ever intended
to lessen the Reputation of the Apostles, by permitting them to fall into the
defects of Memory, though they were never so slight.

I should lookupon the Objection which is drawn from Examples to be of greater
force, were they well grounded. I will not here enter into a particular
examination of the passages upon which the Enemies of Christianity build their
Pretenses, that the Apostles stumbled into Contradictions for want of memory. I
shall only pick out two the most seemingly apparent Contradictions, and they
shall be those that M. N. has marked out himself. The one is, that S. Matthew,
relating the story of Judas's Treachery seems to mistake Jeremy for Zachary:
The other relates to the manner of the Traitors death.

There is nothing to hinder us from affirming, upon occasion of these two
Examples, but that it might so happen that the greatest part of the pretended
Errors, which are imputed to the Evangelists, ought rather to be charged upon
the Copyers of the Books, than upon the Apostles. The Sacred Books were
originally without Blemish; and this perfection extended it self even to things
of least moment. If it be said, that Providence, whose cares are constant for
the substance of Religion, did afterward permit that the Scripture should
suffer by the Hands of Amanuenses in respect of certain petty things, wherein
Religion was no way concerned, yet the work of the Holy Ghost is secured, and
is no way liable to the difficulties we meet with in some parts of the
Scriptures. The faults of Copyers or Printers ought not to do any prejudice to
the Original, which formerly was delivered forth by those Infallible Hands
which the Holy Ghost directed.

But there is no need of bringing this Answer. Providence has guarded the Holy
Scripture, so that after a slight examination, the Scruples vanish. There is
requisite for that, no more than such an Examen, as is necessary for Common
Authors to avoid the Lashes of Criticism. And now I shall demonstrate this
Truth in reference to the two Examples which I have produced by way of
Objection. We don't beg here for any favor, though such a matter, wherein
remoteness of Time, when several Circumstances were known, whereby the
Scripture was more intelligible, and which are lost for us, would require, that
we should not exercise the severity of Criticisin with too much Rigor.

Saint Matthew, Matt. 27.28.
relating the Story of Judas's Treachery, says, that the thirty pieces of
Silver which the Traitor restored, were laid out in the purchase of a Field to
bury Strangers; and adds, that then was fulsilled what was spoken by the
Prophet Jeremy, They took the Thirty pieces of Silver, the price of him that
was valued. Now the words are in Zachary, Zach. 11.12, 13.
not in Jeremy: therefore, say they, S. Matthew mistook one name for another.
But though the mistake be of little moment; I believe the Sacred Writer ought
to be justified, and it is easy to do it in a few words.

There are several Methods that Interpreters make use of, to show that Saint
Matthew was not mistaken. The greatest part are very good; I shall produce
those which seem to me to be the best. For brevities sake, I confine my self to
some few. I begin with the learned Lightfoot, Hor. heb. in loc.
who proves by the Talmud and by Kinchi, that Jeremy was the running Title of
the rest of the Prophets in one and the same Volume. Whence it came to pass,
that in the answer which the Disciples gave our Lord, Jeremy is the chiefest
Prophet. Some say thou art John the Baptist; Others Eliah; Others Jeremy. Which
being so, all the Prophets were cited under the name of Jeremy. He bequeathed
his Name, as I may so say, to the whole Volume, in like manner as the Volume of
the Hagiographers is called the Psalms of David, because that David's Psalms
make up the first part of the Volume. So that according to this Explanation,
Saint Matthew did but follow the common Custom, in citing the words of Zachary
under Jeremy's name.

Grotius, quoted by M. N. to authorize the defects which he imputes to the
memory of the Apostles, makes no use of this means to free Saint Matthew from
the Scandal thrown upon him. He very judiciously observes, that Saint Matthew
does not say that Jeremy wrote the words which he attributes to him. Then was
fulfilled what the Prophet Jeremy had spoken. These words are not to be found
in Jeremy, and consequently he never wrote 'em. He had only pronounced them,
and they were preserved by Tradition, from whence Zachary took them. Grotius,
to make out his Opinion, proves that the Prophets commonly made use of the same
words which other Prophets had left behind them; and that Zachary in particular
strives to imitate Jeremy; so that the Jews were accustomed to say, that the
Spirit of Jeremy was upon Zachary. And then according to this Exposition, Saint
Matthew makes Jeremy to say no more than what he said indeed.

I shall add another, wherein still farther satisfaction may be met with, if
one of the two former does not satisfy. Saint Austin says, that the Holy Ghost
suffered the name of Jeremy, and not that of Zachary to drop upon the
Evangelists Pen; and that Saint Matthew was unwilling to correct himself, as
being persuaded, that the design of the Holy Ghost was to show that all the
Prophets spoke by the same Spirit: Singula esse omnium, and omnia singulorum;
all the Prophetic Writings belonged in common to all the Prophets. But this
Explanation seems to me a little too much forced: and therefore I could more
willingly assent to another which is to be found in the same place. That the
words which S. Matthew reports, Cum igitur ea quae dicta sunt per^^eremiam, tam
sint Zachari^e quam Jeremiae, and q^ae sunt dicta per Zachariam, tam sint
Jeremae quam Zachariae, quod ^pus erat ut emendaret Ma^^^^us?
being to be found part in Zacary, part in Jeremy, both together make a
Complete O^acle, which the Evangelist might attribute to Jeremy, as being the
more considerable of the two Prophets. To support this Explanation, several
Examples are cited, wherein an Oracle, composed of words drawn from two
different Prophets, is alleged under the name of one only. In a word, there
are several Copies of the New Testament, wherein the second Verse of the Gospel
according to Saint Mark is thus rendered, according as it is written in the
Prophet Isaiah, though the words are drawn from both Isaiah and Malachy. So
that the Oracle of Saint Matthew being taken part out of Jeremy, part out of
Zachary, it is no wonder that only one Prophet should be cited, and Jeremy
before the other.

There is another Conjecture which Great Authors have made use of, L. 4. Ep. 31.
I mean Mede and Hammon. The first has enclosed in one Epistle several scruples
like to those which I examine. He says that Saint Matthews intention in citing
the words in question under the name of Jeremy, was to let us understand that
the Chapter where those words are found was really written by Jeremy: and adds,
that if we exactly consider the Contents of the nine, ten, and eleven Chapters
of Zachary, we shall find, that they were written before the time of that
Prophet. The Eleventh Chapter, which is that quoted by S. Matthew, foretells the
destruction of the Temple, which no way agrees with Zacharies time, when the
main Business of the Prophets was to exhort the Jews to rebuild the Temple. For
this reason, among others, Mede maintains that the last Chapters of Zachary
were written by some Prophet more ancient than he; which Prophet could be no
other than Jeremy; seeing Saint Matthew assures us of it, and for that we find
nothing to the contrary in any part of Scripture. It would be in vain to
allege that those Chapters are joined to the Prophecies of Zachary. That
argument is of no greater force than if they should go about to prove that the
whole Book of Psalms was written by David, or the whole Book of Proverbs by
Solomon, because they go under their Names.

They must be very scrupulous that will not be satisfied with one of these
Solutions: I am persuaded they will satisfy any man that is not resolved
whatever it cost him, to maintain that Saint Matthew was deceived. It Is now
time therefore to pass to the second Example, which they make use of to show,
that the Evangelists contradicted one another for want of Memory.

Saint Matthew, Matthew. 27.5.
in the same place tells us, that Judas, after he had cast down the pieces of
Silver, departed, and went and hanged himself. But Saint Luke seems to observe
that this miserable Wretch perished by another sort of death. For, says he, And
falling headlong he burst asunder, Acts 1.18.
and all his Bowels gushed out. Now they pretend, that in this the two Sacred
Authors have contradicted each other. M. N. loudly triumphs upon it, as if
there were no answer to be given to it. There, says he, is a manifest
Contradiction, which the Learned in vain endeavor to reconcile. Sentiments. p.
235.
Let us see whether it be so apparent as he would make us believe.

By admitting the Contradiction, it is to be supposed, that one of the two
Evangelists, was deficient in his memory. Must it be Saint Matthew? How! one of
the Twelve, one of Judas's Colleagues, could he forget how Judas died? This is
that which no body will presume to affirm; I should almost rather choose to say,
that the Apostles forgot what kind of death Christ Jesus died. The death of
Judas was an Accident so considerable and so extraordinary, that they could not
but remember it; will they say that Saint Luke was deceived? How could that be?
He wrote under the Inspection of the Apostles concerning a notorious Accident.
That, says he, which was known to all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Doubtless
he had read the Gospel of Saint Matthew, whom he acknowledged to be a testimony
of sufficient Credit. After which, would he, in common sense, have undertaken
to contradict such a Testimony? By these Reflections it appears, that it is
impossible, that either of the two Evangelists should have been deceived.
Nevertheless one says, that Judas hanged himself, the other that he threw
himself headlong. But easy satisfaction may be given upon this seeming
Contradiction.

1. Nothing hinders the reconciling these two Idea's, by saying that Judas
hanged himself upon some high place, but that the Rope broke, which was the
reason, that his Body falling headlong, he burst himself, and his Bowels gushed
out; this is very possible. In this the Evangelists agree perfectly. One says,
what the other says not; but they do not contradict themselves. Therefore M. N.
is in the wrong to assure us with so much confidence, that it is a manifest
Contradiction.

2. It Is known that there is a difference between hanging and strangling a man's
self. Judas might strangle himself and yet not hang himself. Hammon and other
good Authors say, that upon this occasion, Grief did the Office of a Hangman,
and proves by several Examples that men have been strangled with Grief, that is
to say, that they were choked by intercepting the passage of the Spirits. The
original Greek word (...) signifies no more. Let us say then, that this
Accident befell Judas in some High place, from whence his Body falling might
burst out.

3. I ought not to forget a third Opinion, according to which the word (...) or
strangled himself, includes not the death of Judas, but barely an extreme
Grief. As if a man should say, though he did not die at the same time, I am
stifled with Grief, only to express a considerable degree of anguish of mind.
In the Book of Tobit, Tob. 3.12. vid. Ham. in Matthew. 27.5.
there is an express example of it. We find the Daughter of Raguel so terribly
grieved with the Reproaches that were cast upon her (...), so that she thought
to have strangled her self. However she did not die, as appears by the sequel
of the History. Thus it was, say they, that Judas was surpised by his Grief,
he did not die presently, but some days after he went and threw himself
headlong in the height of that Rage which attends people in in despair. Saint
Matthew speaks of the excessive Grief of Judas: Saint Luke of his Death: there
is no contradiction. After these three Explanations, can a man with so much
confidence affirm, that it is a manifest Contradiction which the Learned in vain
endeavor to reconcile? Must he not have declared open War against the Sacred
Writers, to call this a manifest Contradiction? I appeal to all Persons of
Justice and Moderation, whether it does not appear by the manner after which
the Answers are made to both Examples, that they are not sufficient to prove
that the Evangelists contradicted themselves or were deceived, even in things
of little Importance?

CHAP. IX.
Wherein it appears what ought to be the Extent of the signification of the
words which the Sacred Writers have made use of in the Writings of the New
Testament.

I Have distinguished those things which the Holy Ghost immediately suggested
to the Apostless from those wherein he only presided by way of Direction. They
would not make any Scruple to grant, that the signification of the Expressions
dictated by the Holy Ghost are to be taken in a full sense, but it is pretended
that there is no need of being so exact in those that may be called the product
of Human Wit. M. N. cannot brook, there should be any search made after the
Reasons why the Holy Ghost made use of one word rather than another, and
maintains that it is Ridiculous; because often the Language of the Sacred
Authors is Human, and Careless enough. The ordinary Method has as he thinks a
grear affinity with the Opinion of the Jews, who hold it for a Maxim, that the
Books of the Law are inspired even to a Letter: Defense des sentim. page 235.
let. 9.
There is not one Letter in the Law, say they, upon which great Mountains do
not depend. He alleges the Example of the Antecedent Imputation of the Sin of
Adam, which is grounded upon a Comparison that S. Paul makes use of. that
Comparison, says he, is taken in a rigid sense, whereas it should be
considered, that the Style of S. Paul being the Style of a man, who is not
exact in his expressions, though the ground of his Arguments are to be admired.
Now to be so nice about the full signification of all his Expressions would
expose one to a world of mistakes. I am glad he acknowledges that the grounds
of S. Paul's Arguments are to be admired. Were the Author hard put to it, I
question whether he would not enervate this Confession with some distinction.
But that we may examine what he says concerning those who insist too severely
upon the Sacred Language of the authors of the New Testament, I think it
necessary to observe two Things.

1. That by this sort of Divinity, they annihilate the use of the Sacred Books.
They will make them speak whatever they think fit. Who does not plainly see,
that if they can make us believe, that the Sacred Authors wrote things without
exactness, there must be a door opened for all manner of Errors? Though I set
down a Truth which I might support upon words that seem clear to me, they will
presently dispute it with me, because they may tell me there is no exactness in
the Terms; You deceive your self by confining your thought to the meaning of
the words. This is awonderful Rampart for all manner of Heretics. Had the Holy
Ghost abandoned the Holy Writers to such a Negligence, I should believe that
his design was to have made the Scripture a Nursery of Errors and Divisions,
and not a Nursery of Truth. 2. That although the Style of the Sacred Authors be
Human, it cannot be said to be Careless in respect of Things: we know that
there are Careless Expressions which Grammar would never pardon. The Holy Ghost
had no design to make the Apostles Masters of Language: his aim was only to
instruct them in the Truth; provided they rendered it Intelligible, that was
sufficient. According to this supposition it is plain, that we ought not to take
the Language of the Apostles for a Model of pure Greek; that was never the
design of the Holy Ghost. But since it is certain that he made them
intelligible, it is our Duty to receive with submission all the Truths which he
has permitted the Apostles to wrap up in a common Style. The Holy Ghost has not
suffered them to write any thing but what was true. It Is our Duty to search
after what they have said, and to rely upon those Truths which they have taught
us under the direction of the Holy Ghost.
To which purpose there is no necessity of admitting that all is inspired in
the New T^stament, to a Letter, as the Jews affirm concerning their Law; and
that Great Mountains depend upon every Letter. By this Proverb the Jews mean
Inspiration by suggestion. I have showed that all that we read in the New
Testament was far from being inspired after that manner, but that the greatest
part was the work of the Apostles under the Direction of the Holy Ghost, who
would not suffer them to fall into any Error. In that, our Divinity no way
resembles that of the Jews.

We do not pretend as they do that Mountains depend upon every Letter. They
make every thing to be Mysterious in their Cabalistical Science. This is not
our Genius: nor do we approve the Method of some Christians who turn all the
Scripture into Allegories; but while we avoid that excess which would make the
Ministers of the Holy Ghost to speak what they never thought, we are careful
not to fall into to other extreme, viz. to reject what they both said and
thought. We make a diligent search after the true meaning of the Terms which
they make use of. And when we have found out their true and Genuine Sense, we
submit to their Decision, as if the Holy Ghost had spoken to us. Whatever they
have told us by his direction, may it not pass for the real Declaration of his
Will? When I explain a Scripture composed by his Order and direction, to that
degree of perfection as we enjoy it, I think really that I explain the Voice of
the Holy Ghost.

I shall conclude this Chapter wi^^ ^he words of Curcellaeus, who declares,
that it is one of the Prerogatives of the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost was
their Guide in all Truth. So that we may confidently and without any fear rely
upon them and their Writings, Curcel. p. 715. Col. 2. Adeo ut nos tuto ipsis
ipso rumque scriptis absque erroris periculo, tanquam Christo fidem adhibere
possimus. Et p. 718. Col. 2. Adeoque nos absque metu erroris scripta ab illis
relicta and approbata, tanquam (...) amplecti, and ad illa, tanquam ad rectam
veritatis Amussim fidem and mores nostros componere.
as upon Jesus Christ Himself. My conclusion could not be expressed in fitter
words then these. We have nothing more now to do, than to answer some
Objections.

CHAP. X.
Wherein some Objections are answered, which have no Relation to the Apostolic
Writings.

SPinosa and M. N. have endeavored by various Objections to overturn the
Inspiration of the Sacred Books of the New Testament; but seeing those Authors
only oppose a sort of Inspiration which we admit not, it signifies nothing to
us. Now the main Foundation upon which M. N. builds his Objections, is this:
It Is believed in the first place, that the Things themselves were infused by
Inspiration into the Sacred Historians, and afterward the Terms wherein they
are expressed. In a word, the Sacred History was dictated word for word by the
Holy Ghost; and that the Authors, whose Names are affixed to it, were, as it
were his Secretaries, that wrote according as he dictated. Upon this Foundation
it is, that M. N. rears his Objections. Therefore they don't concern us, who
admit no other than an Inspiration of Direction, in things which it was not
necessary that the Holy Ghost should suggest to the Apostles. Having made this
Observation, I might conclude; for I have answered every thing in explaining
the Nature of the Inspiration of the Sacred Books. But the better to make it
appear, that all their Objections can do my System no harm, I shall propose
them in few Words.

I shall divide these Objections into two Classes, to the end my Answer may be
the more orderly and methodical. There are some which are drawn from the
Behavior of the Apostles upon certain Occasions that have no relation to the
Sacred Writings. The other are derived from the Sacred Writings themselves.
Those of the first Rank, so far as I can remember, are, That S. Peter doubts
about the Admission of the Gentiles into the Christian Church. That the same
Apostle dissembled with the Jews, for which he was deservedly contradicted by
S. Paul. That S. Paul said of the High Priest, that he knew him not: and that
at another time he divided the Opinions of his Judges by a piece of prudential
Policy, which was altogether human. From all which it is concluded, that they
were not inspired.

It Is quite out of the Subject I have in hand to insist upon these Objections;
because I have only undertaken to discourse of the Inspiration of the Sacred
Books. The Question is not to examine whether the Apostles were inspired as to
every thing they said or did; my Argument extends no farther than their
Writings; those Writings which Providence preserved for the Instructions of
Christians in all Ages. It might be, that the Holy Ghost might leave the
Apostles to themselves, upon diverse Occasions, yet that could be no prejudice
to those Writings, upon which, by the appointment of the Almighty, our Faith
and Salvation depend. Nor is it impossible, but that the Apostles in their
first Motions, might both say and think things which were not supported by the
Holy Ghost.

Nor should I much oppose Divines, who would thereby explain what the Apostles
said, when they heard that S. Peter, whom they thought to be in Prison, was at
Liberty. A^t 12.15.
It is his Angel. There is no Ground for the Opinion of a Guardian Angel to be
deduced from those Words: for besides, that the Words might have been spoken by
some Christians in the same Room, who were not Apostles (which one would easily
think upon these Words of the Historian, where several were assembled together
to pray) besides that I say, although it might be proved, that the Words were
spoken by the Apostles, that should be ascribed to their Amazement, that would
not be sufficient to support such a Belief. If at any time where the Apostles
were not employed in the Functions of their Ministry, they seemed to act like
Men, there is no Inference to be drawn from thence, as to what they acted as
Apostles. Under this Quality they were the Ministers of the Holy Ghost in every
thing which they did; and as such they were infallible.

Spinosa acknowledges that the Apostles were inspired in their Preaching,
Conoludimns itaque Apostolos ea tantum ex singulari revelatione habuisse, quae
viva voce praedicaverunt, and simul signis confirmaverunt. Spin. Tract. Theol.
Polit. c. 11. par. 1.
but not in their Writings, which are a kind of constant Preaching. But if we
compare these two sorts of Preaching, I must needs say, that Inspiration was
much more necessary for the Scripture, the use of which is perpetual, than for
Transitory Sermons, and Preaching accompanied with several Advantages which the
Scripture has not.

The Dispute at present is not about Apostolic Preaching, much less about
things which the Apostles either said or did when they were not employed in the
Functions of their Ministry. So that all the Objections which are drawn from
thence no way concern the Question which we have now in hand, I mean the
Inspiration of the Sacred Writings. Yet something must be said to these
Objections for fear one should think they are unanswerable. It Is said, that S.
Peter doubted for some time concerning the Admission of the Gentiles into the
Christian Church, and they conclude from thence, that he was not inspired. Now
if we should maintain that the Inspiration of the Apostles was infused all of a
sudden, and that upon the Feast of Pentecost, the Holy Ghost declared to 'em
all those Truths which they were to promulgate, this Objection might be of some
force. But since we only say, that the Holy Ghost instructed the Apostles by
degrees, and according as he found it expedient, there is nothing solid in the
Objection.

Nor does S. Peter's dissembling with the Jews do any prejudice to what we have
said concerning the Inspiration of the Apostles. We pretend not by any means to
assert 'em infallible in their Manners; they were not exempted from human
Frailties and Weaknesses. And it was one of S. Peter's Infirmities to comply so
far with the Jews, as to break off his Communication with the Gentiles. In so
doing he gave a Proof of his Weakness, but we do not find that he erred at the
same time in point of Doctrine.

We see that these two Examples have no manner of Affinity with the Inspiration
of the Sacred Writings. S. Peter doubted of the Calling of the Gentiles, but we
find that Doubt rectified in the Acts. S. Peter was more indulgent in complying
with the Jews than he ought to have been; but we see his Compliance corrected
in Scripture. What Harm is all this to the Inspiration of the Holy Writings.
Were there any Weight in these Examples, they would be against Spinosa, who
admits in the Preaching of the Apostles an Infallibility, which he denies to be
in their Writings. I speak wholly and solely of the Sacred Writings; so that
there is no necessity for me to trouble my self with answering Objections,
wherein they are not in the least concerned.

However it behooves me in a few Words to say something to what is objected
against S. Paul, who desirous to excuse himself for having said, The Lord shall
strike thee, painted wall, says, That he did not know him to be the High
Priest. We are something concerned to answer this Objection, because S. Paul
spoke in that manner before a Tribunal, that is to say, upon such an Occasion,
wherein our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ had promised 'em expressly the Succor
of his Spirit. Never trouble your selves for what you are to say, The Holy
Ghost shall teach you, at that hour, those things which you ought to speak. Now
being convinced, that Jesus Christ is faithful in all his Promises, I have
reason to believe, that the Answer given by S. Paul, was by the Direction of
the Holy Ghost. Some say, that S. Paul declared, that he knew not the High
Priest in the person of a violent Man, who had degraded himself by a cruel
Order, and was no longer High Priest in the Opinion of S. Paul. Others believe,
that at the time when the High Priesthood was purchased with Money, the Apostle
had reason to say, that the person who purchased the Dignity, was no High
Priest, because he was not advanced by a lawful Ordination. But not to insist
upon these Niceties, in my Opinion there needs no more to be said, but that S.
Paul did not really know that the person to whom he spoke, was the High Priest.
Such an Accident might happen either through a dazzling of the sight, occasioned
by a Transport of Passion, or because it might be some new Face unknown to S.
Paul (a thing at that time no way improbable, when the Changes of the High
Priesthood were so frequent) or because the Crowd being very great, S. Paul
could not perceive that it was the High Priest. It will be said, perhaps, that
these Answers are not satisfactory to justify a person inspired, it being
certain, that the Holy Ghost should not but perfectly know the High Priest. But
we must have a strange Idea of the Inspiration of the Apostles to like this
Objection. The Holy Ghost did not tell 'em all what he knew: many times he let
'em alone to speak as their natural Genius prompted 'em, and in their own
Idiom: and thus it was that S. Paul expressed himself when he said, that he
knew not the High Priest. Could they prove, that in so saying S. Paul spoke not
what was true, there might be some Ground for the Objection; for such an
untruth is incompatible with that Direction, which guided the Apostle in
presence of his Judges. Bt if he spoke Truth, his Answer no way destroys his
Inspiration.

In the same Chapter they raise another Objection drawn from hence, that it
seemed to be a Sleight of human Prudence in S. Paul, to divide his Judges, by
declaring that he was brought before 'em for only asserting the Resurrection.
Is it not certain, that the Resurrection was really one of the principal points
of Religion, for which he was persecuted? He depended so much upon that point,
when he preached at Athens, that several of his Auditors cried out, He seems to
be a Preacher of Strange Gods, Act. 17.18.
because he preached to 'em Jesus Christ and the Resurrection. In the Twenty
Fifth Chapter of the First to the Corinthians, he reduces the whole Christian
Religion to the Resurrection of one that died; I mean the Lord Jesus Christ.
Well therefore might this persecuted Apostle be permitted to say, that he was
brought before 'em for the Resurrection. In so saying, he asserted nothing but
the Truth; but by starting the Proposition in proper season he delivered
himself from Persecution, and that Piece of Dexterity looked like an Artifice
of human Prudence. Are the Saints then forbid to be prudent? Quite the
contrary, Jesus Christ commands 'em to be prudent and wise. The Foundation of
the Objection is, that human Prudence and Inspiration are incompatible. Which
is evidently false in both sorts of Inspiration which I have asserted. In the
Inspiration of Suggestion is it a thing that no way becomes the Holy Ghost to
inspire Men with Expedients that human Wisdom would approve. There is no doubt
to be made, but that the celebrated Expedition of Gideon was according to the
Design which the Spirit of God revealed to him. It was preceded by a Stratagem
which every Body knows; that Three hundred chosen Men took each of 'em a
Trumpet, and a Lamp enclosed in an Earthen Pitcher. When the Signal was given,
every Man sounded his Trumpet, and brake his Pitcher: and upon that sudden and
unexpected Noise, and the sight of so many Lights, a panick Terror seized the
Midianites. Will any one presume to say, that this was not from God? Or that
there was something too much of human Prudence in the Stratagem? I made choice
of this Example among several others: and it is sufficient to show, that it is
not a thing unworthy of the Holy Ghost to suggest to those whom he inspires,
Designs which human Prudence would allow. And this Objection is yet of less
Force, in reference to the Inspiration of Direction. For this sort of
Inspiration leaving the Man to act alone in the Apostle, whom the Holy Ghost is
contented to direct, it is no wonder, that S. Paul, tho inspired, should give us
some Proofs of his human Prudence.

It is evident by my Answer to these Objections, that if I said, that they no
way concerned the Inspiration of the Holy Writings, it was not because they
seemed to be unanswerable. My Design in this Discourse was only to defend that
Inspiration, and in pursuance of it was not my Business to meddle with any
thing more than the resolving and confuting such Objections as directly oppose
it.

CHAP. XI.
Wherein some Objections are Answered, which are directly made against the
Sacred Books of the New Testament.

MY general Answer to these sorts of Objections is, that there is not any one
which injures in the least the manner of my explaining the Inspiration of the
Sacred Books. Had I asserted that they were dictated word for word by the Holy
Ghost, I should have been troubled to answer several Objections; but affirming
as I have done, that the greatest part of the New Testament is not the Work of
the Holy Ghost, any farther than as it was written under his Direction by Men,
whose Faculties he let alone to act of themselves, and guided them; I do not
see that any Objection can be made against it, but what must be built upon a
sandy Foundation.

This has already appeared by several Objections which I have answered by the
by, as they offered themselves. But now I shall make no scruple to collect
together all that Spinosa and M. N. have proposed to countenance their Opinion.
And it will be seen, that there needs no more than to apply my Principles, to
put off these vain Appearances.

It Is said, that the Apostles do not speak good Greek; that they themselves
acknowledge, that they speak upon the Credit of their Senses; that many times
they contradict one another; that they make use of doubtful Expressions; and
that if their Words had been inspired, Providence would have been more careful
of 'em. This in few Words is the whole that is objected against the Inspiration
of the Sacred Writings. If any one believes that the Holy Ghost suggested 'em
word for word, it behooves him to consider how to answer these Objections. For
my part, I see not any one that bears upon the Principle which I have laid
down. Let us run 'em over in few Words.

The Apostles were not Masters of all the Purity of the Language wherein they
wrote. What harm does this do to Inspiration, according to the manner after
which I have explained it. It Is well known, that the Holy Ghost could have made
'em speak more exactly than they did at Athens. But he did not do it, therefore
he did not assist 'em to speak as they did: where is the Consequence? They are
assured, that the Apostles spoke not Foreign Languages to the height of
Perfection. Who will from thence conclude, that they did not learn 'em from the
Holy Ghost? His Design was to facilitate the spreading of the Gospel by the
Ministry of the Apostles: provided they could understand how to do that, it was
sufficient. It was not his Design to make 'em infallible Grammarians. Their
Slips in Grammar are but feeble Arguments against their Inspiration.

I am really convinced that the style of the Apostles is much better, than what
they naturally had, and that that same degree of Perfection proceeded from the
Holy Ghost. But though he should have let them speak Galilean, that could be no
ground for any scruple against the inspiration of the Sacred Writings. If their
Authors, while they committed several faults against Grammar, wrote the truth
exactly; I desire no other advantage to save the Reputation of my System. The
Holy Ghost it was who guided the Apostles in all Truth. This is sufficient:
Truth is the principal Ornament of the Sacred Writings.

It were to be wished, say some, that for a farther proof of the inspiration of
the Sacred Authors of the New Testament, they had declared that they were no
more than the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost, and that like the ancient
Prophets, they had told us, The mouth of the Lord has spoken. But instead of
that, it is said, that they appeal to the testimony of Sense; they declare that
they have seen and heard, and that they arrived to the knowledge of things by
good and authentic Testimonies I have already answered this Objection. 1. Pars.
c. 13.
I shall say no more at present, but that it opposes only the Inspiration of
suggestion. We need not have any recourse to Miracles but in case of necessity.
Now there was no necessity that the Holy Ghost should suggest and dictate those
things which were already known by ordinary means, there is no more to be
admitted than a direction, by means of which the Sacred Writers wrote exactly
those things which it behooved them to write, and after such a manner as they
were bound to write them.

They argue, they deliberate; therefore they are not inspired. This is
Spinosa's great Argument. He maintains, that there is this difference between
the Prophets and the Apostles, Apostoli namque ubique ratiocinantur, ita ut non
prophet are, sed disputare videantur. Prophetae contra, mera tantum dogmata and
decreta continent; quia in iis Deus quasi loquens introducitur; qui non
ratiocinatur, sed ex absoluto suae naturae imperio decernit. Et etiam quia
Prophetae authoritas ratiocinari non patitur, etc. c. 11. l. 1. Tract. Theolog.
that the one never argued, whereas the VVritings of the latter are full of
Arguments. Whence he concludes, that by the Prophets God spoke like a Lord and
Master, without debasing himself to argue with his Creatures: and that the
Apostles speak like Men who submit their Ministry to the Examination of their
Hearers and their Readers.

I do not believe that a more daring and rash assertion could be laid down that
this. It visibly shows that Spinosa was a man who cared not what he said right
or wrong to support his impious Conclusions. How could he be so bold as to
affirm that God and the Prophets never argued with men. All the Old Testament
is full of Proofs to the contrary. Was it not by way of reasoning the case that
God said to Cain, Genesis 4.6.7.
Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.
And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him.

Wherefore then is thy Countenance fallen? This is certainly a Reasoning the
Case, if ever there were any such thing, the like may be said of these words:
Genesis 6.3.
My Spirit shall not always strive with man; for that he also is Flesh: yet his
days shall be above a hundred and twenty years. Let them read the eighteenth
Chapter of Genesis, where they may see how God argues with Abraham before he
went to destroy Sodom. After all this, are they so bold as to affirm that God
never argues with man? I think it needless to run over the Prophets, to show
that they frequently argue the Case. There needs no more than to open the Old
Testament to find proofs of this assured truth. Know they not how Isaiah begins
his Revelations? Isai. 1.2.
Hear O Heavens and give ear O Earth: I have nourished and brought up Children;
but they have rebelled against me. 1.3.
This way of arguing shows the ingratitude of Israel; The Ox knows his Owner,
and the Ass his masters Crib: but Israel does not know. This manner of arguing
puts Israel to shame; 1.5.
Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more. This way of
arguing justifies God, he resolves to take no farther care of his People: and
indeed all the Prophets are full of these Expostulations.

M. N. professes however to believe that our Savior Jesus Christ was a
Prophet, and a Prophet infallible. Could any man have ever read the Gospel, and
seriously maintain that so great a Prophet never argued; All his Exhortations
are full of Arguments, which he sometimes grounds upon the Old Testament,
sometimes upon Natural Notions, and sometimes upon Maxims received among the
Jews. After this, to say that the Prophetic Spirit never argues, is either to
deprive Christ Jesus of the Honor which they pretend to pay him, or else to be
ambitious of speaking those things which are altogether repugnant to truth.

Quite the contrary, it is evident, considering the manner how God, is used to
converse with men, that it was his pleasure to use them like rational
Creatures, and convince them by requiring their Obedience. When he produced the
Light, which made all Bodies visible, he never disputed the matter but with a
commanding Voice, Let there be light, said He. It Is not the same thing with the
light of Conversion. God makes use of Argument in the Creation of that new
Light.

This is the course I might have held in framing my answers, had I affirmed
that the Holy Spirit suggested to the Apostles what they wrote. But there was
no need for me to enter into a discussion; for me, who assert that the Apostles
were commonly no otherwise inspired than by the way of Direction. Their Reason
acted under the infallible Guidance of the Holy Ghost.

From thence it is apparent after what manner we ought to answer to what is
objected concerning the dubious expressions which the Apostles make use of. For
this is one of those Objections which M. N. alleges to refute the Inspiration
of the Sacred Writings of the New Testament. The Evangelists, says he,
Sentiments. p. 2 6.
when they mention a certain time, never determine it exactly, because they
knew it not so precisely, that they could fix the number of the Days and
Months. We find in several places, about a certain Time, or about such a
Number. What is concluded from thence? That the History was not dictated
immediately by the Holy Ghost, who knew exactly the Number and Time that was in
question. This is true, and therefore I do not affirm that the Holy Ghost
immediately dictated the Apostolic History, like an Author from whose lips an
Amanuensis writes whatever he dictates. According to that Principle which I
have laid down, the Sacred History was written under the Direction of the Holy
Ghost; which was no hindrance, but that the Apostles might speak after their
usual manner. He did not acquaint them with all that he knew.

There is one Objection raised against the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers,
that they often stumble into Contradictions. But this is more than they can
ever prove. It may be easily shown, that the one relates some Circumstances
which the other omits. But this is only Variety; no Contradiction: In
Contradiction one of the two extremes must be false; which is a miscarriage
that never befell any of the Apostles. But in Variety there is not so much as
the shadow of an untruth. If two men relate the same story, the one may forget
some Circumstance which may be recited by the other, and yet neither the one
nor the other be guilty of Falsehood. Without question Varieties of this nature
are to be found in the Gospels. If they will maintain that there are any real
Contradictions in them, that is what it behooves them to prove. But I have
already made it out, in my Animadversions upon the History of Judas, that there
is no solid ground for the most seeming Contradictions that are to be found in
the Gospels.

M. N. insists upon this, that God has permitted different readings in various
parts of the Scripture, and they from thence allege, that Providence would
have been more careful of the words, had they been inspired. But do they not
know, that the Prophets also have their various Readings, notwithstanding all
the Nicety, and diligent care of the Synagogue? If there be any thing which
proceeded from the Mouth of God, it is his own Name. Nevertheless, it is well
known that the true manner of pronouncing it is quite lost. I know not what
Opinion M. N. has of the Terms which Jesus Christ makes use of in his
Exhortations: though they were inspi^'d, no body will deny that some of them
were lost, and that those which are lest are exposed to the variety of Reading.
By which it evidently appears, that what is objected in reference to the
Variety of Readings, no way prejudices the first inspiration of the Sacred
Writings. Nor can we find how they should be prejudiced in the least by saying,
that God permitted the words of the Apostles made use of under the direction of
the Holy Ghost, in process of time to suffer some slight alteration, through
the presumption or carelessness of the Transcribers. This is no hindrance but
that the Apostles might be Infallible according to the Promise which Jesus
Christ had made them: their mistakes would otherwise be a disgrace to the Holy
Ghost who took upon him to guide them in the Functions of their Apostleship.

Lastly, it is observed that St. Paul makes a distinction, between his own
thought, and the express direction of Jesus Christ. Thus when he speaks of the
indissoluble Tie of Marriage in general, 1 Cor. 7.10.
But for those that are married, I command, yet not I, but the Lord. But when
the Question is about a particular Fact, upon which he gives his Opinion
according to the wisdom which God had infused into him, he makes use of this
Expression, But to the rest speak I, not the Lord. Whence they conclude, that
many times S. Paul speaks as a wise Man, and that all his words are not to be
looked upon as the words of the Lord. There needs no more than to answer in one
word, that S. Paul distinguishes between the directions which our Lord Jesus
Christ gave when he was upon Earth, and those which he gave by the Ministry of
his Apostles. Jesus Christ declared Marriage to be a Tie not to be dissolved,
as is apparent in the Gospel. Afterward upon a particular case among the
Corinthians, Saint Paul gives his Opinion: this was the foundation of these
expressions; I command, yet not I, but the Lord. This Distinction perfectly
agrees with the System which I have made out. It supposes, that the Apostles
frequently spoke, argued, advised, exhorted according to their own Prudence,
but under the infallible Direction of the Holy Ghost. Thence it comes to pass
that S. Paul, after he has decided several Cases in the Chapter whence the
Objection is taken, declares, that it was by the Spirit of God that he made
those Revelations: And I think also, that I have the Spirit of God.

I do not believe that I have omitted any material Objection; but if there be
any that slipped out, it will be an easy matter to resolve it, when once the
Reader becomes never so little the Master of that Principle which I think I
have very clearly made out.

THE END.

