A REVIEW OF Mr. Richard Baxter's LIFE. WHEREIN Many Mistakes are Rectified,
some False Relations Detected, some Omissions supplied out of his other BOOKS.
WITH REMARKS on several Material Passages.

By THOMAS LONG, B.D. One of the Prebendaries of St. Peter's, Exon.

I have been in the heat of my Zeal so forward to Changes and Ways of Blood,
that I fear God will not let me have a hand in the peaceable building of his
Church.

Mr. Baxter's Letter to Dr. Hill. LONDON: Printed by F.C. and are to be sold by
E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall. 1697.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in GOD, JONATHAN Lord Bishop of Exeter.
May it please your Lordship,
I Am very sensible how Criminal it is for any Christian to do what the very
Heathen have forbid, to speak any thing of the Dead, but what is well; and yet
there are so many ill things recorded of Mr. Baxter in the following Treatise,
that I might justly incur your Lordships displeasure, if I could not plead very
necessary and satisfactory Reasons for this Undertaking.

First therefore, I plead that I have said little or nothing in what is now
published, but what Mr. Baxter reported of himself, as Matters of Fact in the
History of his Life, and other Books printed in his Life time, or what is
fairly inferred from the same.

2. That the Substance of what is now published, was printed about nine years
before his Death, which it is evident he had perused, and acknowledges he had
given no Answer to it, (except a Mentiris, which was his usual Reply to other
Adversaries, for want of Reason and Argument).

3. I say that (though dead) he has first provoked me; for in p. 188. part 3.
of his Life, he says, Long of Exeter wrote so fierce a Book to prove me out of
my own Writings to be one of the worst Men living on Earth (full of Falsehoods
and old retracted Lines and half Sentences) that I never saw any like it: and
yet though so much concerned, and surviving about Nine years, he has not
discovered that fullness of Falsehoods, etc. which he suggested; but tells his
Readers that it is none of the Matter in Controversy, whether he be good or
bad: whereas it is certain, that a good Man would never engage in so bad a
Cause as he has defended by his Personal Actions, as well as in many Writings;
and he himself tells us, That a true Description of Persons is much of the Life
of History, p. 136. of his Life. And an evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit.

4. I plead not my own Cause, but the Cause of the Church and National
Constitutions, and in truth of all Degrees of Persons in the Nation: for this
Historical Relation of his own Life, contains a virulent invective and grinning
Satyr against all that live in conformity to the Ecclesiastical or Civil Laws;
the King is represented as a Papist and Authorizer of the Irish Insurrection;
the Parliament is Tyrannical, making such Laws as proved Taring Engines, and
such as no Man fearing God could submit to; the established Order of Episcopacy
as Antichristian; the Clergy as perjured and persecuting Persons; the Nobility
and Gentry as strengthners of Iniquity in the Land: And do not such Scandals
demand a Reply?

5. It is necessary to disperse those Clouds and Umbrages with which he would
cover his mischievous Designs, his Pleas for Peace, first, second, and third,
and his Only way of Concord, being nothing else but Seeds of Discord and
Confusion; and necessary it was that such ill things should have good Names
given them: those that would propagate Schisms and Heresies need a Form of
Godliness to set them off. Arius, Aerius, and Donatus were Men of good
Learning, and as to appearance of good Lives also; yet the one most strangely
propagated that damnable Error of denying the Lord that bought him: and the
other those Schisms which have divided the Body of Christ, his Church, to this
present Age: It Is but an Artifice therefore of all Seducers, of which the
Apostle forewarns us, 2 Timothy 3.2,3. That in the last days men should be lovers
of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection; truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded; lovers of pleasures more than of God; and all this under a Form of
Godliness; and when even Satan can transform himself into an Angel of Light, it
is no marvel if his Ministers be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness.

6. I remember that our Excellent Bishop of Worcester prudently foretold of Mr.
Baxter, That he would dye leaving his sting in the wounds of the Church; which
Mr. Baxter has abundantly fulfilled in this and many other of his Writings,
which Stings must be plucked out, or the Wounds which they have made, will be
still kept open and bleeding; for though Mr. Baxter be dead, he has done what
he could to raise up, and arm a Succession of such a Generation of Dissenters,
as shall still eat into the Bowels of the Church, and he has provided a
Magazine of Ammunition for them. Mr. Sylvester tells us, How much he was
delighted in a hopeful Race of young Ministers and Christians; how much he
valued young Divines and hopeful Candidates for the Ministry; how liberal he
was of Counsel and Encouragement to them, and inquisitive after, and pleased
with their growthful Numbers and Improvement. (And he told me) that he had the
greatest hopes and expectations from the succeeding Generation of them, that
they would do God's Work much better than we had done before them. To which end
he acquaints us, in the beginning of his Preface, That Mr. Baxter left the
orderly disposal of his bequeathed Library to young poor Students. So that here
is a Fund provided for a perpetual Schism. And Mr. Sylvester has discovered a
hidden Treasure of Mr. Baxter's, which he is improving as a Supply of
Deficiencies, in another Volume.

Having shown your Lordship the Reasons of my Undertaking, I shall briefly give
you an Account of what I have performed to frustrate these pernicious Attempts.
Your Lordship knows, I have served as a Veterane Soldier in these Parts of the
Church Militant about Fifty years, and might now sue for a Dismission (being
somewhat elder than Mr. Baxter was when he left writing, which was, as Mr.
Sylvester says, Seven years before his death, when he was, as I compute it,
Sixty nine years old, and I am now entered into the Seventy sixth year) yet to
excite and encourage men of greater Abilities, I have, as I were able,
performed these two things.

First, Whereas a great part of this, and other Writings of Mr. Baxter, as also
of his whole Life, has been spent in framing Objections against, and
Defamations of our well-establish'd Discipline and Liturgy, which he blames as
too confused for want of Method; and for its Matter (abstracted from the Penal
Laws) as abounding with Thirty or Forty such tremendous things as a man fearing
God could not comply with; though many men, such as Dr. Beveredge, Comber,
Falkner, and the Authors of the London Cases, have convincingly Answered and
Vindicated them; yet conceiving that none could so effectually confute them (
ad homines at least) as Mr. Baxter himself has done, I recommended them that
are unsatisfied, to the serious use of Mr. Baxter's Last Legacy and Admonitions
to Dissenters, lately printed, which if they would read without prejudice and
malice, well weigh the force of his Arguments, they would do much right to Mr.
Baxter and themselves: For whoever shall think of opposing what Mr. Baxter has
said in Passion or heat of Disputation against what is proposed in those
Admonitions, will but show how often Mr. Baxter has contradicted himself; nor
will any sober Person, that has sound and wholesome Reasons offered by Mr.
Baxter, for the informing of his Judgment and Conscience, pass by those and
fasten on such putrified Soars and Ulcers, and like the Horse-leach, continue
sucking in Corruption till he bursts and dies, when Salutary Food is provided.

Secondly, Whereas Mr. Baxter and his Admirers value him for his great Zeal and
constant Endeavors for Catholic Charity, and particularly for Unity, Love,
and Concord between all Parties in this Nation, I have shown in this Abridgment
of his Life, and mostly (ex Ore suo) from his own Relations, that as much as in
him lay, he has made the Terms of Love and Union impossible; and that as he
was a great Incendiary of our Unnatural Wars from the beginning to the end,
having engaged some Thousands in the Rebellion, and served as a Chaplain to the
Garrison at Coventry in 1642. so he was a Chaplain to Whaley the King's Jailer
in 1647. so in our unchristian Divisions, he has been the most forward Agent
and Disputant ( Quorum pars magna fuit, as testifies Mr. Sylvester) and that
elaborate History of Bishops and Councils which he began to meditate in the
Year 1640. and after many years was printed, to show (as the Learned Dr.
Maurice has proved) how much he wanted of being a Scholar or a Christian. For
Mr. Baxter himself was afraid, lest that History, as opened by him, should
prove a Temptation to some to contemn Christianity it self, for the sake and
crimes of such a Clergy, p. 181. part 3. And indeed they had been intolerable
in any Nation, if they had been such as Mr. Baxter represents them. But whoever
shall consult the Catalogues of Ancient Heresies, or the Histories of Schisms
and Ecclesiastical Feuds and Tumults, (whether those Sixty Heresies reckoned by
Epiphanius, or those Eighty eight by St. Augustine, or those greater Numbers by
Philastrius and Theodoret: or those Schisms occasioned by Novatus and the
Donatists) will have a hard Task to prove any lawful Bishop to be the Founder
of any of those Heresies or Schisms. It is evident therefore, that he has
endeavored to ruin the Primitive Government of the Church, to raise a new
Model of his own disturbed Imagination. So that if there be any such Sins as
Schism and Rebellion, and such as Endeavor to defend and perpetuate them are
guilty, this Dux gregis may bear the Bell.

Yet lest it should be thought that I have disquieted my self and others in
vain, and being an old Man, have dreamt a Dream, and Combat with Fears and
Jealousies of my own Imagination, let it be considered, That as of old a Man of
Gath came forth, defying the Armies of Israel, saying, Give me a man that we
may fight together, and if he kill me we will be your Servants, but if I
prevail against him, you shall be our Servants; at whose words all Israel was
dismayed and greatly afraid, and the Philistines shouted and cried Victoria: So
there has been a Defiance published (in the Life of Mr. Baxter) to the whole
Host of Israel, whereat great Insultation and Triumph among the Non-Conformists
is heard in our Streets; and is there not a Cause why an obscure Shepherd, how
meanly soever he be otherwise armed, having got Goliah's own Sword wherewith to
fight him, should enter the Lists against him?

My Lord,

There is another such Disease as the Pice, that has infected both Sexes among
us, and is become Epidemical; Mankind still longs for forbidden Fruit, they
loath Manna, and require Meat for their Lusts. How has that damnable Heresy
of the Socinians spread it self of late, and corrupted the Faith of many,
though the Authors are either unknown, or Persons of a very ill Character, who,
under the Name of Deists and Unitarians, design the Contempt of all Revealed
Religion, and to unite us all in Atheism. But as Mr. Baxter's Person was had in
admiration among many Thousands of his Proselytes, so his Remains are esteemed
by them as precious and venerable, as any Relics of the Blessed Virgin Mary by
the Superstitious Papists. Whatever raw and undigested Notions, uncharitable
Censures, malicious Scandals, and false Histories he has uttered, are lickt up
and swallowed by a giddy Multitude as Rarities and luscious Dainties, and the
Dictates of an Infallible Teacher.

I shall trouble your Lordship but with one Instance; Mr. Baxter has asserted
as past doubt, That the Marquess Antrim had a Commission from King Charles the
First for Raising that Irish Rebellion, wherein Two hundred thousand
Protestants were Massacred; this is published again from Mr. Baxter by Dr. O.
in the later end of his second (...). And though the ground of this Report has
no other Foundation but a Libel published by some Regicides, yet the confirming
it by two such Evidences as Mr. Baxter and the Doctor, has authorized it to
pass as Common Discourse in Cabals and Coffee-Houses. I cannot but wonder that
the Doctor should so little consult for his own Credit; for who will regard his
Testimony against other Persons, who has so confidently asserted such a
Blasphemy against the Lord's Anointed; whatever he has deserved of the Nation
by his former Evidences, he deserves another sort of Pension for this
Scandalous Imputation; for we must blot out of our Calendar the Celebrated
Memory of the Royal Martyr, or show a Mark of our just Indignation against such
a One as has so publicly affronted the Authority and Wisdom of the whole
Nation. Pudet haec opprobria. This may be worthy of the Cognizance of the
Parliament.

My Lord,

I am conscious that I have moved a Nest of Wasps and Hornets that will be
buzzing about my Ears, but I am an old Man and hard of Hearing, so that I shall
not be troubled with their Noise; and as for their impotent Stings, they have
been so vainly spent on the Church of England, that they are become very
Drones. And I well remember, that when the present Bishop of Worcester had
provoked them by his incomparable Sermon against Separation, almost as soon as
it was published, a Forlorn Party of Reformado's appeared publicly against it;
such as Humphries, Alsop, Lob, a Country and City Nonconformist, with Dr. Owen
and Mr. Baxter as their Leaders, with their united Force beset him, and railed
lowdly against him, yet durst not Attack him, but evaded his weighty Arguments.
And Mr. Sylvester in his Preface tells us, That the present Archbishop, the
Bishops of Worcester and Ely, their greatest Antagonists, were expressly
mentioned by Mr. Baxter as Persons greatly admired and highly valued by him;
and of their readiness to serve the Public Interest, both Civil and Religious,
he doubted not. Yet such is the Hypocrisy of these Men, that they will openly
Scandalize and Defame such Persons (for the Edification of their Party) whom
they inwardly approve of and admire for their Personal Virtues and constant
Endeavors to serve the Public Interest of Church and State. And though I
despair of meriting their good Opinion by what I have done, yet I have learnt
to care less for their Calumnies and Reproaches, which though plentifully, and
with great vehemence thrown out, will not stick.

And now, my Lord, begging your pardon for this tedious Address, and too
confident Interruption of your more important Affairs. I bless the good
Providence of Almighty God, who under Christ the Great Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls, has placed me under the Tuition and Patronage of a Person of such
Primitive Courage and undaunted Resolution, as has constantly and successfully
stem'd that Springtide of Popery and Socianism which was violently overflowing
of us, and I trust will as effectually withstand those raging Waves of
Fanaticism, which so impetuously assault the Ark of God on every side, that we
being delivered from the Hand of all our Enemies, may serve God with one
Consent in Righteousness and Holiness all the Days of our Life, is the earnest
Prayer of

Your Lordships Dutiful and Devoted Servant, Tho. Long.
Exon, Jan. 1. 1696.
THE Introduction.
I Think it reasonable to give the Reader an Account how I became obliged to
engage in this troublesome Adventure, and for his Satisfaction and my own
Justification, I shall declare the first occasion of my Contest with Mr.
Baxter. It is generally known how many Books Mr. Baxter has written to
justify that Separation which he, and others of his Persuasion, had printed,
some of which he called elaborate and unconfutable; and as another Goliath,
despised all the Hosts of Israel, whoever appeared against him, was presently
born down with such a Flood of Gaul and bitter Language, (whereof he had an
inexhaustible store) that it was enough to affright any considerate Man from
approaching near him; he was resolved to have the last word to every Opposer;
and his word was as Law and Gospel to all his Party. These Considerations
occasioned me to think of dealing with Mr. Baxter in some other Method; and
having read something, and heard more of his engaging in our late War, in which
he continued well-nigh from the beginning to the end about 71 years, and had
been present at most of the great Fights and Sieges in that war, as you will
find hereafter from his own relation, I resolved to be at some pains to trace
his progress throughout the War; and because I wanted opportunity to enquire it
from others, and partly because I might neither be truly or fully informed,
either from some of the Party with whom he was, or the Party against whom he
was engaged, I thought it much more safe and unquestionable to relate such of
his Actions, and his Principles and Reasons on which he acted, as I could glean
up from his own undoubted Writings: which being done, though I now perceive I
were in the dark, as to many other considerable Passages recorded by himself in
his Life at large, I caused my Collections to be printed in the Year 1682.
while Mr. Baxter was living, upon which he Reflects as follows.

Mr. Long of Exeter (if Fame misreport not the anonimous Author) wrote so
fierce a Book to prove me out of my own Writings to be one of the worst Men
living on Earth, (full of Falsehoods and r^fred Lines, and half Sentences) that
I never saw the like of it; and being overwhelmed with work, and weakness, and
pains, and having least zeal to defend a Person so bad as I know my self to be,
I yet never answered him, it being none of the matter in Controversy, whether
I be good or bad? God be merciful to me a sinner. P. 188. of his Life.

Answ. I will not gainsay his Conjecture of the Author of the Book in question,
which was entitled The second Part of the unreasonableness of Separation,
which was printed 1682. The Book could not seem to be so fierce, being an
account of his own Relations concerning his Actions and Writings, which if they
represent him to be one of the worst Men living upon Earth, I could not help
that. Mr. Baxter himself, in his History of Bishops, pleads for his
justification, That he made use of their own words. In the Preface to that Book
he says, (in a Parenthesis) That the Book was full of Falsehoods, retracted
Lines, and half Sentences) but that he never answered it, which is very
strange, seeing he lived above 9 years after he had perused the Book, in which
interval he wrote several large Treatises, which less concerned him than that
wherein he says he was so much misrepresented: And in all probability, if the
Book which he reflects on, had been so full of Falsehoods, retracted Lines, and
half Sentences, he might, during that interval, have found leisure enough to
have given some Instances of what he pretended against, with his Plea of being
overwhelmed with work, weakness, and pains, appears to be but a vain Excuse,
for he had zeal enough to defend himself against several others, that charged
him with much lesser Miscarriages. And it was very considerable to the Matter
in Controversy, whether the Person so fiercely accused were good, or bad?
whether he were an honest, and peaceable Man? one wholly devoted to serve a
private interest against the public welfare? Mr. Baxter thought this a Reason
why so many adhered to the Parliament, That though the King had the Cause, the
Parliament had the better Men, Mr. Baxter's Life, p. 37.

For my part, I should have been extremely confounded, if either Mr. Baxter,
whilst he was living, or any one since his death, could have discovered an
hundredth part of that Fierceness, Falsehood, or imperfect Sentences in my Book,
which Dr. Maurice has observed in Mr. Baxter's Church History of Bishops,
wherein he strikes at Christianity it self, by the Reproaches which he casts on
the Primitive Bishops, calling them A few turbulent Spirits, p. 46. silencing
and destroying Prelates, p. 73. proud, contentious, ambitious, and hereticating
Bishops, p. 77. firebrands of the world, p. 98. merciless, furious, and
confounders of Churches, p. 183. Nor does he deal more mercifully with our
Diocesan Bishops, whom he calls Silencing damning Prelates, Briars and Thorns,
and Military Instruments of the Devil. Though in a good mood he says, That
none of the Bishops had silenced them, unless by voting as Peers in the House
of Lords for the Laws ^ainst Dissenters, which yet, says he, all did not. Yet
Mr. Baxter spares none: nor does Dr. Maurice, in his Vindication of the
Primitive Church and Diocesan Episcopacy, in answer to Mr. Baxter's Church
History of Bishops, etc. spare him; for whoever reads the Preface to that
Answer, and Chap. 8. p. 276. where he abundantly proves Mr. Baxter's ignorance
and scandalous imputation of the Heresies, Schisms, and Troubles which were
raised by several Presbyters against their Orthodox Bishops to those Primitive
Fathers, he will be of the same mind that I am, That there never was any
Schoolboy more justly, though severely chastised for any Fault, than Mr.
Baxter is for that Treatise which he says is very elaborate and unconfuted.

Mr. Baxter in a Preface to his Penitent Confession, Sect. 9. has this
Question and Answer.

Quest. How should one have the better of any Adversary that blamed him?

Answ. Speak and do things that are most odious, as Perjury, Lying,
Persecution, etc. and cover them with Sacred Pretenses; and then all that
accuse thee will be taken for uncharitable Railers.

This method Mr. Baxter uses for Confutation of his Adversaries. Thus he
answered the Bishop of Worcester's Sermon against Separation, calling it A
Schismatical Sermon in his Preface to his second Defense, p. 12, and says, That
the Bishop's Book is made up, 1. Of untrue Accusations; 2. Untrue Historical
Relations; 3. Fallacious Reasonings: And that in writing that Book against the
Bishop, he felt so little Passion, that he thought verily that he sinned all
the while for want of a livelier sense of the sin and hurt which he was
detecting by his Confutation. And which is to be noted, in an Epistle
Dedicatory to the Bishop, he confesses, That he answered him in a manner that
required his Patience; and if it was too provoking, he beggs his pardon. But
afterward adds, I doubt that I took advantage of his temerity, and confuted
him in too provoking terms; and that some mere impertinent noise was made (to
his Answer) by some one that is confuted. But the Bishop shows what kind of
Confutation it was, p. 59. of the History of Separation; Mr. Baxter discovered
so much anger and unbecoming Passion, that I truly pitied him; and was so far
from being transported by it, that it was enough to cure an indecent Passion,
to see how ill it became a Man of his Age, Profession, and Reputation; for he
seems to have written the whole Book in one continued fit of anger. For which,
and the scurrility of his Preface, wherein having in twenty particulars
described the most unskilful, proud, partial, obstinate, cruel, and impertinent
Adversaries he could think of places of Scripture or Similitudes for; he thus
concludes, Though all this be not the Case of the Reverend Bishop, etc. which
the Bishop notes to be a malicious way of Reproaching, to name so many very ill
things, and leave the Reader to apply as much as he pleases. And in p. 63. the
Bishop complains that Mr. Baxter says, That his Principles overthrow all
Religion; and that he was a secret Underminer of the Proofs of a Deity, p. 63.
of the Bishop's Preface.

After the same manner he confutes Bishop Morley's Letter concerning him;
saying, It is most shameless for untruths in public matters of fact; and adds
(Ironically) the Accuser is a Member of the best Church in the World; but is
this bundle of his gross untruths, a proof that he is one of the best men in
the World? In the like manner he reflects on Bishop Patrick's Friendly Debate,
That his Book was so disingenious and virulent, as caused most religious People
to abhor it for the strain, and tendency, and probable effects, Baxter's Life,
part 2. p. 39. As for Dr. Sherlock, he thinks it Confutation enough of his
former and latter Writings, that they were virulent and ignorant, p. 198. of
his Life, part 3. But Dr. Sherlock's Practical Treatises, whereof we have many,
are as sound, pious, and useful, I need not say as any of Mr. Baxter's, but as
any other on such Subjects as he has written on; as of Death and Judgment, of
Providence, etc. Dr. Fulwood. though Mr. Baxter had formerly commended him for
a Learned Man; yet for some Reflections on his Book called Sacrilegious
Desertion, he calls him railing Russian, p. 6. and his Reflections are a few
confident silly Reasonings: And p. 60. tells him of his want of common sense
and modesty.

P. 113. part 1. of his Life, he says, That Dr. Pierce wrote a bitter Book
against him, full of malignant bitterness against godly men, and breathing out
blood-thirsty malice in a fluent style; abundance of lies are also in it
against the old Puritans and me. And that he wrote a much more railing
malicious Volume than the former, the liveliest express of Satan's image,
malignity, bloody malice and falsehood, covered in handsome railing Rhetoric. I
have not heard, says he, of three such railing men in England, as Tylenus
junior, Pierce and Gunning; of the Jesuits Opinion in Doctrinals, and of the
old Dominical complexion; the ablest men that their Party has in all the Land;
of great diligence in study and reading; of excellent oratory and temperate
lives: but all their parts so sharpened with a furious persecuting Zeal against
those that dislike Arminianism, high Prelacy, or full Conformity, that they are
like Briars and Thorns, not to be handled but by a fenced hand; breathing out
threatenings against God's Servants better than themselves, and seem unsatisfied
with blood and ruins, and still cry, Give, Give; bidding as loud Defiance to
Christian Charity, as every Arius or any Heretic did to Faith.

I fear I have offended my Reader by spreading before him such heaps of putrid
and noisome Garbage. But Mr. Baxter offering no matter of Argument (for how
could he against his own Relations and undeniable Matters of Fact, except he
had given himself the lie) I thought nothing else needful but to show the
temper of the Man, and the usual manner of his Communication, to convince the
Reader that he too often calls evil good, and good evil; and supplies the want
of Argument and Reason with Invectives and Railing.

As to his Charge that my Book was full of Falsehood, half Sentences, none was
more concerned, or better able to have shown a few instances, if the Book had
been so full: And for quoting any retracted Lines, I never heard much of Mr.
Baxter's Retractations, though he had reason enough to have written as largely
upon that Subject as St. Augustine did. I do not think that his expunging out
of his Calendar of Saints the names of Brook Pym, White, etc. amounted to a
Retractation, because he told us that he did it not as altering his judgment of
them, but because it gave offense. Yet Mr. Baxter shows reason enough to have
expunged the Lord Brook; for p. 63. of Mr. Baxter's Life, part 1. he says, That
the Lord Brook was known, and noted as a gross Sectary in the House of Peers,
and Sir Henry Vane in the House of Commons. As for the retracted Lines in his
Holy Commonwealth, it is evident that they also gave offense, but that his
judgment of them was altered appears not. He seemed willing sometime that some
of his Maxims in that Book should be taken as not written: but finding that he
has in other Writings since that, written much to the like purpose, I think he
continued to be of the same mind that Pilate was, Quod scripsi scripsi.

Page 177. part 3. of Mr. Baxter's Life, he says, In June 1676. Mr. Jane the
Bishop of London's Chaplain, preached to the Lord Mayor, and turned his Sermon
against Calvin and me, charging me that I had sent as bad men to Heaven as some
that be in Hell; because I had said in my Saints Rest of Brook, Pym, Hampden
and White, that I thought of Heaven with the more pleasure, because I should
meet them there. This made me blot out those Names after 1659. not as changing
my mind, but not to give offense. For which Reason he should have blotted out
those hard Speeches and uncharitable Sentences which there follow: These
damning Prelatists are for our Silencing, Imprisonment, and Ruin; and Factious
Damners, that for preferment condemn good men, are ordinarily self-condemned.
Mr. Baxter's handling my Betters so rudely, makes me less concerned at his
railing on me.

And this may satisfy the Reader why I took the pains to Review Mr. Baxter's
Life, as written by himself; to enquire what Discovery he had made of
Falsehoods, retracted Lines, or half Sentences, of which I found not any
Instance, which made me to wonder; because I found in the Appendix to his Life,
p.108, 109, 110, 111. a large and scandalous Letter directed to me, and dated
July 26. 1678. wherein he calls me to an account for three Particulars which I
had mentioned in my Examination of Mr. Hales's Treatise of Schism, in which I
represented Mr. Baxter as a Person of a peaceable Temper, and made use of his
Arguments to confute those of Mr. Hales which pleaded for Schism, for which he
ought (as he seems to do in the beginning of his Letter) to give me thanks; yet
he that reads that angry Letter, may perceive that he sought occasions to
quarrel and defame me, when there was no Provocation given him: But when (he
says) I represented him as the worst Man on Earth, and that by Falsehoods, etc.
he shuns the Occasion of justifying himself, or proving any of his Accusations
against me.

A PREFACE Concerning the Power of Prejudice.
IT is a Caution necessary to be observed by all Christians, which St. Paul
gives us, 1 Cor. 3.21. Not to glory in Men; (i.e.) not to prefer the Parts or
professed Piety of some Men, so as to contemn or despise the Ministry of
others. The reason of which he gives us, verse. 4. For while one says, I am of
Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not (i.e. ye are) carnal? This
partiality begets Envying, Strife, and Divisions; which are the works of the
Flesh: And this Prejudice causes men to be puffed up one against another,
chap. 4.6. as the Corinthians were on behalf of false Teachers, to an
opposition of the Apostles themselves. This St. Jude observes to have been the
fault of the Gnostick Disciples, who had the Persons of Seducers in admiration,
because of advantage; (viz.) the liberty, impunity, and temporal accommodations
which were permitted and promised by them. And by such means St. Paul observes,
that his Galatians, chap. 3.1. were so bewitched, that they obeyed not the
Truth. And Tertullian deservedly chides the Christians in his Age; And ex
personis probamus sidem, an ex fide personas? De Praescript. c. 3. It is a good
Rule which Mr. B. says he had learnt (but practiced not) to contradict Errors,
but not meddle with Persons. Page 107. part 1. of his Life.
Do we approve of the Faith by the Persons of Men, or of their Persons by the
Faith? The Faith once delivered to the Saints, should always be the Rule by
which we judge of the Ministry of Men. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach
any other Gospel unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. There are many false
Teachers that transform themselves into Angels of Light, and mix some precious
Truths with their damnable Errors. But if they teach any thing for Doctrine
contrary to the Word of God, any Doctrine that tends to Impiety, Disobedience,
or Divisions, it is our duty to reject; and withold Communion from them, be
their parts never so excellent, and their pretenses never so plausible; lest it
fares with us as with those silly Larks, who being first taken with the
glitterings of the Glass, do play so long about it, till they are also taken in
the Net to their destruction.

For being once dogmatized and captivated by Men of ill Principles; it will
prove a matter of great difficulty to extricate our selves. If we consider how
rare a thing it is for Men of great Learning, and perhaps of good Conscience
too, to deliver themselves from those Snares in which by Education and Custom,
by Prepossession and Carnal Prejudices, they have been involved: whereof St.
Paul himself, being bred up as a Pharisee, may be an instance; for whose
Conversion no less than a Miracle was thought sufficient. And no other account
can be given, why so many Learned Men in the Church of Rome do, against
Scripture, Reason, and Sense, believe and defend such great Errors as they
generally do, but the tyranny of Prejudice and Education: for, quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu. The ways which we are trained up in
from our youth, we will not depart from when we are old: For, as Justin Martyr
observed, Non Ratione componitur, sed consuetudine. Senec. Epist. 123.
Custom having once got the advantage of long continuance, insinuates Errors
and Impostures into the Minds of Men, under the notion and representation of
Truth; and some Men have told lies so long, that at last they have believed
them to be truths. And Scripture it self does intimate that it is morally as
impossible for a Man to learn to do well, that has been accustomed to do evil,
as for an Ethiopian to change his skin, or a Leopard his spots. And Origin
affirms, that of all Customs, those (...); concerning Opinions and Matters of
Doctrins, are most prevalent: for when other Advantages do conspire with our
received Opinions, facile credimus quod maxim volumus: and our religious
Opinions being rivited into our minds by the weighty Arguments of temporal and
eternal Happiness, it must be a power above that of Nature to vindicate us from
the Captivity. Hear Mr. Baxter on this Subject: Take heed of suffering Fancy
and Opinion to go for Reason, and raise in your Minds unjustifiable Mistakes of
any Way or Mode of Worship. It is wonderful to see what Fancy and Prejudice can
do! Get once a hard Opinion of a Thing, and your Judgments will make light of
all that is said for it, and will see nothing that should reconcile you to it.
Partiality will carry you away from Equity and Truth. Abundance of Things
appear now false and evil to Men that once imagiue them to be so, which would
seem harmless (if not laudable) if they were tried by a Mind that is free from
Prejudice. Christ. Direct. p. 66. part 3. Our Savior also forbids us to call
any Man Father or Master upon Earth, so as to make them the Authors of our
Faith, Matthew 23.9. For this is the Genius of all Sectaries, says Dr. Manton on
Jude 16. to cry up all of their own way as Gnostics, (i.e.) Men of great
Knowledge, as if none were to be compared to them; and as Tertullian said,
Illuc ipsum esse est promeriri, it were Religion enough to be one of their
Party.

Now suppose that I had made this Discourse to a Papist, you cannot but think
it reasonable that he should, in a matter of so great concern as his Salvation,
make diligent inquiry whether the Principles in which he has been instructed
from his youth, be agreeable to the Rules of Godliness revealed in the Holy
Scriptures, and whether he ought to believe and practice all things which the
Doctors of that Church require of him, particularly concerning the
Infallibility and Supremacy of the Pope, the giving of Divine Worship to
consecrated Wafers, to Saints and Images; or concerning Prayers to Saints, and
for the Dead, and that in an unknown Tongue, etc. And there is as great reason
for such as have been educated under erroneous Parents, or Teachers in
Heretical or Schismatical Principles, notwithstanding their too great credulity
and fond opinion of the Persons and Opinions of their Leaders, to have recourse
to the Word of God, and search the Scriptures, whether the Dictates that they
so tenaciously adhere unto, be agreeable to them or not. Amicus Socrates,
Amicus Plato; sed magis Amica veritas. Let the Persons be never so nearly
related to us, and their Opinions never so well approved by us, yet if they be
contrary to the revealed Will of God, we ought to reject them. And if this
practice be necessary, as to the National Church wherein we are educated,
(every one being bound to give a reason of the Hope that is in him, and not to
give himself up to an implicit Faith, to believe as the Church does believe)
much more is it our duty in those parts of Religion wherein we differ from the
established Profession, when it is oppugned by private Persons, be they Parents
or Teachers: for as it is probable that they may err, so it may be justly
suspected that they do err, when they lead us into such Opinions and Practices
as have been condemned by the generality of Christians from the most primitive
and purest times of the Church; which they that do err from, will most
vigorously oppose, as knowing that if they should appeal to them, they will
most certainly be condemned by them.

Of this sort are the avowed Opinions and Practices of Mr. B. and many other
Writers of this Age; and to know well the Authors of them, will be a means to
undeceive us, and set us right in our Judgment of their Writings, who have
caused the many Controversies and Confusions which have disturbed the Peace and
good Order both of our Church and State. To which end I did compose such a
Character of the Man and his Communication with whom I had to do, as he had in
several Treatises left upon record; for the informanion of succeeding Ages, as
well as for the undeceiving of the present; unto which I have now added several
considerable Relations from the History of his Life written by himself.

A REVIEW OF Mr. Baxter's LIFE.
CHAP. I.
THE English Nation heard little of Mr. Baxter until the beginning of the late
unnatural War in the Year 1640. when Mr. B. says he conceived a Prejudice
against Bishops, and from that time meditated on that History of Bishops which
was printed Anno 1680. of which History Dr. Maurice says, that it seems to be
written to show how much Mr. B. wanted of being a Christian or a Scholar; for
therein, through their sides, he wounds Christianity it self, by imputing all
the Mischiefs that had troubled the Christian World to that Sacred Order. As he
does also all the Confusions which for Twenty years together kept the Nation
wallowing in Blood, and the Church rent in pieces by diverse Sectaries, as by so
many Evil Spirits, crying, Down with it even to the ground. Yet Mr. B.
confidently asserts in several Papers, That the War was begun between the
Episcopal Parties, the one adhering to Archbishop Whitgift, and the other to
Bishop Laud; and that the Parliament, the Army, and Assembly, consisted
generally of such as were (he should have said, such as had been) Conformists.
I shall not, to disprove him, repeat what others have said, who refer the rise
of it as far back as King James, in whose Reign the Parliaments were divided
into Regians and Republicans, as Wilson reports; who tells us of many Disputes
between Prerogative and Privilege. There was a Party that persuaded that King
and his Son to a War for recovery of the Palatinate; and having engaged them,
denied them the assistance which was promised, intending to work upon their
Necessities. And where other Parliaments left, that of 1640. begun, as Mr. B.
says. But Mr. B. brings the Matter ab origin, p. 32. of his Life, thus: Our
Reformers, in the days of Q. Mary, being fled to Frankford, fell into a
division, one part were for Diocesans, the English Liturgy and Ceremonies, that
they might no more than needed depart from the Papists, nor seem unconstant by
departing from what King Edward had done. The other were for Calvin 's
Discipline and Worship, setting up Parochial Discipline instead of Diocesan;
that Queen Elizabeth did countenance and set up the Diocesan Party. The other
Party, as Mr. B. elsewhere says, flew in the Faces of the Bishops with bitter
Revilings. And he notes, That the Bishops were Jewel, Pelkington, Grindal, Men
of great Learning, good Preachers, and of Hol^ Lives; but the Disciplinarians
petitioned against their Establishment till they were by Law suppressed: but
this lamentable Breach, Mr. B. says, was never healed. Here observe that the
War was not begun by two Episcopal Parties, as Mr. B. often affirms; for this
was in truth the Origin of that War, All the Nonconformists were against the
Prelates, p. 33. Sometimes he says it was for Reformation, and to recover our
Liberties, to relieve the Country, and to punish Delinquents, p. 25. of his
Life. And then it was begun by the Parliaments stirring up Apprentices in great
numbers to Petition with them; and that these went tumultuously to Westminster,
and meeting with some Bishops, cried out, No Bishops, p. 26, 27. and crying for
Justice, drove the King from Whitehall.

Again he says, the War was not founded in Theological Differences, but Law
Differences. Letter to Mr. Hinckley, p. 25. The first open beginning was about
the Militia, says Mr. B. And how then did the Bishops begin it? The Commons
wrested it from the King, and by one Order after another, seized his Forts and
Magazines, the Tower of London, and his Navy: Had any of the Bishops a hand in
this? They all did, and now do own, That the sole command and disposition of it
is, and by the Laws of England ever was the undoubted Right of his Majesty; and
that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, cannot nor ought to pretend
to the same. They were such Conformists who begun the War, as Mr. B. who
taught, That the Law that says the King shall have the Militia, supposes it
to be against Enemies, and not against the Commonwealth, nor them that have a
part in the Sovereignty; and to resist him here, is not to resist Power, but
Usurpation and private Will. And where the Sovereignty is divided into several
hands, as into King and Parliament, and the King invades the other part, they
may lawfully defend their own by War, and the Subject lawfully assist them;
yea, though the power of the Militia be expressly given to the King, unless it
be also expressed that it shall not be in the other. H.C.W. These. 363.

Another beginning of the War was a Confederacy with the Scots, then in the
Bowels of the Nation, with whom the King was informed that some of the
Parliament held Correspondence with. The Earls of Essex, of Warwick, Bedford,
Clare, Bullingbrook, Mulgrave, Holland, the Lords Say and Brook, and many more,
were said to be of this Confederacy, p. 17. of B's Life; with the five Members
and Kimbolton; whom the Parliament and City protected from the hands of
Justice, and procured and countenanced armed Tumults. Mr. B. makes an
Objection, p. 474. of H.C.W. That Tumult at Westminster drove him ( i.e. the
King) away. Answ. Only by displeasing, not by endangering, or meddling with him:
though the King tells us otherwise in his Chapter of Tumults, to which I refer;
and observe Mr. B's Account, p. 19. of his Life, That too great numbers of
Apprentices and others, emboldned by proceedings of Parliament, not
fore-knowing what fire the sparks of their Temerity would kindle, did too
triumphingly and disorderly urge the Parliament (as they had done the King)
crying, Justice, Justice: the King called these, Tumults; the Parliament called
them City Petitioners; which in the end did more than displease the King. So
that his Report of an Episcopal War was but a Dream of his own, though he
affirms he was as sure of it as of any thing that he saw: yet elsewhere he
says, no Man can tell where, and when, and by whom the War was begun.
Confessions p. 61.

Mr. B. knows another sort of five Members that begun the War, who were no
Episcopal Men; I mean the Smectymnuans, who wrote so insolently and pedantickly
against that meek, pious, and learned Bishop Hall: And how Isaac Pennington
brought a Petition of 15000 Londonners against Archbishops, Bishops, etc. which
was seconded by the like from several Counties: And on March 10. 1640. a Bill
is read in the House against Episcopacy, and their Vote in Parliament taken
away, and many of them sent to the Tower for entering a Protest for their
Privilege. Did any of the Bishops call in the Scots? or promote the Covenant?
or sit in the Assembly? who were chosen to that very end, that they might stir
up the People to assist the Parliament against the King. Though all these
things be left on Record, yet Mr. B. thinks by his bare Authority to persuade
the present and succeeding Generations, that the War was begun by Bishops, and
carried on by a Parliament, an Army, and Assembly of Conformists: yet to excuse
the Presbyterians, he says p. 26. that the Separatists and Anabaptists began
the War.

Mr. B. will not say that Bishop Hall (whom he so frequently commends) had any
hand in the beginning of our Wars; nor will he ever be able to persuade others,
that what he has written and publicly delivered, as Matter of Fact, in the
beginning of our Troubles, is false. I therefore refer the Reader to that
Treatise written with his own hand, May 29. 1647. having first given you part
of a Speech delivered by this excellent Prelate in the House of Lords, p. 425.
of his Remains -- My Lords, It is a foul and dangerous Insolence which is now
complained of to you (in the Petitions against Bishops) but it is but one of an
hundred of those which have of late been done to the Church and Government. The
Church of England, as your Lordships cannot but know, has been and is
miserably infested on both sides; with Papists on one side and Schismatics on
the other. The Psalmist has of old distinguished the Enemies of the Church
into wild Boars out of the Wood, and little Foxes out of Buroughs; the one
whereof goes about to root up the very Foundation of Religion, the other to
crop the Branches, and Blossoms, and Clusters thereof: both of them conspire
the utter ruin and devastation of it. As for the former of them, I do perceive
a great deal of good zeal for the remedy and suppression of them; and I do
heartily congratulate it, and bless God for it, and beseech him to prosper it.
But for the other, give me leave to say, I do not find many that are sensible
of the danger of it, which yet in my apprehension is very great and apparent.
Alas, my Lords, I beseech you to consider what it is, that there should be in
London, and the Suburbs and Liberties, no fewer than fourscore Congregations of
several Sectaries, as I have been credibly informed, instructed by Guides fit
for them, Cobblers, Tailors, Felt-makers, and such like Trash; which all are
taught to spit in the face of their Mother the Church of England, and defile
and revile her Government. From hence have issued those dangerous assaults of
our Church Governors; from hence that inundation of base and scurrilous Libels
and Pamphlets wherewith we have been of late overborn, in which Papists and
Prelates, like Oxen in a Yoke, are still matched together. O, my Lords, I
beseech you to be sensible of this great indignity; do but look on these
Reverend Persons: Do not your Lordships see here sitting on these Benches,
those that have spent their time, their strength, their bodies and lives, in
preaching down and writing down Popery; and which would be ready, if occasion
were offered, to sacrifice all their old blood that remains, to the maintenance
of that Truth of God which they have taught and written: And shall we be thus
despightfully ranged with them whom we do thus professedly oppose? But alas,
this is but one of those many scandalous Aspersions and intolerable Affronts
that are daily cast upon us. My Lords, if these Men may with freedom and
impunity thus beat down Ecclesiastical Authority, it is to be feared they will
not rest there, but will be ready to affront Civil Power too. Your Lordships
knows that the Jack Straws, and Cades, and Wat Tylers of former times, did not
more cry down Learning than Nobility; and those of your Lordships that ha^ read
the History of Munster, will need no other Item, etc.

Bishop Hall's hard measure, p. 45. Nothing could be more plain, than that upon
the Call of this Parliament, and before, there was a general Plot and
Resolution of the Faction to alter the Government, of the Church especially.
The Parliament was no sooner sat, than many vehement Speeches were made
against the established Church Government, and enforcement of extirpation Root
and Branch. It was contrived to draw Petitions accusatory from many parts of
the Kingdom against Episcopal Government; the Promoters of the Petitions were
entertained with great respects. The Petitions of the opposite Party,
subscribed with many thousand hands, were slighted and disregarded. The Rabble
of London were stirred up to come armed by thousands to the Houses, offering
foul Abuses, crying out, No Bishops, no Bishops; and professed they would pull
the Bishops in pieces. The House of Lords sent Messages to disperse them; they
hold on. The Marquess of Hartford told the Bishops they were in great danger,
advising them to continue in the House that night. Messages were sent to the
House of Commons, but nothing done for their security. At last the Earl of
Manchester undertook the protection of the Archbishop of York and his Company;
and the rest, by long stay and secret passages, escaped home. This Archbishop
persuades the Bishops to petition his Majesty that they might be secured in the
performance of their Duties, and to protest against such Acts as should be made
during their forced absence. He drew up the Petition and Protestation in our
presence, avowing it to be legal, just, and agreeable to former proceedings,
and got our Subscriptions: And whereas this Paper was first to have been
delivered to his Majesty's Secretary, then to his Majesty, and after to the
Parliament, by the Lord Keeper; these professed they never perused it; and the
Lord Keeper, to ingratiate himself with the House of Commons and the Faction,
reads it in the House of Lords, aggravates the matter as highly offensive, and
of dangerous consequence, and so sends it to the House of Commons; where Glyn
cries it up for High Treason, yea, preferring it to the Powder Plot. The
Bishops are called to the Bar on their knees, charged with High Treason, and on
Jan. 30. at eight a clock in the Night, in extremity of Frost, voted to the
Tower. The Citizens entertained the News with Bells and Bonfires. While we were
under restraint, the Faction renew the Bill which had been twice rejected to
take away the Bishops Votes in Parliament, and prevail. Their greatest Lawyers
were employed to advance our Impeachment to the highest, but found nothing to
fasten on us: One of their Oracles professed they might as well accuse us of
Adultery as Treason. The House of Commons, who first desired we might be
brought to a speedy Trial, suffered us to languish: at last, on our Petition we
obtain it. Our Impeachments being read, we plead Not guilty modo and forma, and
desired speedy Trial. A day is appointed. Wild and Glyn aggravate our pretended
Treason; which our Counsel being ready to answer, we were put off to another
day, which never came. The Circumstances of that days hearing were more
grievous than the substance: we were all thronged so miserably in that strait
Room before the Bar, sweating, and struggling with a merciless Multitude; and
when dismissed, exposed to a new and greater danger: for in the dark we must
back to the Tower, and shoot the Bridge with no small peril: There we lie,
expecting new Summons; but the Parliament wave their Impeachment of Treason,
and accuse us of High Misdemeanors; and in a Bill preferred against us, desire
our Spiritual Means may be taken away. After some Weeks more, finding the Tower
to be chargeable, we petition for Liberty on Bail: the Lords grant it, and we
were freed; but the Commons hearing of it, expostulate with the Lords for
freeing us without their consent; so we are remanded to the Tower. Having
tarried there from New-years-eve till Whitsontide, where by turns we preached
every Lord's Day to a great Auditory of Citizens, upon our Petition and 5000 l.
Bonds, with a Clause of Revocation at a short warning, we were dismissed.

From this Relation the indifferent Reader may perceive how far the Bishops
were from beginning the War, who suffered most of these Indignities before the
War begun; and ^ow causless and shameless the Clamours of Mr. B. and his Party,
concerning their persecution by Bishops are, when they openly affront the known
Laws, by keeping up public Conventicles in the chiefest Cities of the Na^ion;
and those Reverend Bishops were so ^arbarously treated by their Predecessors,
against all Law and Humanity. And I desire the Reader to observe, whether from
the year 1660. to this present time, it has not been his chief work to pour
out the like Contempt, Malice, and Violence, as was begun in 1640. and as
Quintilian says, Maledicus a Malefico non distat nisi occasion. From these
Injuries to the Bishops, they proceeded to abuse and affront the King, and
force from him his two principal Counselors, whom they by unparalled
proceedings cut off as their most formidable Enemies. And having driven the
King away by Tumults, they endeavor by Remonstrances, Declarations and
Propositions, to make his Return impossible. In June 42. the Faction sends a
Petition with Nineteen Propositions to his Majesty; to which he made many
gracious Concessions, as he was ready to do, even to the one half of his
Prerogative, to prevent that Deluge of Blood which he foresaw would follow on
the War. Out of these Concessions, says Mr. B. (and likely he knows by whom)
there was framed a Catechism that would justify the Parliament in all their
proceedings against the King. Yet many of those Propositions were such, as his
Majesty declared he could neither in Honor nor Conscience consent unto. One
was, says the Royal Martyr in his Chapter of the Nineteenth Proposition, To
bind my self to a general and implicit consent to whatever they shall desire
or propound; which were as if Sampson should have consented not only to bind
his own hands, and cut off his hair, but to put out his own eyes, that the
Philistines might with the more safety mock and abuse him; which they chose
rather to do than quite to destroy him, when he was become so tame an Object
and fit Occasion for their Sport and Scorn. This use Mr. B. and the Faction
make of all his Majesty's Condescensions. P. 37. B's Life.
The King's Answer to the Nineteen Propositions greatly confirmed many, that
his declaring that the Legislative Power was in King, Lords, and Commons, and
that the Government was mixed, and not Arbitrary; but as soon as the Parliament
assumed it, they exercised as Arbitrarily as ever Tyrant did. But let them take
in also his Majesty's Concessions at the Isle of Wight, when his Life was in
such apparent danger, and make a second Edition of that Catechism: And I
suppose there cannot be a more full Justification of his Majesty's real desires
of Peace, who granted so much; nor a clearer demonstration of their intentions
for War, who would accept of nothing less than an absolute Surrender of the
whole Sovereign Power; and having seized that, they could not be secure without
his Life also.

This may suffice (there being so many Histories of the rise of our lare Civil
Wars, especially that of Mr. Dugdale) to disprove Mr. B's Paradox, That the War
was begun by Episcopal Men; which the very taking and pressing of the Covenant
by them that begun the War does so plainly overthrow, that Mr. Baxter says,
None but young Men and Foreigners will believe. Were they Episcopals that Voted
down Episcopacy, before the War was began, Root and Branch? Or they who
petitioned the King at York for abolishing Episcopacy and Common Prayer? Were
the Smectymnians Episcopal Men? or the Covenanters? or the Assembly? and
Directory-men? Yet these begun and continued the War. Let the Reader judge what
Credit is to be given to Mr. Baxter in other Relations, who asserts a notorious
Falsehood in a Matter of Fact, as well known to himself, as to every Rational
Man in the Nation. For this, and several other Reasons, I am tempted to believe
that he was as far from approving our Episcopacy at the time of his Ordination,
as at the time of his Death: For the Bishop demanded of him these two
Questions; Will you maintain and set forward, as much as lies in you,
quietness, peace, and love among all Christian People, especially among them
that are or shall be committed to your charge. Answ. I will so do, the Lord
being my helper. Again; Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, to whom the Government and Charge is committed over you, following
with a glad mind and will their godly Admonitions, and submitting your self to
their godly Judgments? Answ. I will so do, the Lord being my helper. But
whether he more industriously performed these Solemn Vows, or perfidiously
acted against them, let the impartial Reader judge?

I now apply my self particularly to Mr. Baxter's Actions in relation to that
War. That Mr. Baxter has obtained the Vogue of a numerous fry of Sectaries,
who though they differ among themselves in many considerable Points, yet agree
to own him as their Champion, is no more than what the Anabaptists of Munster
did for John of Leyden, or our English Sectaries for Cromwell and Hugh Peter's.
That he still professed a great love to Peace, and zeal for Religion, while
under a Form of Godliness he helped to destroy the Power of it, his own Actions
will evince. It is necessary indeed, that whoever will set up for an
Arch-Heretick, Schismatic, or Rebel, should, besides many plausible Pretenses
for Reforming Errors and Grievances in Church and State, have some stock of
Reputation, as well for Knowledge as Purity, to buoy them up in the Opinion of
the People, who mostly judge according to appearance. The Devil and his
Instruments could never accomplish their ends of disturbing well-established
Churches and Kingdoms, if they did not transform themselves into Angels of
Light; and not only guild over their poisonous Pills with a show of Gold, but
mix some savoury Ingredients with them. Mr. Baxter has in like manner written
diverse Practical Books with specious Titles, for Peace, Holiness, and
Self-denial: and happy it had been for himself and the Nation, if he had
published them only; but these being laid as Baits in the way of the Vulgar, to
make them swallow his Polemical Writings, which are but so many Hooks and
Snares to draw them in, and retain them in Rebellion and Schism; our Nation
would be less in danger of new Flames, if they were all consumed to ashes.
Neither Men nor Books, nor any thing else, is properly good, but what is so ex
causis integris. And when his own practice demonstrates that his Writing for
Peace and Unity are but so many Pleas for Schism and Division; and like the
Egyptian Temples, however beautiful in the Porches and Outsides, are full of
Serpents and Crocodils within, which a multitude of People do adore; they do
not only need an Index, but an Ignis expurgatorius, to secure the People from
them. There needs no other Argument to undeceive the People, as to his
Pretenses for Peace and Unity in the Church of God, than his furious acting in,
and arguing for that most unnatural War against the King. And I dare challenge
and Historian that has observed or read the Tragedies of the late Times, to
show a Parallel in any one Person (I say, not only amongst the Apostate Clergy,
but the Laity, and the worst of them) that may equal Mr. Baxter. Who is there
among the Living, that entertained more early Prejudices against the Bishops?
that left his Calling, as a Minister of Peace, and entered with the first into
the War against the King? and for four years space (which was the heat of the
War) was an Agent as well as an Eyewitness of most of the terrible Battles
that were fought in England? Who ever boasted of drawing some thousands to that
War? Who has said more to justify not the War only, but the Death of the
Royal Martyr? Who more opposed the Return of our present Sovereign? or has
been as active in making the Government uneasy? or who has or can do more
than Mr. Baxter to renew all our Troubles and Confusions? So that I could not
devise a better Epitome of the late Rebellion and Schism, than this account of
Mr. Baxter's Actions and Writings, which is an Abstract of the Rise and
Progress of both; in whom they yet both live, and with whom I wish they may
both die.

Had any Man published the like Passages as are here related upon his own
Credit, they would have been thought a Satirical Essay, or Romantic Fiction;
but being the products of his own Hand and Pen, and the lively Idea of his very
Soul and Spirit, it is impossible any Man can represent him a more vile Person,
than he has done himself in that which follows.

P. 39. of his Third Defense, he says, I was not bred in Wales nor Ireland, but
in Shropshire, (lest men should suspect he had been a Jesuit or Tory.) In my
Childhood I was first bred up under the School and Church-teaching of eight
several Men, of whom two only preached once a Month, the rest were but Readers
of the Liturgy, and of very scandalous Lives. (Introduction to the Hist. of
Episc.) Mr. Baxter began to be a Censor morum before he was at the age of Ten;
but being now above Seventy, either Gratitude or Charity should have obliged
him to spare the Ashes of them that had been long dead, and to say nothing, or
no ill of them: and probably some of them deserved better things; but Ingratum
si dixeris, etc. His first Master, he says, was a Reader never at any
University, and preached once a Month: of him (being allied to Mr. Baxter, and
because he mended) he says no more, but leaves us to conjecture, by what he
says of the rest. From the Age of Six till Ten, I had four Schoolmasters
Curates of the place successively, that read Common Prayer; two never preached,
the other two seldom; but the two more learned drank themselves into beggary,
and left us. The like he says of one Mr. Yale B.D. who drank himself, Wife, and
Children to stark beggary. After the Age of Ten, he says, p. 58. of his late
Apol. he came to live at the habitation of his Ancestors, (but names not the
place:) the Curate there was another of his Schoolmasters, who, he says, never
preached but once in his time, and then he was drunk in the Pulpit. After that
I fell into the hand of a Teacher that studied for Preferment, and reviled
Puritans (it seems his love to these, transported him against all good Manners
to speak so ill of his Masters:) at length I was taken into the Tuition of a
grave and eminent Man of high esteem among great Men, who expected verily to
have been a Bishop. He loved me well, but so far frustrated my expectation,
that in two years time he neither read to me, nor instructed me one hour, but
discoursed usually of the unlearned factious Puritans: in his Study, which was
all my help, I remember not one Greek Book but the Testament; nor one Father
but Austin de Civitate Dei; nor any of the Councils, but ordinary English and
Neoterick Divines: And he studied little all the year but Bishop Andrew 's
Sermons. Hitherto, says Mr. Baxter, I had no Non-conformists Principles. N.B.
This was before he was Ordained.
I know not of what Age Mr. Baxter was then; but at Nineteen he tells us he had
a distaste against Bishops as Persecutors (as he had also against his Masters
for reviling of Puritans. Pref. to Cathol. Theol. p. 2.
)

If any suspect that his Father infused the Principles of Nonconformity, he
denies that his Father ever scrupled any Point of Conformity, or spoke against
it, which is a bare Negative; yet he was reviled by the Drunkards and Rabble by
the Name of Precisian and Puritan, as bitterly as any Nonconformist now. But
whether Mr. Baxter made his Father a Rebel, or his Father him, he tells us his
Father was twice taken Prisoner; and Mr. Baxter's first Adventure was, to seize
the Person of a Neighbor, to be an Exchange for his Father; but quo warranto I
find not. You see how early Mr. Baxter's Spirit was fermented with Principles
of Faction and Sedition. At Fourteen years of Age he Censures the Reverend and
Learned Bishop Morton: I went my self (says he) at Thirteen or Fourteen years
to the Worthy (but unworthily dealt with) Bishop Morton, with the rest of the
Schoolboys (for Confirmation) without any Certificate, and without any
Examination. (But I ask Mr. Baxter, Did your Master, who was also a Minister,
first Examine you and the rest? And how know you but he certified your Names to
the Bishop, who all know was a Man of Piety as well as Learning, though you
say) He hastily said, as he passed on, three or four Lines of a Prayer over us,
when I knew not what he said. This was Mr. Baxter's fault, not the Bishop's, no
more than that he considered not what he Subscribed to at his Ordination: But
he was an Aristarchus, a controler of Bishops at Fourteen: and at Nineteen his
Palate was so vitiated, that he distasted them altogether as Persecutors.

Now of what University Mr. Baxter was, and where he got that stock of Learning
which he has so prodigiously scattered, to his own, as well as the Nations
great trouble, he mentions not, nor can I inform my self. His chief Tutors were
those (of whom p. 59. of his Apol.) Three neighbor Ministers, venerable for
Age, dying two of them above Eighty, and the third near it, were my most
profitable Acquaintance; these were very worthy godly Conformists, who kept me
from the Principles of Nonconformity. One of them was a Learned great Disputer
for Conformity, and my chief Tutor. But what kind of Conformists they were, Mr.
Baxter tells you in a Parenthesis, ( Though they had all three much rather been
rid of it, ( i.e. of Conformity) and so were before they died.) They were some
of Mr. Baxter's Passive Conformists, who waited an opportunity to be Active in
ruining the Church. Mr. Baxter now bethinks himself of entering on the Ministry;
and (to remove his Scruples which he had entertained so early against Bishops,
etc.) his chief Tutor engaged him to read Dr. Burges, Mr. Sprint, Bishop
Downam, Hooker, etc. So that I was not at all in doubt of the matter; and with
this satisfaction I WAS ORDAINED, AND DID SVBSCRIBE. But I verily believe never
made Conscience of performing what he Subscribed to; for he confesses he had
never read any thing on the other side, nor ever read the Book of Ordination,
nor exactly weighed what he subscribed to, though at that time I suppose he was
about Twenty four. And whether he was made only Deacon then, as is probable, or
was ever ordained Presbyter after, I cannot find. Bishop Morton, who Ordained
him, acted very regularly; and to what Order Mr. Baxter was admitted, does not
appear: it was not usual to grant both Orders at once, especially to Persons
that never had been at any University: For Mr. Baxter, in his Penitent
Confession, N. 8. reckons among his Sins his strong inclination to have
settled at the University, till he had attained some Eminency of Learning and
Degrees; and accounts it a great Mercy that he was hindered and saved from that
danger and loss of time. And I ground my Suspicion on what Mr. Baxter says,
That he Baptized none in Twenty years, and gave the Lord's Supper to none in
Eighteen years, p. 62. and 86. of Answ. to the Bp. of Worcester. No serious
Presbyter could think but he incurred the Woe for not Administering the
Sacraments, as much as for not Preaching the Gospel: For at his Ordination he
promised to give faithful diligence so to Minister the Doctrine, Sacraments,
and Discipline of Christ as the Lord commanded, and as this Realm, received the
same; which he could not do, who renounced Communion with our Church, and
omitted the Administration of both Sacraments for Eighteen years. See the Bp.
of Worcester's Historical Account of Separation, p. 151. His first setting up
was in another Country, among diverse private poor Men that were very zealous
Non-conformists: Against these he pretends he was a forward Disputer, and by
writing against a Minister of theirs about kneeling at the Sacrament, silenced
the Opponent: and in his Disputations for Conformity, he thought he had ever
the better. But these Men brought him to resolve to read the Writings of both
sides impartially, especially Dr. Ames's Fresh Suit; whereupon he settled in the
Judgment which he never since changed, about Liturgy and Ceremonies. Though he
had conceived a Prejudice against them long before as Persecutors, viz. when he
was 19 years old.
But still he was absolutely for Episcopacy as it is with us, till 1640. when
the new Canons with the etc. Oath came out; which was the very thing that
occasioned such Nonconformity as he is guilty of.

About this time 1640. Mr. Baxter having no Benefice, as he tells us, See page
73. of the Treatise of Episc. and page 60. of his Apol.
and perhaps for that reason among others being a resolved Nonconformist,
betakes himself to Bridge-North, a Town in Shropshire, consisting of six
Parishes, most of them great ones; which were under an Ordinary and Court of
their own, exempt from the Bishops Jurisdiction; so that he never used Cross
nor Surplice, (his Subscription notwithstanding) having liberty to forbear
them. He had no inclination to a Pastoral Charge ( p. 13. of his Life)
Subscription, almost as soon as he made it, he began to judge unlawful, p. 14.
and while he was at Bridge-North, he never administered the Sacrament, nor
Baptized with the Sign of the Cross, nor wore the Surplice, ibid. p. 14. This
place he chose to make the Stage for that Prologue which ushered in the
following Tragedy. To ingratiate him with the People, there is a Report spread
that it rained Manna at his coming thither. From the Oath mentioned in the
Canon, he takes the Plot of his first Scene, which was this: Though every
Minister in the Country (says Mr. Baxter) was for Bishops as well as himself,
yet they were so startled by the Oath, (or rather by Mr. Baxter, who was
resolved to oppose it) that a Meeting is appointed about it; for (N.B.) the
Meeting was to be on his Lecture-day, and it was his lot to be the Opponent;
which was too much for one Man, to preach the Lecture and manage the Dispute,
had not Mr. Baxter been overzealous. Mr. Baxter, p. 27. of his Life, says
overdoing is undoing. To magnify that days exploit, he says, The Defendant was
Mr. Christopher Cartwright, a good Man, and incomparably beyond him in
Learning, the Defender of King Charles the First against the Marquess of
Worcester, and the Author of the Rabinical Commentary on Genesis, whose Papers
of Justification, says he, I since answered. All these Titles he gives Mr.
Cartwright, to enhance his own Victory, which he easily obtained: for though my
Objections, says Mr. Baxter, were none of the strongest, yet the Ministers
thought that he failed in answering them, so that they broke up more dubious;
(i.e.) more dissatisfied as to Episcopal Government than before. And thus the
Learning and Reputation of Mr. Cartwright were made Trophies to adorn Mr.
Baxter's Victory. The Scotch Covenant (he says) was not the first imposed on us
(that would have been swallowed without chewing, though imposed without
Authority:) but this, though required by lawful Authority, he was prepared and
resolved to oppose. P. 37. of his second Defense against the Bishop of
Worcester, Mr. Baxter says he was so well acquainted forty years ago with many
aged Nonconformist Ministers as his familiar Friends, that he knew their minds,
(and probably was confederate with them) which was about the beginning of the
late War, in which he was so active, that he encouraged some thousands, and by
the Loyal Party was looked on as a dangerous Person; for he complains that they
often sought his Life by unjust Accusations, though God delivered him,
Postscript to true Cath. p. 312. And now if it appear not by his own Narrative
of his Education what put the Principles of Nonconformity into his Head, yet
that which follows will plainly evince what Prejudices against Conformity had
possessed him from his youth, as well against the Government of the Royal Martyr,
as against his Ecclesiastical Superiors; to both which, by many actual Oaths,
as well as other Legal Oblations, he was bound to yield obedience, but acted
and wrote most violently against them. P. 84. He boasts of his Success in
converting Souls; Before I entered on the Ministry, God blessed my private
Conference to the Conversion of some. In the beginning of my Ministry I was
wont to number them as Jewels, but since I could not keep any number of them;
when (says he) the Reverend Instructors of my Youth did labor fifty years
together in one place, and could scarcely say they had converted one or two of
their Parishes. This is too uncharitable a Censure of Reverend Men's Labors for
fifty years together. Let others judge, whether he thought not too highly of
himself. He turned many from the Church to Schism and Faction; and encouraged
Thousands, he says, to engage in the War against the King. If his Converts were
such, he had no reason to glory in the number of them.

His Treatise of Diocesan Bishops, he says, was meditated in the year 1640.
that is, at the same time he entered into a War against the King, he broached
Faction in the Church. His Pen disdained to be less active than his Sword. And
it is probable his Church History had its Conception at the same time: for as
they were born near together, so no Twins are better like. On these, his
Meditations have been more or less employed ever since. In every Treatise
almost (for he has written to the number of Eighty) we are told of the Pride,
Oppression and Cruelty of the Bishops: and in his five Disputations of Church
Government, we have a Model of this Babel; for the erecting of which, he has
assembled all the Arian Heretical Authors that he could hear of, such as
Philostorgus, Sondius, etc. and out of them he quotes only the worst things,
omitting what is left on Record concerning the Learning, Piety, Courage,
Patience, Charity and Condescensions of those Fathers and Martyrs of whom the
world was not worthy: he notes only the Calumnies of their Adversaries, or
those Infirmities which their Zeal for Truth against Error, and their Love of
Peace against Faction, might discover in them. And contrariwise, speaking of
their Adversaries, whether Arians, Nestorians, Donatists, Novatians, etc. he
commends them as good and well-meaning Men, mistaken only in the manner of
expressing themselves, applauding them for their holy and strict Lives, without
any notice of their damnable Errors, though they denied the Lord that bought
them. And thus he has dealt with the Councils and Ancient Fathers, to whose
Decrees he imputes all the Troubles which were occasioned in the Church by
those Heretics and Schismatics that opposed them, not taking any notice how
great a Fence those learned and godly Men were to the Church of God, as well
against Heathen as Heretics, whom they resisted even to Blood. So that Mr.
Baxter has not reproached them only, but Christianity it self, and represented
the Discipline and Authority of the Church, as not to be submitted to, or
tolerated in the World. And this he does by the whole Order of Church
Governors, that he may make ours the more odious. He says, (as in diverse
places) p. 252. and 253. of Saints Rest, That the first rage of the Prelates in
silencing as learned able Ministers, and incessantly persecuting as godly
Christians as the World enjoyed, was (just before the War begun) increased an
hundred fold. P. 251. As I am certain by sight and sense, that the extirpation
of Piety was the then great design which so far prevailed, that very many of
the most able Ministers were silenced, Lectures and Evening Sermons on the
Lord's Day suppressed, Christians imprisoned, dismembered, and banished: (He
speaks as if it were done by Heathen, for no other cause but as being
Christians:) That it was as much at least as a man's Estate was worth, to hear a
Sermon abroad, when he had none (or worse) at home; to meet for Prayer, or any
other godly Exercise; and that it was a matter of Credit, and a way to
Preferment, to Revile and be Enemies to those that were most Conscientious, and
every where safer to be a Drunkard or an Adulterer, than a painful Christian;
and that multitudes of Humane Ceremonies took place, when the Worship of
Christ's Institution was cast out, (besides the slavery that invaded us in
Civil respects.) So I am most certain, that this was the Work which we took up
Arms to resist; and those were the Offenders whom we endeavor to offend. You
see Mr. Baxter is armed with Prejudice and Zeal Cap-a-pee for a War, wherein to
resist his Superiors, under a pretense of Reformation, though to that
Resistance the Word of God threatens Damnation. Yet Mr. Baxter, p. 271. says,
As I cannot yet perceive but that we undertook our Defense upon warrantable
grounds, so I am most certain, God has wonderfully appeared through the whole.
(Success was the great Argument;) of which p. 250. Having been an Eyewitness
of a very great part of the eminent Providence from the first of the War, I
have plainly seen something above the common Course of Nature, in almost every
Fight that I have beheld. The War (says Mr. Baxter) was begun in our Streets,
before the King or Parliament had any Armies, between the Puritans and drunken
Rabble that hated the Parliaments Reformation; and so I was forced to be gone
before the Wars. And a Man that was more pious and devout than the Multitude,
could not live by them in most places, but were forced into Garrisons and Arms
to save their Lives, p. 252. of Saints Rest, (i.e.) in plain English, Mr.
Baxter, with the other Reformers, put themselves into Arms, and seized the
King's Forts, making them Garrisons against the King.

I desire the Reader to reflect on this part of the Narrative. Mr. Baxter often
accuses the Conforming Clergy with deliberate Lying and Perjury. What was it
in Mr. Baxter being prejudiced against the Bishops at Nineteen, yea against
Bishop Morton at Fourteen, being familiar with Nonconformist Ministers, and
knowing their Minds, yet to submit to Episcopal Ordination, and Subscribe and
Swear to obey the Bishop in licitis and honestis, and presently omit the Cross
and Surplice, and dispute openly against Bishops, and prosecute and defend the
War against the King, against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and when
his taking of Holy Orders seems to be for no other end but to enable him to do
the more mischief: Was not this to be deliberately perjured? But to go on, (he
says in cold blood) His engaging in that War was the greatest outward Service
that ever he performed to God: That Neutrality had been sinful; and to have
been against the Parliament in that Cause, had been Treachery, p. 481. of
H.C.W. And p. 480. If I had known that the Parliament (in that Cause) had been
the beginners, and in most fault, yet the ruin of our Trustees is a punishment
greater than any fault of theirs (though it were the cutting off his Head)
against a King can deserve; and that their faults cannot disoblige me from
defending the Commonwealth. I knew the King had all his Power for the Common
Good, and none against it; and therefore that no Cause can warrant him to make
the Commonwealth the Party which he shall exercise Hostility against: and that
War against the Parliament, especially by such an Army, in such a Cause, is
Hostility against them, and so against the Commonwealth. All this seemed plain
to me, and especially when I knew how things went before, who were the Agents,
how they were minded, and what were their purposes against the People. Would
not this Man have made a better Solicitor against the Royal Martyr, than Cook
(who said he was another Solomon for his parts?) Did Cromwell or Bradshaw ever
object such things against him as Mr. Baxter has done? Who could think that
Mr. Baxter, who pretends for so much Peace, was ever a Man of such a Temper?
With what heart could he be an Eyewitness of the Humane Butcheries that were
made in almost every Fight from the beginning of the War? or with what Face
could he say there appeared more of Christ's Interest on the one side than on
the other, as in the first occasion, so in the Prosecution? p. 252. of Saints
Rest. And again, Whatever the end may prove, I am sure I have seen the Lord in
the means, p. 251. And, That as we undertook our Defense on warrantable
grounds, so I am most certain God has wonderfully appeared through the whole,
ibid. He says in the Epistle, he was wonderfully rescued from many dangers in
four years Wars; and after many tedious nights and days, and many doleful
sights and tidings, he and many of his Kederminsters (whom he, it seems, had
led on to the War) were returned in peace; that he was twenty several times
delivered when he was near to death. O the sad and heart-piercing Spectacles,
says he, p. 115. that mine eyes have seen in four years space! In this Fight a
Friend fall down by me, from another a precious Christian brought home wounded
or dead, (precious Christians, no doubt, that died in such a horrid Rebellion;)
scarce a Month, scarce a Week, without the sight or noise of Blood. Surely
there is none of this in Heaven; our eyes shall then be filled no more, nor our
hearts pierced with such Fights as at Worcester, Edgehill, Newbury, Nantwich,
Montgomery, Horn-Castle, Naseby, Langport, etc. (it seems he was present in
these Fights:) For he adds, Mine eyes shall never more behold the Earth covered
with the Carcasses of the slain. And he says, He had traveled over the most
part of England (to pursue the War.)

Illi robor and aes triplex circum praecordia. Mr. Baxter says the War began
first in their Streets at Kederminster, between those that would have pulled
down Painted-glass and Pictures, and the People that opposed them; which
Parties were so violent against each oother, that he was forced to fly for his
Safety. And having been a while at Bridge-North, (...) Parties of the King's
Soldiers frighted him from thence to Coventry; and as soon as he heard of
Essex's Army at Worcester, he went and tarried there until Edgehill Fight; and
the next Morning hearing that Essex won the Field, he went to see the Slain,
and after that he took up his quarters at Coventry, and staid with the
Governor in his House preaching as Chaplain to the Garrison for a whole year,
p. 43, 44. of his Life. From thence he went to Wem in Shropshire to settle a
Garrison there, and procures Thirty or Forty of his Neighbors to enter
themselves under Col. Mackworth to strengthen that Garrison. But Wem being
taken, he follows the Parliament Army which marched toward the West, where
first he fully describes the Fight at Langport, and says he was next to Major
Harrison when the flight of Goring's Army was begun; and Goring marching
toward the West, Mr. Baxter tarried at the Siege of Bridgwater and Bristol.
The Siege of Bristol continuing about a Month, he was taken sick of a Fever
after the three first days; but being recovered, he came back to Bristol Siege
three or four days before it was yielded, p. 55. He was also at Naseby, and
went to see the Field two days after the Fight, p. 50. He also followed the
Army that went Westward in pursuit of the Lord Goring, and says he was three
Weeks at the Siege of Exeter, and then returned with Whaley's Regiment, which
was sent to streighten the Garrison of Oxford, in order to a Siege; he
quartered two Months at Banbury and Agmondesham in Buckinghamshire. N. 1. of
his Penitent Confessions, he says, While he was at Coventry he went out twice
with the Army; once to take in Tamworth Castle; and then to besiege Banbury
Castle, whence we were driven home with some loss.

P. 58. When the Siege of Worcester was over, he went to London for his health;
though he said the riding in the Army did him most good of any thing, p. 10.
And from London he returned to his quarters in Worcestershire, and from thence
to Leicestershire, Staffordshire, and Darbyshire; and then back again to
Leicestershire, and was three weeks at Nowel's House, and a quarter of a year
at the Lady Rouse's in Worcestershire. So that for the space of Seven or Eight
years he constantly pursued the Wars, tho he had been very often in danger of
his Life. But though he carried on the War with great Zeal and Vigor amidst
many dangers against King Charles the First, yet he is not ashamed to tell the
World, p. 68. That when King Charles the Second marched by Kederminster toward
Worcester, Col. Graves sent two or three Messengers to him, as from the King,
to come to him; and afterward sent others from Worcester to invite him
thither: He refused to go because he had fore Eyes.

T'wice, he says, the Season called him to endeavor for the King; once at the
Worcesier Fight, and at Sir George Booth's Rising, but I durst not meddle on
either side, because I foresaw the Divisions, Silencings, Persecutions and
Calamities which the Bishops and other revengeful Instruments would bring to
the Kingdom. It seems his Prejudice against the Bishops, bound him up from
doing his Duty to the King, when he was actually sent to by Col. Graves. See
his Necessary Vindication, Reply to Accus. 6.

Had not Mr. Baxter told us the contrary, we might have thought he had been
born in Ireland, and nursed up by some ravening Wolf, that could see the Death
of so many of his Friends who died in Rebellion, and were like to perish
eternally as well as temporally; and so many Loyal Nobles and Gentry perish in
their Integrity, some perhaps by his own hand, but many probably by his
procurement, without any regret, and please himself with the meditation of it;
yea, and ascribe all to the eminent Providence of God, above the ordinary way
of God's working. Matthew. of Westminster, p. 71. of his History, That Richard
the First, in the French Wars, took among other Prisoners Richard Bishop of
Beaux near his own City, who was presented to the King in his Armor as he was
taken; and being imprisoned, the present Pope wrote to the King an angry
Letter, chiding him for imprisoning his dear Son, and requiring him to send his
dear Son home to him. The King detains the Bishop, and sends only the Armor in
which the Bishop was taken, willing him to consider whether that were his Sons
Coat or no.

Reader, you see here a little Man, ( David some account him) but in the Armor
of Goliath; and as he, a Man of War from his Youth, defying the whole Israel of
God, saying, Give me a Man that we may fight together: his confidence in his
Armor, which is all of Brass, so close knit with Lies, Contradictions, and
Slanders, that as the Scales of the Leviathan, you can scarce discern any space
between them. Let the Reader take a full view of him, and then tell me whether
he be a Child of Peace, or a Man of War. Do these things savor of an
Evangelical Spirit? or are these fit Meditations for one that was penning the
Saints Everlasting Rest? Well may he talk of it: But such Men as Mr. Baxter,
and Brook, (who was actually slain in the Rebellion) Pym, Hamden, and White,
etc. who were perpetually tormenting themselves and others in an unnatural and
bloody War, without timely and serious Repentance, could never enjoy it; though
Mr. Baxter place them all there, with many more such precious Christians.

As to Mr. White, this Apostate Presbyter is another of Mr. Baxter's white
Saints, who boasted that he and his Fellows had turned out near Eight thousand
Ministers out of their Freeholds, contrary to the Magna Charta, the Petition of
Right, and the Proclamation of Charles the First against the Oppression of the
Clergy by the intrusion of Schismatical Persons into their Cures, mentioned in
Bibliotheca Regia, p. 324. And when the Parliament had encouraged the Mob to
bring in Articles against their Ministers, he began his infamous Centuries to
blacken the Reputation of the ejected Ministers with those false Imputations
with which their factious Parishioners accused them, but never proved against
them. We have printed Catalogues of the London Clergy, the Heads of Houses in
both Universities, as also of the Bishops and Dignitaries, etc. then Ejected as
Scandalous and Insufficient. Ministers who were Men of Extraordinary Merit,
both for their Lives and Learning; such as Bishop Juxton, Morton, Hall, Cousin,
Prideaux, Davenant, Brownrigg; and Dr. Sanderson, Hammond, Holdsworth,
Hinchman, Sheldon, Morley, Gillingham, Mason, Duppa, Howel, Hacket, Westfield,
Featly, Walton, etc. of whom the Age was not worthy, were forced to forsake
their Families and Relations, and to wander up and down, and seek their Bread
in unknown Places and Foreign Countries. Yet Mr. Baxter approves of these
barbarous Actions, and takes it for one of the best things they could do to
cast out these, and to put in such as he calls better in their places. See p.
78, 79. of his Apology, where he tells us what sort of Persons were put into
the Cures of the Ejected Clergy. In my Opinion, says he, the Sequestring
Ministers being mostly young Men in the Universities, that had nothing of their
own, could not else get Bread and Clothing, much less Fire and Houseroom. Many
of these thought it a good work, yea a very good work to cast out those as
Insufficient and Scandalous, and having a lawful Call to the Work, they thought
they had so to the Salary. And when these Sequestrators were forced by the
approach of the King's Army to leave their Cures to their proper Owners, Mr.
Baxter thinks these the Usurpers before God, and that they were bound, if
possible, to make Restitution of the Tithes and Maintenance which they had
received, as much as if they had broke men's Houses, or robbed by the Highway.
See Dr. Pearce against Baxter, 26.

Mr. Baxter affirms, That if Bishops, who come in by the King's Nomination, and
not by the Majority of the People, shall impose inferior Pastors on the Parish
Churches, and command the Peoples Acceptance and Obedience, the People are not
bound to accept and obey them as such, nor is it Schism to Disobey, no more
than it is Treason to Reject the Usurper of a Kingdom. So that Mr. Baxter
pronounces, as well the King as the Bishops, and all Ministers Presented by
them, or other Patrons, to be mere Usurpers. This is, as the Bishop of
Worcester says, an excellent Plea for Peace, p. 138, 139. of the History of
Separation.

I cannot omit to inform the Reader (because I my self, and some thousand
others, yet live to contradict him) how falsely, as well as maliciously, he
calumniates the happy and peaceable Reign of the Royal Martyr: for so it was,
until the times of Mr. Baxter's unhappy Reformation. We read, Ezra 3.12. When
the Foundation of the second Temple was laid, the People shouted: but the
Priests and Levites, and chief of the Fathers, who were ancient Men, that had
seen the first House, wept with a loud voice. I cannot, without a fit of Grief
and Pain, look back upon those (over-prosperous) times, wherein Peace and Truth
did so flourish, that we were the Envy of our Neighbor Nations; and until
groundless Fears and Jealousies distracted us, this Nation was as Jerusalem, a
City at unity within it self. Every one sat under his own Vine, and under
God's Vine too. There was no decay of Trade, no leading to Captivity, till we
began to surfeit of our Plenty, and to grow sick of Peace, and to loath Manna
it self; and then God gave us up to the hands of such Physicians as had the
skill only to let us Blood, but never the Art to staunch it, till all our
Strength and Beauty, all our Liberties, Properties, and Religion were past
recovery by the Wit of Man; and God himself did it by a Miracle from Heaven.
And yet this Man of Peace (forsooth) to whom (and such as he) we owe the loss
of all our Blessings, and all the Damages done to Church and State, is at every
turn defaming those happy Times, complaining of Persecution of Christians, and
Slavery in Civil Respects. See what he says, H.C.W. p. 7. The Peoples Rights
were evidently invaded; many Thousands have suffered, or were forced to remove
out of the Land, upon the account of illegal Impositions; (and though he
himself observes the contrary, p. 88. of his Apol.) Ministers were ejected and
punished for not bowing toward the Altar, for preaching Lectures, and twice on
the Lord's day; (whereas the Canon only required, that they who used that
Ceremony, would not despise them that used it not, etc. obliging no Man) and
the Afternoon Sermon was only to be exchanged for a Catechize Lecture. The
Preachers that were silenced were mostly Brownists and Anabaptists, or such as
were prohibited to preach at Norwich. One was a Draper, another a Tailor, a
third a Weaver, as appears by the Register there. If any Ministers were
silenced, they were such, as contrary to their Subscriptions and Solemn Vows,
refused Conformity, and preached up Sedition and Schism, which no Government
could endure. Nor were any punished, but for preaching or practicing Sedition
and Faction, which was then so strong as to affront the Laws, and within a
little while to destroy them and the Government both in Church and State. To
dismiss this Book of the Saints Rest, which was his first and his best, as he
thought himself: for if Mr. Cressy (says he) had read no better than my Saints
Rest, the Life of Faith, the Divine Life, the Christian Directory, etc. he
would never have gone from the Protestants to Popery, for want of an
affectionate Spiritual Devotion.

I would willingly prevail with Mr. Baxter, that as in a later Edition of his
Saints Rest, he left out the mention of Brook, Pym, Hamden, etc. as Members of
a more knowing, unerring, well-ordered, right aiming, self-denying, unanimous,
honorable, triumphant Senate; so if he lived to see another, he would leave
out those unsuitable Passages which I have mentioned, and change them for such
as this in the Epistle: I shall leave you my best advice for your immortal
Souls, as the Legacy of a dying Man; receive it as from one that unfeignedly
loves you, as if I offered it on my bended knees, yea, as one that has
received Authority from Christ to command you: I charge you in his Name, as you
will answer it when we shall meet at Judgment, that you faithfully and
constantly practice these Directions, (whereof this is one:) Above all, see
that you be followers of Peace and Unity, both in the Church, and among your
selves. I differ from many in several things of considerable moment; yet if I
should zealously press my judgment on others, so as to disturb the Peace of the
Church, and separate from my Brethren, I should fear lest I should prove a
Ferebrand in Hell, for being a Firebrand in the Church. And for all the
interest I have in your Judgments and Affections, I here charge you, that if
God should give me up to any factious Church-rending course, that you forsake
me, and follow me not a step.

No sooner had the Preebyterians excluded the Bishops, and their Directory the
Liturgy, but the Lord's Prayer is also exploded as a thing of no use, either
for matter or form: for the men of that Age thought it not Spiritual enough for
such overgrown Christians as they were, being adapted only to the Nonage of
the first Disciples: Nor was it sufficient to disuse it, but they poured out
all the Contempt they could upon it, both from their Pulpits and the Press. Dr.
O. was so transported with the In-dwelling of the Spirit, that at the same time
when he wrote against the Socinians, he wrote also against the use of our
Lord's Prayer. And this Anticristian Practice prevailed so far, that the People
generally refused to teach it their Children: Some gave God thanks they had
forgotten it; and if any sober Clergyman did conclude his own Prayer with it,
a great part of his Auditory would presently depart out of the Church, as if it
were impossible for them to be edified by such a Preacher as had no better Gift
of Prayer. And thus to make a thorough Reformation, they first agreed on no
more Addresses unto God, before they Voted no more Addresses to the King. The
Creed and Commandments suffer the same Indignities, being generally omitted in
their Public Worship; and in many places, especially at their Lectures, scarce
a Chapter of the Holy Scripture read to the People; the whole Exercise being
made up of Extemporary Prayer and Preaching: the best of their Sermons, if I
may account them so that are printed, and were preached in the greatest
Congregations on most Solemn Occasions, abounding with such Invectives against
the King, such Arguments and Motives to Rebellion and Shedding of Blood, as
will be an indelible Reproach to the Presbyterian Party, who so taught others
the Doctrine of Resisting their Superiors, that they soon felt it to be
practiced against themselves, who had broken down all the Fences of Government,
and opened those wide Breaches by which so many Heresies and so great Confusion
overflowed the Nation; so that the Pulpit-Drums exceeded those of the Field in
doing Mischief, drawing on more Souls to Destruction than the other did Bodies.

Mr. Baxter, p. 43. of his Life, tells us what Chaplains were in Essex's Army:
Abundance of famous excellent Divines were Chaplains to his Army, Stephen
Marshal and Dr. Burgess to Essex 's Regiments; Obadiah Sedgwick to Col. Hollis;
Calibut Downing to the Lord Roberts; John Sedgwick to the Earl of Stamford; Dr.
Spurstow to Hamden 's; Mr. Perkins to Col. Goodwin 's; Mr. Moore to the Lord
Wharton 's; Adoniram Bifield to Sir Henry Cholmley 's; Mr. Nalton to Col.
Grantham 's; Mr. Simeon Ash to the Lord Brooks; Mr. Morton of Newcastle to Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, with many more. These were the first Incendiaries and
Boutefew's that first kindled and continued the Wars, and such of the King's
Friends as escaped the mouth of the Armies Swords, were sentenced to a worse
Death by the Sword of these Men's mouths.

In the Year 43. when the Parliaments Army were worsted and weakened by the
King, and they thought themselves in danger of being overcome, they entreated
help from the Scots, who taking advantage of their straits, brought in the
Covenant as the Condition of their help. Thus Mr. Baxter, p. 127. of his first
Plea; who confesses it was contrived as a Stratagem of War to bind the Faction
in both Nations in a Confederacy against the King, and strengthen the War
against him; for the doing whereof, they pawned their Souls to each other, as
his Majesty observes in the Chapter of the Covenant. And if it be considered by
how many Solemn Oaths and Protestations the Subjects of both Nations, as well
as by the Laws of God and Nature, were obliged to defend his Majesty's Person,
and the Laws and Government established; it will appear to be true, as Mr.
Philip Nigh observed, concerning the Covenant, That for Matter, Persons, and
other Circumstances, the like has not been in any Age or Oath we read of in
Sacred or Humane Story. But it did the work for which it was designed; it
brought in the Scots Armies, by by the promised hopes of dividing the Church
Lands upon the Extirpation of Episcopacy; and was as fatal to the King as to
the Bishops: For the King's Forces being broken, he withdraws from Oxford,
where he was besieged, and commits himself to the Scots Army, who solicit him
to take the Covenant, and sign their Propositions for the Presbyterial
Government. Henderson is sent to dispute the point with the King; and he being
baffled, Mr. Cant, Blaire, and Douglas endeavored the same; but more by
railing than reasoning with him. One of them (besides many rude expressions in
his Sermon before the King) called for the 52 Psalm; which begins thus: Why
do thou, Tyrant, boast abroad, Thy wicked works to praise? Whereupon the King
presently stood up, and called for the 56 Psalm, which begins thus: Have mercy
Lord on me, I pray; For men would me devour. Which the People readily sung,
leaving the other. And the Commissioners of the General Assembly resolved, That
if the King be excluded from Government in England for not granting the
Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, it was not lawful for that
Kingdom to assist him for the Recovery of the Government. Nay, they threaten to
deliver him up to the Parliament of England, as shortly after they did for
400000 l. for the raising of which Sum, an Ordinance is past for Sale of the
Bishops Lands at Ten years value, Nov. 16. And by another Ordinance, Febr. 8.
none were to bear any Office Civil or Military that refused to take the
Covenant. The Parliament having gotten the King in their power, thought
themselves very secure; and therefore resolves to disband the whole Army, Horse
and Foot, and to send a good part of them for Ireland; which so startled the
Army, that they began to take new measures. And first they demand their Arrears
for 56 Weeks. Next, that a Declaration against the Army March 13. might be
recalled, and they secured for what had been done in the late Wars: which
things at a general Rendezvous they petition the Parliament for; who being
under great fears, Vote all that was desired. But the Army had a farther
design, and by 1000 Horse under Cornet Joyce, seize the King's Person, and
detain him in the power of the Army; which was Cromwell's design, who though he
sat with the Members at Westminster, and protested there with Execrations
against himself and his Family, that he was ignorant of the Fact, yet he told
his Considents, that having got the King into his hands, he had the Parliament
in his Pocket. And presently he falls to purging of the House, impeaching
Eleven of the chief Presbyterians of High Treason, and secluded them the House;
and afterward got the Militia of London into their hands: for the Army being
drawn up on Hounslow-heath, marched up to the Parliament House, and gave it a
second purge of many more Members; and marching triumphantly through London,
did demolish their Works; and never left, till he had settled the Parliament to
his own liking.

But to return to Mr. Baxter: Four years, he says, he was a Member of the Army;
part of which time (by what follows) will appear to be after that the
Independent Party was predominant, and the Army new modelled; yet he tarried
with this Army under Cromwell, until the King was murdered, and till Richard
the Protector was cast out of the Government by those that had placed him in
it. Hear what Mr. Baxter says, p. 14. of his Answer to Bagshaw: Is it possible
for any sober Christian in the World to take them to be blameless, or these to
be little sins? What? the violating of the King's Person, and the Life of so
good a King, and the Change of the Fundamental Government, and The Armies Force
upon the Parliament; the setting up a Protector, and pulling him down again;
the setting up the Remnant of the Commons, and presently pulling them down, to
whom (as Mr. Baxter said) they had sworn, and sworn, and sworn again to be
faithful to, and defend them; and that they were the best Governors in all the
World. If all this was not Rebellion, or Treason, or Murder, there is no such
Grime possible to be committed? -- If I was guilty of such sins, I do openly
confess, that if I lay in Sackcloth, and in Tears, and did lament my sins
before the World, which had done such unspeakable wrong to Christ and to Men, I
should do no more than the plain Light of Nature assures me to be my great and
needful duty, p. 17.

Now that which Mr. Bagshaw accused Mr. Baxter of, was, That he was guilty of
stirring up and fomenting that War against Charles the First, which Mr. Baxter
had confessed, and that he had drawn some Thousands into it: of this we have
him boasting often, but not of his Repentance for it. And N.B. he thinks the
pulling down of the Protector, and the Remnant of the Commons, to whom they had
often sworn to be faithful, and defend them, and says they were the best
Governors in the World, to be as great a Sin as the violating the King's
Person and Life, in Mr. Baxter's Opinion.

Mr. Baxter pretends he was sent among the Army by an Assembly of Divines: And
I find, that such Divines as attended the Westminster Assembly were ordered (
Aug. 28. 1643.) to go into the Country to stir up the People to rise for the
defense (as they call it) of the Parliament; but indeed, to strengthen the
Rebellion against the King: For against this Assembly, consisting of half Lay
and half Clergy, but wholly of disaffected Persons, we find the King thus
declaring by Proclamation: That many of them were persons who had openly
preached Rebellion, and excited the People to take up Arms against him: That
the far greater part of them were Men of no Reputation or Learning, and
eminently disaffected to the Government of the Church of England; and therefore
he forbad their meeting. But Mr. Baxter was of another judgment: he says, I
have not read of many Assemblies of worthier Men since the Apostles days; Answ.
to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 84.

Mr. Baxter, p. 73. of his Life, says of this Assembly, That the Divines there
congregate were Men of excellent Learning and Godliness, and Ministerial
Abilities and Fidelity; and I speak it in the Face of Malice and Envy, that as
far as I am able to judge, the Christian World, since the days of the Apostles,
had never a Synod of more excellent Divines than this Synod and the Synod of
Dort. To these were added many Lords and Commons, and six or seven
Independents, five proved dissenting Brethren, Nigh, Goodwin, Buroughs, Simpson
and Bridges, For my part, says Mr. Baxter, I honor the Men, but am not of
their mind as to the Government they would have set up; and some words in their
Catechism I could wish had been more clear: And above all, I could wish that
the Parliament, and their more skilful hand, had done more to heal our
Breaches. N.B. The Assembly had a skilful hand, the Parliament a more skilful;
but Mr. Baxter was Magnus Apollo, that could have healed all our Breaches, by
his only way of Concord. But which of these three Parties were more skilful to
divide and destroy, we need a greater Oracle than that of this Apollo to
determine.

I cannot pretend to know much more of the Learning and Godliness of these
Assembly-Divines, than by what I have read in their Sermons preached upon
special Occasions: Several of them are named, among the Chaplains that attended
the Earl of Essex's Army, Mr. Marshal was one, who in a Letter of his, p. 19.
says, That if the King had been slain ( in the Battle at Edgehill) it had not
been the Parliaments fault, for he might have kept himself farther off if he
pleased. And in his Sermon, January 8. 1647. The question is now, says he,
whether Christ or Antichrist shall be King. And in another Sermon to the Mayor
and Aldermen, 1644. speaking of the King's Party, he says, These are miserable
and accursed Men, Factors for Hell, Satan's Boutefews; and as true Zealots are
set on fire from Heaven, so these Men's fire is kindled from Hell, whether also
it carries them. And in his Sermon Curse ye Meroz, I pray lock on me as one
that comes to beat a Drum in your Ears, to see who will come out to follow the
Lamb; with much more to the like purpose. John Goodman, another of them, says,
That the Doctrine of Resistance was reserved for our times. Mr. Arrowsmith, in
a Sermon 1643. We are not a Kingdom divided against it self, but one Kingdom
against another; that is, the Kingdom of Christ against Antichrist. So Mr. John
Bond told the Parliament, That they fought against Babylon, Dagon, and
Antichrist; and exhorted them to pull it down, though, like Sampson, they died
with it. Mr. Case, in a Sermon 1644. says, God would have no Mercy showed where
the quarrel is against Religion, p. 16. Those who would bring in Idolatry and
false Worship to depose Christ from his Throne, and set up Antichrist, Christ
has doomed to destruction. St. Luke 19.27. As for these mine Enemies, bring
them out and slay them before me; p. 18. Mr. Thomas Palmer said, That God saw
it good to bring Christ into his Kingdom by a bloody way. Dr. Downing told the
Artillery-men, It was lawful for Defense of Religion to take up Arms against
the King: And so did Mr. Calamy; It Is commendable to fight for Peace and
Reformation against the King's Command. And in a Sermon December. 25. 1644. he
calls them the Judas 's of England that made their Peace with the King at
Oxford. What a sad thing is it, says Mr. Case, to see our King in the Head of
an Army of Babylonians, refusing, as it were, to be called the King of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and choosing rather to be called the King of Babylon;
Sermon. on Isa. 43.4. 1644. p. 18.

Mr. Herle in a Sermon to the Commons, Nov. 5th. Anno 1644. exhorts them to do
Justice to the greatest; Saul 's Sons are not spared, nor Agag, or Benhadad,
though Kings. Brooks to the Commons, December. 26.48. Set some of these Grand
Malefactors in Mourning, that caused the Kingdom to mourn so many Years, in
Garments rouled in Blood by the execution of Justice. Mr. Love was chosen as
the fittest Person to assist at the Treaty at Vxbridge, who in compliance with
the sense of his Masters, called Episcopacy and Liturgy, Two Plague Sores, and
tells the Commissioners, That while their Enemies go on in wicked practices,
and they keep their Principles, they may as soon make Fire and Water, nay he
had almost said, Heaven and Hell to agree; it is the Sword, not Disputes that
must end this Controversy: Wherefore turn your Plowsheres into Swords, and
your Pruninghooks to Spears to fight the Lords Battles, to avenge the Blood of
the Saints which has been spilt: It must be avenged by us, or upon us. I have
prayed that too much pity in our State Physicians, do not retard the healing
of the Land; here are Malignant Humors in the Nobles and Gentry to be purged
out, before they be healed. O that in this our State Physicians would resemble
God, to cut off those from the Land who have distempered it. You may know what
he means by his Latin sentence, Melius pereat unus, quam unitas, Men that be
under the guilt of much Innocent Blood, are not fit to be at Peace with, till
all the guilt of Blood be expiated by the Sword of the Law, or the Law of the
Sword.

It is true, says he at his Execution, I did in my place and calling oppose
the Forces of the late King, and were he alive again, and I should live longer,
the Cause being as then it was, I should oppose him longer: But the present
Power saw it not fit to trust him with a longer Life. And it is very
remarkable, that Prideaux the Attorney General repeated most of those passages
which Mr. Love had urged against the King and his Party, to ruin them, to show
that he ought not to have any Mercy showed him: See the Printed Trial of Mr.
Love. Mr. Baxter, page 67. of his Life, says, That the Soldiers, said he was
so like to Love, that he would not be right till he was shorter by the head.
But Mr. Baxter acted more warily, and as he says, p. 84. of his Life, that
after Wars he had Fourteen Years Liberty in such sweet employment, and that in
times of Usurpation when under a Rightful King and Governor, he was laid by as
a broken Vessel, suspected and vilified, scarce Tolerated to live privately and
quietly in the Land. But if Mr. Baxter had complied but half so much with the
rightful Government in things lawful, as he had done with usurped Powers in
things unlawful, he might have lived more than twice as long, as quietly and
godly as other good Men did. Yet after the clamor of his Sufferings, he
thrived in those worst Times (as he accounted them) for he had a stock of
Money, out of which he could spare a Thousand pound to the Exchequer, intended
most of it for pious uses (as he says) p. 89. part 3. But in Seven years he
endeavored a purchase of House or Land, but could not find it: So that he
perceived the Devils resistance of it, and that there are Devils that keep up a
War against Goodness in the World; yet he found the Devil did not hinder his
disbursing almost as great a Sum to build a Synagogue for his Conventicle. He
did not thrive so well in the Service of the Army; for his Arrears of many
hundred pounds were never paid him: Nor was he dealt with as Mr. Love. Ille
crucem sceleris precium tulit hic diadema. But to return: This, or some other
Relick of this Assembly (who themselves ran before they were sent) did send Mr.
Baxter to the Army, under Cromwell after the King's death, where he says he
accompanied Commissary-General Whaley, a Person who was sometime the King's
Jailor, and whom you may find in that black List of his Majesty's Judges; a fit
Conductor and great Confident of Mr. Baxter's; to him Mr. Baxter dedicates his
Apology, by the Name of The Honorable, etc.

With this Achitophel our Shemei hunts David from Mountain to Mountain, cursing
and railing at him as he goes; the Sword of his Tongue being longer and sharper
than his furbished Sword. Curse ye Meroz, and Cursed be he that does the work
of the Lord deceitfully, and Cursed be he that holds back his Sword from
Blood, were the common Texts of the Army-Chaplains: And the Maxims of his Holy
Commonwealth were the Subjects of some of his Sermons.

He says in the Epistle to his first Plea for Peace, My honest Friend, (a
Proselyte of his, whom, it seems, he had engaged in the War) when he saw here a
Leg, and there an Arm, (was faint-hearted, and) said it was time for him to
stop. But the valiant Mr. Baxter, though he had seen many sadder sights, even
the Carcasses of some Thousands, Streams of Blood, the Ruin of Cities, Towns,
Churches, and Castles, goes on as undauntedly as the Horse that rusheth into
the Battle. Let the Reader view (if he can without horror) what Mr. Baxter
reports of himself in two Epistles dedicated to two of his Army-Saints. In that
to Whaley, he says, Providence did so clear his way ( viz. in that War) and
draw him on, and sweeten unusual Troubles with unusual Mercies, and issue all
in Testimonies of Grace, that he had great mixtures of Comfort with Sorrow in
the performance. And that he had more eminent Deliverances and other Mercies in
those years and ways of Blood and Dolor, than in most of his Life besides. It
seems he was of the mind which our Savior foretold of some, that should kill
his Disciples, and think they did God Service. He adds: The best is, we now
draw no blood, (it seems he had done that sufficiently) they were now as
Conquerours to divide the Spoil. And great things did this Champion promise
himself, though it appears that he was disappointed of his hopes: For in
another Epistle to Colonel Berry, whom (Stilo Novo) he calls Honorable too, as
being one of the Council of State, he thus expostulates; Was I not capable of
Secular and Military Advancement as well as others? (it seems he thought so,
but they did not) Did I ever solicit you as much as for my Arrears, which is
many hundred pounds? (it seems he had served them long, and was well promised
for his pains; but this Man of Conscience was content with the pleasing work of
drawing Blood gratis:) he scorned to open his mouth for the many Hundreds due
to him, hoping they would have advanced a Man of so generous a Spirit to some
eminent Military Preferment, whereof (his Ministry notwithstanding) he thought
himself capable. But this great Warrior, partly through regret at his
disappointments, of which he complains p. 2. of his Epistle before his Saints
Everlasting Rest, against ungrateful men; and partly through his bodily
infirmities (for however willing his Spirit was, his Flesh was grown weak)
being exhausted by the Accidents of War: For in the same Page he tells us, that
being in his Quarters far from home, he was cast into extreme languishing by
the sudden loss of about a gallon of Blood, (which should have minded him of
the many Gallons of Blood whereof he had been the cause of effusion) after many
years foregoing weakness, by which his Body was ruined beyond hopes of
recovery, the sentence of present death being by the ablest Physicians past
upon him; from which he was delivered by a wonder in the midst of his duties, (
i.e. in the War) and was supported fourteen years in a languishing estate,
wherein he had scarce a waking hour free from pain. And thus (though against
his will) he is forced to leave the Army. And might not Mr. Baxter justly say
(and the Reader believe him in this) as he writes in a Letter to Dr. Hill -- I
have been in the heat of my Zeal so forward to changes and ways of blood, that
I fear God will not let me have a hand in the peaceable building of his Church?
And the Judgment of God is eminently upon him, who has been so far from
building, that it has ever since been his great business to destroy the best
established Church in the World; which will appear, by taking a view of this
mortified Man in his retirement from the War. And we find him sitting down on
the sequestered Living of Mr. Dance at Kedderminster; he had enticed many of
that place and neighborhood to the War, and some few returned with him again.
How far he was given to Plunder in the time of War (whereof he has been
accused) I affirm not; but it will draw a shrewd suspicion on him, that he was
not afraid to take a Horse or two in time of War, who seized on the Person of a
Neighbor, to serve as an Exchange for his Father; and possessed himself of the
Livelihood of Mr. Dance, of whom he confessed, as the then Bp. of Worcester's
Letter, p. 3. informs, That he was a Man of an unblameable Life and
Conversation, though not of such Parts as might qualify him for the Cure of so
great a Congregation. And though Mr. Baxter was not welcomed here by a Miracle
(as he was at See Mr. Baxter's Relation of this in a Postscript to his True
Catholic, p. 294.
Bridgenorth, where the Report is, that it rained Manna on the Church wherein
he was to officiate;) yet he was convinced by Providence, (as he says in that
Epistle) That it is the Will of God it should be so: (a strange Argument, from
God's permission of an unrighteous Act, that it is his Will it should be so!)
For this (says he) I clearly discerned in my first coming to you, in my former
abode with you, and in the time of my forced absence from you. But the truth
is, Mr. Baxter had too much adhered to the Presbyterian Interest, to be
advanced by that Army; though he desires them to remember how far he had gone
with them in the War, and pleads their acknowledgment that a special Presence
of God was with the Parliament; and presses on them the Sin of forcing out 140
Members first, and then 120, and their proclaiming it Treason to say that the
Parliament was in being: And then he urges those Scriptures to them, which
himself had shown them an example to contemn, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.13. and that
they might know his meaning, he tells them, That the secluded Members were the
best Governors in all the World; that they had the Supremacy, and yet had been
resisted and deposed in England. It was a Sin with Mr. Baxter to oppose the
Usurpers, and a Duty to resist the King and fight against him; which Mr. Baxter
did for four years together: And it is to be believed (says Mr. Baxter) that a
man would kill him against whom he fights, p. 423. Holy Commonwealth.

But Mr. Baxter was not very constant to his own Profession concerning his long
beloved Parliament: For in the same place and breath almost, he says, Secondly,
I mean the Powers that were last laid by, (viz.) Richard and his Parliament;
of whom he says, as to Richard, That he piously, prudently, and faithfully, to
his immortal honor, did exercise the Government, how ill soever you have used
him. But wherein did all this Piety and Prudence appear? was it that he did
inherit from his Father Oliver a tender care of the Cause of Christ? of which
you seem to give an instance in the Protestants of Piedmont; when it was
notorious, that a great part of the Charity of the Nation for their Relief, was
employed in maintaining the War against the King. Was it that at the instance
of a few of his Officers, he dissolved that Parliament of his? Was it in
swearing that he would to the utmost of his power maintain and preserve the
just Rights and Privileges of the People, and govern according to Law? which
he could not do. Was it in making a tame Submission to some of his Army,
calling them The present Government, from whom he expected Protection, and held
himself obliged to live peaceably under them, and to procure to the utmost of
his power that others should do so too? These things argue no great stock of
Piety, Prudence, or Faithfulness. And as to Richard's Parliament, which had an
Upper House consisting mostly of Military, Mechanical, and Fanatic Members; a
Lower House of Men of none or very ill note: Of this Parliament Mr. Baxter
says, He never had known a Parliament more inclined to Piety and Peace; (the
Long Parliament not excepted) whereof he gives this instance: Because it was
their desire to have settled Elections according to Mr. Baxter's advice, (i.e.)
to keep out all whom he calls ungodly, from choosing or being chosen. See the
Preface to the Holy Commonwealth. These, and such like, were they of whom Mr.
Baxter says, They were the best Governors in all the World, such as they had
sworn and sworn to obey again and again; such as might not be imposed on pain
of Damnation; and that he would with great rejoicing give a thousand thanks to
that Man that would acquaint him of one Nation in the World that had better
Governors in Sovereign Power, as to Holiness and Wisdom conjunct, than these,
who yet had been resisted and deposed. It seems Mr. Baxter could have been
easily reconciled to any Governors, but those to whom of right the Government
did belong. And any Reader conversant in Mr. Baxter's Writings, may observe,
that Mr. Baxter never complained so much of Arbitrary Government and
Persecution under any of the Revolutions of Usurped Powers, as he has done
since the King and Church were restored; nay, he wrote as industriously for
Obedience to some of them, as he has since to encourage Disobedience to these.
And let me desire the Reader to consider what ground Mr. Baxter had for his
great veneration of the Secluded Members, more than for those who were called
the Rump. Did not they agree in that accursed Vote of Non-Addresses to the King
before their Seclusion? Did not they upon their readmission, reenforce the
Engagement to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, without a King or House
of Lords? Did not some of them provide an Oath of Abjuration of the King, to be
taken by such as were to sit in the Council of State? Did not some of them send
to General Monk to advise him that he must take that Oath, before his
admittance into that Council? Did they not offer to settle Hampton Court on
General Monk, and desire him to take the Government on himself, under what
Title he pleased? And because they did this, (and might justify themselves in
so doing, upon Mr. Baxter's Theses in his Holy Commonwealth) they are (all
these things notwithstanding) the Supreme Powers, the best Governors in all
the World, and such as to resist, is to incur Damnation.

Mr. Baxter during the time of his abode at Kedderminster, was not employed in
writing only, as he did against Dr. Pierce, justifying the Trade of
Sequestrations; and against others, representing them as Men that had neither
hatred to Sin, nor love to Godliness or common Honesty; because, he says, they
published so many, so gross and shameless Falsehoods, and over-acted the part
of the Accusers of the Brethren, p. 308. of Postscript to the True Catholic.
But he was employed also in assisting the Commissioners for Sequestrations, p.
297. ibid. Yet he excuses the matter, and says, He never persecuted or cast
out any, or endeavored it by word or deed, unless for notorious scandal or
insufficiency; and we know that Dr. Pierce, and such as he, were then accounted
such, as not having the Grace of God in them. Upon some such account it was,
that Dr. Sanderson and Dr. Pocock were ejected, to the perpetual Infamy of the
Ejectors.

How vainly does Mr. Baxter still plead for Sequestrations, p. 78. of his Apol.
First, That the Ministers were ejected by the Secular Power. But were not they
animated by the Clergy, who, as Mr. Baxter, had then no Benefices? Secondly,
That some of the Parish were the Accusers, Witnesses, and Sollicitors. And such
may be still found in most Parishes where there are very good Ministers. But,
Thirdly, The People should not be left as Heathen, and therefore it is an
excusable error; and when the love of Souls makes them spend themselves for
the Peoples good, this should not be thought their unpardonable Crime. And they
did think that the Salary was for the Work; and if they had a lawful Call to
the Work of the place, they thought they had so to the Salary. Now though Mr.
Baxter framed these Reasons for them, he adds, I justify not their Reasons;
but my Opinion is, That being young Men mostly in the Universities, that had
little or nothing of their own, they could not well otherwise have got Bread
and Clothing, much less Fire, House-room, etc. Those young Men could better
have shifted for their Maintenance, than by turning so many aged Ministers,
with Wives and Children, out of all. Of such as say, We may do evil that good
may come of it, the Apostle says, Their damnation is just. But Mr. Baxter
concludes, p. 79. To say the truth, many of them thought it a good work, yea
very good, to cast out those (thousands of them whose Livings were desirable,
by false Accusations) as insufficient or vicious.

These are that learned, godly, faithful Clergy, who to requite Mr. Baxter,
has chosen him their Prolocutor, to justify them in all their Disobedience
and Violences, and to accuse the Conformists of Perjury, Persecution, and other
heinous Sins, in those Books which he calls his Pleas for Peace.

Because Mr. Baxter thinks himself abused in the account which Mr. Durel and
others have given of his Sequestration at Kedderminster, take his own account.
In the year 40. the Parliament began to Sequester such Ministers as appeared
most Loyal: and so early the People of Kedderminster article against their
Vicar: it was worth then about Eightscore pounds per Annum, (now more.) The
Vicar fearing to lose all, is forced to give a Bond of 500 l. to pay 60 l.
yearly to a Lecturer. Mr. Baxter is invited to accept of it, and holds it for a
year and half, being driven off by the Wars, which he followed four years, and
thinks it a kindness that he did not sue the Vicar for his 60 l. per Annum,
which he did nothing for. But at his return, the Vicar is sequestered by a
Committee, and Mr. Baxter is importuned to take it; which he refuses to do in
his own name, but thus it was contrived: I got all the Magistrates and Chief of
the Town together, who openly subscribed to give me 100 l. per Annum, as their
Lecturer; and that no part of this should accrue from the Vicaridge. But mark
the Juggle! He said immediately before, I told them, that by an Augmentation
which I had procured, making my 60 l. an 100 l. and a House, I would be their
Lecturer as before. This 60 l. was to come out of the Vicaridge,
notwithstanding that Proviso to the contrary. But the Sequestrators, who
gathered the Tithes, gave him no account; nor needed they: if it be true that
Mr. Baxter had 80 or 90 l. and an Assistant about 60 l. more, there was not
much left for the Vicar. But Mr. Baxter asked them whether any of the Money
they gave him came out of the Tithes? They told him, the 60 l. due by Bond, and
an Augmentation granted by Parliament, was more than he had; (i.e.) all that he
had came out of the Vicaridge, though it were not full as much as was promised
him: for the Bond and Augmentation came to 100 l. whereas he received but 80 or
90 l. And they used my name (says Mr. Baxter) in letting the Tithes: for they
had privily got an Order to put me in the sequestered Vicaridge; which when I
knew, I consented to, for their indemnity. So that after all his Art to evade
the guilt of a Sequestrator, it is plain the Vicaridge was sequestered in his
name, the Tithes agreed for in his name, the Pay was made out of the Tithes;
and to all this, though post factum, Mr. Baxter consented. And this was my
taking the Sequestration, p. 81. of Apol. I know that some Persons have minded
Mr. Baxter to make Restitution; but he thinks he had a Right to it, and wants
but a Secular Power to place him in it again; yea, he thinks himself wronged
that he has not the fifth part still paid him: for, p. 85. Eve^ the Usurpers
allowed the Wives of the sequestered Ministers the fifth part; for my part, I
never asked you so much. He expected to have it offered him as his due, without
asking. But I suppose his many hundred pounds of Arrears from the Army, and his
Fifths from Kedderminster, will be paid together.

Mr. Baxter says, the Protector Oliver never had any respect for him: and he
would now persuade the World that he had as little for the Protector; although
in an Epistle to his Son Richard, before the Key for Catholics, he thus
applauds him: The serious Endeavors of your Renowned Father for the
Protestants of Savoy, discovered to the World by Mr. Morland, has won him more
esteem in the hearts of many that fear the Lord, than all his Victories in
themselves considered: We pray that you may inherit a tender Care of the Cause
of Christ. When Mr. Baxter could not be so great a stranger as to be ignorant
how the Charity of the People, which was very large at that time, was abused,
and employed to very ill uses; yet with Mr. Baxter, Oliver is as David, and his
Son Richard as Solomon.

Mr. Baxter's Key for Catholics was dedicated to Richard Cromwell, where he
gives this Character of himself: One that rejoices in the present happiness of
England, and wishes earnestly that it were but as well with the rest of the
World; and that honors all the Providence of God by which we have been
brought to what we are: One that concurs in the common hopes to these Nations
under your Government. And in another Epistle before his Five Disputations of
Church Government, when all Religions were tolerated, except that of the Church
of England, (to prevent the toleration of that) he says, If you give Liberty to
all that is called Religion, you will soon be judged of no Religion, and loved
accordingly.

How Mr. Baxter and his Party behaved themselves during the Imprisonment of the
King, and while he was in the hands of his Murderers, they are not willing to
discover. Mr. Baxter for his part says, That he proved in the times of
Usurpation, that the Presbyterians detested it, that the London Ministers
printed their Abhorrence of it to the World, Preface to Second Plea. As for the
London-Ministers, I read, that about 59 of them in number pleaded for the King
in these words: That the woeful Miscarriages of the King himself, which we
cannot but acknowledge to be very many and great in his Government, have cost
the three Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from his Excellency into a horrid
Pit of Misery beyond example. This Plea for the King is like their late Pleas
for Peace, ( i.e. Justifications of Schism and Sedition;) for in it they say
enough to excuse the Regicides: We cannot but acknowledge, (i.e. we affirm and
bear witness) that the woeful Miscarriages of the King himself, not of his evil
Counselors only, but his personal Crimes and fundamental Errors in
Government, too many and great to be here mentioned, have cost the three
Kingdoms so dear, as that all the Bloodshed, and Rapine, and Devastations that
have been made in England, Scotland, and Ireland, might be charged on him; and
for these he is justly cast down from his Excellency into so horrid a pit of
Misery beyond example; (i.e.) Though the like were never done in the World, he
is justly fallen under a Sentence of Condemnation. As to Mr. Baxter's
particular abhorrence of that barbarous Fact, and his proving that the
Presbyterians detested it, I suppose the place he refers to, is his Key for
Catholics, p. 321, etc. he says in p. 323. That the Case of Murdering our
King, differs very much from the Powder Plot, or Papists murdering of Kings,
and teaching that it is lawful for a private hand to do it. A War, and a
treacherous Murder, are not all one; nor is a part of the Sovereign Power all
one with a private hand, p. 324. I have read what John Goodwin and Milton have
written in Vindication of that horrid Murder, and do believe that Mr. Baxter
has outdone them both. Let the Reader seriously peruse that part of his
Writings (which he quotes to prove the contrary) from p. 323. to p. 326. and I
believe he will be of the same opinion: for the design of it is to prove, that,
( p. 323.) If the Body of a Commonwealth, or those that have part in the
Legislative Power, and so in the Supremacy, should unwillingly be engaged in a
War with the Prince, and after many years Blood and Desolations, judiciously
take away his Life, as guilty of all this Blood, and not to be trusted any more
with Government; and all this they do, not as private Men, but as the remaining
Sovereign Power, and say they do according to Laws: undoubtedly the Case
differs very much from Papists murdering of Kings. I speak not this by way of
Justification, says Mr. Baxter, p. 325. whether they were in the right or
wrong; I am not the Judge: but surely it was the Judgment of the Parliament
upon the Division, (between the King and them) the Power was in them to defend
themselves and the Commonwealth, and suppress all Subjects that were in Arms
against them; and that those that did resist them, did resist the Higher Powers
set over them by God, and therefore were guilty of the Damnation of Resisters.
And this they assured the People was a Truth: And so has Mr. Baxter done too
in his Political Aphorisms more at large; but expressly enough in this place,
where under the name of Grotius, p. 324. he asserts, That the Legislative Power
being divided between the Prince and Senate, the Prince invading the Senates
Right, may justly be resisted, and lose his Right. And this was well understood
by all that engaged in the War against the King from the beginning, that in
case they Conquered the King, he was no more to be trusted with the Government:
For if it were known beforehand, (says Mr. Baxter) that if they should
purchase a Victory by their Blood, when they have done all, they must be all
governed by him, whom they have conquered, and lie at his mercy, they would
hardly ever have an Army to defend them. So that the King was never more to be
trusted (i.e.) either with Government or Life.

As for Mr. Love, Mr. Baxter in the cited Preface intimates, that he was
Beheaded for his Loyalty; which I think he sufficiently demonstrated, in these
two passages: (Not to take notice here of his barbarous insulting over that
truly great Prelate when he was brought to the Block, waving his Handkerchief,
and crying out, Art thou come, little Will, etc.) the one, in his Sermon at
Vxbridge: It was the Lord that troubled Achan, and cut him off because he
troubled Israel. O that in this our State, Physicians would resemble God, to
cut off those from the Land that have distempered it; (and he tells us plainly
whom he means) Melius pereat unus quam unitas: Men that lie under the guilt of
much Innocent Blood, are not fit persons to be at peace with, till all the
guilt of Blood be expiated and avenged, either by the Sword of the Law, or by
the Law of the Sword, else the Peace can never be safe or just. The other
passage was, in his Speech, Sect. 14. of his Trial; where speaking of his
opposing the Tyranny of a King, he says, I did, it is true, in my place and
calling, oppose the Forces of the late King; and where he alive again, and
should I live longer, the Cause being as then it was, I should oppose him
longer; That is, he had lived, and would die a Rebel.

An hundred Instances of such fatal Reflections on that excellent Prince, have
been noted in the Sermons and other Writings of Men of Mr. Baxter's Persuasion;
and yet to show that he dares do any thing to justify his Party, he makes a
bold Challenge to those whom he calls their Accusers, to show, if they can,
what Body or Party of Men on Earth have more sound and loyal Principles of
Government and Obedience. And yet they have preached and published to the World
the same Doctrines which were voted January the 4th, 1648. That the
Representative of the People in Parliament have the Supreme Power of the
Nation; and whatever is enacted or declared for Law by the Commons in
Parliament, has the form of a Law; and the People are concluded thereby,
though the Consent of King and Peers be not had thereunto. Which Votes were
passed in order to the King's Trial.

Were not they the King's most Loyal Subjects, that carried on a War against
him, until they made him their Prisoner, and then used him as a captived Slave,
denying him the liberty of a Man, the society of Wife, Children, and any
Attendant whom he could trust; and of a Christian, denying him the assistance
of his Chaplains; leaving him no Comfort that might make his Life desirable,
but perpetually baiting him with the Covenant, and such unreasonable
Propositions as they knew beforehand the King could not in Honor or
Conscience comply with? Being thus bound and chained, the Independants take him
out of their hands, and put an end to his Sufferings. Salmasius, a great
Presbyterian himself, truly represents the Case: If a Thief (says he, p. 353.
of his Defensio Regia) apprehends a Traveller, disarms him, robs him of his
Money, and leaves him naked, and fast bound to some Tree, and some ravenous
Beast finding him in that condition, kills and devours him; to whom ought the
cause of his Death to be imputed? to the Thief, or to the Beast? And he
concludes, Ita justum Regem and sanctum extinxere Presbyteriani. These disarmed
him of his Militia, these bought and sold him as a Captive, these covenanted to
preserve his Life, with a Condition of his preserving their Religion; which
when he should refuse, they thought themselves bound by Covenant to desert him.
The Army in a Remonstrance from St. Albans, November. 16. say, that Whereas it
might be objected that the Covenant obliged them to preserve the King's Person:
They say, It was with this restriction, In the preservation of the true
Religion. Religion and Public Interest were to be understood the principal and
supreme Matters engaged for; the King's Person and Authority were inferior and
subordinate; which being not consistent with the preservation of Religion and
Public Interest, they were by the Covenant obliged against it. And what was it
less that the Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Scots resolved on,
viz. That if the King were excluded from Government in England for not granting
the Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, it was not lawful for
that Kingdom to assist him for the recovery of his Government? (yet this is
that Solemn Covenant, for the obligation whereof Mr. Baxter so contumaciously
pleads, against the Authority of the whole Nation.) And upon these and such
like Proposals from Scotland, the Parliament vote, That no more Addresses be
made from them to the King, nor any Letters or Message received from him: And,
That it should be Treason for any person to receive Letters from the King, or
deliver any to him, without leave from both Houses. And were not these the
King's most Loyal Subjects? Or what Body or Party of Men have in Mr. Baxter's
sense more sound or loyal Principles of Government and Obedience?

How often and how deeply this incomparable King was wounded at the heart by
those barbarous Declarations of the Parliament and Presbyterian Incendiaries,
as if he were a witless, worthless, faithless Person, not to be trusted in his
most Solemn Protestations against his Intentions for Tyranny and Popery, is
beyond any Man's expressions but his own? These had often murdered him in his
Honor and Reputation before his last Execution. Nor could his last Speech
silence those malicious Blasphemies; he was no sooner dead, but he was executed
in his (...), and as much as lay in the power of his Adversaries, robbed of that
immortal Jewel more worth than his Crown, though no Man was so qualified for
such pious and excellent Meditations as himself. Those two Disputes about
Episcopacy against Henderson, and a Junto of Presbyterians at Newport, of which
his greatest Enemies could not deny him to be the genuine Author, sufficiently
show his great Abilities both for Learning and Acurateness of Style; of which
Debates the Bishop of Worcester says, that his Majesty understood the
Constitution of our Church as well as any Bishop in it, and defended it with as
clear and strong Reasons, whereof that Learned Bishop made great use against
Mr. Baxter's opposition of Episcopacy, p. 271, and 280. of his History of
Separation. Yet from the beginning of the War to the end of the Life of that
best of Kings, and I may add to the end of Mr. Baxter's Life, no one has
endeavored to defame him more, and render him odious to Posterity, than Mr.
Baxter, by charging him with granting Commissions to those Irish Papists that
massacred Two hundred thousand Protestants; of which more hereafter.

Though Mr. Baxter was disabled to combat any longer with the Sword, yet is he
resolved to do it with the Pen, which he dips not in Gall and Vinegar, but in
the very Poison of Asps, to keep open the Wounds of the expiring Church: To
which end he endeavors to draw his Neighbour-Ministers into an Association,
and procures the Worcestershire Agreement; the design of which you may see in
Mr. Baxter's Gildas Salvianus, which was intended as a Humiliation Sermon to
those that would enter into the Association; not that they should humble
themselves, but the Clergy that yet adhered to the King: For one effect of it
was, the promoting a Petition, That notoriously insufficient and scandalous
persons (and as such, Mr. Baxter represented the Loyal Clergy; though, as
himself observes in the same Book, the Synod of Dort called them Stupor Mundi,
the Astonishment of the World, by reason of their Eminency) should not be
permitted to meddle with the Mysteries of Christ, especially the Sacraments.
Upon which Petition, as Mr. Baxter has been told, there issued that rigid
Proclamation for Silencing all sequestered Ministers, and forbidding them not
only the Exercise of their Ministry, but of keeping any Schools, etc. A design
as witless as it was wicked; for Mr. Baxter notes in the Preface to that Book,
That it had been put to a Vote in Parliament, to take away both Ministry and
Maintenance, which was carried in the Negative by two Voices only; yet, like
another Sampson, he is pulling down the Pillars of that House, whose Ruins
would bury himself and all his Order. A little taste of his Malice at that
season, must needs distaste the impartial Reader. One sort that will be
offended at me (says he) are some of the Divines of the Prelatical way, (as
indeed they all justly might) for reproaching not as by hearsay, but from
sight and feeling, first, the Silencing of most godly able men, the Persecution
even of the peaceable, the discountenance of godliness, and the insulting scorn
of the profanest in the Land. And many hundred swearing, drunken, ignorant,
scandalous, negligent Ministers are cast out, and we have now many humble,
godly, painful Teachers in a County. And as for the People, he says in the same
Epistle to his Gildas, That most of them wherever he came, did make Religion,
and reading the Sacred Scriptures, or speaking of the way to Heaven, the matter
of their bitter scorn and reproach. He spares not to Revile the Royal Martyr,
as if he intended to justify his Murder: King Charles (says he) by the
Bishops instigation, kept Mr. Pryn long in Prison, and twice cropped his Ears for
writing against their Masks and Plays, and the high and hard proceedings of the
Prelates; though the Archbishop (whose Head they cut off for less) showed
greater Crimes, of which he was proved guilty, in his Speech in the
Star Chamber. This was not such a fast as God required, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to break every yoke, and to let the
oppressed to free. This was the Hypocrite' s fast for strife and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness, and to make their voice to be heard on high,
Isai. 58.4. in the words of the proud Pharisee, God I thank thee, I am not as
other men, nor as this Publican, as will appear to him that reads chap. 4.
sect. 1. and p. 154. where he raileth intolerably against the Rulers, as Haters
of practical godliness, and of all that would but speak seriously of Heaven,
and tell Men of Death and Judgment, and spend the Lord's day in preparation
thereto; that did but pray in their Families, or reprove Drunkenness or
Swearing. What could any Papist say more to disparage the Church of England? As
to the inferior Clergy, he says, p. 157. The Churches were pestered with
abundance of mere Readers, Drunken, Profane, and Debauched Men: and many that
had more plausible Tongues, made it their chief business to bring those they
called Puritans into disgrace. So that I must needs say, I knew no place in
those times (for he speaks of Men and Places within his knowledge) where a Man
might not more safely have been drunk every Week, than to have gone to hear a
Sermon if he had none at home. Nor does he spare those that died long before
his memory, p. 143. What Toys and Trifles did the ancient Reverend Fathers of
the Church pester the Church with? And what useless Stuff are many of their
Canons composed of? Three lamentable Vices did the Prelates of the Church
commonly abound in; Pride the Root, and Contention and Vainglory the Fruit,
etc. to p. 149. where he is not ashamed to tell the World what Troubles the
first Nonconformists raised at Frankfort against those Reformers and Confessors
that were Exiled for maintaining the same Worship and Liturgy, for the defense
of which many Bishops and Ministers were suffering Martyrdom under the Papists.
No sooner were they (the Nonconformists) called home, says he, p. 150. but
some of them were so intemperate, impatient, and unpeaceable, that some turned
to flat Separation, and flew in the faces of the Prelates with reviling. Yet
Mr. Baxter does the same, and accounts the requiring of Uniformity in the same
or a better Worship, to be a Persecution. As for his Brethren, he professes to
believe, That England never had so able and faithful a Ministry since it was a
Nation as at this day, viz. December. 4. 1655. in the heat of Rebellion; yet he
affirms, Sure I am, the change is so great within these Twelve years, that it
is one of the greatest joys that ever I had in the World to behold it. But for
the Prelatical Party, he brings in some, saying, They are all empty, careless,
if not scandalous and ungodly men. And may we not conclude, as Mr. Baxter does,
p. 167. This is not a confessing sin, but an applauding those whose sins they
pretend to confess? Mr. Baxter calls this Book Gildas Salvianus; but he might
have more truly entitled it Excidium Britannicum: for that followed on it.

How Mr. Baxter can be excused from the guilt of Schism, in the departing from
the Communion of the Church, after his Ordination and Subscription, and Solemn
Vows then made, for more than Twenty years before the Impositions and Penalties
enjoined by the Secular Powers, which he pleaded in his justification after the
year 63. will be a very difficult, if not an impossible work to him that
considers Mr. Baxter's circumstances and actings. I shall therefore only show
the heinous nature of that Sin, as described by Mr. Baxter himself, p. 741. of
his Christian Directory.

That Schism is a sin against so many clear and vehement words of the Holy
Ghost, that it is utterly without excuse; Whoredoms, and Treason, and Perjury
are not oftener forbidden in the Gospel than this. That it is contrary to the
very design of Christ in our Redemption, which was to reconcile us all to God.
That it is contrary to the design of the Spirit of Grace, and the Nature of
Christianity; a sin against the nearest bonds of our highest relations; a
dividing of Christ, or robbing him of a great part of his Inheritance. That it
is accompanied with Self-ignorance, Pride and Unthankfulness to God. That
Church-dividers are the most successful Servants of the Devil, and serve him
more effectually than open Enemies. That it is a sin which contradicts all
God's Ordinances and Means of Grace; a sin against as great and lamentable
Experiences, as almost any sin can be; and this is a heinous aggravation of it,
that it is commonly justified, and not repented of by those that commit it; and
the more heinous, that it is commonly fathered upon God: Therefore remember
this, that Schism and making Parties in the Church, is not so small a thing as
many take it for.

Yet this pious Man, to keep his Proselytes from ever returning or repenting
for Schism, tells them in the Preface to his Plea for Peace, That more like
truth has been said for the lawfulness of Anabaptism, Polygamy, Drunkenness,
Stealing and Lying in case of Necessity, than any thing he ever yet read of for
a full Conformity, as he their describes it. Behold here the great Charity of
Mr. Baxter, which he extends rather to the Congregations of Schismatical
Anabaptists, and such as live in those detestable sins of Polygamy,
Drunkenness, Lying and Stealing, than to the most Solemn Assemblies of
Conformists, to which yet he has often joined himself in Communion. How great
soever his Knowledge was, how strong soever his Faith, yet wanting Charity, the
Sacred Scripture assures us, that such a Man is but as sounding Brass or a
tinkling Cymbal.

In the year 1658. just Ten years after that the best of Kings suffered by the
worst of Men, Mr. Baxter sets forth his Grotian Religion; and through Grotius's
sides, strikes at the Head and Members of the Church of England with one blow:
For the Grotian design ( i.e. Popery) was carrying on, says he, in the Church
of England; and that this was the cause of all our Wars and Changes in England,
p. 105. Another Cause of the War not Episcopal.
where he thus talks concerning the Royal Martyr, beyond any thing that his
barbarous Judges could accuse him of. -- How far the King was inclined to a
Reconciliation (with the Church of Rome) I only desire you to judge: 1. By the
Articles of the Spanish and French Match sworn to. 2. By his Letter to the Pope
written in Spain. 3. By his choice of Agents in Church and State. 4. By the
Residence of the Pope's Nuntio here, and the College of the Jesuits, etc. 5.
By the illegal Innovations in. Worship so resolvedly gradatim introduced. All
which I speak not with the least desire to persuade Men that he was a Papist --
but only to show, that while he as a moderate Protestant ( i.e. a Papist in
Masquerade, as they are now termed) took hands with the Queen a moderate
Papist, the Grotian design had great advantage in England, which he himself
boasted of, p. 106. Of this indignity to that Religious Prince, the Learned
Bishop Bramhal, p. 617. of his Works, took notice, and vindicated him: of which
Mr. Baxter being told by a Book called the Impleader, who said only, that Mr.
Baxter gave several intimations that the King was Popishly affected; he numbers
that among other lies of that Author, p. 100. of his third Defense; and says,
Why did not the Man tell where and when; and that he had printed the contrary
in times of Usurpation; and that he is a Calumniator unless he prove it? Why
did he not cite Bishop Bramhal 's proof -- and you see that a Calumniator with
them is no singular person; they are not ashamed to tell the world that their
Archbishops lead them, and are as bad as they. It seems Mr. Baxter was pinched
by this Relation, which makes him cry out, I have printed the contrary. See
what these sort of Men are come to! What credit is to be given to such Men's
Reports! Is this it in which the Authority of Archbishops consists, that they
must be followed in slanders, etc. I have saved the Impleader the labor of
quoting the place, and desire the Reader to consult it, and see how maliciously
and groundless he urged those things against the King at such a time as that.
But Mr. Baxter says, he printed the contrary in times of Usurpation. That time
which now he calls a time of Highest Usurpation, was the same which he then
looked on as a blessed time, when Richard Cromwell piously, prudently, and
faithfully, to his immortal honor, exercised the Government, 1659. and to him
he dedicated that Book, wherein he says he wrote the contrary, p. 327. where
having accused the new Episcopal Party for following Grotius, he adds, As for
the King himself, that was their Head, if any conjecture that he was a flat
Papist, etc. Mr. Baxter believes him not; but he was the head of the Grotian
Papists; and he himself boasted of it (ubi supra.) Now if any would know how
far Grotius was a Papist (he says) he was a more arrant Papist than Cassander,
and one that owned the Council of Trent; And such I think are flat Papists. And
therefore it was no lie in the Impleader, to say Mr. Baxter gave intimations
that the King was Popishly affected; but a gross one in Mr. Baxter to deny it,
and give him the lie, as he does impudently to others. But Mr. Baxter says, He
did not believe it himself, that the King was a flat Papist: Then his iniquity
was the greatter, to give so many instances by way of proof, that others might
believe it. Did not Mr. Baxter know that the fear of introducing Popery was
made one ground of the War against the King? and may he not make it a ground of
another War, because the King adheres to his Bishops, whom Mr. Baxter calls
Popish Clergymen? And he says, That the Parliament, whom they were bound to
believe, made it their great Argument and Advantage against the King, that he
favored the Papists; and on this supposition (says he) Thousands came in to
fight for their Cause. And they made one Article against the Archbishop of
Canterbury, That he endeavored to introduce Popery, though he were indeed one
of their greatest Adversaries, whose Life on that account they endeavored to
take away. And the Relation of Dr. Du Moulin, That at the Death of the King, a
known Papist was heard to say, That now their greatest Enemy was cut off, is
very credible. But Mr. Baxter knew that old Maxim, Fortiter Calumniare,
aliquid adhaerebit. It is no honest Man's part, first to break a Man's Head,
and then to give him a Plaster; which if it be not too narrow to heal the
Sore, or ineffectual to cure it, yet may leave some ugly Scar behind.

Dr. Pierce has given many more Arguments to prove Mr. Baxter a Papist, than
he has given of King Charles the First: And if his actings for Forty years
together be well considered, it will appear he has been made use of as one of
the most keen and Catholic Tools that ever the Papacy did employ, whether he
knows it or not. It is, I confess, a difficult thing to tell the World what
Persuasion Mr. Baxter was of as to Church Government, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or Independent; he has been of all, and I think he is now of
neither, having a peculiar Model of his own.

In a Book called A Method for Peace, etc. printed 1653. I find him to favor
Lay Elders, though in other Writings he condemned them as Superstitious; but by
a passage in p. 341. he seems reconcilable to them: for thus he says, Nothing
almost is wanting to us to set our Congregations in the Order of Christ, and to
the great Work of Reformation, so much as want of Maintenance for a competent
number of Ministers or Elders to attend the Work: We have diverse godly private
Christians capable of helping us as Officers in our Churches; by which I
suppose he intends Lay Elders, although I cannot certainly affirm what his
Judgment is concerning them: for he would willingly set up a new Model of his
own, (i.e.) a mixture of Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent Government; but
declares for neither of them. It is more certain, that he once professed
himself a Conformist, and disputed for Bishops and Liturgy as by Law
established; and he thought he had ever the better: yet if it be true that he
had a prejudice against them ever since he was Nineteen years old, it was
rather to betray than defend them. But in an Assize-Sermon preached 1654. at
Worcester, p. 191. he pleads for the Presbyterian Government, in these words:
How long has England rebelled against his (Christ's) Government? Mr. Udal told
them in the days of Queen Elizabeth, That if they would not set up the
Discipline of Christ in the Church, Christ would set it up himself in a way
that should make their hearts to ache: I think (says Mr. Baxter) their hearts
have aked by this time; and as they judged him to the Gallows for his
Prediction, so has Christ executed them by Thousands for their Rebellion
against him. Now it is evident what Discipline Vdal meant, by his Confederacy
with Coppinger, Penry, etc. of which Cambden, p. 420. of his Eliz. Angl. says,
Some of those Men who were great Admirers of the Geneva Discipline, thought
there was no better way for establishing it in England, than by railing against
the English Hierarchy, and stirring up the People to a dislike of Bishops. They
therefore set forth scandalous Books against the Government of the Church, and
Prelates; as Martin Mar-Prelate, Minerals, Diotrephes, A Demonstration of
Discipline, etc. In which Libels they set forth virulent Calumnies, and
opprobrious Taunts and Reproaches, in such manner, as the Authors seemed
rather Scullions out of the Kitchen, than pious and godly Men: yet the Authors
were Penry and Vdal, Ministers of the Word. Bishop Bancroft quoteth a Pamphlet
of Mr. Vdal's, called A Dialogue, where he says, That the Bishops Callings are
mere Antichristian, p. 59. of Dangerous Positions; and p. 45. he says, They
were very devilish and infamous Dialogues, and that there was a Conspiracy
between Coppinger, Wigginton, etc. by some extraordinary means (such as Vdal
had prophesied should make their hearts to ache) for releasing of some that
stood in danger of their lives; meaning, as I suppose, says the Bishop, Vdal,
Newman, etc. The dangers threatened by such extraordinary means to disturb the
Government, hastened the Trial of Vdal, who with three others, took occasion from
the intended Invasion in 88, to alarm the Nation at home; as also they did on
the Powder Plot, and to this day do, by scattering seditious Pamphlets. Vdal
was charged with a Book called A Demonstration of Discipline which Christ has
prescribed in his Word for the government of his Church, in all times and
places to the Worlds end. The Preface was directed To the supposed Governors
of the Church of England; to whom he says, Who can deny you, without blushing,
to be the cause of all ungodliness, seeing your Government is that which gives
leave to a Man to be any thing, save a sound Christian? for certainly it is more
free in these days to be a Papist, Anabaptist, of the Family of Love, yea, as
any most wicked, rather than what we should be: And I could live these Twenty
years as well as any such in England, yea, in a Bishop's House it may be, and
never be molested for it. So true is that you are charged with in a Dialogue
lately come forth, and by you burnt, that you care for nothing but the
Maintenance of your Dignities, be it to the damnation of your own Souls, and
infinite millions more. The whole Book being like this Preface, he was indicted
at the Assizes held at Croyden, and found guilty. He pleaded That he was
indicted on the Statute of 23 of Eliz. c. 2. for publishing seditious words
against the Queen, but that the Book charged on him, contained no seditious
words against the Queen, but the Bishops only. But it was answered by the
Judges (N.B.) That they who spoke against her Majesty's Government in Cases
Ecclesiastical, her Laws, Proceedings, or Ecclesiastical Officers which ruled
under her, did defame the Queen. And on clear proof that he was the Author of
that Libel, he was found guilty, and received Sentence of Death; but by
intercession of Archbishop Whitgift, was Reprieved. Mr. Baxter's actings have
been so like Mr. Vdal's, that it is no wonder to find him laboring to justify
him in a Cause wherein himself is so nearly concerned.

In 1659. came forth Mr. Baxter's Key for Catholics, dedicated To his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, p. 323. where he asserts, That if the Body of a
Commonwealth, or those that have part in the Legislative Power, and so in the
Supremacy, should be unwillingly engaged in a War with the Prince, ( suppose
the Long Parliament, or the Commonwealth under Oliver against King Charles the
First) and after many years Blood and Desolations, judiciously take away his
Life as guilty of all this Blood, and not to be trusted any more with
Government, (as the Parliaments Vote for Non-address to the King.) And all this
they do, not as Private Men, but as the remaining Sovereign Power, and say they
do it according to Law; undoubtedly this case does very much differ from the
Powder Plot, or Papists murdering of Kings. With much more to the same evil
purpose. And doubtless the difference is great; it is more horrid for Subjects
to pretend Justice, than for the Pope to attempt by secret Plots to destroy a
Protestant Prince. In the year 58. he prints his Five Disputations of Church
Government; which were designed against restoring the extruded Episcopacy and
Liturgy, and to justify the Presbyterian Ordination, where (as also in his
Method for Peace, p. 389.) he says, We have taken down the superfluous honor
of Bishops, (viz. their power over Presbyters.) as Antichristian. This
disputatious Book (he says) was written against Dr. Hammond, who was then his
Neighbor; and he dealt very friendly with him: for he scarce touched one of
his Arguments, but the design of the Book was to destroy the whole Order, as
Optatus said of a Donatist, Dei Episcopos linguae gladio jugulasti, fundens
sanguinem non corporis sed honoris, Opt. Milevit. l. 2.

And because after No Bishop follows No King, in 1659. he sets forth his Holy
Commonwealth; which was no other than a Plot to keep out the King, as the other
was to keep out the Bishops: for there being great hopes that upon so many
Revolutions of Government we should settle again on our ancient Foundations, he
says, He suited that Book to the demands and doubts of those times. And his
endeavor is to prove, That the King being secluded, and his Subjects
discharged of their Obedience, ought not to be readmitted. Thus in the Preface:
That a Succession of wise and godly Men, may be secured to the Nation in the
highest Power, is that I have directed you the way to in this Book. And thus he
explains himself: First, as to the higher Powers; Prove, says he, that the
King was the highest Power in the times of Division, and that he had power to
make that War that he made, and I will offer my Head to Justice as a Rebel.
These confident, Assertions of his were such as brought a far better Head to
the Block. But what would Mr. Baxter have? My wish is, says he, that our
Parliaments may be holy, and this ascertained from Generation to Generation, by
such a necessary Regulation of Elections, that all those who by wickedness have
forfeited their Liberties ( i.e. the King and Loyal Party) may neither choose
nor be chosen. And the reducing Elections to faithful, honest, upright men,
such as (he says) were then in Richard Cromwell 's Parliament, is the only,
only, only way to a certain and perpetual Peace and Happiness. He commends
Richard Cromwell, as one that inherited his Father's Virtue; one that piously,
prudently, and faithfully, to his immortal Honor, exercised the Government;
persuades all men to live in obedience to him; and styles himself (in the
Epistle to his Five Disputations, desiring his favorable acceptance of the
tendered Service of) a faithful Subject to his Highness, as an Officer of the
Universal King, R.B. Does not this Man affirm, notwithstanding all the
Confusion that had covered the Land, all the Blood that had been shed, and all
the Heresies and Blasphemies that had poisoned millions of Souls, that he is
one that rejoices in the present happiness of England, and honors all the
Providence of God by which we have been brought to what we are? Epistle Dedic.
to Richard before his Key for Catholics; and in his Holy Commonwealth, p. 487.
Nor can I be so unthankful as to say, for all the sins and miscarriages of Men
since, that we have not received much mercy from the Lord. And therefore he
sets up his Stone of Remembrance, with this Inscription in great Letters:
HITHERTO HAS THE LORD HELPED US.

Is it possible, that a Man who has said and done such barbarous unnatural
Deeds, and stirred up many Thousands to do and say the same things with him,
should still deceive the meanest Christians? Is it possible he should still
persist in the same, and yet retain the opinion of a Saint? and be reputed the
chiefest Guide of a Godly People? Yet thus it is: He is consulted as the Oracle
of the Non-conformists; All of them, as a late Encomiast says, do light their
Fires at his Torch. And he has the forehead with the strange Woman, to wipe
his mouth, and say, What have I done? You may guess by what he says: I must
profess, that if I had taken up Arms in that War against the Parliament, (he
says it, p. 488. of Holy Commonwealth) my Conscience tells me I had been a
Traitor, and guilty of resisting the Higher Powers. And in his Key for
Catholics, where the Legislative Power and highest Judicial Power is divided
by Constitution of the Government between the Prince and Senate, (as he
determines the English Monarchy to be) he says modestly there, many will think;
but he elsewhere delivers it as his own Sentiment, That the Prince invading the
Senates Right, may justly be resisted and lose his Right, p. 324. Yet this Man
says, Further than I was for the King, I never was one year with the stronger
side: As if he had been always Loyal. And p. 489. of Commonw. If any of them
(i.e. his Accusers) can prove that I was guilty of hurt to the Person, or
destruction to the Power of the King, or of changing the Fundamental
Constitution of the Commonwealth, (not the Kingdom) taking down the House of
Lords without consent of all three Estates that had a part in the Sovereignty;
I will never gainsay them if they call me a most perfidious Rebel, and tell me
that I am guilty of far greater sin than Murder, Whoredom, or Drunkenness. And
Anno 1680. he is not ashamed to say in his Preface to the second part of the
Nonconformists Plea, -- In all the times of Usurpation, and since, I said and
wrote that the King's Person is inviolable, and to be judged by none, either
Peer or Parliament: And the Book accused (i.e. the Holy Commonw.) goes on
these Principles. So that notwithstanding his pretense of recanting what was
there said, he still seems to justify those Theses, and adds, The Book accused
has not a word meet to tempt a Man in his wits to such accusation: Yet he
says, These. 352. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad meritum Causae
they are on the worser side, yet may he not lawfully war against the Common
Good, (i.e. the rebellious Party) or on that account; nor any help him in that
War. And These. 374. If a Prince that has not the whole Sovereignty (which he
says of our King) be conquered by the Senate that has the other part, and that
in a just defensive War, (as he thought the late War to be) the Senate cannot
assume the whole Sovereignty, but supposes that Government in specie to
remain: and therefore another King must be chosen. This was pleasing Doctrine
in the Protector's time. And These. 137. If Providence ( i.e. Success in
Rebellion) statedly disable him that was the Sovereign from executing of Laws,
protecting the Just, and other ends of Government, it makes him an incapable
Subject of the Power, and so deposes him. And being so made incapable of
Government, by These. 146. Though he were unjustly dispossessed, it is not the
duty of his Subjects to seek his Restitution. The Reader has heard of a famous
Roman Saint called Ignatius, who, if compared with others of that Church, we
may say of him as one does of Mr. Baxter, That he exceeds them as much as a
Flint does a Freestone, because out of him so many Fires have and may be
kindled. If such an Historian as Plutarch were now living, how easily might he
run a Parallel between these two Generals? Both were famous tam Mart quam
Mercurio; but whether of them was the greater Soldier or the better Saint,
might occasion some dispute; the reading whereof would not be altogether so
sad, as the restless endeavors of the Disciples of them both; who, however
they seem to differ in other things, join all their hands to pull down our
Church. Impiety being grown to such an height, I should think it a thing
impossible that it should proceed any farther, the wickedness and shame of it
being (notwithstanding any pretense) manifested to all Men: and that upon the
joyful tidings of his Majesty's most happy return in peace, by a most
miraculous and admirable Providence, the Authors of such Opinions and
Practices should seek where to hide their heads. But we are told, that
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, which seldom admits repentance; and
though they have power to do hurt, yet they have none to do good. Hence it is
that this confident Man appears still with open face, and pursues the same
ungodly ends. I know not how it came to pass, but this same Man was admitted to
preach a Fast Sermon to the House of Commons when they were consulting of
inviting home the King to his Father's Throne; and with great boasting he tells
us often, That the King was called home the next day after that Sermon of his,
as if it had not been done if he had not preached: whereas it is very
observable, that in all the Sermon there was not one word that might be
interpreted to promote that noble Design, but many things that were intended to
hinder it, or clog it with very dishonorable terms. He intimates the Supreme
Power to be still in the two Houses. He tells us indeed, that Romans 13. is part
of the Rule of his Religion, (and adds) but unhappily there has been a
difference amongst us which is the higher Power. (And be it remembered, that he
had offered his Head to Justice as a Rebel, if any could prove that the King
was the highest Power in the time of Division.) Whereas he himself confesses,
that a Heathen persecuting Nero must be obeyed; Yet he affirms, That it was not
the intent either of St. Peter or St. Paul, to determine whether the Emperor
or Senate was Supreme; though St. Peter plainly determines it, when he calls
the King Supreme; and St. Paul, by appealing not to the Senate, but to Caesar.
In that Sermon he magnifies the Loyalty of the Presbyterians; adjures the
Commons to an opposition of Episcopacy, though the King in his Message
commended it to be as ancient as the Monarchy in this Island. And under the
Titles of Sound Doctrine and Church Government, pleads for Presbytery; and
would ( p. 46.) have the Church Revenues settled on them: p. 43. saying, Give
first to God the things that are Gods. For these he pleads, under the name of
the godly, peaceable, and prudent people of the Land, in opposition to the
profaneness: And to insinuate new fears and jealousies, cries out, O what
happy times did we once see! When were those happy times? Not in the peaceable
time of King Charles the First; those were days of Profaneness and Persecution:
He must mean either under the Long Parliament, when so much Loyal Blood was
shed; or under the Protection of Oliver, when the best of Princes was
butchered; or under Richard, of whom and his Mock-Parliament he gives such
large Encomiums. But now, Nox una perpetuo mansura, The days of Light and
Jubilee are gone: And (as it is with Bats and Owls) when the Sun appears, their
Night is come. He was it seems of the same mind with his Brother Jenkins, who
said in a Sermon preached Sept. 25. 1656. That the removal of Prelatical
Innocations countervailed for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in the late
Distractions; nor would he redeem all those by the return of the same, if it
might be done. For Mr. Baxter speaking of Prelatical Men, who condemn the
Ministers and Churches that had not Prelatical Ordination, says, They would
surely silence such Ministers, and dissolve such Churches through all the Land,
if it were in their power, as it may be (says he) when our sins have ripened us
for SO GREAT A PLAGVE, Postscript to True Cath. p. 335.

CHAP. II.
Nec dum finitus Orestes.
IF Great Theodosius, as Mr. Baxter says, ( Treatise of Bishops, part 1. p.
147.) did cast himself down on the Earth before Ambrose to beg pardon and
readmission with tears, and was not received till some Months continued
penance. If Great Mr. Baxter, being so heinous a Criminal as he has under his
own hand acknowledged, should, after such a miraculous return of the King,
humble himself before the King and his Nobles in such manner as he promised
once he would do; it was no more than was his duty, and perhaps not enough to
expiate his Crime. Thus then Mr. Baxter expostulates, p. 14. of his Answer to
Bagshaw: Is it possible for any sober Christians in the World to take them to
be blameless, or those to be little sins? What, both the violating the Person
and the Life of so good a King? and the change of the fundamental Government or
Constitution? The setting up the Protector, and pulling him down again? etc. If
all this were no Rebellion, Treason, or Murder, is there any such Crimes to be
committed? If I was guilty of such sins, (Habemus confitentem Reum) I do openly
confess, that if I lay in sackcloth and in tears, and did lament my sins before
the World, and beg pardon both of God and Man, and beg all Men to take warning
by my fall, which had done such unspeakable wrong both to Christ and Men, I
should do no more than the plain Light of Nature assures me to be my great and
needful duty, p. 17.

But he that had the confidence to meet the old King and his Armies in the
Field, (now that the Sword is taken out of his hands) wants not confidence to
take up his Pen, as dangerous a Weapon, and most maliciously handled, and to
affront the then present King before he be well settled on his Throne, in this
Military way, as he terms it in his Third Plea, page the last. And though his
Fraternity could not be permitted to bring him under Articles before, yet they
vigorously attempt it after his return. The first attempt was concerning a
Declaration to be extorted from the King about Ecclesiastial Affairs: We
offered his Majesty and the Bishops, at first, the Archbishop Usher 's Model
for Concord: Treatise of Episc. Part 2. p. 53. The Bishops would not once take
it into consideration, nor so much as vouchsafe to talk of it, or bring it
under any deliberation. They knew whence it came, not from the Archbishops, but
the Presbyterian Forge: Mr. Baxter confesses, p. 87. second part, They that
would have conformed to his Majesty's Declaration (which, as you shall hear
anon, they had caused to be drawn according to their Model) went on this
Supposition, that the Species of Prelacy was altered by it: and yet on these
terms they would unite with the Prelatists, only so far as to go in a peaceable
performance of their Office, p. 116. (just as now they do.) In that 116 p. Mr.
Baxter supposes this Objection against the Declaration; (for I can scarce call
it his Majesty's, being by the necessity of times, and the importunity of
troublesome Men, extorted from him.) Obj. You did but obtrude on us your own
Opinions: for when you had drawn up most of those words, his Majesty was forced
to seem for the present to grant them to you, for the quieting of you. Answ. p.
117. If we did offer such things, (for it was in vain to deny it) let the World
judge what we sought by them. 2. There is most of that about Rural Deans put
in, I suppose, by the Bishops consent, who were to word it after it went FROM
US; (a good office indeed, to whet a Sword to cut their own Throats, and be the
Presbyterians Journey-men to their own undoing.) For Thirdly, Whoever mentioned
or desired it? it appears that the work of Jurisdiction, Excommunication,
Absolution, no nor Ordination, was not thought to be above the Office of a
Presbyter; that is, They would have robbed the Bishops of all their Power and
Authority, and taken it to themselves; and then they would go on peaceably in
the performance of their Office: and therefore it is no wonder that the Bishops
refused to consider of such a Model, And that very Parliament that had so much
manners as to thank his Majesty for that Declaration (which others have not
done for the Act of Oblivion) did lay it by, so that it was never done, but
other Laws established which we feel, says Mr. Baxter.

I cannot pass by that vainglorious boasting of his so often mentioned, how
soon the Archbishop of Armagh and he was agreed as to Episcopacy, etc. in half
an hour: and in another place, in a quarter of an hour: when indeed the Model
which he calls the Archbishop's, was published after the beginning of our Wars,
to put a stop to that utter Confusion then intended by the total Extirpation of
Episcopacy, and not as a Pattern for 1660. He says, one Mr. Stanly of
Dorchester told him, That Archbishop Usher did profess to him, that he took a
Bishop to be Primas Presbyterorum, of the same Order; and every Presbyter to be
a Governor of the Flock: and when he asked him, Why then he would be a
Primate? he told him, That he took it not for any part of his Office, but for a
collateral Dignity which the King was pleased to bestow on him. And that Bishop
Reynolds professed to him his Opinion to be the same when he took the
Bishopric. At Bishop Reynolds I cannot wonder; perhaps he cared not for the
Species of Episcopacy, which this Opinion of his destroys, but the substantial
advantage: His Bishopric was managed partly by his Wife, who visited the
Conventicles, and his Chancellor, who, as Mr. Baxter says, p. 184. of Treatise
of Episcopacy, had been a Judge-advocate in Fairfax 's or Cromwell 's Army. But
that Archbishop Usher, who so long and so laudably exercised the Jurisdiction
of an Archbishop, should act against his Judgment and Conscience, Mr. Baxter
nor Mr. Stanley shall ever make such as knew any thing of that good Man to
believe: something he might do in that necessary time, for the reduction of the
Church, which was then in a miserable confusion, to some order and government;
but he never intended that Model which Mr. Baxter calls his, and which altered
the very Species of Episcopacy, for the reduction of Episcopacy. The Bishop's
Practice for so many years, is an undeniable Argument of his Judgment for
Episcopacy. Dr. Bernard confutes all such Slanders, having recorded the
Archbishop's Judgment in these words: Holding as I do that a Bishop has
SVPERIORITY IN DEGREE ABOVE A PRESBYTER, you may easily judge that the
Ordination made by such Presbyters as have severed themselves from those
Bishops unto whom they had sworn Canonical Obedience, cannot possibly be
excused by me from being Schismatical. But Mr. Baxter has well observed, That
Faction is one of the greatest Liars (and I may add, the greatest Slanderers)
in the World.

It is usual with Mr. Baxter from the Concessions of Men in Cases of Necessity,
to frame an Argument against their free and most deliberate Judgment; as he
has most injuriously dealt with his late Majesty in his Concessions to the
Nineteen Propositions of the Parliament, which he made for Peace sake, wherein
he condescended to part with much of his right, but could not be heard.
Archbishop Usher was translated to Armagh, March 22. 1624. and died March 21.
1655. so that he continued in that See 31 years, and doubtless did not act
against his Conscience all that time. I cannot give you his Judgment in all our
controverted Points: One thing is very considerable which he delivered in a
Speech at the Castle of Dublin before the Lord Deputy and the great Assembly,
April the last, 1627. concerning a Supply of Money to be granted the King, p.
80. of Dr. Barnard's Sermon: In this case give me leave as a Divine to tell you
plainly, that to supply the King with means for the necessary defense of the
Country, is not a thing left to your own discretion either to do or not to do;
but a matter of Duty, which in Conscience you stand bound to perform. The
Apostle, Romans 13. having affirmed, that we must be subject to the Higher
Powers, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake, adds this as a reason to
confirm it; For, for this Cause you pay Tribute also; as if the denying of such
payment could not stand with conscionable Subjection: thereupon he infers this
Conclusion, Render therefore to all their due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom
to whom Custom is due, agreeable to that known Lesson which he had learned of
our Savior, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. where you
may observe, That as to withold from God the things which are Gods, Man is
said to be a robber of God, whereof he himself complains in case of
substracting Tithes: so to deny a Supply to Caesar of such means as are
necessary for support of his Kingdom, can be accounted no less than a robbing
of him of that which is his due; which I wish you seriously to consider -- And
in this Mr. Baxter and many of his Persuasion will be Dissenters from the
Archbishop, and so they would from his Model also; for why else did they not
show any readiness to accept it when it was first proposed? Nothing would
please them then, but the Extirpation of Episcopacy Root and Branch. And
secondly, the Archbishop's Model preserves that Species of Diocesan Bishops,
which Mr. Baxter would destroy, and (Thirdly) under which Mr. Baxter makes
Christ's true Discipline impracticable. Nor will any Government please Mr.
Baxter as long as the Liturgy is established, which he fancieth to abound with
many heinous sins, whereof, as long as any one is retained, Conformity is to
him impossible.

Mr. Baxter has been always opposing the Party that was uppermost. He began
with the King and Bishops: then with the Presbyters, opposing their Doctrine in
the Confession of Faith, see p. 20. of Mr. Baxter's Confession. And their
Discipline by Lay Elders. And p. 83. of his Apology, When the Presbyterians
seemed uppermost, I was looked on as a Dissenter: When the Rump was uppermost,
I was by their order (de jure) Sequestered: With the Army I was out much more:
Cromwell was not for me, because I was not for him. And yet he was so much for
him, as to leave it on record, That if the Lord Protector had not stepped in all
the Ministry had been taken down. And whence came it, (says he, p. 321. of his
Key for Catholics) that Sexby and others that have been Soldiers in our
Armies, have confederated with Spain to murder the Lord Protector? And whence
came their Jesuitical Treasonable Pamphlets, (such as Killing no Murder, whose
Author is known to be no Jesuit) provoking Men to take away his Life? Whence is
it that Mr. Baxter prays that his Son Richard might inherit a tender care of
the Churches of Christ, if he were so much against Oliver? The plain truth is,
he was neither for Oliver nor Richard, but so far only as to hinder the return
of his Majesty and the Church to their lawful and ancient Rites. In his
gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, his Majesty desired the
Dissenters to read as much of the Common Prayer as they had no just Exceptions
against. But though Mr. Baxter and others of his Brethren had professed that
they could use the greatest part of it, we never heard that they gratified his
Majesty in the reading so much as one Collect; but instead thereof, they
petition for a Reformation both of Doctrine and Discipline: and particularly,
they petition his Majesty that some Learned, Godly, and Moderate Divines of
both Persuasions, indifferently chosen, may be employed to compile such a new
Form, as they there described, or at least to revise and effectually reform the
old, etc. The King denies the first part, of making a New Liturgy; and tells
them he had in his Declaration of October. 25. expressed his esteem of the
Liturgy of the Church of England: but grants the second, and authorizeth
certain Persons to advise upon and review the said Book, comparing the same
with the most ancient Liturgies: And, if reason be, to make such reasonable and
necessary alterations, corrections, and amendments, as should be thought
needful, etc. with this special caution -- Avoiding as much as may be, all
unnecessary abreviations of the Forms and Liturgy wherewith the People are
acquainted. And how thankfully was this received? Mr. Baxter tells us, That he
drew up another Liturgy, a Petition for Peace and Concord, and a Reply to the
Answer of the Bishops to their Exceptions: This new Liturgy, though he
confesses it had many imperfections, and needed to be amended, being the hasty
offspring of eight days; yet he pedantically calls it their more correct
Nepenthes, and protests before God and Men against the dose of Opium which was
by the Bishops prescribed, (i.e.) the Liturgy which the King recommended to
them) as that which plainly tended to cure their Disease by extinguishing of
Life, and to unite them in a dead Religion. Dr. Reynolds (he confesses) blamed
them for offering a new Liturgy instead of additional Forms; but they would
have their New (or) nothing: And tells the Bishops, If these be all the
abatements and amendments you will admit, you sell your innocence and the
Churches peace for nothing; (which is indeed somewhat cheaper than that for
which his Brethren sold the King, and those other things to boot.) I have heard
it credibly reported by some Reverend persons there present, that that Treaty
might have had the desired effect of Concord, had not Mr. Baxter so obstinately
resisted: Particularly, the Learned Bishop of Chester told Mr. Isaak Walton,
that Dr. Sanderson said, There was a certain person there (Mr. Baxter knows
whom he meant) that appeared to be so bold, troublesome, and illogical, as
forced the meek Doctor to say, with an unusual earnestness, that he never met
with a Man of more pertinacious Confidence, and less Abilities, in all his
conversation. And the Reverend Bishop of Worcester in his Letter, p. 13.
affirms, That Mr. Baxter's furious eagerness to engage in a Disputation to
which his Brethren showed themselves unwilling, did wholly frustrate the way
that tended to an amiable and fair compliance.

His Petition for Peace then, was like his Pleas now, mere threatening and
reviling. Take heed (says he, p. 5.) how you drive men by Penalties upon that
which they judge does tend to their Damnation. And p. 14. The denial of their
desires would renew all our troubles. p. 18. they tell the Bishops of
unmerciful Impositions. Nor did they deal better with the King, whom they
desired to leave out of his Declaration these words: We do not in Our
Judgments believe the practice of those particular Ceremonies we except
against to be in it self unlawful; that is, we account them unlawful. They tell
the Bishops in the close of the Second Paper, If they will grant those favors,
it would revive their Hearts to daily and earnest Prayer for their prosperity:
But p. 12. Should we lose the opportunity of our desired Reconciliation, it
astonisheth us to foresee what doleful effects our Divisions would produce;
which we will not so much as mention in particular, lest our words should be
misunderstood. And p. 117. of their Reply: As Basil said to Valens the
Emperor, that would have him pray for the life of his Son, If thou will
receive the true Faith, thy Son shall live; which when he refused, he said, The
will of God be done with thy Son: So we say too, If you will put on Charity,
and promote the Churches Peace, God will honor you; but if you will do
contrary, the will of the Lord be done with your Honors. Now what greater
insolency could they have used, if the King had been as low as his Father, and
the Bishops as obnoxious as Mr. Baxter and his Brethren; And who but Mr. Baxter
could have thought by a hasty work of eight days, done in opposition to his
Majesty's Commission, and as he confesses, against the advice of some of his
more sober Brethren, to justle out the Liturgy composed by many Martyrs and
Confessors, and approved of by the Reformed Churches ever since the
Reformation, as his Majesty tells him in that Declaration? To which, though
they now say they would have submitted, yet could they not then at his
Majesty's request read any part of the Liturgy; though they confessed they
could have used almost the whole: But instead thereof, his Majesty complains in
that Declaration, of their restless Spirits, who continued their bitterness
against the Church, and endeavored to raise Jealousies against his Majesty;
and unseasonably Printed, Published, and Dispersed a Declaration to his
Majesty's reproach. Their whole Petition was a Pharisaical Remonstrance of
their own Godliness and Abilities, and the Profaneness of such as were not of
their Persuasion; besides their frequent and fearful outcries of Persecution
and Sufferings, when themselves had been the Persecutors for Twenty Years
together, and as yet had suffered nothing but from their own guilty
Consciences, and just fears.

Well might the Loyal Party have answered those Complaints, as once their
Independent Brethren did: Is there the least show of Oppression, Sorrow, or
cause of Complaint, except it be that you are not suffered to oppress, vex, and
gall your Brethren that join not with you? Can you feed upon nothing but the
Blood of your Brethren, that though you are as capable of all Preferments, even
Bishoprics and Deanaries, as any of the Loyal Clergy) you complain of Slavery
and Oppression, because you cannot enslave and lead into Captivity? Is this to
kill you with the Sword, that you cannot (again) kill your Brethren with the
Sword? See more to this purpose in the Pulpit-Incendiary, printed 1648. p. 45.
Your Renowned Protector Oliver speaks home to you at the dissolution of the
Parliament 1654, in these words: Is it ingenuous to ask Liberty, and not to
give it? What greater Hypocrisy, than for those who were oppressed by the
Bishops, to become the greatest Oppressors themselves so soon as the Yoke was
removed? And his Majesty in the Chapter concerning the Ordinances against
Common Prayer, to this effect: I see that those are the most rigorous exactors
upon others to conform to their illegal Novelties, who were least disposed to
the due obedience of lawful Constitutions: So that I know not whether they
sinned more against their Consciences by violently opposing Our established
Order, or violently imposing their own. We have one instance more of their
dutiful behavior to his Majesty, in a Pamphlet called The due Account and
Petition, which was after the Debate; where they say, We must needs believe,
that when his Majesty took our consent to a Liturgy to be a Foundation that
would infer our Concord, you ( i.e. his Majesty) meant not that we should have
no Concord but by consenting to this Liturgy without any considerable
alterations. Whereby they would cast the Odium of the Rupture on his Majesty,
which they themselves notoriously caused; being resolved beforehand (their
Profession in a Liturgy, and accepting his Majesty's Commission only to make
some reasonable Alterations and Additions, notwithstanding) to have a new, or
rather no Liturgy; but to be left at liberty to use their own Liturgy, or
extemporary Effusions in all the most Solemn Administrations. And whether their
Hypocrisy or Insolency in dealing thus with his Majesty, to whom they owed
their lives, were greater, let the Reader judge.

The Kings Commission dated March 25th in the 13th of his Reign was directed to
an equal number of Divines, as well on the behalf of the Church Party as of the
Dissenters; among these, two, that had been Covenanters, were made Bishops,
being esteemed Men of Moderation and Learning (viz.) Dr. Reynolds. and Dr.
Gauden: Three others were of the Smectimnian Club (viz.) Edmund Calamy, Matthew
Newcomen, and William Spurstow, who wrote several scandalous Pamphlets against
Episcopacy and Liturgy, in Answer to the Right Reverend Bishop Hall, the rest
were Persons that had been educated under the Discipline of the Covenant and
Directory. Among these we find Mr. Richard Baxter, who had made himself
considerable by his Turbulent Spirit and Bitter Zeal against Episcopacy and
Liturgy, ever since the Year 1640, and was become the Head and Protector of
diverse Factions. And who so fit to be the Disputer and Chief Scribe in this
Grand Debate as Mr. Baxter. It was he that drew up the Petitions and Addresses
to the King; It was he that in Eight days time drew up another Liturgy, or
rather a Directory, and insisted to have that received as the Rule of Public
Devotion, to the excluding of our Liturgy, which had been used by the Church of
England for more than One Hundred Years, and highly approved of by all the
Reformed Churches. It was he that drew up the Exceptions against the Liturgy,
though not like a Wise Scribe, for he brought nothing new out of his Treasury,
but only such old Scruples, as had been long before confuted by the two
Archbishops Bancroft and Whitgift, and other Divines. And these with many
other such Factious Pamphlets he procures to be Printed and Dispersed through
the Nation. And as is if all his Fellow-Commissioners were but Ciphers, and he
the only Person that made any Figure, Mr. Baxter undertakes to be the
Disputant. At the first Congress of the Commissioners, there happened some
Discourse among the Episcopal Party, how unreasonable, it was to disturb the
Peace of the Church, for some inconveniences in the Liturgy, at the hearing
whereof Mr. Baxter says, He wondered at the mavelous Oscitancy of the Bishops,
p. 343, as mistaking the matter to be Discoursed of, for Mr. Baxter had found
out first Eight, then Ten, afterward Thirty or Forty Tremendous Points, so
Unlawful and Sinful, that Men fearing God could not submit to. Among these, the
first unlawful Imposition which was by Mr. Baxter chosen to be the Subject of
the first Disputation, was; That to enjoin all Ministers to deny Communion to
all that dare not kneel in the reception of it on the Lords day, is sinful. I
shall not transcribe the whole Disputation, which the Reader may find, p. 346,
etc. And only observe what Mr. Baxter has spoken concerning that Ceremony; For
he judges that posture as lawful, as for a Person to receive a Pardon from his
Prince upon his knees. And Part 3. Of Christ. Direct. That no reason can been
given, why a lawful thing should become unlawful; because a lawful Superior
does command it, else (says he) Superiors might take away all our Christian
Liberty, and make all things unlawful to us by commending them. And it is
observable, that Mr. Baxter hoped to enforce his Argument, by adding to the
Question of Administering the Sacrament, etc. On the Lords day, because kneeling
was forbidden to the Primitive Christians, by a temporary injunction on such
days in honor of our Saviors Resurrection, but was not intended as a standing
Rule, nor practiced in after Ages in any Church: The Case of Kneeling, etc. by
the London Divines, Answers Mr. Baxter's, and all other Objections against it.
It cannot be expected that I should engage to Answer all the Cavils which Mr.
Baxter has raised against Episcopacy and Liturgy, which makes up well nigh one
half of his Life, and indeed of his Conversation; yet I have seen a little
Posthumous Book, called Mr. Richard Baxter 's last Legacy, etc. out of which
sufficient Arguments may be urged, to confute all the Objections which he has
made in this, or any other of his Books, against our Episcopacy, Liturgy, or
Conformity. So unformable was Mr. Baxter to himself, as well as to our Church.

Yet I cannot pass by those Scandalous Reflections, with which he defames those
Learned Bishops and other Divines, with whom he treated.

Bishop Morly, says he, Was often there, and with fluent words and much
carnestness, was the chief Speaker of all the Bishops, and the greatest
Interrupter of us. [This Bishop was a Person well known beyond the Seas, by his
Discourse against Militere and other Papists in defense of our Religion. In his
Exile, he best knew Mr. Baxter, and affirms, as is noted, p. 13. of a Letter
concerning him, That his furious eagerness to engage in a Disputation, to which
his Brethren showed themselves unwilling, did wholly frustrate the way, that
tended to an amicable and fair compliance; and Mr. Baxter was sensible that he
spoke too much, and too boldly, and therefore might deserve to be interrupted
by his Diocesan.

Bishop Cosins was there constantly, and had a great deal of talk with so
little Logic, natural or artificial, that none was moved by any thing he said,
but two Virtues he showed; one that he was excellently well versed in Canons,
Councils, and Fathers, which he remembered when we tried him; the other was,
that as he was of a rustic Wit and Carriage, so he would endure more freedom
of our discourse, and was more affable than the rest, but we took him not for a
Magician. [It was no sign of a Rustic wit and carriage, that he could endure
freely the Language and Behavior of Mr. Baxter, with which the rest of the
Commissioners were more offended. And his Two excellent Treatises of the Canon
of the Sacred Scripture, and Transubstantiation, which were Two such Bones, as
brake the Teeth of the Doctors of the Sorbone, and stick in their Throats to
this day, nor will they ever be able to digest them, show that he wanted
neither Logic, nor any part of Learning becoming an excellent Divine, though
he never pretended to be a Magician; or to work such wonders as Mr. Baxter and
his Disciples at Kidderminster are reported to have done, p. 80, 81, etc. Of
Mr. Baxter 's Life.

Bishop Hichman was of the most Grave, Comely, Reverend Aspect of any of them,
and of a good insight in the Fathers and Councils; he spoke calmly and slowly,
but was as high in his Principles and Resolutions as any. He was a Person of a
Sedate and Christian Temper contrary to the passionate and furious transports
of Mr. Baxter; a Person of serious deliberation, and constant resolution, as
fit for a Privy Councellor as any of his Order, and this which was his singular
Virtue, Mr. Baxter represents as his Crime.

Bishop Sanderson of Lincoln seldom spoke, but his great Learning and Worth are
known by his Labors, and his aged Peevishness not unknown. Mr. Baxter more
than once noted this Bishop for a Partial and Peevish Old Man, but his profound
Judgment and Mature Determination of such Subjects as he considered, such as
his Tracts De Juramento, De Conscientia, his Volume of Sermons, and his
occasional Cases of Conscience, are not to be paralel'd by any Ancient or
Modern Writer. Nor was he mistaken when he told the Bishop of Chester, as Mr.
Isaak Walton affirms, that there was at the Savoy Meeting, one that appeared so
bold, troublesome and illogical, as forced this meek Bishop to say with unusual
earnestness, That he never met a Man of more confidence and less abilities in
all his Conversation.

Dr. Stern looked so honestly, and gravely, and soberly, that I scarce thought
such a face could deceive me; but when I talked of many Dissenters in the
Nation, he turned to the other Bishops, and said, He will not say in the
Kingdom, least he own a King. [This is that Person that is supposed to be the
Author of that excellent Book, The whole Duty of Man, and some other Works
collected into a Volume in Folio; nor did he fail in his Conjecture, that Mr.
Baxter was unwilling to own a King.

Mr. Thorndike spoke a few impertinent passionate words. [Such as galled Mr.
Baxter; but whatever his Presence seemed to Mr. Baxter, his Words and Writings
are weighty and full of useful Knowledge and Learning.]

Dr. Sparrow spoke but a little; yet with a Spirit enough for the imposing
dividing Cause. [That is, he was constant to his Principles; a Virtue wanting
in Mr. Baxter.]

Dr. Walton, Bp. of Chester, asked me, Whether I did not say that if our
Churches had no more than bare Liberty, as others had, without the compulsion
of the Sword, that none but Drunkards would join in them. I answered, I only
said that as they had been ordered, if they had but equal liberty for
Volunteers, they would be like Alehouses, where many honest men may come, but
the number of worse comers is so great, as makes it dishonorable. [This Man
set forth the Polyglot Bible, which for its worth, exceeded the Bibles set
forth by the Kings of Spain or France. And what he charged on Mr. Baxter he
himself proves to be true, in declaring the Conformists to be guilty of Schism
and Perjury, which he says are worse than Drunkards.]

Dr. Pierson and Dr. Gunning did all their work. Dr. Pierson was their true
Logician and Disputant, without whom, as far as I could discern, we should have
had nothing from them. He disputed accurately, soberly, and calmly, being but
once in a passion. He was the strength and honor of that Cause, which we
doubted whether he heartily maintained. [i.e.] They thought him to be an
Hypocrite or Presbyterian, but his Vindication of Ignatius has struck Mr.
Baxter's, and others Discourses against Episcopacy, to the very heart, so as
noon need to strike again. And his Treatise on the Creed has done the like to
the Cause of the Atheists and Socinians. But the reason why he speaks so well
of this Doctor, was to raise his own Trophies in his conceited Victory over
him.]

Dr. Gunning was the forwardest and greatest Speaker, understanding well what
belonged to a Disputant; a Man of greater study and industry than any of them;
well read in Fathers and Councils, and of a ready Tongue, and I hear and
believe of a very temperate Life, as to all Carnal Excesses; but so vehement
for his high imposing Principles, and so over-zealous for Arminianism and
Formality and Church Pomp, and so very eager in his Discourse, that I conceived
his Prejudice and Passion much perverted his Judgment; and I am sure they made
him lamentably overrun himself in his Discourses. [The University of Cambridge
where he long and deservingly possessed and adorned the Chair, give him a
better Character, viz. for an accurate Disputant and excellent Divine, as well
as for a Person who had a great power over his Passions and Appetite; but all
these things made against him; for when some Persons of note interceded for him
with the Committee that cast him out of his Chair, their Plea of his Learning
and Holy Living was silenced by one of the Committee, who said, He was the more
like to do hurt.]

On our part, says Mr. Baxter, Dr. Bates spoke very solidly, judiciously and
pertinently when he spoke. And for my self, I thought the day and Cause
commanded me these two things, which were objected as my Crimes, viz. speaking
too boldly and too long. [I shall only refer the Reader to p. 90. of the third
part of his Life, where to p. 98. he gives transcendent Encomiums to his
Nonconformist Brethren, every one almost has some extraordinary Praises for
Learning and Godliness.]

But, wherever he speaks of the Conforming Clergy, he bestows some of these
black Characters on them, That they are proud, worldly, covetous, domineering,
malignant, lazy, the Plague of the World, Troublers of Princes, Dividers of
Churches, that will (being Hypocrites as to Christianity and Godliness) like
Judas, that loved the Bag better than Christ, make themselves a Religion
consisting of mere Corpse and the dead Image of true Religion. See his
Prognostication dated (he says) when by the King's Commission we in vain
treated for Concord 1661. p. 12, 13. of his Prognostication, with such
Prejudice, it seems, he came to that Conference, which waxed so gross, that he
quite lost his Faculty of discerning Light from Darkness, or good from Evil. So
that though he was constrained to acknowledge the great Learning of the Bishops
with whom he contended, yet he thought it sufficient to blacken them all, to
say that they were for Conformity, (i.e.) in his sense for Persecution and
Perjury. How unfit Mr. Baxter was to commit to History, either the Relation of
our late War against the King, or of this Debate, or of the Primitive or Modern
Bisops, appears by those Qualifications which he himself requires to the
credibility of an Historian, as in his Preface to his Church History of
Bishops, etc. (viz.) That he be impartial, a lover of peace, and not engaged in
a faction; a sober, calm, considerate man, not one that is passionately rash,
that shows a malignant spirit; one that extenuates or denies all the good that
was in his Adversaries, and fastneth on them all the Odium he can without
proof; one that is not deeply engaged in a party; one that is of manifest hon^
(...) conscience, etc. For want of which qualifications, it is truly observed
by Dr. Maurice, that as his Church History was designed to disgrace Diocesan
Bishops, so the Preface looks as if it were intended to disgrace his History.
Nor must we believe our Senses, if we must believe that they were Episcopal men
that begun the late War, when the contrary appears, by many other acknowledged
Proofs and continued visible Effects related by Mr. Baxter himself.

The Parliament having had long and late experience how troublesome and
implacable such as Mr. Baxter were, proceeded to the establishment of the
Church and public Worship, excluding none but such as would exclude
themselves: And as a signal of his Majesty's impartial favor, he offered
Bishoprics to three, Deanries to two or three; more and other Dignities were
given to several sober Persons that had been of another Persuasion. One
Bishopric was accepted; one (which I suppose was Mr. Baxter) refused it. See
p. 134. of First Plea. His reason I suppose was the same that he gave for not
reading Common Prayer, p. 105. of Sacr. Desert. Should the Ministers that have
suffered so long, but use any part of the Liturgy and Scripture Forms, though
without any motive but the pleasing of God, and the Churches good, (it seems
these Motives would not prevail for this Reason) what muttering and censuring
would there be against them? This bold Man was afraid of the People. And in
truth he has made it morally impossible for him to accept a Bishopric, having
often declared by word, and published it in print, That the Office of a Bishop,
as exercised in the Church of England, was Antichristian. And says in his
Method for peace of Conscience, p. 389. We had taken down the superfluous
honor of Bishops as Antichristian; upon which (N.B.) the Devil set them to cry
down also as Antichristian, Tithes, Maintenance, Priests, and Ministers: And
moreover, that the return of such Men would be a great Plague to the Land, in
Postser. to the True Catholic, p. 335. And Mr. Baxter knows there is an
ancient Canon, That a man that had his hand in blood, might not be a Bishop.
See p. 213. of his History. And p. 36. A Government which gratifieth the Devil
and wicked Men.

And now he begins to defame the Laws, as he had formerly done the Liturgy: and
not having other means, he discovers his impotent malice in writing a
Prognostication, dated when by the King's Commission we in vain treated for
Concord, 1661. He observed, p. 40. That the Sectarian Spirit was like
Gunpowder, ready to take fire on such injuries: And Mr. Baxter with his
Prognostication, like Guy Faux with his Dark Lanthorn, is ready for the
Exploit, and sorry only that it is not done. He intimates the Clergy to be
proud, worldly, covetous, domineering, malignant, lazy, the plague of the
world, troublers of Princes, dividers of Churches, that will (being Hypocrites
as to Christianity and Godliness) like Judas, that loved the Bag better than
Christ, make themselves a Religion consisting of mere Corpse, and the dead Image
of true Religion. See p. 12, 13. He cries out of New Impositions,
Subscriptions, and Oaths, words and Actions which they believe to be against
God's Word. Does not this aim directly at the Laws? P. 14. he says, Their
Sufferings will make many otherwise sober Ministers too impatient, and to give
their Tongues leave to take down the Honor of the Clergy: And this will stir
up the People, and make them pray for the downfall of the Clergy, which they
take to be Enemies of God and Godliness; and that to speak easily or charitably
of such Men, is but to be lukewarm and indifferent between GOD AND THE DEVIL,
p. 20. Some (of the Nonconformist Ministers) will think these Passions of the
People needful to check the sierceness of the Afflictors: Some of the more
injudicious hot-brained sort (who are the greatest number) will put them on,
and make them believe that all Communion with any Conforming Ministers or
Parish Churches is unlawful, and that they are all Temporizers, and Betrayers
of Truth and Purity, that communicate with them: and carry about among
themselves false Reports and Slanders; because they will think that the
upholding of their Cause, which they think is God's, does need the suppression
of these men's Credit and Reputations, p. 25, 26. The godly and peaceable
Conformists will get the love of the sober, by their Doctrine and Lives; but
will be despised by the Sectaries, because they conform; and will be separated
by the proud and persecuting Clergy, as leaning to the Dissenters; and
thereupon will be under continual Jealousies and Rebukes: And perhaps new
Points of Conformity shall be devised to be imposed on them, which it is known
their Consciences are against, that so they also may be forced to be
Non-conformists, because secret Enemies are more dangerous than open Foes: and
so part of them will turn downright Non-conformists, and the other part will
live in displeasure till they see an opportunity to show it. And these are the
likeliest to cross and weaken the worldly persecuting Clergy. This is such a
Prognostication, as that for which Mr. Baxter observes Mr. Vdal was condemned
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in an Assize-Sermon on Psalm. 2. And it is no
otherwise a Prognostication than ( Astrologers observe of Blazing-stars) they
do irritate and dispose the Humors and Spirits of Men to disorderly Actions;
to which the event shows that this Prognostication, and Mr. Baxter's influence
on the People, has had a malign Aspect, not unlike the Prophecy of
Nostredamus's Son, That a certain great City should be burnt; and to fulfill his
Prophecy, did procure it to be set on fire.

My next Remark is on Mr. Baxter's behavior at Kedderminster, where the Bishop
of Worcester publicly declared, That he made the People believe that it was
lawful for them to take up Arms against the King, and suffered or made them to
scruple at those things which were lawful, which he himself confesses to be
lawful; and that he himself heard him to maintain such a Position as was
destructive to the Legislative Power both of both of God and Man; (viz.) That
the enjoining of things lawful by lawful Authority, if they might by accident
be the cause of sin, was sinful. This was the chiefest Argument urged against
Kneeling, etc. by Mr. Baxter.
See the Bishops Letter, p. 4. and 6. Now though the known integrity of the
Bishop is enough to make all good Men believe this Relation, yet the
consideration of the Premises puts the truth of it beyond all doubt or
exception. Was this behavior of Mr. Baxter's a token of his Gratitude to those
Bishops who gave him license to preach in their Diocese; or to his Subscription
to the Bishop of London (then Shelden) to those terms of peaceableness which
the Bishop accepted, and Mr. Baxter voluntarily subscribed? p. 12. of his late
Apology. If ever he did any thing toward Public Peace, he was drawn to it in
vita Minerva, and soon retracted it; but to promote Divisions he labored
manibus pedibusque, with all his strength.

His Book called The Cure of Church Divisions is the only Work of Mr. Baxter
that has any thing of Moderation; and yet as if he were sorry for what he had
done, at Mr. Bagshaw's Exceptions against he, he says, Does it not speak
against Church Tyranny, unjust Impositions, Violence, and taking away Men's
Liberties, and Rigor to Dissenters, from end to end? p. 7. of his Defense. It
seems it was expected of Mr. Baxter that he should have called the Bishops
Sacrilegious Silencers of the faithful Ministry, Murderers of many hundred
thousand Souls, perjurious, proud, tyrannical, covetous, formal Hypocrites,
malignant haters of good Men, and then he had not incurred the blame of the
People, p. 20. And to regain their good opinion of him, he has since said all
this again and again. Another part of Mr. Baxter's Character appears in what
was done about the Indulgence; which by a Book called The peaceable Design,
agreeing well with Mr. Baxter's Plea for Peace, seems to have been procured by
the joint Endeavors of the Papists, and those that call themselves Protestant
Dissenters; in which Book, p. 71. is this Objection: What shall we say then to
the Papists? Answ. The Papist in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and
the conscientious and peaceable among them, must be held in the same
predicament with those among our selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common
Prayer. And p. 72. As for the common Papist, who lives innocently in his way,
he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like toleration. So
that Herod and Pontius Pilate are confederate against Christ. But Mr. Baxter
must lead the Chorus here also; for he much exceeds the Author of that
Treatise, in his good opinion of the Papists: yet he says, Mr. Humphry is a man
of latitude, and tyeth himself to no Party or Opinions of other men; And I
(says Mr. Baxter) so little fear the noise of the Censorious, that even now
while the Plot does render them most odious, say freely, 1. That I would have
Papists used like men: And, 2. I would have no man put to death for being a
Priest: 3. I would have no Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, or any Law compel
them to our Communion and Sacraments.

And is not this to open the door for Papists and Fanatics to enter together?
If the Laws, how severe soever, cannot keep them out, would not this Liberty
bring them in? See p. 19. of Second Defense. If you will not bring the Papists
in, he is resolved, for ought I see, to go to them: for p. 235. of First Plea,
he says, It is but reasonable if on such necessity ( i.e. the Penalties for
Nonconformity) they should accept of favor from any Papist that should save
them, etc. By which the Reader may judge, who is a greater Friend to Popery,
the old Protestants, who have made Laws to keep it out; or the Dissenters, who
would destroy those Laws to let it in.

To put life into the languishing Cause, he inspires it with a Dose called
Sacrilegious Desertion of the Ministry rebuked; and declares, That as they had
preached formerly without leave, so they would do it much more now; and says,
That though it had cost some excellent men their lives, yet nothing but death,
or utter disablement, should make them desist. So that his Pleas and his
Practice before and since the Indulgence, show that he owned the King no great
thanks for it: Yet being advised by a moderate hand not to abuse that
Indulgence, he rails at him most intolerably; (you shall hear it by and by:) I
will only ask Mr. Baxter, why the neglect to administer the Holy Sacraments was
not as much Sacrilegious Desertion of the Ministry (whereof it is a chief Work)
as the omission of preaching? For Mr. Baxter confesses, That he had not
baptized any, nor administered the Lord's Supper, for eighteen or nineteen years
together; nor adhered to any Sect (no not the Sect of Diocesan Bishops) for
twenty five years. See p. 119. of Answ. to Dr. Hinkley: Which to me seems to be
not only a Desertion of the Ministry, but of Christianity it self. Certainly if
he ought to do the one, he ought not to leave the other undone. That he and
others are Pastors to no Church, that he never gathered a Church, nor has he
constantly joined in Communion with any Church, Answ. to the Bp. of Worcester's
Sermon. p. 64. 24. 62. 86. Yet p. 76. of his Book of Concord, he says, I
constantly join with my Parish Church in Liturgy and Sacraments, and hope so to
do while I live. But if he thought it his duty to preach, it was his duty to
administer the Sacraments also; for preaching was never esteemed the sole Work
of the Ministers: And they that omit this Duty, to refuse to hear the Universal
Church of Christ, as well as the Church of England: For by Canon. Apost. the
9th, Whoever of the Faithful enter and hear the Sacred Scriptures, but stay not
at Prayers and Communion, ought to be excommunicated as Disturbers of the
Church. All Churches in the Primitive times did on every Sunday celebrate this
Holy Sacrament; and all the faithful were wont to receive it. It is also very
observable, that when our Church was to be settled, that some of the
Presbyterians moved to have the Rubric struck out which obliges the People to
Communicate three times yearly; whereas some modern Churches have found it
necessary to declare as the Council of Agatho did, (which Mr. Baxter accounts
one of the best Councils) That those who receive not the Sacrament, ought not
to be reputed as Christians. And St. Cyprian says, This bread we crave every
day, lest we who are in Christ, by the interposing of any grievous Crime while
restrained, and not communicating, should be separate from the Body of Christ.

And now prepare your ears against that nauseous Billinsgate Language and
barbarous Censures, wherewith Mr. B. answers his learned Adversary Dr. Fulwood.
in his Sacrilegious Desertion, for want of Arguments, p. 6. Railing Ruffian,
p. 13. Selfish envious Conformists; the doleful pride and selfishness of the
carnal part of the Clergy; a Silencing Diocesan, p. 25. Churchtearers, p. 105.
Such Toys, p. 31. A few confident and silly Reasonings of Dr. Fulwood and other
Pamphleteers; Usurpers, p. 39. Hear it now, for you shall shortly hear it from
God, p. 8. I would give all the Money in my Purse to make me understand what
the Church of England is, p. 35. Foolish superstitious Priests, p. 44. He talks
of Per and Pers, p. 49. but lays his Scene in Vtopia, and says, I know this is
not our case in England, but if we must follow you into Utopia. Lest the Reader
should not understand this, he speaks plainer, p. 74. I have been long of the
opinion which you ( viz. that are of a contrary opinion) will one day pardon,
that perjury, perfidiousness, and persecution, proud contending who shall be
greatest, and covenanting never in certain points to obey Christ against the
world and the flesh, is not the way of God, p. 56, 57. Such confidence upon
such insignificant reasons, is a great dishonor to the wit and humility of the
Author, p. 59. Our excellent Successors, that do nothing but see the Peoples
faces in the Church: You forbid Baptism and the Lord's Supper to all that have
not as large a Swallow as your selves, p. 60. His want of common sense and
modesty, p. 65. O with what face, p. 66. He tells us, p. 96. of some of the
Nonconformists Principles and Purposes: They suppose that the Ministry does not
save Men, as Wizards think that Charms do heal Men by their presence, titles,
names, or habits, by standing in the Reading-place or Pulpit, or being called
the Parson of the Parish, or saying his set words over them when dead. (As if
the Conformists did believe all this.) P. 10. They suppose that a greater
number of the conformable Priests than they are willing to mention, do preach
so ignorantly and dully in the Pulpits, and do so little of their private work
besides, that there is great need of a far greater number of Assistants than
all the present Non-conformists be. They are not able to confute the People,
who tell them that their public Priests are so defective in their necessary
qualifications for their Office, as that they hold it unlawful to own such for
true Ministers, and encourage them by their presence, or commit the care of
their Souls to such. P. 11. They think that the ejecting (the Non-conformists)
from the Temples and Tithes did not degrade nor make them no true Pastors to
their Flocks; and that the Magistrates putting another Parish Minister in
possession of the Temple and Tithes, did not dissolve the foresaid relation.
They think that the ejected Minister, foro Conscientiae and Ecclesiae vere sic
dictae, retains still his ancient relation to his Flock, and part of them
schismatically separate from him, and join with another Intruder that never had
a lawful Call. P. 14. They think that Conformity would be in them such a
composition of heinous crimes, as they forbear to name, for fear of seeming
Accusers of others, and unpeaceable. P. 31. Look up man, without blushing; alas
for these poor People that cannot try Sense from Nonsense. P. 61. His next has
no bounds, it grieveth me to read it. O Posterity, how will you know what to
believe! P. 62. Here is much that would as handsomely serve Celsus, Julian,
Porphyry, or Eunapius, p. 72. P. 25. I will not offend the Readers ears by
giving them the names I think they deserve, but wish them to read 1 Thessalonians.
2.15. which in words at length he puts in his Title page, They both killed the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted us. And tell them, by what
Names or Titles soever they be distinguished, that I, that am a dying man,
would be loath to stand in their case before God: And if we were well agreed
that there is indeed a God and a Christ, a Heaven and a Hell, we should easily
be agreed in all the rest; (i.e.) Seeing you are not of Mr. Baxter's mind, you
are very Atheists, and in a state of Damnation.) P. 132. I must tell you, that
we cannot but think that you need Repentance, great Repentance, (that your
Souls yet, if possible, may be saved, p. 74.) for sinning more, and that by
public, deliberate, chosen covenanted, ministerial sin, protesting against
Repentance. I conclude this Collection of many such great Calumnies which that
little Book does abound with, with his impudent Challenge; Come, and
impartially debate the Case with us, who have been the greatest Causes of
Protestant Divisions, Conformists or Nonconformists. These putrid, Pestilential
Stinks and Corruptions are so unlike the Breathings of a mortified Christian,
that the like never proceeded from any dying Man, except such a one as has
been dying Twenty years together, of which this is a shrewd Symptom; and
another is as bad, that (as they say of dying Beasts) he bites deadly,
Animamque in vulnere ponit. I challenge any Man to show in so little a Book, so
great Pride, Malice, and Obloquy, on so slender occasion as the Indulgence,
prepared by the means, and in favor of the Papists as well as the Presbyter.
Mr. Baxter knew the Person against whom he wrote to be a Person of Great
Learning and Moderation, as he had acknowledged under his own hand in his Book
of Conformation, where he often quotes him; he calls him The Learned Mr.
Fulwood in the Postscript, but now he is a mere trifler.

But there is yet ultimus conatus naturae. And his restless Spirit grows more
brisk and sparkling, as it is pouring forth from the crazy Vessel. By the great
mercy of God, that most execrable. Plot of the Papists to Assassinate the King
(whom God has hitherto by a series of Miracles preserved) and the Church of
England, against which the Gates of Hell have not, and we hope never shall
prevail, was discovered, to the great joy of all true Protestants. And now
while they are undermining the Foundations, Mr. Baxter (though a dying Man)
lifts up himself, and gets on the top of the Fabric, to throw it down with all
his might. This Polity he learnt of his Predecessors, who on the intended
Invasion 88. and the Gunpowder-Treason, when the Papists thought to have
swallowed us up quick, took their advantage to thrust us into their Jaws, or at
least to devour us themselves, if we should escape our other Adversaries. That
he might act with less suspicion, and more success, he calls his Engines A Plea
for Peace, which, as Bishop Stillingfleet observes, might be better called, A
Plea for Discord and Division; And another called, The true and only way of
Concord; so full fraught with impracticable Notions, and dividing Principles,
as if his whole design had been to prove, that there is no true way of Concord
among the Churches, Bishop Stillingfleet. But of this Book hereafter: Another
Book claims precedence, whereof after great labor Mr. Baxter is delivered; but
it proved a Monster full of Teeth and Claws, which he calls Church History of
the Government of Bishops; but is indeed (though very partial) a History of
those Confusions which were raised in the Church by such as opposed the
Orthodox Bishops. That the sight of this Monstrous Birth may not offend, let
the Reader fortify his Eyesight with what Mr. Baxter himself has prepared:
For, telling us what History is credible, p. 2. n. 4. of that Tract, It ought
to be, says he, of One that is impartial, a lover of Peace and not engaged by
Faction or Interest to one side against the other; a calm and considerate Man,
not a passionate hasty Judge; a Man of manifest Honesty, Conscience, and Fear
of God; not a Worldly, Wicked, Bloody, Unconscionable Man. Now let the Reader
consider whether this Character agree with our Author: And then let the Reader
take that other Antidote in the Preface -- The Sectaries, says Mr. Baxter, who
rashly separate from some Churches, because of some Forms, Opinions, or
Ceremonies, which almost all Christians on Earth have used in the former purer
Ages, and still use, should be more cautelous in examining their grounds, and
should hardly venture to separate from any Church, for that which for the same
reason would move them to separate from almost all Christians in the whole
World, if not unchurch the Church of Christ. And let the Reader satisfy
himself, whether Mr. Baxter's Model be not such a Form. And may it not be said
of Mr. Baxter, as he says of Dr. Heylin? He is so palpably partial, and of so
malicious and bloody a strain, representing excellent persons as odious
intolerable Rogues, that he is not to be believed? Judge by this one passage,
p. 120. If our Neighbors, that commonly these Thirty Years last use the word
God dam me, had put but thee instead of me, I should have suspected that the
Councils and Bishops had made their Religion. To which add, p. 464. Have not
the Ministers themselves been the principal instruments of taking down the
Bishops, etc? And what have they got by it? I doubt not but the Reader will
find the whole Collection to be a History of the Confusion and Bloodshed
occasioned by discontented and ambitious Presbyters and their party, against
the Orthodox, who suffered under Heathen Arian, and other heretical Emperors,
by Popes, Heretics, and Schismatics, misapplied all to the Bishops and
Councils; and often speaks more favorably of Heretics, viz. of Arius, the
Novatians, and Donatists, who though they were usurping Presbyters, he calls
them Bishops; and through their sides strikes at the Sacred Office, p. 276. of
his Plea for Peace; It was by Bishops striving who should be Chief, that the
Donatists set up: Whereas the Donatists were discontented Presbyters. And in
the Schisms of those times, the Bishops were almost ever the chief Cause. The
Almost will not save it from a Lie. But evident it is, whatever quarrel there
was in all Church History, wherein a Bishop was concerned, how Innocent, how
Orthodox soever, Mr. Baxter makes him the cause of the Quarrel, and is his
Adversary. Hereof I could give many instances, had not Mr. Baxter prevented me,
having said and done enough to overthrow the credit of his History. However, I
will show the Reader a Specimen of Mr. Baxter's Candor and Truth in relating
Church History. Does not Mr. Baxter know (however he dissembles it) that Arius
and Aerius, Novatus and Novatian, Majorinus Chaplain to Lucilla a Noble Woman,
with Botruus, and Silesius, who first opposed Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, and
set up for Bishops by the help of Donatus, who succeeded them, and gave name to
the Schism, were all Presbyters? Till they dubbed one another Bishops, and then
with whole Armies opposed their lawful Bishops, who with great patience and
constancy withstood their malice. Read the History of the Donatists lately set
forth, and see how they used St. Augustine himself. Mr. Baxter may as well
ascribe all the Rebellion and Outrages, all the Blasphemies and Faction that
have been made within Forty Years past, to the Bishops of this Land, whereto
(it is well known) the Presbyterians opened the way, and led the dance, as to
impute what he does to the ancient Bishops; and indeed he is not ashamed to
assert both these notorious falsehoods. Mr. Baxter asks the Question, p. 429. of
his Cure of Divisions; Who brought in the errors of the Arians, Eunomians,
etc. And he Answers, They were Bishops or Presbyters: He would be sure to speak
one true word. I shall not trouble the Reader with all that Mr. Baxter writes
of the Arians, Nestorians, etc. in that voluminous Book, but refer him to what
he says more briefly in his other late Works; for he repeats it in many of
them. P. 27. of his Plea, He would not have the Arian Emperors made worse than
they were, because they were for Toleration of both Parties; nor were the
Arians themselves like the Socinians (says he) because they acknowledged all
save the (...) (i.e.) save the Divinity of Christ, which was all then in
Controversy. How dangerously (says he, as if he were pleading for the Arians)
did Justine and most of the Ancient Doctors, before the Nicene Council, speak
hereabout; and how certainly Eusebius and other great Bishops were Arians; and
how the Council at Ariminum laid by the Word (...) endeavoring reconcilation,
I need not send you to Philostorgus or Sondeus ( Arian Authors) for proof. If
the Conformist should have said half so much, he and the whole Church should
have smarted for it.

In the Dispute between St. Cyril and Nestorius, whether the Virgin Mary might
be called the Mother of God, you may see how partially he describes both the
Persons and Opinions, p. 271. of his Plea: Nestorius (says he) was a Man of
Study and Retirement, a poor garb, and a strict life, (i.e. a Presbyterian)
abhorring public Contentions, and loving Quietness, till he got to be
uppermost; and then he showed a peevish Zeal against Dissenters, called
Heretics. Then for St. Cyril of Alexandria, whose Works praise him in all the
Churches, Mr. Baxter has scarce a good word for him, because he was the first
Bishop that used the Sword, and persecuted the Dissenters: He was a Man (says
he) of great Parts, Spirit, and Power; but the Head of a Turbulent People. As
to their Opinions, the Error of the Nestorians lay in his want of skill in
speaking, says Mr. Baxter, and the Controversy was about words rather than
matter. Most of the People were for Nestorius, and most of the Courtiers and
Clergy against him; and so was the Emperor, who deposed Nestorius, and
restored Cyril: but Nestorius returned to his Monastery, and there lived four
Years in Peace and great Reputation; but afterward was Banished into Foreign
Countries, and died. I wonder why after Four Years he should be Banished, if he
had lived peaceably and quietly. Did not Mr. Baxter ever read how the Emperor
Theodotius confirming the Decrees of the Third General Council at Ephesus,
commanding, That none should dare to keep, read, or transcribe the wicked Books
of the profane and sacrilegious Nestorius, but search them out, cause them to
be burnt publicly; and that none permit them to have any House or Field to
hold private or public Assemblies; and whoever adhered to Nestorius, should
suffer the loss of his Goods? By which Edict (says the Perfect) our pious
Emperor knowing the Orthodox Religion to be the strength of the Empire, has
taken away all the seeds of Impiety. Edictum Theodosii in fine Concilii. I see
no reason why Mr. Baxter should speak so favorably of Nestorius, though I have
considered all that he writes, but that he might make his Readers think more
contemptible of Cyril, who was so great, learned, and good a Bishop. Vincentius
Lyrinensis, an approved Author, who lived near that time, writes thus: Infelix
ille Nestorius subito ex Ove conversus in Lupum gregem Christi lacerare cepit;
Cum enim hi ipsi qui rodebantur, ex magna adhuc part Ovem crederent, morsibus
ejus magis patebant. Nam quis eum facile errare arbitraretur, quem tanto
Imperii Judicio electum, tanto Sacerdotum studio prosecutum videret, Qui cum
magno Sanctorum amore, Summo populi favore celebraretur, quotidie palam divina
tractabat eloquia, and noxios quoque Judaeorum and Gentilem confutabat errores.
This is as much as Mr. Baxter could say for him: But what follows? Qui ut uni
haeresi suae aditum patefaceret, cunctarum Haeresewn blasphemias insectabatur,
cap. 16. and cap. 17. In audito scelere duos vult esse filios Dei; unum Deum,
alterum hominem; unum qui ex patre, alterum qui sit generatus ex matre: atque
ideo asserit Sanctam Mariam non (...) (i.e., sed (...) (i.e. dicendam, quia
scilicet ex ea non ille Christus qui Deus, sed qui homo, erat natus. Quod si
quis eum putat in literis unum Christum dicere, and unam Christi personam, non
temere credat, hoc enim fraudulentiae causa, and conceptus sen partus virginei
tempore duos Christos fuisse contendit. Who will not believe this Father, that
lived in those days, a Man of great Learning and Integrity, before a late
prejudiced Person that serves a Party? Another instance of Mr. Baxter's racking
Ecclesiastical History, to make it speak his sense against Bishops, is his
account of Novatus and Novatian, one of which he calls an ill chosen Bishop of
Rome, i.e. Novatian; though indeed they were both ambitious Presbyters: and
Novatus and African Priest (says Mr. Baxter) went to Rome to make Novatian a
Bishop, p. 36. when Cornelius was duly elected before: Of which St. Cyprian
says, Agnoscant atque intelligant Episcopo semel facto, and collegarum ac
plebis testimonio and judicio comprobato, alium constitui nullo modo posse,
Epist. 4. ad Cornel. For indeed Novation was an ambitious Presbyter that
contended against Cornelius to thrust him out of his Chair, for admitting those
to his Communion who in the time of Persecution under Decius had denied the
Faith, supposing that they could not repent after such a fall. In opposition to
such, he calls his Faction the Cathari (which Mr. Baxter knows how to English.)
This pure Presbyter sent for three Rustic Bishops, as my Author calls them,
from Italy, to come to him at Rome, under pretense of mediating for him with
Cornelius and the other Bishops. Being come he entertains them with plenty of
good Cheer and Wine (which is still in fashion with that sort of People;) and
when they had well drank, some of his Party force the Bishops to lay their
hands on Novatian, and make him an Vtopian Bishop: for it will puzzle Mr.
Baxter to name his Title, though he call him an ill chosen Bishop of Rome;
which Title he gives him, only to draw an Odium on the Bishops, though the
great troubles brought upon the Church by their Errors and Schisms, were
wholly the fruit of their Envy against Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome. Of
which St. Cyprian also gives a full account, who caused the meeting of some
Councils to suppress them. Yet Mr. Baxter (such is his Zeal for Anti-Prelatical
Men) thus excuses the matter: It was Zeal against Error, which made both the
Novatians and the Donatists run into Error, p. 32. And though that long and
sad Schisms did ensue, yet he thus excuses it: The Rigor of the Novatians was
increased by their offense at other men's sinful latitude and tepidity, p. 35.

Chap. 3. Mr. Baxter treats of the Council of Nice, and the Heresy of Arius.

P. 45. Mr. Baxter says, That Athanasius refusing to admit Arius to his
Communion, caused much Calamities: And p. 46. They that had gathered Separate
Churches, did communicate with Arius that they might be delivered from the
Persecution of a godly Bishop, (i.e.) from Athanasius, whom Mr. Baxter
confesses to be a godly Bishop: but being Bishop, and opposing the Arian
Conventicles, he is a Persecutor. That you may see the Partiality of this
Historian, I shall give you a brief History of the growth of Arianism. Arius a
Presbyter, was condemned in the first General Council at Nice, for denying the
Deity of Christ, making him a Creature; for which he was banished by
Constantine, as the cause of great Division and Corruption in the Church. But
there was a certain Presbyter who grew into so great familiarity with
Constantia the Emperors Sister, as to persuade her that Arius had been abused
by the Council, and did not hold the Opinions for which he was condemned:
Whereupon Constantine recals Arius, and enquires into the truth of that report;
and Constantia dying, recommends this Presbyter to the Emperor her Brother, as
worthy of his favor; and when Constantine died, this Presbyter carries the
News to Constantius, that his Father had bequeathed the Eastern Empire to him:
Which being what he hoped for, he received the Presbyter into his Favor, and
kept him in his Court; where first he infected some of the Eunuchs with that
Error, and by their means the Empress also, and so the Emperor himself.
Socrates l. 1.19. and l. 2.2. This revived the Arian Faction: Arius is restored
to Alexandria, from whence the multitude of his Followers having conspired the
death of Athanasius, Constantine had removed Athanasius into Gallia, where
Constans his Son then lived, who entertained him with some respect; and writes
to his Brother Constantius to admit him again to Alexandria, or threatens him
with War, lib. 2. cap. 18. Whereupon Athanasius is restored, but his life is in
perpetual danger, the Arians being more in number than the Orthodox. Hosius
Bishop of Corduba, a Man of great Age and Learning, and a constant Assertor of
the Truth, was shamefully whipped and tortured by them, lib. 2. cap. 26. And
though they were condemned by the Councils of Milain and Ariminum, Constantius
favors them, and threatens the Councils. To him succeeded Julian the
Apostate, then Jovianus, who reigned but Seven Months; then Valentian, who
admitted Valens and Arian to partake of the Empire: All which time the Arians
exercised great cruelty not only on the Orthodox Bishops, but against each
other; for under them sprang up the Novatians and Eunomians, lib. 4. cap. 23.
and lib. 5. cap. 20. who all agreed in the Arian Heresy, but persecuted one
another: So did the Macedonians, lib. 2. cap. 13. and 35. and the Nestorians,
who burnt the Arian Church at Constantinople, lib. 7. cap. 20. vexed the
Novatians and Macedonians, lib. 7. cap. 31. And all this by the instigation of
Anastatius a Presbyter, lib. 7. cap. 32. Yet all these T^mults are imputed to
the Bishops, who all the while suffered from the heretical Presby^ the true
Ancestors of Mr. Baxter.

Majorum quisquis fuit ille tuorum,
Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud quod dicere nolo.
Chap. 7. Mr. Baxter treats of the Tria Capitula.

The Tria Capitula were three Chapters mentioned in the Council of Chalcedon,
in which the Nestorians, who could not longer defend their Heresy under the
Name of its Author, sought to cloak it under the Name and Writings of Theodorus
Bishop of Mopsuestia; of Theodoret's Writings against St. Cyril; and an Epistle
of Ibas unto Maris. These made the Tria Capitula, for which Pope Vigilius and
some of his Party appeared: But the Emperor Justinian and the Catholic
Bishops appeared against them. Many Sectaries who were condemned under the name
of the Acephali, disclaimed this Council; others pretended it had approved of
the Tria Capitula. Great Divisions ensued hereupon. Justinian knowing that the
Council of Chalcedon had exploded that Heresy, sends forth his Imperial Edict,
wherein accursing the Authors and Abettors of those Tria Capitula, he summons
the Fifth General Council of Constantinople; at which the Pope refused to be
present; noluit interesse, says Bellarmine; and the true reason was, because
he favored that Heresy, and approved not of the Council of Chalcedon, which
was held without him, and did determine for the Prerogative of Constantinople
against him. Vigilius, though he came not himself, sent his Decree which
maintained that Heresy, and was confuted in the Sixth Collation of the Council
of Constans. And they set forth a most holy Confession of their Faith,
consonant in all points to that which the Holy Apostles preached; which the
four former Councils explained, and the holy Fathers with uniform consent
maintained.

Now I would desire Mr. Baxter to resolve me, whether the blame of those
Commotions which followed on this Dissension, is to be laid on the Emperor and
the Catholic Bishops who sided with him in defense of the true Faith, against
Nestorianism, as Binius and Baronius would have it; or on the Pope and his
Italians, who pleaded for that Heresy; and together with the Agnoites,
Gainaites, Theodosians, Themistians, and the rest of the Acephali, promoted and
continued those Broils.

Chap. 9. Consisting of about Sixty Pages, is spent about the Worshipping of
Images, whereof he makes the Bishops Patrons: Whereas many, both Emperors and
Bishops, suffered very much as Iconoclastes. (i.e.) the destroyers of Images.
Bishop Jewel challenges the Church of Rome to show but one Authority, during
Six hundred Years of the Church, for worshipping Images, and is not yet
answered. The rise of which in brief, was this: The Arcans and Donatists having
wasted the Church, made way for vast numbers of Infidels to enter in, who
brought with them, and superstitiously honored the Images of their
Benefactors; and many ignorant Christians learned their customs: The Pictures
of St. Peter and St. Paul we read of in Ancient History; but withal we read
they were not permitted to be brought into the Churches. The opposition made
against them, may be seen in the Magdeburg. In the year 754 the Bishops
disputed against them, and in a Council at Constantinople, consisting of 338
Bishops. How Leo Isauricus and Gregory Bishop of Neocaesaria opposed them, is
too large to repeat. It was about the year 787, that Irene, who was Daughter to
a Pagan King of Tartaria, gave public countenance to Image Worship. She ruling
as Empress in the minority of Constantine her Son, promoted this Pagan custom:
for, as Mr. Hales observes, Dux femina facti, she was a Woman of so Tyrannous a
Spirit, that she caused the eyes of her Son Constantine to be put out; which
struck a great awe into the Christians under her. One cause of her Cruelty to
her Son, being his opposing this Image Worship. But finding one Tarasius to be
of her mind, she makes him Patriarch of Constantinople, and calls a Council at
Nice consisting of 350 Bishops, most of them Arians; and so about the year 787,
they Decreed for Image Worship. But in the year 792, all was reversed by
Charles the Great in a Council at Frankfort. One Decree mentioned by Mr. Baxter
I shall remind him of; it is p. 213. A man that had his hands in blood, must
not be a Bishop.

Another Heresy which makes the Church History to swell, is that of the
Monothelites, of which Mr. Baxter speaks, chapter 8. And because he says nothing
of the rise of it, I shall. It was occasioned by one John Philoponus a
Presbyter, who wrote subtly concerning it, and drew many to his Opinion, Anno
517. but all the time that Justinian was Emperor, they hid themselves, and
propagated their Heresy in Conventicles; for it was condemned by 175 Bishops,
in the fifth Synod of Constantinople, and confuted by the Learned Bishop
Gregory Nazianzene, and by 603 Bishops in the fourth General Council at
Chalcedon, and in the sixth Synod of Constantinople by 170 Bishops. But after
the death of Theodosius, Philippicus succeeded, of whose Succession a
Monotholite Monk had foretold him; and that if he would rescind the Decrees of
the sixth Synod, and favor the Monothelites, he should reign long and happily.
This made Philippicus to espouse that Cause; and presently he banisheth Cyrus
Patriarch of Constantinople, and many Orthodox Bishops: He makes one John a
Presbyter Patriarch, and fills up the vacant Bishoprics with Presbyters of
that Faction; and then assembles them, and confirms that Heresy. But the
Bishops of the Western Churches resisted it, and sent thundering Letters
against it. And it is no wonder that the Orthodox Bishops did hide themselves
under this Tyranny, or that Philippicus found Presbyters to make Bishops in
their room, who defended him and the Faction: For it is well known how many
such in our Age adhered to usurping Powers, and defended as great both State
and Ecclesiastical Heresies, as this of the Monothelites, and would not permit
the Bishops to appear. But if these Presbyters had taken the name of Bishops
under Cromwell, as the Monothelites did under Philippicus, you might with as
much truth have affirmed, that innumerable Bishops did in the times of our
Confusions defend Rebellion and Heresy, as, that the Bishops who suffered all
manner of indignities from the Monothelites, did defend that Error, or raise
those Tumults. This Philippicus within a year and half was deprived of the
Empire by the same Soldiers that set him up; who put out his Eyes, and left
him to die in Prison as a Tyrant. These instances (for I remember that I am
writing a Character of Mr. Baxter, and not of the ancient Heretics) may
suffice to acquaint the Reader of the ingenuity of this Man, who rails
intolerably against others as corrupters of History, when it appears he had no
other design in this Collection, but to serve his Hypothesis, and implacable
malice against the Bishops, and inrage the People to set the Nation in a Flame.
It is but a small matter for Mr. Baxter to support himself in Church History:
He can bid open defiance to the Laws of the Land, which he calls tearing
Engines, and Enemies to God's public Worship, and ought to be disobeyed,
because it is written, Whether it be better to obey God or Man, judge ye.

He begins with a modest complaint, p. 101. of first Plea; It is not the sense
of the Liturgy (in that they seem satisfied) but a Statute of Parliament which
we doubt of: it seems insufficient, if not impertinent, to tell us what is
taken for the sense of the Church; for the doubt is, what is the sense of the
Parliament, which we cannot otherwise know, but by their plain words, till they
will otherwise declare their meaning: (i.e.) They must declare a meaning
contrary to their plain words. But Mr. Baxter speaks plain enough, Plea the
first, That the Laws required of them such Subscriptions, Covenants,
Declarations and Practices, as they durst not do, because they feared God. A
strange Parliament, to make so many Laws as a Man that fears God cannot obey!
If Mr. Baxter had any Fear or Reverence of Men, he would not thus Reproach the
Governors, and Defame their Laws, and all the while cry out of Persecution.
But what are those impious Laws? This you find in another Book called, A search
for the English Schismatic; where he states the Case between the Diocesan
Canoneers, and the present mere Nonconformists; and though he determine not (as
he says) which of them is the Schismatic, yet he makes the Book to be a pair
of Spectacles for the Purblind to discern it, p. 43. This is just as he dealt
by his first Plea, where he tells us he will not urge the Case, but mention
Matters of Fact only: Yet in his Book of Concord, he says, To answer the
earnest demand of our Reasons (against Conformity) by you the Lord Bishop of
Ely, I have published an Historical Narration, etc. How did this answer the
Bishop's earnest demand of Reasons, if it did not contain them, when Mr. Baxter
says that was the end of publishing that Book? Any one that uses Mr. Baxter's
Spectacles may see they were his Reasons, though he might well be ashamed to
call them so. But as for those Spectacles that will so plainly discover the
English Schismatics, a very skilful Artist has turned into a Looking-glass,
which if Mr. Baxter be not afraid to make use of, he may thereby see him whom
he pretends to search for: it is called, A Discourse about Church Unity, in
defense of the Bishop of Worcester. The Laws opposed, are such as were made on
mature deliberation, to secure our Peace: The Act for Uniformity and Renouncing
the Covenant: The Declaration, that it is not lawful on any pretense
whatsoever, etc. The Book last mentioned, shows his Malice to the Parliament,
in making false and odious Representations of them to the People, p. 457. It is
scarce worth the notice, that he says the Parliament was drawn in by the
Convocation to make those Acts: P. 13. of his Search.
this is but Scandalum Magnatum. He comes near to Blasphemy, p. 107. of his
third Defense, where he pleads for excusing the ignorant People, who, when
Divisions fall out between King and Parliament, do doubt which it is that
should be obeyed: (He adds) Christ was drawn by Hypocrites to pay Tribute to
Caesar, rather than offend; as if our Savior did what he never intended, or
really approved, to comply with Hypocrites. And who can wonder if he that
speaks thus of the Master, should not stick to revile his Disciples, making the
Conformists so many deliberately perjured Persons; and, which is in his own
Language Mendacium magnum, That about Six thousand Persons that had gone the
other way, did declare their assent and consent to a Book which they never saw,
p. 69. of his second Defense, Mr. Baxter complains, Preface to Diocesan Bishops.
That at such time as he was turned out of all, he was never in so good a
condition as to keep a Manservant (except when he traveled) nor a
Maidservant, except an old Woman to provide him Necessaries; and lived in some
upper Rooms of another Man's House: and yet (he says) he built a Tabernacle in
St. Martins to preach in himself, p. 55. of his second and lost One thousand
pounds in the Exchequer He hoped, it seems to gain a reputation among the
Factious, of being their great Centurion, who loved their Nation, and built
them a Synagogue. But it is very observable, that if at such time as Mr. Baxter
was turned out of all, he was in so low a Condition, that he got well by his
Nonconformity, being able to part with a considerable Sum to build
Tabernacles. One Intreague I find darkly delivered, p. 250. of his first Plea:
Even Bishops (says Mr. Baxter) need to be remembered, that while the Wheel is
turning, the upper side should not tempt Men to forget what side will be
uppermost shortly and for ever. The words are ambiguous, like the old Oracles,
and may be interpreted pro captu Lectoris, but whether he means the Revolutions
of Providence, as by the turning of the Wheel seems most proper, or the Divine
Judgment at last, it savours of equal Pride, Malice, and Uncharitableness. In
Mr. Corbet's Funeral Sermon, p. 33. preached by Mr. Baxter, he speaks more
plain: It seems (says he) there is some great evil to come, when God takes
away the best: yea, if it should be a forerunner of a better state, yet all
save two of the old stock that dishonored God perished: And it was by bloody
Wars that Joshua and the new GENERATION were to possess the Land of Promise.
But the Oracle is expounded by other Cabalistical Rabbis, who tell us boldly,
the time of the Episcopal Persecution is but short: And on that confidence
invite those whom Mr. Baxter calls the passive Conformists, to come over to
them, promising them a kinder entertainment than they have had from their
Brethren of the Conformity: Spes est fore ut Fanatici quos vocant, utamur illis
aequioribus, says the Celeusma, p. 34. There is now good hope that we whom
they call Fanatics, may show them more favor. Now whether these Men be not
engaged in some Plot for the extirpation of the Ecclesiastical Government by
Law established, to which end they so importunately plead for the Obligation of
the Covenant, let the Reader judge. Time may discover what an ingenious Man
hints in his Defense of the Bishop of Worcester, p. 68. I will tell Mr. Baxter
a Secret which I have heard, but hope he will not put me to prove it, That the
Parliament made good Laws, the Papists out of a pretended reverence to tender
Consciences, hindered the Execution of them, and some leading Fanatics had
private Encouragement (to say no more) to set up a mighty cry of Persecution,
to cast all the odium on a persecuting Church and Diocesan Canoneers. Dr. Owen
noses this hint: Some have reported (says he) that some of the Non-conformists
at least do receive, or have received Money from the Papists to act their
Affairs, and promote their interest; which he (very angrily) calls, a putrid
Calumny, a malicious Falsehood, a frontless Lie: and for himself, he avows, that
never any Person in Authority, Dignity, or Power in the Nation, or any that had
any relation to Public Affairs, nor from them, Papist or Protestant, did once
speak one word to him, or advise with him about any Indulgence or Toleration to
be granted to the Papists. He says not that he never received any Money to
promote a general Toleration, which he (thinking himself particularly reflected
on) might have done in few words. And my Author desires Dr. O. to resolve him,
Why a Fast was appointed by a certain Independent Pastor at that time on the
fifth of November, which (as he notes) is no Popish Festival. It Is a miserable
shift which the Doctor uses, speaking at large of the plain, open,
uncontrollable Evidence which the Non-conformists always gave, and continue to
give, of their faithful cordial adherence to the Protestant Religion and
Interest in the Nation; whereas ever since Forty one, they have notoriously
scandalized, and as much as in them lay, ruined the Protestant Religion and
National Interest.

His dealing with Mr. Cheney is most unchristian; for in the Preface of his
third Defense, he judges him a godly serious Man; yet, says he, his Book is
so dismal a piece in its extraordinary privation of common Reason, Truth,
Charity, Tenderness, and Modesty, that I am constrained to think that honest
Man is diseasedly Melancholy: and reports, that his Book is (...) away as a
fardle of dotage and shameless lies, p. 2. of Second Part. Yet if a sober
Reader be admitted to judge, this melancholy Man has so provoked Mr. Baxter's
choler, that he seems quite to have lost his Reason, and betakes himself to
Railing. One Argument Mr. Cheney may well boast of, which Mr. Baxter calls his
Catholicon, concerning a confident Tenet of Mr. Baxter, That the Acts for
Uniformity and Prefaces are parts of the Book of Common Prayer, to which we are
to declare our Assent, etc. Now it is said in a Preface concerning the Service
of the Church, That forasmuch as nothing can be so plainly set forth, but
doubts may arise in the use and practice of the same; to appease all such
diversity, if any arise, and for the resolution of all doubts concerning the
manner how to understand, do, and execute the things contained in this Book,
the parties that so doubt, or diversely take any thing, (as do now the
Conformists and Non-conformists; for Mr. Baxter says, they could do and declare
as the Conformists do, if they could get the sense of the Acts, etc. to be
expounded so as the Conformists understand them) (N.B.) shall always resort to
the Bishop of the Diocese, who by his discretion shall take order for the
quieting and appeasing of the same; so that the same Order be not contrary to
any thing contained in this Book: And if the Bishop of the Diocese be in doubt,
then he may send for the Resolution of the Archbishop. Mr. Baxter answers, That
the words make not the Bishops Expositors of the Law or Book, as Judge, but as
a Teacher only. Mr. Cheney replies, Any intelligent Man may help the ignorant
to understand the things in the Book; but the Bishops are made decisive Judges,
to order in what manner to understand, do, and execute all (doubtful) things in
the Book, p. 212. And p. 213. he tells Mr. Baxter, The late Covenanters had not
such Security for their Consciences, in taking that Oath in a sense varying
from the precise Letter, as the Conformists have for their Subscriptions, etc.
And thus the melancholy Man beat the Conjurer out of his Circle, and in his
third Defense he takes no notice of it.

As for Mr. Hooker, how contemptibly does he speak of him, p. 74. saying, That
a long tedious Discourse in him has as much substance as one might put into a
Syllogism of six Lines. And in his Preface to the Answer of the Bishop of
Worcester, I am, says Mr. Baxter, past doubt, that Richard Hooker, Bp. Hall,
Bp. Usher, were they now alive, would be Non-conformists.

In the year 1681. comes forth Mr. Baxter's Apology for the Nonconformist
Ministers, in justification of their preaching against Law. This he directs to
the Right Reverend Bishops of London, Lincoln, Hereford, Carlisle, St. David's,
and Peterborough, and others of their moderation, in some hope, though evil Men
and Deceivers wax worse and worse. What his hope is, he tells them, If the
ancient Christians might present their Apology in hope to Heathen Emperors,
may I not so much more to Christian Bishops? You are more sensible than we,
with what deep sense Men will shortly hear, Inasmuch as you did it to one of
the least of these my Brethren, you did it unto me. See his Charity to those
whom he calls our best Bishops! But in p. 233. he thus concludes: And now we
humbly lay these Petitions at your feet, and beseech you for the souls of many
hundred thousands, that you who call your selves their Pastors, and the Fathers
of the Church, will not deny them the bread of Life. We beseech you to come out
of your Palaces a while, and be familiar with the People, and confer with all
the Poor of the Parish, and dwell in some Country Village as we have done, (who
choose the greatest Cities and Towns) that you may not see many hundred
thousands damned by your means, and you have nothing to say when it is to late,
but a non putaram: That the Instances of the Obduration of Pharaoh and the
Pharisees, make you not afraid, lest wrath come upon you to the utmost, while
you please not God, and are contrary to all Men, forbidding Christ's Laborers
to preach to the Ignorant and Impenitent, that they may be saved, 1 Thessalonians.
2.15. And O that God would make them sensible how many thousand Persons
damnation is like to be charged upon them for what they have already done, for
seventeen years hindering so many faithful Ministers! I must profess, if it were
the last word that I should speak in the world, that I had rather be the basest
Scavenger, yea, and suffer many deaths, than be found at the Judgment Seat of
Christ in the place and guilt of those of you who have done what is done
against the Gospel and Church of Christ in this Land. Does not the Reader blush
for Mr. Baxter, to read such arrogant Censures from a dying Man concerning his
betters? and all this too causelessly, as I shall prove out of his own words. He
asks the Question, p. 236. Why I write all this to you, and not to his Majesty
and the Parliament? I answer, It is not them, nor any of their Laws or Actions,
which in all this Book I intend to speak against. (Mend. Mag.) For though he
had indeed done it sufficiently in other, yet this Book was penned on purpose
to justify the preaching of Nonconformists, though forbidden by Law. P. 102.
He raises the Objection of preaching in Cities, etc. against Laws. And Answ.
Did not the ancient Christians also disobey a lawful ^er when forbidden? etc.
As if Christian Magistrates were to be reputed as the Heathen Persecutors. But
to omit this, p. 104. he says (N.B.) No Bishops have silenced us by Spiritual
Government that we know of, but only as Barons by the Secular Laws, to which
they gave their Votes, (and he acknowledges) all did not. And if any shall
read the Preambles to those Acts, he may plainly see, the cause of making them
was not only the late dreadful Experience which the Nation had of the
Confusions caused by the preaching of such Men, but their present endeavors to
reduce us to the like again; which (all those Acts notwithstanding) they are
still laboring for. This is evident, that Mr. Baxter, though he were Ordained
by a Bishop, and subscribed, (though as he confesses, he had not read the Book
of Ordination, nor exactly weighed what he subscribed to, p. 59. for it seems,
he was a passive Conformist, and one that came into the Church to find a better
opportunity to pull it down;) he did partake with Mr. Pryn in an Antipathy
against Lordly Prelacy, and glories in being styled the Antisignanus
Presbyterorum, p. 11. And p. 6. he tells us of one Fenne, a famous Country
Nonconformist, who with a loud voice would say Amen to all the Prayers in the
Liturgy, except that for Bishops; to which his silence was accounted a dissent.
Doubtless Mr. Baxter is of the same mind; he cannot pray for them, lest it
should seem a compliance with Church Tyranny, and a frame of Government
destructive of the Churches Ministry, p. 241. and with such Persons as
professing themselves Fathers of the Church, are grand Enemies of Christ and
Souls, and the Captains in the Army of the Devil, p. 243. I have heard a late
Report of a Rebel in Scotland, who being under Condemnation, was put in mind of
begging Pardon, and to say, God bless the King: but his Answer was, He would
not purchase his life at so dear a rate. Let the Reader judge how near Mr.
Baxter approaches that temper, who will not, and cannot indeed pray for the
Bishops as such, but rather suffer many deaths, than be in their case, etc. How
amazing a passage is that, p. 135. When you are in the dust, the world will not
be afraid of you, but freely tread upon you, Hic Jacet, (Mr. Love did as bad by
Archbishop Land while he was alive) and cast up your bones to make room for
others, and talk of you and your acts as freely as of King Henry the Eighth,
Queen Mary, Bishop Bonner and Gardner, are now talked of. As if our Bishops
were the Successors of those, and not of Cranmer, Latimer, Ridly, Hooper, and
other Martyrs of that Age, who died for the Defense of that Reformation, which
our Bishops still defend against both Papists and Fanatics. But Etiam post
mortem invidia: How sollicitous is dying Mr. Baxter to bequeath a double
portion of his Anti-Prelatical Spirit to the People; who by prophesying what
they will be, tells them what he would have them to be; (i.e.) Perpetual and
implacable Enemies to the Bishops, p. 187. And in his Prognostic, to which he
refers, how often does he croak over his Cant of Perjury, a sin meet for none
but utterly debauched Consciences, and such as threatens dreadful ruin. Such
principles and practices would make us guilty of the perjury and impenitence of
many hundred thousand persons, p. 154. And p. 219. Aggravated perjury,
deliberate lying, rebellious profession of disobedience to God, owning great
and public sins, corrupting holy Worship, etc. P. 221. The sins which we fear
( viz. in Conformity) be of the greatest sort that Hell suggesteth, perjury,
and owning the perjury of thousands, and doing that which is equivalent to the
preaching of impenitency, and saying, Repent not, for I declare it is no sin,
and lying deliberately, and making a public Ministerial profession of
Usurpation and Church Corruptions, and of our resolution never to obey God in
doing any duty of ours in order to a Reformation, etc. Will any Man believe
that Mr. Baxter is so grievously persecuted, who hears him thus affronting the
Laws, and reviling and provoking Authority? P. 200. It may be your great
Patrons may die, or fall, or forsake you; and then your hearts are broken. It
may be death (he seems to speak of a violent death, as p. 204. One Felton may
end the great Duke of Buckingham, p. 205. Or they may meet with such
Executioners as Cardinal Beton) may enter into your Families, and make you
think what blood-thirstiness does tend to. And you must consider also, that if
blood or destruction be the means you trust to, you must set up a Shambles or
Trade of Butchery, and make it the profession of all your lives, etc. which I
abhor to relate what he there talks at large. And p. 226, 227. The world
already thinks that the Clergy are so covetous, proud, and envious, that like
the great Dog that has got the Carrion, snarls at every little Dog that
looks at them, suspecting they come to take some from him: it is the common
opinion, that the Clergy are the Incendiaries.

Troublers of the World; and that the worst Princes left to themselves, are not
half so cruel against the faithful preachers and practisers of Christianity, as
if they persecuted it (eo nomine) as the proud and covetous Clergy are. Now
that it has been Mr. Baxter's work to effect this temper in the People, he
gives us this instance, besides what I might mention in London and
Kedderminster, p. 90. I love to instance where I dwell, and see because of
certainty. This Market Town of Barnet ten miles from London, was so extremely
addicted to your way, so impatient of the Directory and Ministry now cast out,
that one who was their Minister in times of Usurpation told me, he was fain to
leave them, and professed he was really afraid lest they would have put him
into the Grave, and buried him alive, for burying a Corpse (without Common
Prayer) according to the Directory: And now the Case is so much altered, that
though the Town consists so much of Inns and Alehouses, a private meeting near
the Church is so much crowded as the Churches were, and the Church is almost
empty. Egregias vero lauds, and spolia ampla! the Inns and Alehouses are
become Conventicles, by Mr. Baxter's Reformation, and the Church forsaken.

From p. 197, to 210. you have a continued cry of the bloodiness of Bishops,
comparing them to Foxes, Wolves, and Kites, that live on flesh, and devour
those that are better than themselves, p. 201. Yet, contrary to all this
clamor, he says, p. 104. No Bishops have silenced as by spiritual Government,
(i.e. as Bishops) but only as Barons by the Secular Laws to which they gave
their Votes, which yet all did not. Yea Mr. Baxter acknowledges their favor
to himself in particular: For my part, (says he, ibidem) I have one or two of
their Licenses never recalled nor nulled. Are these Men such horrible
Persecutors, who did no more than the whole Nation in Parliament have done for
Peace sake? yet all their Silencing and Sufferings are charged most invidiously
on the Bishops, as if it were done by their sole Authority: for one reason why
they cannot give over Preaching is, p. 241. n. 11. It will be an encouraging
compliance with Church-tyranny, to give over preaching as often as Bishops forbid
us, because we will not take their Oaths, and be stigmatized with their PER.
The Bishops as Bishops require no more now, than what was required when Mr.
Baxter and others subscribed at their Ordination; and they are most likely to
bear the PER, who act contrary, not they who act conformably to their
Subscription. The great cry of Perjury is raised in favor of the Covenant: Yet
Mr. Baxter, p. 112. of his Apology, says, I never heard abjuring (the Covenant)
was required of the Ministers: they are only to subscribe, That there is no
obligation on them or any other Person to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government in the Church. And can this be thought a sufficient reason for Mr.
Baxter a Man of 74 years old to cry out as a Child that has fancied a Bugbear,
till he puts himself into dangerous fits, and afrights all the Neighborhood?

So bold and bloody are his accusations against the Bishops and Clergy
especially, for Persecution and Perjury, that if a Stranger should read them,
he might think them mere Cannibals that lived on Humane flesh, or incarnate
fiends that delighted in Sacrifices of Blood; though Mr. Baxter all the while
knows them to be very innocent and tame persons. For though he represent them
as Lions greedy of prey, yet dares he pluck them by the Beards, and disgorge
his filth in their mouths; and after all imaginable provocations, trusts
himself between their Teeth and Claws, as he is pleased to phrase it. So great
a Master of Discipline is Mr. Baxter. But though he deal thus with the Bishops,
yet he should not make so bold with the King and Parliament, and their Tearing
Engines of the Laws, as to write whole Volumes in defiance of them.

When the two Cromwels were on the Throne, he taught a Doctrine quite contrary
to his Apology for their practice then under King Charles. Then he taught us,
That God never instituted Churches to be kept up in disobedience to those
Christian Magistrates which he commands us to obey upon pain of Damnation. p.
352. of his H. Commonwealth. And Thesis 319. That Disobedience to our Rulers,
is in Ministers double treason and wickedness. And 240 Thesis, That it is
necessary to the Churches peace, that no private Congregations may be gathered,
or Antichurches erected, without approbation or toleration from the
Magistrates: And that if private Assemblies be permitted unlimitedly, then, 1.
It will be impossible to restrain Heresy, Infidelity, or Impiety: Yea, 2. They
may meet to plot against the Magistrate. And no Assemblies whatsoever (he means
besides those of the Parish Church) are to be allowed by the Magistrate. And
These. 263. If Magistrates forbid Ministers to preach or exercise the rest of
their Office in their Dominions, they are to be obeyed; as he instances in
David and Solomon taking down and setting up Priests, and ordering Officers in
the House of God. Were the two Cromwels such as David and Solomon, to be
entrusted with the House of God? and is King Charles like Jeroboam, whose
interest it was to suppress the true Worship of God, and permit Calves to be
set up at Dan and Bethel? I would fain see Mr. Baxter's Reasons for the
Uniformity of the Churches then, more than now; and wherein Oliver and Richard
did more Piously, Faithfully, and Prudently exercise the Government, than King
Charles. I know it will grate on Mr. Baxter's spirit to have his Theses so
often urged, seeing he has desired the whole Book might be taken as non
Scriptus; and that he retracts some things (though he adds) not all, nor tells
us any particulars. But, Quid verba audiam, quum fact a videam? To what purpose
serves a Protestation against plain matter of Fact, and daily practice whereby
Mr. Baxter still vindicates many ill things delivered in that Book? which he
does expressly also in the close of his Preface to the Second Plea, where he
affirms, That in all the times of Usurpation he said and wrote, that the Kings
Person is inviolable, and to be judged by none, either Peer or Parliament; and
that neither the King may destroy nor hurt the Kingdom, nor the Kingdom the
King. And then adds, That the very Book accused ( viz. The H. Commonwealth)
goes on such principles, and has not a word meet to tempt a man in his wits
to this accusation. The contrary to which has been often rehearsed, to Mr.
Baxter's great regret. And his Brother Dr. Owen rightly tells him, That they
who will take liberty to speak what they please, must be content to hear
sometime what will displease. And I would desire him to reconcile the former
Theses of the Obedience of Ministers under Cromwell, to his late Doctrine of
resolved Disobedience to our present Governors. For p. 226. of his First Plea,
he teaches, That Pastors preached against the will of Princes for Three
hundred years. And p. 26. That God wrought Miracles to justify such Preachers
when forbidden by Christian Princes, who spoke freely after their Tongues were
cut out; That there is a woe unto them if they preach not, and many woes to them
that shall forbid them; which is the subject of his Apology.

Can Mr. Baxter wonder that no Man Answers these Books of his, when the smoke,
and flame, and stink of them is so horribly mischievous and inaccessible, as if
it came forth from the Bottomless-pit? And this is the work of his
Fellow Laborers, of whom he says, p. 163. There is not this day on Earth a
more conscionable, godly, faithful Party of the Ministers of the Gospel, than
those that are now ejected, silenced, Nonconformists in England: And his
Testimony (he speaks it of himself) shall be believed when the Defamers and
Calumniators shall not.

These Books and some other, (of which hereafter) he covers over with much
combustible matter, prepared many years past, against such false and bloody
Plotters ( i.e. the Bishops) as would persuade the King and People that the
Nonconformists are Presbyterians and Fanatics: That it was such Presbyterians
that killed his Father; and that their principles are rebellious, and that they
are plotting a Rebellion and his death; and lastly, that this is the Genius of
the Parliament. I hope whatever Mr. Baxter may do, no other Man's Conscience
does accuse him of such horrid crimes. All this we have in the Title Page of
his Second Plea for Peace: But as the Learned Doctor observed of the First
Plea, it looks as if he had designed these Books on purpose to represent the
Clergy of our Church as a company of notorious lying and perjured Villains.
These and diverse other Firebrarnds he fixes in the top of the Fabric, as if
that could not be purged but with Fire, pretending it was guilty of many
heinous Sins in the Constitution of it: And when that Reverend Doctor
endeavored to quench those Junipercoals which had well-nigh set all in a flame,
he flies in his face, charging him with pleading for Presumption, Profanation,
Usurpation, Incharitableness, and Schism, p. 73. of his Answer to the Dr's
Sermon. Again, when the Dr. said, that preaching in opposition to the Laws
established, is contrary to the Doctrine of all the Nonconformists of former
times; Mr. Baxter replies, p. 21. This Assertion is so rash and false in
matters of notorious fact, that it weakeneth his reverence of the Doctors
judgment in matters of Right, p. 8. So that the Doctor might well say, that he
wrote that Book in a continued fit of Anger. And how could it be otherwise,
seeing that, as Bishop Burnet relates of the Earl of Rochester, when God gave
him a sight of his sins, that he confessed he had been drunk five years
together: So Mr. Baxter had been distempered with an habit of wrath and rage
against the Government of the Church ever since he was Nineteen years old; how
could he choose but write with the spirit of Gall and bitternest against such an
Adversary as would dissect him alive, and discover all the Distempers of that
dying Man? And what could Mr. Baxter do less than call the Doctor's Sermon a
Schismatical Sermon, that would so divide Mr. Baxter that makes Union
impossible in any Church but what he himself shall give being and union to? And
yet this Man of Wrath is angry with himself, that he was not more angry with
the Doctor: For p. 12. of Second Defense, I profess (says he) I felt so little
passion in writing that Book, that I think verily I sinned all the while for
want of a livelier sense of the sin and hurt which I was detecting by my
Confutation. And in his Title Page, dividing the Doctor's Book into
Accusations, Reasonings, and History, he pronounces them all untrue; i.e. (in
plain English) You lie, Sir, in all that you have written. Perhaps Mr. Baxter
may not account this Passion, but Zeal; And his admirers say, he is a Stranger
to Spite and Anger; but he has a very quick and earnest temper of mind, and
his style is very keen and pungent. Yea, and they think it lawful for him too,
to make the Scripture serve his passion, and rail in holy Language; for
doubtless his Disciples think that in the Title Page, 1 Timothy 6.5,6. well
applied to the Doctor, Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw
thy self; which in plain English is, that the Doctor is one of those Men, and
you are bound to have no communion with him: For Mr. Baxter (though under
another name) represents the Doctor to be a most unskilful, proud, partial,
obstinate, cruel impertinent Adversary. Yet Mr. Silvester in his Preface,
speaking of the Author (i.e.) Mr. Baxter says, I have heard him great and
copious in commendation of several Prelates and Conformists, and that he
particularly mentioned the Reverend Bishops of Worcester and Eli, (i.e.) Bishop
Stillingfleet, and Bishop Patrick as Persons greatly admired, and highly valued
by him, and of their readiness to serve the Public interest both Civil and
Religious, he doubted not, it was therefore his bitter Zeal that transported
him to write such scandalous invectives contrary to his Knowledge and
Conscience. But as Mr. H. says, in defense of Mr. Baxter, Some Men have humors
and ways of their own. And this, it seems, is the proper humor of that Party;
They think with Jonah, they do well to be angry, that God has spared us so
long; and because he suffered their Gourd to spring up and cover their heads
for a time, whereof they were exceeding glad, now that he has suffered a Worm
to strike it, and make it wither, and the Wind and the Sun beats on their
heads, they are desperately angry for their Gourd, and justify their anger
even against God; they do well to be angry even unto death, Jonah 4.9.

His Treatise of Episcopacy, he says in the Title Page, was meditated 1640.
when the etc. Oath was imposed; written 1671. and published 1680. by the call
of Mr. H.D. and the importunity of our Superiors, who demanded the reason of
our Nonconformity: The design was, the concord of all the Protestants who can
never unite in the present impositions, and for necessary reformation of
Parish-Churches, and those abuses which else will keep up in all Ages a
succession of Nonconformists; and to give an account why we dare not covenant
by Oath or Subscription to endeavor the (amending) alteration of the
Church Government, etc. ( i.e. in plain English) against an Act of Parliament.
P. 140. of his Second Part, we have this pathetical Exclamation: Alas Lord, How
long shall Christ's enemies (the Bishops) be Pastors of his Flocks? and the seed
of the Serpent be the great Instrument that must break the Serpents head; and
the lovers of sin be they that must be the suppressers of it; and those
employed to teach in Knowledge, who themselves will not know; and to preach up
Holiness, that will not endure it? And p. 124. The truth is, that is an
excellent person to us, who is an odious and contemptible person to the
Prelates. If he will make the People believe that Presbyterians are Rebels, and
Disciplinarians are seditious brainsick fellows, living in Hypocrisy: And
that praying without Book, and much preaching, is Fanaticism; and that none are
worthy to Preach the Gospel who will not swear to be true to the Prelatical
interest: That Drunkenness in a conformable Man is a tolerable infirmity; and
that their ignorantest Nonsense is fitter to save Souls and edify the Church,
than the Labors of the Holy and Learned Non-conformists: That Calvin was a
Rogue (as Salmasius said of the Learned Dr. Hammond:) That Cartwright and
Amesius were discontented factious Schismatics, unworthy to preach or be
endured; this is a Son of the Church, and an excellent Person. P. 213. of the
second Part, Confect. 3. He says, That to Swear, Subscribe, etc. That though
Millions should swear to endeavor a Reformation of Episcopacy in their Places
and Callings by lawful means (which is his addition, there is no obligation
lies on any one of them so to endeavor it) the Lord have mercy on that Land,
City, or Soul that is guilty of it. And Consect. 4. All carnal Interest, and
all carnal Reason, is on the Diocesans side; and all the lusts of the heart of
Man, and consequently all that the Devil can do; and therefore while carnal
Christians make a Religion of their Lusts and Interests, and Pride, and
Covetousness, and Idleness are more predominant than the fear of God and the
love of Souls, no wonder if the Diocesans Cause prevail with such. Consect. 7.
Take but from such Prelates the Plumes it has stolen from Magistrates and
Presbyters, and it will be a naked thing and simple name. He says in the
Preface, The Sufferers will call the Prelates Persecutors, Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, who are known by their fruits, their teeth and claws. P. 163. part 1.
It is the Prelacy that makes almost all the Sects that be in England this day;
(whereas those little Foxes were not heard of until the Wild-boars had broken
down the Fences of Episcopacy) and when they see what Ministers, and how many
hundred of them are silenced, and what Fellows are set up in their stead, they
think they can never ^y far enough from such Prelates: and we that dwell among
them do take them that dislike their course and ways, to be generally the most
religious and sober People in the Land, (but I think Mr. Baxter spoke in jest,
when he adds) excepting always the King and Parliament. And p. 167, 168. That
before the Prelates had again ruled seven years, there were seven and seven
against them, for one that was so before: Which is a notorious falsehood, there
being a general Conformity until a Toleration was granted. And p. 161. he
proclaims thus: I am one of the eighteen hundred that have been silenced by
better Authority than the Prelates alone; yet I think I am bound in Conscience
to exercise the Ministry which I received, whatever I suffer: and if the Sword
straightened me no more than my Conscience of the Bishops prohibition, I should be
very little hindered; for that (says he) is vanished into Air, p. 163. And so
it seems is the power of the Sword too with him: for that he means by better
Authority, the Laws established by King and Parliament. And yet this Man had
taught other Doctrine: for p. 30. of his first Plea, Princes and Rulers may
forbid all that preach Rebellion and Sedition, and punish them if they do it;
and may hinder the incorrigible, whose preaching will do more hurt than good,
from exercising the Ministry in their Dominions. P. 32. They should see that
their Kingdoms be well provided of public Preachers and Catechists, and may be
due means compel the ignorant to hear and learn what Christianity is. Sect. 36.
They may, when a Peoples ignorance, faction, or wilfulness make them refuse all
that are truly fit for them, urge them to accept the best, and may possess such
of the public Temples and Maintenance, and make it the Peoples duty to
consent, as is aforesaid. (No great need then of the Peoples consent, which Mr.
Baxter so much contends for.) Sect. 37. They ought to hinder Preachers from
uncharitable and unrighteous railing at each other, and unpeaceable
controversies and contentions. And p. 35. sect. 40. They may make their own
Officers circa Sacra to execute their Magistratical Power; and if they
authorize any particular Bishops or Pastors to exercise any such power as
belongs to the Prince to give, not contrary to Christ's Laws, etc. we judge
that the Subjects should obey all such even for Conscience sake. P. 117. We
deny not (says he) but if the generality of the Ministry obtain their liberty
by some small tolerable sin or error, and the sounder part be few and
unnecessary in that Country, prudence obliges them to go to some other place
that needs them, and never to exercise their Ministry where in true Reason it
is like to do more hurt than good. And of this he makes the Magistrate Judge,
p. 265. of his Way of Concord. Yet p. 244. of his Plea, he says, That though
the execution of the Laws have cost some excellent Men their lives already, we
may know, that no execution short of death or utter disablement, will make the
most conscionable forsake their duty. And p. 249. Why we should not speak
openly rather than in secret; and what but a Spirit of Envy or Carnal Interest,
cross to the interest of Christ, should grudge at such preaching, we cannot
tell. Nor can any one reconcile these Contradictions.

One thing I shall observe from his Church-Historian, mentioned in the Preface,
That when Philip Nerius set up his Oratorian Exercises at Rome, it was found
necessary (to win the people) to use large, affectionate, extemporate Prayers,
Expositions, and Sermons. Yet when the Bishop of Worcester says, This practice
was brought into England by the Jesuits, to bring the Liturgy into Contempt, in
the Preface to his History of Separation; Mr. Baxter replies, p. 12. That this
is a sad saying, and that there is no probability that the Jesuits should be
the first setters up of this way in England, (though the Bishop gave two
instances of it in Matter of Fact.) And says in the Preface to his second
Defense, That the Bishops's Book is made up of three parts: 1. Of untrue
Accusations: 2. Untrue historical Citations abundance: 3. Fallacious
Reasonings. As if there were not one true word in the whole Book: though even
this imitating of Philip Nerius in extemporary Exercises and separate Meetings,
is by Mr. Baxter himself paralleled with ours as the Original and Copy, p. 22.
of Preface to Mr. Baxter's Now or Never: The Meetings of the Oratorians and
their Exercises, are so like those now abhorred by many, etc. Then comes forth
his first and second Plea for Peace. Of the first, the Bishop of Worcester
says, It seems to be designed on purpose to represent the Clergy of our Church
as a company of notorious, lying, perjured Villains, for conforming to the Laws
of the Land, and Orders established, with no less than thirty Aggravations of
the Sin of Conformity. And Mr. Baxter in his Answer seems to justify it: And
with a great deal of vainglory, in the latter end of that Book printeth a
complemental Letter sent him from Mr. Glanvil in 1661. to show how he loves the
Applause of Men; of which, he says, he had been surfeited with Humane Applause,
p. 133. which rather than he would want, he blows a Trumpet himself in another
Book called the Only way to Concord, saying in the Preface to Bishop Morley and
Bishop Gunning, I am fully persuaded that in this Book I have told you a
righter way of Christian Concord, more divine, sure, harmless, and
comprehensive, fitted by Christ himself to the interest of all good Men, yea of
the Church and all the World. He speaks as if he had gotten an infallible
Spirit, and had not only the Presbyter, but the Pope in his belly. Whereas that
way of Concord will rather prove a means of perpetuating Discord and Divisions
in the Church. In that Book he calls the Bishops Thorns and Thistles, the
Military Instruments of the Devil, and accounts them to be mad Dogs; applying a
Welsh Proverb to them, Though thy Dog be thy own, trust him not when he is mad;
in the Premonition. He rails at the Laws in a Verse of Ovid: Id quod natura a
remittit, Invidie Jura negant.
(After the Contents.)

The Bishop of Worcester propounded several Concessions to be made for the ease
of the Dissenters, viz. The use of the Cross, the Surplice, Kneeling at the
Sacrament, etc. (in the close of his Preface;) which Mr. Baxter rejects,
saying, That the benefit would redound sibi and suis, ( i.e. to the Bishop and
his Party) not reaching our necessities, but much better than nothing, p. 21.
of his second Defense. Nothing will satisfy him, but the altering the Species
of Episcopacy, changing the Liturgy for a Directory, and repealing such Acts of
Parliament as were made to secure the Peace of the Nation against such
seditious Persons and Practices as had once destroyed it. And p. 84. of his
third Defense, part 2. Mr. Baxter threatens another destruction to it: for
comparing the Constitution of our Church to a separating Wall, or dividing
thorny Hedge, he professes, That he (An. 1660.) once made it the most earnest
action of his life, to prevent the building of this Wall or Hedge: And adds, I
will do the best I can while I live to pull it down. And I believe him: for
then he hopes he shall be set up not as a Parochial Bishop, but an Archbishop,
succeeding the Apostles in the ordinary Office of Government; or at least as an
Officer of the King. And I have heard of a Proposal, that Dr. Owen and Mr.
Baxter may be two of the first Archbishops. P. 66. of the last part of that
Book, he says, That which has been the chief cause and engine of Division,
will never become the means or terms of concord: but such are the multitude of
unnecessary, uncertain, humane Decrees, Laws, and Canons of Faith and Religion,
whatever the proud and ignorant say to the contrary. (Yet Solomon said, In the
multitude of Counselors there is safety.) P. 59. In a word (says he) Councils
of Bishops have been but Church Armies, of which at first the Patriarchs were
Generals, and afterward Popes and Emperors, who fought it out for victory. And
p. 71, 72. he condemns the Lutheran and Calvinist, the Erastians and Behemists,
as well as the Diocesan ways of Concord: And adds, What the Independants have
done toward Division and Separation, it is in vain in this Age to recite; and
many wise Men think that the Presbyterians over-violent rejecting of all
Episcopacy, setting up unordained Elders, and National Churches, as headed by
National Assemblies, are divisive and unwarrantable, as their making by the
Scotch Covenant the renouncing of the Prelacy to be the Test of National
Concord also was. What remains then? Nothing but Mr. Baxter's Model is the
Only, Only, Only way of Concord: More sure, divine appointed by Christ himself,
etc. But where any Person should find that Rule of which Mr. Baxter speaks so
confusedly himself, is the great Question; for thus he concludes that Book: 1.
Approving the best: 2. Tolerating the tolerable: 3. Sacraments free, and not
forced: 4. The intolerable restrained, the Test of Toleration being this: 5.
Whether such tolerated Worship do more good or hurt: 6. Magistrates keeping all
in peace, would heal us. But alas, Magistrates, Laws, and Power, are resisted:
Every Faction count themselves more tolerable than others, yea condemn others
as intolerable; and judge of men and things at best, by their agreeing with
their own persuasions; and so the Only way of Concord will leave us still in
Confusion. Yet Mr. Baxter fearing the Book would fall into the hands of bad
Neighbors, he sends it forth with the highest Commendations. In the Preface to
his second Defense, I value it (says he) above all the rest, being assured
that the Churches will never otherwise be healed, than by that impartial, sure,
and easy Catholic way, which some have reviled, but none since that I know of
confuted; nor need they: for it so confutes it self, that there needs no other
confutation but the reading of it. Here it is that he calls the Clergy Tyrants,
p. 37. Thorns and Thistles, grievous Wolves, and the Military Instruments of
the Devil. P. 123. Under the name of Bishops, they are Troublers, Persecutors,
and Destroyers. P. 47. Here he says, That to tell them as Mr. Dodwel does, that
no unlawful thing is imposed, will as much satisfy them, as if he had said
that lying, perjury, and deliberately covenanting against God's Precepts, and
for corrupting his sacred Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, are lawful things.
P. 9. of his last part, He accounts all Bishops and Pastors that have not the
consent of the People, to be Usurpers. And infers, p. 10. If the Temple or
Tithes be given to a Priest of Bishop not lawfully called or consented to by
the Flock, and another be lawfully called ( i.e. by the People) whom the
Magistrate casts out of the Temple and Tithes, it is the Peoples duty to
adhere to him that is justly called; it is not always a duty to adhere to him
whom the Magistrate imposes: the Churches met against the will of the
Magistrates above three hundred years. As if our Magistrates were Heathen
Persecutors: for Christian Magistrates (he says, p. 143.) must keep peace among
all, both approved and tolerated, and not suffer any unpeaceable Preaching or
Disputes which tend to destroy Love and Quietness, nor suffer railing Calumnies
against each other to be published or printed. Now whether Mr. Baxter's way be
the Only way of Concord, or needs any other Confutation, let the Reader judge.

And such as the Way of Concord, such are the Pleas for Peace, (i.e.) Pleas for
Schism and Division, and such Trumpets as give no uncertain sound to a War. For
he proclaims the terms for Uniformity to be to them morally impossible, and is
grieved that he must set forth an unarmed Defense. He tells the People of many
heinous sins in their Conformity, though he had formerly encouraged it, and
conformed himself as a Layman. But now Godfathers and Godmothers, the Sign
of the Cross, and kneeling at Sacrament, reading the Apocrypha, the Office of
Burial, all are offered to the People as sinful; or they are encouraged to
think them so: for Mr. Baxter thinks it is a sin in Magistrates to punish them
for their Nonconformity. But the great quarrel is against the Laws for
Subscription and Renounceing the Covenant, etc. of which he speaks dreadful
things; calls them the tearing Engines of the Law; represents the Magistrates
as Persecutors, and the Clergy as a company of notorious, lying, and perjured
Villains. And tells the Magistrates (in the Epistle, for they were the
Legislators) It is now seventeen years since near two thousand Ministers of
Christ were by Law forbidden the Exercise of their Office, unless they did
conform to Subscriptions, Covenants, Declarations, and Practices which we durst
not do, because we feared God. (As if the Magistrates had no fear of God.) The
reason of which Impositions, it is God, and not we, must have an account of
from the Convocation, etc. By which, etc. he must mean the Lawmakers. He says,
He had read the Books written for Conformity, and thinks Mr. Tombs had written
more for Anabaptistry, a late Hungarian for Polygamy, many for Drunkenness,
Stealing and Lying in case of Necessity, than they for the terms of Conformity,
as the Conformists describe them.

His second Plea is to the same tune: It was published (says he in the Title
Page) to save our lives and the Kingdoms peace from the false and bloody
Plotters, who would persuade the King and People that the Non-conformists are
Presbyterians and Fanatics: And next, that it was such Presbyterians that
killed his Father: That our Principles are rebellious, etc. and in the Preface
makes this Challenge; I desire those that seek our blood and ruin, to tell me,
if they can, what Body or Party of Men on Earth have more sound and loyal
Principles of Government and Obedience. He says indeed, p. 109. We are far from
designing any abasement of the Clergy; nor do we deny or draw others to deny
any due reverence to them; yet he calls the Bishops Popish Clergymen, Thorns
and Thistles, and the Military Instruments of the Devil; and complains of
tearing Engines, Goals, starving, and bloody persecution, ruin, and death.

The very reading of such things are to an ingenuous Person a sufficient
Confutation of his Books, which being so many, (for he tells us he has written
Eighty Books, and many of them in the Plural Number, by a consult it seems with
the Brotherhood) I am fearful to meddle farther with, lest I should provoke the
Legion (as some Learned Men already have) to rent and tear them in pieces. Such
a Character as I have begun, if it were drawn by some Person that has known
the Man and his Communication from the beginning of our Wars (for I have
discovered no more than what he was pleased to tell the World in his Writings)
would be more effectual to silence and shame him, than all the Laws of the
Land, or all the Arguments of his Learned Adversaries, how cogent soever: for
he is resolved as long as he lives to have the last word, and to answer all
that shall be said against him with downright railing Exclamations to the
People, sophistical Evasions, and rather than fail, with plain
Self-contradictions. And of late days his wont is to confute his Adversaries as
a young Scholar did Bellermine in one word, Mentiris. But if contradictio sit
oppositionum Maxima, (as Mr. Baxter grants) there is not a more common Liar
than he, who has beyond any other so frequently and flatly contradicted
himself (for of contradictory Propositions, if the one be true, the other is
false, i.e. a lie.) And this being another fit medium to confute many of his
Writings, I may, if occasion serve, make up one Volume more of Mr. Baxter's
Works, such, as though he be able to split a hair, he shall never be able to
reconcile. Sir Roger L'Estrange has given an Essay how far Richard differs
from Baxter. So did the Reflector on his Sacrilegious Desertion; and though but
in a few Particulars, yet it put him to a Nonplus, and set him a whining,
saying, I can reconcile my own words, though he cannot: And all is not
contradiction which Men that understand not words think so, p. 148. of his
third Defense. And p. 151. I never taught Mr. L'Estrange to understand my
Writings; but I can reconcile more than he can: as if they understood not the
difference between a Negative and Affirmative Proposition. So that considering
with what Contumely, instead of Argument, he has answered the Bishop of
Worcester, I think no discreet Man will trouble himself to answer his
Impertinences. The Impleader of his first and second Plea, answered all that
was considerable in those Books, and reflected on his Book of Concord and
Prognostication; who returns scarce any thing but a Mentiris, even sometimes
when the Impleader repeated Mr. Baxter's own words. The Impleader answered that
bold Challenge of Mr. Baxter in his second Plea, to show what Party of Men were
of more sound Judgment than the Non-conformists in point of Obedience, p. 72.
shows who were Presbyterians, who began the War, who killed the Royal Martyr:
on what rebellious Principles they went, and who are plotting a Rebellion: of
what dangerous consequence his immoral Prognostication is like to be. Which
things Mr. Baxter takes notice of in his third Defense, but in all haste seeks
to evade them, and complains p. 146. of his third Defense, that the Impleader
rakes up the actions of the evil Civil War, as if that were any thing to the
present Cause; that he heaps up abundance of untruths: that he had fully
confuted them before; and then takes up an Exclamation, O miserable World!
where the very Preachers of Holiness, Love, and Peace, go on to the Grave and
Judgment, and Eternity, fighting against Holiness, Love, and Peace. And whether
Mr. Baxter be one of that number, let the Reader Judge.

If any shall demand to what purpose I have collected all this? I should not
have presumed to give such an Answer as Mr. Baxter has prompted, p. 151. of
his third Defense, To show whether I be not a giddy, mutable,
self-contradicting Fool and Knave. I should only have inferred, that
notwithstanding all his Pretenses to Piety and Peace, he may probably have some
evil Designs against both; for the Things related are mostly Matters of Fact,
recorded by his own hand; and therefore I hope his seduced Followers will
consider to what manner of Guide they have committed the conduct of their
Souls; and what probability there is of gathering Grapes from such Thorns. And
because by the mouth of two or three Witnesses every thing is established, I
shall conclude with the Testimony of two or three credible Persons of his own
Fraternity: The first is Mr. Herle, a noted Presbyterian, who, as Mr. Bagshaw
reports, said of Mr. Baxter, That it had been happy for the Church of God if
Mr. Baxter 's Friends had never sent him to School. The second is Mr. Cawdry,
who was of the same Opinion. And he mentions a third Person, as knowing in the
Mystery of Godliness as either of them, who said, That notwithstanding the
great noise raised about Mr. Baxter, he would end in flesh and blood. But these
Testimonies are nothing to that whereby the great Judge, before whom he has so
often Summoned others, will sentence him ex ore suo.

If any think Mr. Baxter is too severely handled, let him consider it is by a
Rod of his own making, though it be smartly applied; and that though he be a
thousand times more obnoxious than the worst of those Bishops whom he so
Calumniates, yet has he spoken maliciously and falsely of them; which the
Collector has not done by him. The best is, the words of such a scandalous
Person will not be taken as a blot. And I desire my conforming Brethren not to
be troubled at the Railings or Reproaches of this Zealot; and that they would
forbear troubling him, who, as he says, has been a dying Man almost these
forty years. And though I never spoke nor thought half so ill of him, as he
has recorded of himself; yet I shall charitably hope and pray, That if he live
to see himself in this his own Glass, he will yet at last repent of those Sins
which he cannot but condemn as very heinous and dangerous in the sight of God
and Man. I shall be so charitable as to propose a method to ease him from one
great fear. Mr. Baxter seems much troubled to think that his Adversaries may
have the last word of him. Now I perceive that Mr. Hicringle by opposing the
Bishop of Worcester, has ingratiated himself with Mr. Baxter, Preface to
Second Defense.
of whom he does not come much short in confident boasting of himself. It is a
difficult matter to infuse to him the Art of Defining and Distinguishing, by
which Mr. Baxter is able to evade any Argument: But this defect may be
supplied, if Mr. Baxter bequeath him his Eighty Books, and enjoin him
especially to study his Arguments for Separation, and the heinous sins of
Conformity, which he shall find often repeated, and to apply them on all
occasions. But let him not do as in his Naked Truth, conceal the Name of his
Benefactor, but quote him totidem verbis; and so Mr. Baxter may have the last
word as long as the Faction continues. But if this fear be thus removed, I
question whether a greater will not follow (viz.) of being like Jeroboam, who
having set up Calves at Dan and Bethel in opposition to the established
Worship, is recorded to have made Israel to sin, not in his lifetime only, but
long after his death: and how dreadful the final Sentence of such a one may be,
I commend to Mr. Baxter's most serious Meditations. But if Mr. Baxter, who so
solemnly cites others to Judgment, continues to go on impenitently to that
dreadful day, I shall yet pray for him as he does for the Conformists, Lord
have mercy on him. And because I doubt not but his Friends and Disciples will
raise a Monument to perpetuate the Memory of their Master, I shall commend this
Characteristical epitaph.

Hic jacet RICHARDUS BAXTER, Anglicanan

Deo Gratias.
REFLECTIONS ON Some Material Passages.
First concerning the Marquess Antrim.

MR. Baxter had related in his Penitent Confession, N. 22. That he had read the
King's Letter in Spain to the Pope, promising to venture Crown and Life for the
Union of Christian Churches, including the Roman; and whether it be true, as
the Scots say, That the King put the Broad Seal to a Commission for the Irish
Rebellion, he determines not; but it is past doubt, that the Marquess of Antrim
had his Commission, (if Mr. Baxter means that he had a Commission) for the
Irish Rebellion in the first Insurrection; yet he himself says, That if a
Subject had seen such a Commission, he was bound not to believe that the King
was the Author of it, p. 16. of second Plea for Peace. What ground then had he
for his confidence, that Sir Philem O Neale had such a Commission as was
boasted of? But the Cheat was undeniably proved; but Antrim's Commission was
not heard of till after the end of the War; and then there appeared no Evidence
of it; nor do we find it mentioned in any History of that War. I shall
therefore set before the Reader Mr. Baxter's Relation of that pretended
Commission, and then show that his presumption could have no other ground, but
his vile Opinion that the Royal Martyr was a Papist, as he maliciously
represents him; or from the Relation of Ludlow, or some other of the Regicides
in that Scandalous Pamphlet, which is Mr. Baxter's chief Authority, called
Murder will out.

That I may clear the Prejudice of such Readers as are too ready to give Credit
to this Relation of Mr. Baxter, I desire them to take notice that this
Commission to Antrim is pretended to be granted to authorize that Insurrection
of the Irish, wherein Two hundred-thousand Protestants were massacred; which,
if it had been true, how vainly and foolishly did Sir Phelim O Neale act in
Counterfeiting another Commission, and pleading that to countenance their
Rebellion, if they had an Authentic one? Had Antrim such a Commission, and
never made it known to Sir Phelim O Neale, or to the Lord Muskerry and
Mackguire? Or if these Men had known of such a Commission, would not they, or
one of them, at least have confessed it when their Lives and Estates were
offered them upon that Condition before their Execution? And did not all three
deny that they knew of any Commission from the King, or that he was privy to
their Rising? How then is Mr. Baxter past doubt, that the Marquess of Antrim
had that King's Commission? which he aggravates as follows.

I had forgotten one Passage in the former War of great remark, which put me
into an amazement. Part 3. of Mr. Baxter's Life, p. 83.
The Duke of Ormond and Council had the Cause of the Marquess of Antrim before
them, who had been one of the Irish Rebels in the beginning of that War when
two hundred thousand Protestants were murdered.

His Estate being sequestered, he sought Restitution of it when Charles the
Second was restored. Ormond and the Council judged against him as one of the
Rebels. He brought his Cause over to the King, and affirmed that what he did
was by his Father's Consent and Authority. The King referred it to some worthy
Members of his Privy Council to examine what he had to show. Upon Examination
they reported, that they found that he had the King's Consent, or Letter of
Instructions for what he did; which amazed many. Hereupon his Majesty, Charles
the Second, wrote to the Duke of Ormond and Council, to restore his Estate,
because it appeared that what he did was by his Father's Order or Consent.

Whereupon the Parliaments old Adherents grew more confident than ever of the
righteousness of their Wars: And the very Destroyers of the King, whom the
first Parliamentarians called Rebels, did presume also to justify their Cause,
and said, That the Law of Nature did warrant them.

But it stopped not here, for the Lord Mazarine, and others of Ireland, did so
far prosecute the Cause, as that the Marquess of Antrim was forced to produce,
in the Parliament of England, in the House of Commons, a Letter of King Charles
the First's, by which he gave him Order for his taking up Arms; which being
read in the House, put them into a silence: But yet so egregious was their
Loyalty and Veneration of Majesty, that it put them not at all one step out of
the way which they had gone in. But the People without doors talked strangely:
Some said, Did you not persuade us that the King was against the Irish
Rebellion? And that the Rebels belied him, when they said they had his Warrant
or Commission? Do we not now see with what mind he would have gone himself with
an Army into Ireland to fight against them?

A great deal more, not here to be mentioned, was vended seditiously among the
People; the sum of which was intimated in a Pamphlet which was printed, called,
Murder will out; in which they published the King's Letter, and Animadversions
on it. Some that were still Loyal to the King, did wish that the King that now
is, had rather declared that his Father did only give the Marquess of Antrim
Commission to raise an Army, as to have helped him against the Scots; and that
his turning against the English Protestants in Ireland, and the murdering so
many hundred thousands there, was against his will; but quod scriptum erat,
scriptum erat. Although the old Parliamentarians expounded the Actions and
Declarations, both of the then King and Parliament, by the Commentary of this
Letter, yet so did not the Loyal Royalists; or at least thought it no reason to
make any change in their Judgments, or stop in their Proceedings against the
English Presbyterians, and other Non-conformable Protestants.

Mr. Baxter adds in the Margin, We are not meet Judges of the Reasons of our
Superiors Actions, p. 83. part 3. of Mr. Baxter's Life. By which he seems to
intimate that the Matter of Fact, how odiously and maliciously soever reported
by him, is true; but he leaves it to others to consider and judge of the
Reasons of it. He might with much more Ingenuity and Candor have practiced
himself that Advice which he gives to others in the second part of the
Non-conformists Plea for Peace, p. 16. That if Subjects saw a Commission under
the Broad Seal to seize the Guards, destroy the Kingdom, or deliver it to
Foreigners, they were bound to judge that the King was not the Author of that
Commission. Subjects should not have ill thoughts of Kings; though they be
sinful, their Faults are neither to be aggravated nor divulged. This is good
Advice, and would have utterly destroyed the pretense of Sir Phelim O Neale,
and those bloody Papists that joined with him in that execrable Massacre, for
which they pretended a Commission under the Broad Seal; whereas it appeared
that the Broad Seal then in Scotland, See Burlace's Hist. of that War, p. 29.
part 2.
had not been applied to any Commission or Patent in some months before the
date of that pretended Commission. And the Forgery plainly appeared at the
Trial of Sir Phelim O Neale, who, at his Trial, and also at his Execution,
though he was offered Pardon for Life, and Restitution of his Estate, if he
would own that he had a Commission from the King to Authorize what he had done,
he affirmed constantly, That he had no such Commission from the King, nor was
his Majesty privy to their Insurrection. This Relation is attested by Dr. Ker
Dean of Ardah, who was present at his Trial and Execution, and affirms the same
in a Letter printed Febr. 28. 1681. a Copy of which I shall give you when I
have told another part of his Confession, viz. That he having found a Patent of
the Lord Caulfield's, when he seized on Charlemount-Castle, to which the Broad
Seal was annexed, he caused a Commission to be drawn agreeable to his own
purpose, and caused that Broad Seal to be affixed to it, and so gave it out
that he had the King's Commission for what he did.

Now for the further clearing of the Royal Martyr from this foul Imputation, it
will appear that he had Intelligence from abroad, that great Companies of
Priests and Soldiers were from several Countries hastening into Ireland; and
that others from Ireland held Correspondence with diverse Soldiers of that
Nation then in Foreign Service, which gave Suspicion that there would be some
Trouble in that Nation: whereupon his Majesty, in a Letter drawn by Sir Henry
Vane, and sent to the Lords Justices in that Kingdom, charged them with great
Care and Diligence to secure themselves against what was likely to happen; a
Copy whereof is subjoyned.

DR. John Ker of Ardagh, being present in the Court in Dublin when Sir Phelim O
Neale was Tried and Examined about a Commission, which, as was said, he had
from Charles Stuart, for levying the War in Ireland, did testify that the said
Sir Phelim O Neale answered, That he never had any such Commission; and that it
being proved in Court by Joseph Travers and others, that the said Sir Phelim
had such Commission, and did show it unto the said Joseph and others in the
beginning of the Irish Rebellion; the said Sir Phelim confessed, That when he
surprised the Castle of Charlemount, that he ordered one Mr. Harrison and
another Gentleman to cut off the King's Broad Seal from a Patent of the Lord
Caulfield's which he found in Charlemount, and to affix it to a Commission
which Sir Phelim had ordered to be drawn. And the said Mr. Harrison did, in the
face of the whole Court, confess that by Sir Phelim's order he did stitch the
silk Cord or Label of that Seal, and fixed the Label and Seal to the said
Commission. And the Court urging the said Sir Phelim to declare, why he did so
deceive the People; he answered, That no Man could blame him to use all means
to promote the Cause he had so far engaged in. And upon the second day of his
Trial, some of the Judges told him, That if he could produce any material proof
that he had such a Commission from Charles Stuart, to declare and prove it
before Sentence had passed against him, that he the said Sir Phelim should be
restored his Estate and Liberty. But he answered, That he could prove no such
thing: Nevertheless they gave him time to consider of it till the next day;
upon which day, Sir Phelim being urged again by the Court, he declared again
That he never could prove any such thing; and that he could not in Conscience
calumniate the King, though he had been frequently solicited thereunto by fair
Promises and great Rewards while he was in Prison. And proceeding further in
this discourse, he was stopped before he had ended what he had to say: And the
Sentence of Death was pronounced against him.

And the said Dr. Ker further declares, That he was very near the said Sir
Phelim when he was upon the Ladder at his Execution, and that one Marshal Peak,
and another Marshal, before the said Sir Phelim was cast off, came riding
toward the place in great haste, and cried aloud, Stop a little: and having
passed the Throng of Spectators, one of them whispered with the said Sir
Phelim; and the said Sir Phelim answered in the hearing of several hundreds, of
whom I was one, I thank the Lieutenant General for his intended mercy; but I
declare before God and his holy Angels, and all you that hear me, that I never
had any Commission from the King for what I have done in Levying or Prosecution
of this War, and do heartily beg your pardon, etc. To the Testimony whereof the
said Dr. Ker did subscribe his Seal Febr. 28. Anno Dom. 1681.


Sir Henry Vane's Letter to the Lords Justices concerning some Informations of
Danger in Ireland.
Right Honorable,
HIS Majesty has commanded me to acquaint your Lordships, with an Advice given
him from abroad, and confirmed by his Ministers in Spain and elsewhere, which
in this Distempered Time and Conjuncture of Affairs deserves to be seriously
considered, and an especial Care and Watchfulness to be had therein: which is,
That of late there have passed from Spain (and the like may well have been from
other parts) an unspeakable number of Irish Churchmen for England and Ireland,
and some good old Soldiers under pretext of asking leave to raise Men for the
King of Spain; whereas it is observed, among the Irish Friars there, a Whisper
runs, as if they expected a Rebellion in Ireland, and particularly in
Connaught. Wherefore his Majesty thought sit to give your Lordships this
Notice, that in your Wisdoms you might manage the same with that dexterity and
secrecy, as to discover and prevent so pernicious a Design, if any such there
should be, and to have a watchful Eye on the Proceedings and Actions of those
who come thither from abroad, on what pretext soever. And so herewith I rest,

Your Lordships most humble Servant Henry Vane.
Whitehall, March 16. 1640.

The Original Letter was found among the Papers of Sir John Parsons, one of the
Lords Justices.

Moreover, Archbishop Usher saw a Letter of the King's own Writing to the Lords
Justices to the same purpose about the same time, as he affirmed to Bp. Hacket,
who relates the thing in the Life of Archbishop Williams, part 2. p. 19. So
that there can be no color of his Majesty's designing such an Insurrection,
against which he often repeated his Solemn Protestations, published
Declarations, and made many Overtures to the Parliament of England for the
Suppression of that Rebellion, concerning which his Meditations in the Twelfth
Chapter of his Book (...) he says enough to satisfy any but an Infidel: as
first, That the Sea of Blood which had been there barbarously and cruelly shed,
was enough to drown any Man in eternal infamy and misery, whom God should find
the malicious Author or Instigator of its effusion; and that there was nothing
that could be more abhorring to him, being so full of sin against God,
disloyalty to himself, and destructive to his Subjects.

Yet some Men, says he, took it very ill not to be believed, that what the
Irish Rebels did was by my privity at least, if not by my Commission: But these
knew too well, that it is no news for some of my Subjects to fight, not only
without my Commission, but against my Command and Person too, and yet to
pretend they fight by my Authority, and for my Safety. But as I have no Judge
but God above me, so I can have comfort to appeal to his Omniscience. Which he
does with this Imprecation in a Soliloquy immediately following, in these
words: If I have desired or delighted in the woeful day of my Kingdoms
Calamities; if I have not earnestly studied, and faithfully endeavored the
preventing and composing of these bloody Distractions; then let thy hand be
against me and my Father's house. And the Restoration of his Son in so
wonderful a manner, seems strongly to assert the Father's Innocence.

The beginning and progress of that barbarous Massacre, will appear in diverse
Authentic Papers in Mr. Nalson's Collection, part 2. p. 543. But I need
mention no more concerning the King's obstinate aversion to Popery, then what
he says in the following Letter to the Heads of the Popish Party.

A Letter by the King's Order to the Lord Muskerry, etc.
HE tells the Rebels -- Your Party it seems is not satisfied with the utmost
that his Majesty can grant in Matters of Religion, that is, the taking away the
Penal Laws against Roman Catholics in that Kingdom; and his Majesty hears that
you insist upon the Demands of Churches for the Public Exercise of your
Religion, which is the occasion that his Majesty has commanded me to write
thus frankly unto you, and to tell you, That he cannot believe it possible that
rational and prudent Men (had there been no Professions made to the contrary)
can insist upon that, which must needs be so destructive to his Majesty at the
present, and to your selves in the consequences of his Ruin. Wherefore my Lords
and Gentlemen, to disabuse you, I am commanded by his Majesty to declare unto
you, That were the condition of his Affairs much more desperate than it is, he
would never redeem them by any Concession of so much wrong, both to his Honor
and Conscience. It is for the defense of Religion principally that he has
undergone the Extremities of War here, and he will never redeem his Crown by
sacrificing it there. So that to deal clearly with you, as you may be happy
your selves, and be happy Instruments of his Majesty's Restoring, if you will
be contented with Reason, and give him that speedy assistance which you well
may; so if nothing will content you but what must wound his Honor and
Conscience, you must expect that, how low soever his Condition is, and how
detestable soever the Rebels of this Kingdom are to him, he will in that point
join with them the Scots, or any of the Protestant profession, rather than do
the least act that may hazard that Religion, in which and for which he will
live and die. Having said thus much, by his Majesty's command, I have no more
to add, but that I shall think my self very happy if this take any such effect
as may tend to the Peace of that Kingdom, and make me

Your affectionate humble Servant.
Cardiff, Aug. 1. 1845.

This Lord also, at the time of his Execution, did most solemnly, as he hoped
for Salvation, declare the Kings Innocence as to that War.

When the Reader has seriously considered the import of this Letter, I
earnestly entreat him to read the second Meditation of the (...), relating to
the Death of the Earl of Strafford, and I dare appeal to his Conscience, of
what quality soever he be, whether it were morally possible for such a Person
who so passionately, and for many years till his very death almost, daily
bewailed his constrained and unwilling assent to his death, to have a
Conscience so seared and void of all sense, as in case he had been wilfully and
designedly guilty of promoting and maintaining that barbarous War, wherein as
well the Blood of those that fought under my Lord Ormond by his undoubted
Commission, as of those that fought against him by a falsely pretended one,
might justly have been charged on him, if that pretense had been true, to have
lived about Seven years, and died without any regret of Conscience for so much
Blood-guiltiness.

Bishop Hacket's Testimony on July 24. 1654.
AT Rigate in Surry I had conference about this Defamation with that excellent
Primate of Armagh, says he, Stop their mouths with this that I shall
faithfully tell you. Sir Will. Parsons, our Chief Justice, was much entrusted
with the King's Affairs in Ireland; he deceasing, his Friends sent his Papers
to me. In his Cabinet I found a Letter written by the King, to warn him to look
well to the meetings of the Popish Irish, for he had received certain
Intelligence out of Spain, that they were upon some great Design of Blood and
Confusion, etc. I was so scrupulbus, says Bishop Hacket, to forget nothing of
this Relation, that before I stirred, I wrote down the speaker, the words, the
place, the year and day. Page 197. part 2. of Archbishop Williams 's Life.

There needs nothing more to be said of Mr. Baxter's being past doubt that
Antrim had the King's Commission for the Irish first Insurrection, than what
the King replied to that virulent Remonstrance of no farther Addresses, p. 289.
of the Kings Works, printed 1662. That if the Irish Rebellion can be justly
charged on the King, then I shall not blame any for believing all the rest of
the Allegations against him.

The Regicides in the last Charge against the King, did not impute to him any
hand in the first Insurrection in Ireland; but only his continuing Commissions
to the Prince and other Rebels, and to the Earl of Ormond, and to the Irish
Rebels and Revolters associated with him. Mr. Baxter it seems could have proved
much more, that he gave a Commission to Antrim for that War, wherein two
hundred thousand Protestants were slain.

I am not so well read in the managing of that War, as to find Antrim named,
either as Commander, Counselor, or Confederate, until the Cessation was
treated of July 19, 1643. and the first public Employment of Antrim was his
being sent with Muskerry into France to the Queen, when the Confederate Papists
were in a low Condition, to desire her and the Prince to compassionate them,
and restore them to their Protection, making many Protestations of their Duty,
and applying themselves to his Majesty's Service; but this was when the King
was in Prison; and what rhey promised for the King's Service, or what they
performed, we find not. See Burlace's Hist. p. 119.

His Majesty's Answer to the two Papers concerning Ireland, delivered by the
Parliaments Commissioners at Vxbridge, which is to be seen, p. 553. in his
Works, do abundantly justify the Cessation of Arms made with the Irish by
Ormond.

The Letter of Charles the Second, printed in the Pamphlet called Truth brought
to Light, which I suppose is the same in that other Pamphlet, called Murder
will out; says -- Our Referrees report that they have seen several Letters of
our Royal Fathers hand writing, and several Instructions to the said Marquess
concerning his treating and joining with the Irish in order to the King's
Service, by reducing them to their Obedience, and by drawing some Forces to
them for the service of Scotland; and that besides the Letters under the King's
hand, they had sufficient Evidence and Testimony of several private Messages
and Instructions from our Royal Father, and from our Royal Mother, (N.B. This
was probably in 1648. when the King was like to be murdered, for then we find
Antrim and Muskerry were with the Queen and Prince in France) with the privity
and direction of the King our Father. So that this was done to reduce the
Papists to Obedience, and to draw some Forces for his Service, he being then in
Extremity. Supposing then that all this were true, of which I doubt, because
Antrim still adhered to the Pope's Nuncio, and opposed Ormond; who can justly
blame the King for employing and interfering one Rebel against another to save
his Life. To conclude, although the Protestations of Sir Phelim O Neale,
Muskerry, and Mackguire, at the time of their deaths, denying that they knew of
any Commission of the King's for raising or countenancing that Irish
Insurrection, when if they had owned it they might have saved their Lives and
Estates, and the Regicides could not mention it in their Charge at his Trial,
be a sufficient Evidence of the King's Innocence, yet his Majesty's frequent
Asseverations, solemn Imprecations, and dying Protestations, make it past
doubt, that Marquess Antrim had not a Commission from Charles the First for
raising or encouraging that bloody War, wherein Two hundred thousand
Protestants were murdered.

When I first read this Relation of Mr. Baxter's, it called to my mind that
which the present Bishop of Worcester said concerning him, That he would die
leaving his sting in the wounds of the Church; which he has verifed in the
History of his Life. And I may add, That he has poured forth the very bottom
of his Gaul to blacken the Memory of the Royal Martyr. I cannot therefore let
it pass without some Remarks upon it.

And first, I considered what Authority he had for this Report, and I found in
the Margin that he quoted only a Pamphlet called Murder will out; which was a
scurrilous Libel, written, as is believed, by the infamous Ludlow, who was one
of the King's Judges. Now to give some color to this Pamphlet, Mr. Baxter
bestows Notes of Admiration, as that it is of great remark, and put him into
Amazement, and he seems to wonder how he should forget it in his former
Relation of that War. The Substance of the Relation is, That Antrim's Estate
being sequestered when Charles the Second was restored; and that having applied
himself to Ormond, and the Council in Ireland, they judged against him as a
Rebel; so that in all probability he had no Order or Commission from Charles
the First to produce: but coming into England, he pleads to Charles the Second,
that he had his Father's Consent and Authority. For proof whereof the King
referred his Cause to some of his Privy Council, who, on Examination, found
that he had his Fathers the King's Consent. But none besides, Mr. Baxter says
the Letters were a Commission for the first rising; and probably the Plea which
Antrim then made, was grounded upon some Order which he had received from
Charles the First while confined, or from King Charles the Second whilst he was
yet but Prince of Wales: for by Burlace's Relation, p. 199. the Confederate
Catholics being distressed by their Enemies, they sent Antrim and Muskerry to
the Queen and the Prince in France, to take Compassion of their miserable
Condition: and both the Queen and Prince told them, That they would shortly
send a Person qualified to treat with them, who should have power to give them
whatever was requisite to their Security and Happiness. And they returned to
Ireland well satisfied with what was then granted them, which probably was very
large, the Prince being then wholly at his Mothers dispose; and how far the
King might remember what Orders and Concessions he had made them at that time,
or some time afterward, this was that which prevailed for the restoring of
Antrim to his Estate, and not any Order from K. Charles the First. But here it
is to be noted, that these things were transacted in the Year 1648. when the
King was a close Prisoner, and therefore no Commission could be had from him;
much less is it like that he had given Antrim a Commission in the beginning of
that War which was in 41, which was denied by Sir Phelim O Neale, and the Lords
Mackguire and Muskerry, at their several Executions, and was never pretended by
any of the leading Papists in their Declarations or Confessions. Or if they had
pretended any such Order or Commission, who could believe any reality or truth
in it, when it is most certain, that the King did commission the Noble Ormond,
as his Lord Deputy, to manage that War for his Protestant Subjects against
those bloody Rebels, which continued for several years; which, as the good King
complains in that Twelfth Chapter of the (...), were to represent him to the
World as a Cyclopick Monster, whom nothing would serve to eat and drink but the
Flesh and Blood of his own Subjects,

Mr. Baxter adds, That Antrim was forced to produce in Parliament a Letter of
King Charles the First, by which he gave him order to take up Arms. Mr. Baxter
is the first that I have heard or read to mention this particular, and by the
event it appears, that either there was never such a Letter produced, or what
he pretended to be the King's Order and Instructions, was not for raising the
first War, (for then doubtless some of that Parliament, who had engaged against
the King in the late War, would have been loud and clamorous enough, but they
were all silent, and went not a step out of their way) but a Cessation being
agreed on, some of the Popish Party being beaten, and in fear of utter ruin,
thought it more eligible to join themselves with my Lord Ormond, than become a
Prey to the Parliaments Army, who were resolved on their utter Extirpation.
This was in the Year 1648. and then, for ought I know, he might have something
to plead for himself with Charles the Second. I remember that there was a Case
brought into the House of Peers, between the Lord of Ormond and the Lord of
Anglesey, wherein the former was Accused by the latter for the Cessation of
Arms made by him, and his joining with some of the Papists, wherein the Lord of
Ormond was acquitted by his Peers. I have not the Case by me, but it will give
much light to this Affair.

All the talk without doors, which Mr. Baxter says was murmured by the People,
was probably the scandalous Suggestion of his inveterate Malice to that good
King, against whom he had been an active Enemy during that War; and would now
justify himself and others upon this late and false pretense, That the King
gave his Commission to Antrim for that Insurrection, wherein Two hundred
thousand were slain.

But that the Veracity of Mr. Baxter in relating of History may appear, I will
set before the Reader one notorious Instance which he produces, p. 199. of the
third part of his Life, in these words -- Many French Ministers sentenced to
death and banishment, came hither for refuge, and the Churchmen relieve them
not, because they are not for English Diocesans and Conformity. Where I shall
take notice of the gross falsehood of first the Matter of Fact; and secondly, of
the Reason and Occasion of it.

First, As to Matter of Fact, viz. That the Churchmen did not relieve those
French Ministers, who being Sentenced to Death and Banishment, fled hither for
refuge; this is so loud a Lie as needs no Bell to proclaim it. The Matter of
Fact is so notoriously evident to the contrary of what Mr. Baxter reports, that
almost every Churchman in England can disprove it. The Reverend Bishop of
London did most affectionately compassionate their Case, and made competent
provision for a great number of them, as tenderly as a Father could do for his
Children. He sent down some into every Diocese of the Province of Canterbury,
with earnest desire to the several Bishops to provide for them; in order
whereto, several of those distressed Ministers were fixed in beneficial
Curacies. The Register for the Bishop of Exon has Recorded the several Names
of such French Ministers as were Ordained by him to Exercise their Ministry in
the places hereafter mentioned. Mr. Johannis Jacobus Mauzino was Ordained
Presbyter to Officiate at Barnstable, March 22. 1685. Mr. Jacobus Sanxay
Ordained Presbyter, and settled in the Parish Church of St. Olaves Exon. Mr.
Johannis Calvetus and Mr. Johannis Guardian Giury were both Ordained Presbyters.
Mr. Daniel Cauniers was Ordained Presbyter, and Inducted to a competent
Benefice called East-Budly in Devon, May 25. 1686. Mr. Peter Pabouleus was
Ordained and Settled at Falmouth. Mr. Andrew Coyaldus de Sante Ordained and
Settled at Darmouth. Mr. Lodovicus Beenaudea^ Ordained and Settled at Biddiford.
Diverse others, who had been Ordained at London, were sent hither and provided
for. But how great the number was which were Settled in and about London, and
other Diocesses, is too large to be inserted here. Therefore Mr. Baxter's
Affirmation, That the Church men relieved them not, is notoriously false, and a
Scandalum Magnatum.

Secondly, Nor is the Reason which he gives for their not relieving them less
scandalous; for it was, says Mr. Baxter, because they were not for English
Diocesans nor Conformity: whereas all the Persons abovenamed, did submit to
Episcopal Ordination, and declared their Conformity; which accordingly they did
practice in their several Congregations, having the English Liturgy translated
into French for that purpose. Could Mr. Baxter have discovered so gross a
falsehood in any Writing of a Conformist, he would have branded it with all the
Notes of Infamy that his snarling Rhetoric and Malice could have invented. But
I shall make only this Reflection upon it, viz. That this Calumny is one of the
last Periods in the close of his written Life, which once more called to my
remembrance what the Bishop of Worcester said of Mr. Baxter, That he would die
leaving his sting in the wounds of the Church.

But where went the Charity of Mr. Baxter and those liberal Friends who made
him their Almoner? He tells us, That this did begin and end at home to help the
silenced Ministers and the Poor. Such Poor probably as frequented their
Conventicles; for these are every where the Objects of the Presbyterian
Charity; though none boast more that they are Men of Catholic and Universal
Charity. But it was particularly designed to increase the number of such as
followed them for their Loaves. Had any Man the opportunity to inspect the
Subscriptions of the several Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and other Dignitaries
of the Church, as also of both the Universities, toward the Relief of the
Refugees, he may find not only a bountiful Supply for the present, but
Provision made for their future Subsistence, as Brethren, and professed Members
of the same Church, with us who want not the countenance or encouragement of
the Conforming Clergy to this day.

My great Age and Infirmities (being now within one year as old as Mr. Baxter
was at the time of his death) do enforce me to omit many other Remarks of
Pride, Hypocrisy, and Contradictions, which he that runs may read in this and
other Writings of our Author, which I leave to the Observation of such as
better knew the Man and his Communication, and shall make only this one
Reflection more on his partiality in censuring the Conformists and
Non-conformists of all sorts and degrees.

And first, the Reader may see his hyperbolical Commendations of his
Nonconforming Brethren, from p. 90. to p. 99. of his Life, where he gives the
Character of such of the Eighteen hundred silenced Ministers as were his
Neighbors, not speaking by hearsay but personal acquaintance, which were
between Forty and Fifty, besides many whom he had forgotten; and about Forty
London Ministers, with Fifteen Independants; and others of several parts that
were Fellow Sufferers with himself. All which, if they deserved the Titles
which he gives them, he might have Canonized them as Saints in Heaven, on
better grounds than he has done by Brooks, Pym, and White in his Saints
Everlasting Rest.

As to the Lay-Brethren of the Separation, he gives the pre-eminence to those
of his own Flock at Kidderminster: And p. 85. part 1. he says, Some of the poor
Men did competently understand the Body of Divinity, and were able to judge in
difficult Controversies; and so able in Prayer, that few Ministers did match
them in order and fullness, in apt Expressions and holy Oratory with fervency.
And of Six hundred Communicants, which Mr. Baxter had there, he says, there
were not above Twelve of whom he had not good hopes of their Sincerity. And
this he imputes to his own Labors; For before I came thither, there was about
one Family in a Street that worshipped God, and called on his Name; but before
I came away, there was not past one Family in the side of a Street that did not
so, p. 88, 89. And he adds this reason of their proficiency, That being
Weavers, they could set a Book before them, standing in their Looms, and edify
one another by reading or talking. Of such Tradesmen and Freeholders, he says,
that they are the strength of Religion and Civility in the Land; though such
made up the Mob which begun and continued our Wars, and destroyed our Religion
by dividing it into innumerable Sects and Factions. So that Mr. Edwards
observed in his Gangreena, that in the space of four years after that
Episcopacy was laid aside, there were more Heresies started in this Land, than
had been known in the Universal Church from the foundation thereof.

As to his Censures of such as lived in Conformity to the established Religion,
he is as impartial as Death, condemning them all as a profane and persecuting
Generation, in a Book called Cain and Abel: How he has branded the best of our
Kings and the Clergy, has been already shown: How he Censures the Parliament
and their Laws, which he calls the tearing Engines that woried Two thousand
Ministers, casting them out of their Possessions into Poverty and Prisons to
starve and pine away; and for imposing such Oaths, Subscriptions and
Declarations, as any Man that feared God could not comply with, is such a
Common Place, that I wonder it was no more taken notice of.

After this Censure of the Parliament, Mr. Baxter speaks of the Nobility and
Gentry in general, p. 134. where he says, I more than ever lament the
unhappiness of the Nobility and Gentry, and great Ones of the World, who live
in such temptations to Sensuality, Curiosity, and Wasting of Time about a
multitude of little things, whose Lives ^re too often a Transcript of the Sins
of Sodom, Pride, Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, and want of
Compassion to the Poor. And p. 89. That Gentlemen and Beggars and Servile
Tenants are the strength of Iniquity in the Land; though it was not very civil
to put the Beggar on the Gentleman, yet it was much worse to join them in the
Bonds of Iniquity, and make the Comparison between them and the Tradesmen so
odious, that these are reputed the strength of Religion and Civility; but the
Gentry and their Tenants and Beggars, the strength of Iniquity. And he
instanceth in Sir R. Clare and Sir John Packington, who much hindered his
Success in gathering Proselytes in Kidderminster. He gives this Character of
Sir R. Clare, p. 94. part 1. That he was an old Man of great Courtship and
Civility, very temperate as to Diet, Apparel, and Sports; seldom swore any
louder than by his troth; one that showed him much personal reverence and
respect beyond his deserts, and conversed with love and familiarity. One that
sent his Family to be Catechized and personally Instructed, which swayed with
the worst among that People to do the like. But being ruled by Dr. Hammond, he
liked not of Mr. Baxter's Preciseness and Extemporary Prayer, and abstained
from the Sacrament, which Mr. Baxter delivered to such as sat or stood at the
receiving it, which gave offense to Sir R. Clare: whereby (he says) Sir R.C.
did more to hinder his Success than a multitude of others could have done. And
on such an account all the Conforming Gentry are the strength of Iniquity. And
although the Poverty of Mr. Baxter's People, whereof the Master-workmen lived
but little beter than their Journey-men, from hand to mouth, p. 94. was a help
to his Success: the Poor receiving the glad tidings of the Gospel, and being
usually rich in faith. Yet for those that frequent the Churches and Common
Prayer, they are coupled with the Gentry, as the strengtheners of Iniquity;
whereas the Laws have provided such a Competency for their Maintenance, as may
keep them from beggary, which the Law allows not: but in truth the multitude
of Beggars in occasioned and increased by those many Families that depend upon
the Trade of Weaving, who living but from hand to mouth, are forced, on the
decay of Trade for a few Weeks, to beg for their Subsistence, or to do worse;
of which such places as abound with Men of that Calling have sad experience. I
have enlarged this Remark on Mr. Baxter's Charity, because, as an Error in the
Foundation, it runs through the whole Narrative of his Life, and as a Root of
bitterness, invenometh all that it brings forth. What Credit can his Profession
of Endeavors for Love and Peace, and his Pleas for Concord obtain, when he
will allow of no other way of Concord but what he himself fancied, and all
Christian Churches have condemned? I only entreat the Reader of this, or Mr.
Baxter's Description of his Life, to carry in his mind those properties of
Christian Charity, mentioned in 1 Cor. 13, 4, 5, 6 and 7th Verses. Charity
suffers long, and is kind. Charity envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not
puffed up. Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth. Bears all things, believes all things, endures all things. And then
apply these Rules, as the Apostle does, v. 1, 2, 3. That though one speak with
the Tongues of Men and Angels; though he have the Gift of Prophesy, and
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though he have all Faith, so
that he could remove Mountains; and though he bestow all his Goods to feed the
Poor, and have not Charity, it profits nothing. And as St. James, chap. 1. V.
4. If any man seems to be righteous, and bridleth not his Tongue, that man's
Religion is vain.

Mr. LONG's ANSWER TO Mr. BAXTER's LETTER, Dated July 26. 1678. And now printed
in the Appendix to his Life, p. 108, 109, 110, 111.
Mr. Baxter's Letter.
SIR,
I Find that in a Book of yours, defending Schism against Mr. Hales, on
pretense of opposing it, you were pleased to think many passages in my Writings
worthy of your recital to your ends; I thank you that you chose any words for
peace, which some may make a better use of than your self: But I think, if you
had referred Men to my own Books to read them, with what goes before and
after, they would have been more easily understood. I understand by your Book
that you think that you are in the right, which is the most that I have yet
learned out of it; unless it be also that you think the Non-conformists be not
yet hated and afflicted enough; or that he that swears must ascend by
treading upon him that fears an Oath? I am in some doubt lest you have
wronged our Prelacy, by so openly proclaiming the Enmity of so great a Man as
Hales against them, and by enticing Men by your noise to read his Book, which
you contradict; which if they de, I doubt your Confutation will not save them
from the Light. But the reason of my troubling you with these Lines, is only to
crave some satisfaction about two or three Matiers of Fact in your Book, which
would seem strange to me, did I not find such things too common in Invectives
against silenced Ministers; and did I not know that it is part of Satan's work
to persuade the World, that no History has any certainty of Truth, that so
Sacred History may be disadvantaged.

I. One is in these words, p. 110. When they had in the grand Debate given in
their Objections to the Liturgy, some of the Brotherhood had prepared another
Form, but a great part of their Brethren objected many things against that; and
never as yet did (as I hear of) agree upon any other, nor I think ever will. I
crave the justice of you to tell us, which was that you call the Grand Debate?
and who those were that dissented? or what proof you have of any such things?
Either you know what you say, or not? If not, and yet publish it in such a
manner, while you are accusing others of sin? What is this to be called? If you
did, it is yet far worse. Either you speak of the Westminster Assembly, which
made the Directory; or of the Commissioners in 1660. Not the first sure; for
none I think was yet ever vain enough to pretend that they thus drew up another
Liturgy. It must needs be the later: of which this is past denial by any but
the -- 1. That the King's Commission under the Broad Seal, authorized us to
make some [additional Forms]. 2. The late Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr.
Sheldon, when we came according to appointment, to try by friendly Conference,
what Alterations each Party might yield to for our desired Concord, without any
injury to their Consciences, began with a Declaration, That we being the
Plaintiffs, they would no further proceed to treat with us, till we had given
them in entirely in writing, 1. What we blamed in the Liturgy; and our Reasons
of it. 2. And what we desired as better. Mr. Calamy and others said, [This was
plainly to deny the Conference which we were Commissioned for.] And they would
have broke off, had it not been for me, who requested them rather to yield, and
undertake it, than give them occasion to charge us with Tergiversation and
Refusal of any lawful thing; though I easily saw that the Motioner thought
thereby to break us, as disagreeing when we came to perform the undertaking.
While others drew up their Exceptions against the Liturgy, they appointed me to
draw up the Additional Forms. But remembering the Bishops [what we desired
instead] I drew up a Liturgy. It must needs be very imperfect, being done (in
necessary haste) in eight days. Dr. Reignolds only thought that we should be
blamed for offering a whole Liturgy instead of Additional Forms. I told him
first, It was but to be added to the old, if reformed. 2. And they might cut
off all that they thought superfluous upon Debate, even all that the Bishops
should except justly against; for we did but offer it to them, professing we
were ready to alter any thing upon their reasons. Hereupon Dr. Reignolds
yielded, and it was often read over among us; only the Prayer for the King
being thought too long, Dr. Wallis was appointed to draw up a shorter, which he
did; all the rest standing as I wrote it: It was agreed to without one
dissenting voice: Nor had we one Objection sent us in by any other. I was
appointed at a meeting with the Bishops at the Savoy, at once to deliver them
this Liturgy, a Reply to their Answer to our Exceptions, and a Petition for
Peace and Concord; all which they had appointed me to draw up, and had examined
and consented to. We waited for an Answer to all, and never had an answer to
any one of them; but they kept them, and said nothing of them. I was especially
desirous to have heard their Exceptions against our Liturgy (where they thought
we would have disagreed among our selves) and urged some of them to it, and
could never get a word of Answer or Exception, which made me wonder; as well
knowing, 1. How very willing some were to have found it faulty: 2. And how hard
it is, in necessitated haste, to write such a thing that shall not be liable to
many Exceptions. Yea, when Roger L'Estrange after wrote against us, he says
little at all against the Liturgy, save that we left men at too much liberty.
To which we then said, That imposing and restraining was not our work, but the
Bishops; who, we supposed upon debate, would have too much done it. Now if this
full Concord, and no Answer or Exceptions from them that extorted this Work
from us, be agreeable to the Report you make; or if you have here dealt like a
Minister of Truth, I pray you help me to discern it. The Book, with the rest,
was printed long ago; most of them by some poor Scriveners, that being used in
transcribing, had got a Copy, and did it for gain.

II. Another passage is p. 293. No sinful act being required to make
Ministerial Conformity unlawful (which if there had been, they or some other
would and ought to have discovered it, and then, I doubt not, it would by
Authority have been taken away; but that being not done -- Here I desire you to
satisfy me in a few things: 1. When even our public Reply and foresaid
Petition against the old Conformity, were never answered to this day, is it
ingenious to take this for a Confutation, barely to say [It is not done?]
Should I say [It was never yet discovered that Episcopacy is lawful] would you
not have called me -- as long as Saravia, Bilson, Hooker, etc. are unanswered?
2. Do you not know what abundance of old have thought they discovered the
sinfulness of Conformity ( Bradshaw, Nicols, Ames, Parker, Jacob, Cartwright,
etc.) and what Blondel, Salmasius, Gersom, Bucer, Didoclave, etc. have written
against Prelacy; and some of late against our Conformity, ( Cawdry, Hickman,
and others yet unanswered) And is this your dry Denial a rational Confutation?
3. Would not your words make the ignorant believe that we have the liberty of
the Press, and may do it if we will: and do not the Act of Parliament, and the
several Searches of the Press, and the Printers refusal, show how false such an
intimation is? It may be some small Pamphlet may, with much ado, creep out; but
so cannot any thing that is full and satisfactory? Our Cause is a mere stranger
to our Accusers; (it seems even to such as you) because we cannot have leave to
print it: A few have heretofore, when the watch was less strict, got somewhat
out, to little purpose (Mr. Hickman's was beyond Sea) but nothing that may make
us well understood. And is it fit work for a Minister to blame men thus
publicly for not doing Impossibilites? 4. It must be supposed that you know
these things: 1. That the Law forbids us to deprave or speak against the
Liturgy upon grievous Penalties. 2. That the Canon excommunicates us ipso
facto, that is, sine Sententia Judicis, if we do but say that there is any
thing that a man may not with a good Conscience conform to. 3. And that our
present Governors are against it. 4. And that for doing it we are sure by
Conformists to be called Disobedient to Authority, and Seditious. 5. And that
we are so accused by you commonly for preaching when forbidden, which is as
much our vowed duty sure as writing. And do you now tell us, That we ought to
discover it if there be any sinful act commanded? Will you warrant us against
the Charge of Disobedience, or do you drive us on that, which if we do, you
know we are already judged to Excommunication, Jails and Ruin? We have long
begged of Parliament men, that we might but once have leave to speak for our
selves (which we never had as to the new Conformity to this day) and that we
might petition for such leave; and they tell us these fifteen Years almost,
There is no hope: it will but ruin you. I have offered two of the most eminent
Bishops to beg it of them, or any, on my knees, that we might but once publish
the Case and Reasons of our Dissent: And is it not enough to be fifteen or
sixteen Years ejected, silenced, scorned, accused as unworthy to be endured,
and to be silently patient, and never answer for our selves, nor have the
common justice of being heard, but we must have the additional abuse, to be
told that we ought to do it? Yea, many of the Conformists (O with what face!)
have published to the World, that we take not the things which we refuse for
sins, or dare not say so of them; when even the far easier Conformity 1660. we
did by word and writing declare to be sinful, and in our Petition for Peace
(printed) protested, That did we not take it to be sinful, and hazarding our
Souls, etc. we should never have stuck at Conformity to them. And it is no
small number of sins so heinous which we suppose since imposed, that we dare
not so much as name them, least we displease you, and make you say, that we
render the Conformists such heinous sinners! But I will allege your Authority
when any of us are next blamed for discovering the heinous sinfulness of
Conformity, as we yet believe it would be to us. If you say that the Licensers
would license our Writings if we did it with sobriety; 1. You know that the
Canon and Law is against it. 2. I shall then in justice challenge you to make
it good, I here promise you an account of my Nonconformity when ever you will
procure it licensed. 3. And which way got you so strong a faith, as to be past
doubt, That did we discover any sinfulness, it would by Authority have been
taken away. Make this true yet, (after near Two thousand Minister have been
near sixteen years ejected and silenced, and many killed by imprisonment, and
the People of the Land divided and distracted by the tearing Engines) and you
shall have the honor of being the greatest healer of our breaches that ever
rose in the days of my remembrance. But if it be not true --

III. The third passage is p. 69, 70. throughout. These are great things to be
spoken so boldly. 1. Do you suppose your Reader one that never read Church
History? What work the Bishops made for Arianism, for Nestorianism, for the
Eutychians und Acephalites, against Nazianzen, Chrysostom, etc. for the
Monothelites, about the Tria Capitula, for Images, against Emperors and Kings,
setting up the Pope, and decreed the deposition of all Princes that obey him
not, and making Loyalty to be Haeresis Henriciana: How the River Orontes at
Antioch has been colored with the Blood, and the Graves of the Monks and
People, that fought it out in the streets for the several Bishops? What work
they made at the first Council at Constance, the first and second at Ephesus,
the Council at Chalcedon, and many another? How many Ages they were, and yet
are the Army of the Pope, to subdue Princes and Nations, Truth and Justice, and
set up the Evil that now reigns in the Christian World? How even against the
Pope's will they made the best King and Emperor Lodovic. Pius, as a Penance,
resign his Crown and Scepter on the Altar to a Rebel Son, and sent him to
Prison? He that ever read but Baronius, Binius, or other Episcopal History,
will pity you. Can you name one Presbyter for very many Bishops, that have been
the Heads or Fomenters of Heresy, Schism or Rebellion? And yet Presbyters were
more in number than Bishops? Innumerable Bishops, says Binius, were in the
Monothelite Council under Philippicus. Of all things that ever befell the
Christian Church, I scarce know any thing comparable in shame and mischievous
effects, to the horrid Perfidiousness, Contention, Schism and Pride of Bishops;
Cursing one year by hundreds all that were of one Opinion; and another year all
that were of the contrary, as the Times and Interest and Emperors changed. And
if Arius or Novatus, Aerius and Donatus, (which are all you name were the
beginners of any Schism, how many hundred Bishops were the promoters of them
all, save that of Aerius against themselves? And is it any honor to
Episcopacy, that Arius, and Aerius (an Arian) were not Bishops, when they are
said to be Seekers of Bishoprics, and to divide because they could not obtain
them? Sure they were Prelatical Presbyters: What honor were it to Episcopacy
that you are no Bishop, if all these, and such things, were vended by you in
hope of a Bishopric, or some Preferment? I will never whilst I breathe trust a
Bresbyter that sets himself to get Preferment, no more than I will trust a --
But did you know, or did you not, that as for Novatus and Novatian, one of them
was an ill chosen Bishop of Rome, and the other a promoter of his Prelacy? And
that as for Donatus, there were two of them; one of them a Bishop: and that the
Donatists Schism was merely and basely Prelatical, even whether their Bishop or
Cecilianus should carry it? and that their rebaptizing and re-ordaining, and
Schism, was because they took none to have power that had it not from their
Bishop, as being the right? (like our re-ordainers.) And are these Instances to
prove what you assert? Were it not for entering upon an unpleasing and
unprofitable task, I would ask you, 1. Who that Juncto of Presbyters was that
dethroned the King? was it they that petitioned and protested against it? 2.
Whether it was not an Episcopal Parliament (forty to one, if not an hundred)
that began the War against the King? 3. Whether the General and Commanders of
the Army, twenty to one, were not Conformists? 4. Whether the Major-Generals in
the Counties were not almost all Episcopal Conformists? (The Earl of Stamford
was over your Country.) 5. Whether the Admiral and Sea-Captains were not almost
Episcopal Conformists? (As Heylin distinguishes them of Archbishop Abbot's
mind disliking Arminianism, Monopolies, etc.) 6. Whether the Archbishop of York
were not the Parliaments Major General? 7. Whether the Episcopal Gentry did not
more of them take the Engagement (and many Episcopal Ministers) than the
Presbyterians? 8. Whether if this Parliament, which made the Acts of Uniformity
and Conventicles, should quarrel with the King, it would prove them to be
Presbyterians and Non-conformists? 9. Whether the Presbyterian Ministers of
London and Lancashire did not write more against the Regicides and Usurpers,
and declare against them, than all the Conformists, or as much? And the Long
Parliament was forced, and most of them cast out, before the King could be
destroyed. And when they were restored, it made way for his Restoration. And
Sir Thomas Allen Lord Mayor, and the City of London's inviting General Monk
from the Rump into the City, and joining with him, was the very day that turned
the Scales for the King. But all these are Matters fitter for your better
Consideration than our Debate.

Your Servant, Ri. Baxter.

Mr. LONG's Answer.
Mr. Baxter. SIR, I find that in a Book of yours defending Schism against Mr.
Hales, on pretense of opposing it, you were pleased to think many passages in
my writings, worthy of your recital, to your ends.

Answ. Whether my Book which you mention, or that of Mr. Hales do most oppose
Schism, is sub judice. Had Mr. Hales opposed it, I wonder how you and so many
Schismatics, quoted him against Obedience to Authority, Episcopacy, and
Liturgy, barely on pretense of things scrupled; and seeing I oppose Mr. Hales
in most of the Passages that concern Schism by your Arguments, it must be you
or he that defend it, and not I.

That I thought some Passages in your Writings worthy of my recital, and to my
end, was first, Because I thought your end to be the same with mine, (i.e.) to
promote Peace and Unity, and to destroy Schism and Division: For it was once
your Resolution, to speak for Peace while you had a Tongue, to write for Peace
while you had a Hand, and to live to the Churches Peace while you had an hour
to live, and could do any thing that could promote it. And I hope you did not
verba dare.

Secondly, Because, as Mr. Hales was a Man in great esteem with you, upon the
account of that Tract, so are you with some others; and therefore I could not
think of a better Argument ad homines. And I find that you with others, did
urge fiercely the Authority of Mr. Hales, p. 2. of the Exceptions at the Savoy,
in these words; To load our public Forms with private Fancies on which we
differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate Schism to the Worlds end, etc.
which you resume p. 8. of your Reply. Though the Reverend Bishops had answered,
We heartily desire, that according to this Proposal, great care may be taken to
suppress private Conceptions of Prayer, lest private Opinions be made the
Matter of Prayer in public, is it has and will be, if private Persons take
liberty to make public Prayers. And on second thoughts, I find you to agree
with them, p. 201. of the Cure of Divisions, in these words; Every Separatist,
Anabaptist, Antinomian, does too willingly put his Errors into his Prayers. On
which words Mr. Bag shaw in his Antidote, p. 7. does thus Paraphrase; By
mentioning of Separatists as a distinct Body of Men from the Antinomians,
Quakers and Anabaptists, it is evident he can mean no other but his
Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren.

This I have noted by the way, that what I said of his Brethrens dissenting
from his Reformed Liturgy (as he calls it) may not seem strange, seeing he so
far differs from it himself; for there he gives liberty to all Ministers to
Pray and Exhort, as they think fit: and here he declares against the
Inconveniences of it.

Mr. Baxter. I thank you that you chose any words of mine for Peace, which some
may make a better use of than your self. But I think if you had referred Men to
my own Books to read what goes before, and after, they would have been more
easily understood.

Answ. They that read your words, which I have for the most part quoted, and
heartily desire them to peruse, shall find, that I did not wrest, or misreport
them. But in truth, if Men shall read your Actions before and after, they would
find a great disparity between them and your Words. And if I had shown any fowl
dealing in my Quotations, why did you not deal so fairly as to give one
Instance.

Mr. Baxter. I understand by your Book that you think that you are in the
right, which is the most that I have learned out of it; unless it be also, that
you think the Non-conformists be not yet hated and afflicted enough; or that,
he that swears, must ascend by treading upon him that fears an Oath.

Answ. I am the more confirmed that I am in the right, because you say nothing
to convince me of my Error, for which I should have thanked you. And if you
have learned nothing by my Book, you may thank your self; some Men must unlearn
a great deal, before they are capable of learning any thing against their
Prejudices and Interests. That I think the Non-conformists not hated and
afflcted enough, is more than you can learn from my Book; and I challenge you
to show any Passage there tending to the punishment of Nonconformists, equal to
that, which your own Principles suggest: For you say, The Magistrate will
quickly find that the Distractions of the Church will quickly breed, and feed
such Distractions in the Commonwealth, as may make them wish they had quenched
the fire while it was yet quenchable. The fire that began in the Church, may,
if let alone, reach the Court, p. 209. of Confirm. You objected the like to
another moderate Antagonist, p. 160. Sacril. Desertion; What good will our
Sufferings do you? Do you feel your selves ever the more at liberty when we are
in the Common Goals? Are you the fuller when some Non-conformists want bread?
but upon better information you saw cause then, and may now, to retract that
obloquy.

As for that other Insinuation that you should learn from me, That he that
swears must ascend by treading upon him that fears an Oath, you came too
late to learn it out of my Book: If it had been there, the swearing to the
Covenant taught that Lesson perfectly, how to ascend into their places that
feared that unlawful Oath. Our lawful Subscriptions injure no Man. Pray where
did you learn to load the Conforming Ministry with a Charge of Perjury,
Perfidiousness, and Persecution, greatest, and covenanting never in certain
Points to obey Christ against the World and the Flesh, as you too plainly
insinuate p. 74. of Sacr. Desertion.

Mr. Baxter. I am in some doubt, lest you have wronged our Prelacy, by so
openly proclaiming the enmity of so great a Man as Hales against them, and by
enticing Men by your noise to read his Book, which you contradict: which if
they do, I doubt that your Confutation will not save them from the light.

Answ. I am out of doubt why Mr. Hales is accounted so great a Man with you,
(viz.) for opposing our Prelacy; and I perceive you practice the same way of
growing popular. But the reading that Book of mine, (which if it have not
answered Mr. Hales's Arguments, yet shows how he confuted them himself, when in
his later days he was perfectly reconciled to that Sacred Function, and died as
a Martyr in its Communion) cannot prejudice our Prelacy). He had indeed a fit
of distempered Zeal, as other good Men may, but it was not hectical and
inveterate: He had a strong Brain and sound Vitals, which restored him to a
better Judgment; and that is all the hurt I wish you. But I pray Sir, when you
say, That I defend Schism; had not you such a Notion as Mr. Hales, That the
Bishops, who endeavor Conformity, are Schismatical. I find p. 29. of your
Sacril. Desertion, that you call them the Sect of the Diocesan Prelates; and
Schism in Fact, must lie on them, or you, and those of your Persuasion; who
declare, That upon just Reasons you dissent from the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
or Prelacy disclaimed in Covenant, as it was stated and exercised in these
Kingdoms, p. 5. of your first Paper to the King. But your just Reasons for so
doing are still in the dark. Reasons indeed you suggest, as well against the
Primitive Bishops, in your History of Bishops throughout, as against our
Prelacy: But oh! with what Injustice, with how much Malice are they insinuated!
The Grotian Bishops (as you term them) were destructive of Religion, animating
the haters of Piety, and driving Multitudes out of the Land, the most of them,
twenty for one, being Conformists, Preface to Grotian Religion. So that it was
safer in all places that ever you knew, for Men to live in constant Swearing,
Cursing, and Drunkenness, than to instruct a Man's Family on the Lord's Day, p.
109. And again, p. 113, 114. Should one of you (i.e.) of the Episcopal Clergy,
pretend to be the Bishop of a Diocese, you would have a small Clergy, and none
of the best; and the People in most of the Parishes, that are most ignorant,
drunken, profane, and unruly, with some civil Persons of your mind, who would
be inconsiderable in the Crowd of the ungodly: for the cause of their Love to
Episcopacy, is, because it was a shadow, if not a shelter, to the Profane
heretofore; so that the Prelatical Church would be in the common account, near
kin to an Alehouse or Tavern, to say no worse. Thus have you poured out as
much Contempt upon that Sacred Order, as so slender a Vessel could hold. But
none of this Filth will stick upon it, with those that can remember, The
Agreement that was in the Worship of God, the solemn Sanctification of the
Sabbaths, the discountenancing and punishing of Vice, the Love and Charity
among Neighbors, which I my self do yet remember in this City, where I had my
Education under that happy Government, before our late unhappy Wars; all which
Blessings we do now again in some good measure enjoy. And if this be the way
which you call Schism, I do resolve, by the Grace of God, living and dying, so
to worship the God of my Fathers; nor will any but a Romanist account me a
Schismatic for so doing.

Mr. Baxter. But the reason of troubling you with these Lines, is only to crave
some satisfaction about two or three Matters of Fact in your Book, which would
seem strange to me, did I not find such things too common in Invectives against
the silenced Ministers; and did I not know, that it is part of Satan's work, to
persuade the World that no History has any certainty of Truth, that so Sacred
History may be disadvantaged.

Answ. How strange soever the Matters of Fact may seem to you, I doubt not but
they will appear to be true to the indifferent Reader: but that I have acted
the part of Satan, to persuade the World that no History is true, that so I
might disadvantage Sacred History, is most untrue: Nor have you (because you
could not) mentioned any Instance that might color it. But thus you dealt with
Dr. Pierce, who having truly quoted and applied a Passage of Bishop Bancroft's
in his Appendix to you, p. 254. you told him, That he could not have uttered
more falsehood if the Devil had dictated to him. That my Book is an Invective
against silenced Ministers, is already answered: That I am guilty of depraving
Ecclesiastical or Sacred History, needs no answer, because there is no Charge.
How notoriously you are guilty of this Crime, I shall show in an instance or
two, besides that wherein you abuse the Primitive Bishops; of which hereafter.
Show me, says Mr. Baxter, in Scripture or History, that either there was ever
de facto, or ought to be de jure, such a thing in the World as the Papists call
the Church, and I profess I will immediately turn Papist.

Answ. This was some ground for them that then said you were one, to think so
of you: For what is more plain in Church History, than that there was de facto
such a Church, as the Papists call the Church of Rome, one thousand years
together, and which has been acknowledged by Learned Men of your Persuasion;
and if we may not believe this, how shall we believe there was any Church at
all at Rome in St. Paul's days. But Mr. Baxter cannot be persuaded that there
is any such thing as the Church of England, p. 35. of his Sacr. Desertion. I
would give him all the Money in my Purse, to make me understand what the Church
of England is, and yet our Ecclesiastical Histories will show that we have had
the face and form of a Church among us before the days of the Conqueror. The
Presbyterians did acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a true Church, Divine
Right, p. 265. Will not you allow so much to the Church of England? The old
Non-conformists generally granted it: And Ruthband says all the Reformed
Churches acknowledge the Church of England to be their Sister. And you say, p.
263, 264. That almost all the Christian World is worse than it. -- And if we
deny Communion with such a Church, there has been no Church to Communicate
with these Thousand years. We are more beholding to Mr. John Goodwin, who says,
p. 26. of his Sion College visited, That there was more of the Truth and Power
of Godliness in the Church of England, under the Prelatical Government, than in
all the Reformed Churches beside. And if Mr. Hickman say true, you have had
Communion with the Church of England in all its Ordinances. It is then a
Church, and a true Church.

The second Instance is concerning Kneeling; for though you cannot be ignorant
that our Savior did kneel at his Prayers, and do confess that kneeling at
Prayers was in use in the Apostles time, p. 110. of Grand Debate; and that it
has been practiced in the Universal Church, ever since that Kings were its
Nursing Fathers, yet from an occasional and temporary Constitution of the
Church, restrained to the Lord's days throughout the Year, and to Week days
only between Easter and Whitsontide, and applied only to the duty of Prayer,
not receiving of the Lord's Supper, (which you make different Actions, and say
we are not to be in the Act of Praying, when we are in the Act of Receiving)
from this temporary limited Order which they thought fit to continue only till
the People were confirmed in the belief of the Resurrection, you tell your
Kidderminsters, That it is against the Canons of the General Councils, and many
hundred years Practice of the Church, to kneel in the Act of Receiving on the
Lord's day. Whereas you might with more probability have applied it against
kneeling at Prayers, if there be now any obligation in that Constitution; and
it holds much more against sitting, which was never practiced in the Primitive
Church, though you plead mostly for it. And you add, All knew that my judgment
ever was for the lawfulness of kneeling at the Sacrament, Defense of Brinc. p.
34. And so you told the Episcopal Party, That you would rather kneel than
disturb the Peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. Whereby, as
the Bishop of Worcester inferred, you confess that kneeling at the Sacrament is
not sinful; and that not to kneel, when required, is to disturb the Peace of
the Church; and that the imposing it upon penalty of being deprived of the
Communion, is an effectual means to make those that otherwise would not kneel,
to conform to it; and consequently the imposing it is not unlawful. But Mr.
Baxter says in his Christian Directory, Part 2. p. 111. Q. 3. Sect. 40. says,
For kneeling, I never heard any thing yet to prove it unlawful; if there be any
thing, it must be either some word of God, or the nature of the Ordinance,
which is supposed to be contradicted. But (1.) there is no word of God for any
gesture, nor against any. Christ's Example can never be proved to oblige us
more in this, than in many other Circumstances that are confessed not obligatory;
as, that he delivered but to Ministers; and but to a Family; to Twelve; and
after Supper; on a Thursday night; and in an upper Room, etc. And his gesture
was not such a sitting as ours. And (2ly.) for the nature of the Ordinance, it
is mixed. And if it be lawful to take a Pardon from the King upon our knees, I
know not what can make it unlawful to take a sealed Pardon from Christ (by his
Ambassador) upon our knees. Now if you knew not what might make it unlawful to
receive the Sacrament kneeling, when you wrote your Christian Directory, which
was long after your Disputation with the Bishops at the Savoy, you did not very
advisedly urge with so much heat, That the requiring Communicants to receive it
kneeling under such Penalties, was a sinful imposition. What? to receive a
pardon from Christ upon our knees, this could not be sinful in the Receiver,
nor could it be sinful in the Imposer: For there being nothing said by our
Savior concerning the Gesture, he has left that to the determination of the
Church. And if the Church may determine of the place and time of Public
Worship, because they are not determined by Christ, why may it not determine of
particular Gestures not determined by him? And I am glad, that on second
thoughts, you cannot find what may make it unlawful: For, as you say, it would
be intolerable in a Child or Servant, who when his Parent or Master bids him do
a thing lawful or indifferent, or else he would beat him; should reply, Sir, I
could have done the thing if you had not commanded it, but your Command renders
it unlawful to me. I have said so much of this, which you account one of the
most tremendous sins in our Conformity, as by your singling it out for the
Subject of your Dispute which you managed at the Savoy with so much heat and
importunity it does appear.

This concerning Kneeling, etc. is the third of those ten Particulars which are
mentioned by Mr. Baxter, p. 131, 132, 133. and there he says that in their
Exceptions and Reply, we have an account of what they take to be unlawful and
inconvenient: 1. The Sign of the Cross. 2. The Surplice. 3. Kneeling at the
Sacrament. 4. Pronouncing that Infants baptized are Regenerate. 5. Putting the
Sacred Elements into the hands of Communicants. 6. The Absolution at the
Sacrament. 7. Giving thanks for all that are buried. 8. Subscription to the
Book of Common Prayer. 9. Not permitted to use Extemporary Prayers. 10. The
Oath to the Bishops. These he judges contrary to the Word of God. -- But until
Mr. Baxter, or some other Nonformist, shall confute the Arguments of the London
Divines, and others that assert the Lawfulness of these things, we have no
reason to think of Alterations.

The Reason of your writing to me, you say, is to crave Satisfaction about two
or three Matters of Fact in my Book. -- One is in these words, p. 101. When
they had in the grand Debate given in their Objections to the Liturgy, some of
the Brotherhood had prepared another Form; but a great part of their Brethren
objected many things against that, and never as yet did (as I hear of) agree
upon any other, nor I think ever will. And, as if I had not signified plainly
enough that I meant the grand Debate at the Savoy, you question whether I meant
the Westminster Assembly; when you your self say that it was the Directory
which they drew up; and that none was yet vain enough to pretend that they drew
up another Liturgy.

Answ. Mr. Baxter was then very vain to conjecture that I meant what was done
by the Westminster Assembly; for, as he adds, it must needs be meant of the
later, of which this is past denial.

Mr. Baxter. That the King's Commission authorized us to make some Additional
Forms. (And adds what Archbishop Sheldon propounded, which concerns not me).

Answ. Instead of conforming to the King's Commission, Mr. Baxter says, that
some of them drew up their Exceptions against the Liturgy, and appointed him to
draw up Additional Forms. But I, says he, drew up a Liturgy which (the Prayer
for the King being made shorter by Dr. Wallis) was agreed to without one
dissenting Vote. I am glad to hear that all the Nonconforming Party did agree
to a Liturgy, having so long acted according to the Directory. And if they
could agree to such a Liturgy, as Mr. Baxter says, must be very imperfect,
being done in necessary haste in eight days, I wonder that they could not be
reconciled to that Liturgy which was so maturely drawn up by our first
Reformers, Learned Bishops, and Holy Martyrs, which had endured many a Trial,
and obtained the Approbation of the other parts of the Reformed Churches, and
had been practiced by many of those that then opposed it; and for their
satisfaction was corrected in many things whereat they took offense. Besides,
the King's Commission authorized them (if occasion should be) to make such
reasonable and necessary Alterations, Corrections and Amendments, as should be
by both Parties agreed to be needful to give Satisfaction to tender
Consciences, etc. But avoiding, as much as might be, all unnecessary
Alterations of Forms and Liturgy wherewith the People are already acquainted,
and have so long received in the Church of England. And when Dr. Reignolds
thought they should be blamed for offering a whole Liturgy, instead of
Additional Forms, I thought I might rationally infer, that, as Dr. Reignolds
observed, they might justly be blamed for offering another Liturgy so directly
opposite to the intention of the King's Commission. And I wonder how Mr. Baxter
could say this work (viz.) a new Liturgy, was extorted from them, when it was
forbidden by the King. Or how there was such a full Concord, as Mr. Baxter
speaks of, when the Prayer for the King contained some things fit to be
omitted; and when Dr. Pearson and others wrote, that there was no necessity of
Reforming the Church, either in Doctrine, Discipline, or Worship; and when Mr.
Baxter says it must needs be very imperfect? I confess that the dissenting
Party might agree to your Liturgy so, as to think it an imperfect hasty Work,
free from Heresy, Blasphemy, or Treason; but not under your Notion, as fit to
rival or thrust out the Public Liturgy; the Commissioners could not agree on
those terms, seeing, as they observed, it left Men at liberty to use it as a
Directory, by saying thus, as in the several Collects, or to this purpose, in a
Prayer of their own conception; for you tell them, it was not your work to
impose; and what uniformity in Worship could be expected, if some should use
the Forms in the Liturgy, and others be left at liberty to use your Forms, or
their own Conceptions? Mr. Calvin commended a Liturgy and Forms of Prayer, to
prevent the Inconveniences which might be occasioned by Extempory Effusions.
And your Brethren in their Morning Lectures, affirm p. 58. That the heart may
be easily deceived in Inlargements in Prayer, Opinion of the Person, Taking
Expressions, Popular Applause, Flourishing Novelties and Notions, Satanical
Illusions, Common and Ordinary Inspirations, such as are granted to Reprobates.
All, or any of which, may make the heart dance in a duty, and yet it is
possible, nay probable, the heart may dance after the Devil's Pipe.

In the Preface to your Liturgy, p. 23. you would have your own Forms inserted
into the several places of the Liturgy to which they do belong, and left to the
Ministers choice to use the one or other. But first, this would aggravate that
Grievance which you complain of, that the Liturgy is already too long. But
secondly, this would be to raise Altar against Altar, and maintain two distinct
Forms of Worship. And you doubted not but your correct Nepenthes, as you term
your Liturgy, would be better relished by young Prelates than a Dose of Opium,
to which you compare the Liturgy; though a sober use of Opium may be more
useful to fix the Spirits, which so large a draught of your Nepenthes may make
volatile and giddy.

Mr. Baxter. I was especially desirous to have heard their Exceptions against
our Liturgy and urged some of them (i.e.) the Bishops, to it, and could never
get a word of Answer or Exception.

Answ. Roger L'Estrange in his Relapse Apostate says in the Introduction, That
though your Liturgy was addressed to the Bishops, yet from them, above all the
rest, it was with more care concealed -- That it was delivered to the Printer
by Mr. Baxter, or his order, and being wrought off, this Nepenthes was
barrelled up, and dispersed through the Nation without the knowledge of the
Bishops.

But supposing it had been delivered to them, it was not their work to view or
correct your Liturgy, but that which the King in his Commission recommended to
them: it was their duty to reject yours in gross, without Reflections on the
Particulars. You add, Nor had we one Objection from any other. Yet I saw a
Treatise by a very learned hand about that time, called, The grand Debate in
case of Prayer resumed; proving that those Free Pravers which you so earnestly
contended for, had no advantage above the prescribed Liturgy; and by that
Person, and many other Writers, there was not one Objection made which was not
answered and confuted. I desire therefore such Readers as do still adhere to
Mr. Baxter's Arguments against the Common Prayer, to do themselves so much
right, as to peruse what Dr. Comber has written concerning the Method observed
in the several parts of Devotion throughout the Liturgy, against the disorder
of it objected by Mr. Baxter; and the several Cases of the London Divines
against all Mr. Baxter's, or any other Objectors, concerning the Unlawfulness
of any thing therein prescribed. And seeing in the Preface of his Majesty's
Commission, he did express his Esteem of the Liturgy, and authorized the
Commissioners to make such reasonable and necessary Alterations as by and
between them should be agreed upon, avoiding as much as might be all
unnecessary Abbreviations of Form and Liturgy; not only the King had been
disobeyed, but the most pious Members of the Church might justly be offended,
if any of the Commissioners should have condescended to such Alterations as
were insisted on, which would have amounted to a confession that the Liturgy
was a heavy burden to tender Consciences, a just cause of Schism, a
Superstitious Usage, etc. upon which pretenses the Alterations were desired.

But first, It is not true that there was a full Concord as to your Liturgy;
for the Reader may observe, that the King's Commission was granted to about
forty Persons to review the Liturgy, and to make such reasonable and necessary
Alterations and Amendments, as by and between the said Commissioners should be
agreed upon to be needful and expedient, avoiding as much as might be all
unnecessary Abbreviations of the Form and Liturgy wherewith the People are
altogether acquainted, and have so long received in the Chapter of England; can any
Man believe there was a full Concord (I will not say of all the Commissioners)
to Mr. Baxter's new Liturgy, but among those of the Dissenters, that there
should be a new Liturgy presented, when the Commission confined them to make
only some necessary Alterations and Amendments of the old, expressly cautioning
them to avoid, as much as might be, all unnecessary Abbreviations of the Form
and Liturgy for the Reasons therein alleged: For though Mr. Baxter glories in
this Exploit of drawing up a new Liturgy in eight days, yet he acknowledges it
was very imperfect, and that Dr. Reignolds said they should be blamed for it:
and the Reason of the thing, as well as the Example of Dr. Reignolds, was
sufficient to convince all such as had any sense of their Duty, or hope of an
Agreement. We find also (though Mr. Baxter intimates the contrary) that there
was a particular Exception against the Prayer which he had made for the King,
which was to be altered by Dr. Wallis; his Rubric also was disliked by them,
as he confesses. Besides, it is certain that a great part of the dissenting
Brethren had sometime before conformed to the old Liturgy; not only Dr.
Reignolds and Mr. Baxter himself, but Dr. Conant, Spurstow, Wallis, Manton, and
generally all the rest; and the Amendments and Alterations which were made,
being about Six hundred, were thought so reasonable and satisfactory, that
diverse who had dissented, did conform to it, notwithstanding that by reason of
some other Subscriptions and Declarations, their Conformity was made more
difficult, as did Dr. Reignolds, Dr. Gauden, Dr. Conant, Dr. Wallis, and Dr.
Lightfoot, etc. Where then was this full Concord and no Exceptions? when they
all agreed to a Liturgy; and Mr. Baxter's Model was a draught of Nepenthe,
compounded of unknown Ingredients, as every one should fancy. And this I hope
may be a competent help to make Mr. Baxter discern that the Report that I made
(viz.) that some of the Brotherhood had prepared another Form; but some of them
objected many things against that, and never as yet (that I heard) did agree
upon any other, and I think never will, is a true Report, and such as becomes a
Minister of Truth.

Mr. Baxter. But I well know it is a part of Satan's work to persuade the World
that no History has any certainty of Truth, that so Sacred History may be
disadvantaged.

Answ. If it be Satan's work falsely to relate Matters of Fact recorded in
History; and if it tends to so impious a Design as to disadvantage the Credit
of Sacred History; I doubt not to make it appear in two instances, viz. in that
Historical Relation which Mr. Baxter has given concerning Bishops, and in that
of the beginning of our detestible Civil War, of which I shall take occasion to
speak, on two Assertions of Mr. Baxter in this Letter; the one is where he
affirms, That of all things that ever befell the Christian Church, he scarce
knew any thing comparable in shame and mischievous effects, to the horrid
Perfidiousness, Contention, Schism and Pride of Bishops. The second is, That it
was an Episcopal Parliament (forty or an hundred to one) that began the War
against the King. On these two Assertions of Mr. Baxter, I say, I shall make it
evident, that none has done more to disadvantage the credit of Sacred History
than Mr. Baxter has done in the false Relation of other Histories, be a ready
way to it.

Mr. Baxter. Another passage is p. 293. (which being imperfectly related by Mr.
Baxter, I shall give it the Reader in full) viz. (Ministerial Conformity being
submitted to by many of the Assembly of Divines, and no sinful act required to
make it unlawful, which if there had been, they, or some others, ought to have
discovered it, and then I doubt not, it would by Authority have been taken
away; but that being not done) the Ministers ought to conform by the same Rules
as the People ought; which is granted by Proposition the fourth, and confirmed
by Mr. Baxter 's practice in receiving the Sacrament.

Answ. Mr. Baxter repeats only so much as is within the Parenthesis, on which
he runs out into six grand Divisions, and under them into two, or three, and so
under one into five Sub-divisions: The whole may be comprehended in these two;
1. That the Sinfulness of Conformity has been already proved: And then 2dly,
That we require impossibilities of them, because they have not the liberty of
the Press. [Though the Liberty of the Pulpit be as much denied them, yet it is
no impossibility to use that.] But I shall for the Reader's satisfaction
consider the Particulars.

Mr. Baxter. Do you not know what abundance of old have thought they discovered
the sinfulness of Conformity, (Bradshaw, Nicols, Ames, Parker, Cartwright,
etc.) and some of late against our Conformity, Cawdry, Hickman, and others, yet
unanswered.

Answ. I know what the most of those you name have written. And I know that
what you say they thought to be sins, have by Whitgift, Bancroft, Hooker,
Moreton, Burgess and Sprint been proved to be the Non-conformists duties. And
as to the new Conformity, it has by these Doctors, Faukner, Durel, Fulwood,
proved to be lawful; and also by the Lay-Conformity of all the old
Non-conformists, as well as by Mr. Baxter to be lawful.

Mr. Baxter. And is this your dry Denial a rational Confutation?

Answ. A Confutation! of what? No rational Man would undertake a Confutation,
of what others only thought, (and Idem est non esse and non apparere,) had the
Long Parliament acted rationally when they armed themselves, if they had no
other Enemy to fight against, but those false Reports of German Troops and
Armies under ground, and Designs to blow up the Thames, which were sometime
talked off? This were like Don Quixot, to fight with Windmils and Fancies of
their own inventions; bring down your Objections from the Clouds, fix them
somewhere that we may behold them, and try if they be formidable Gorgons, as
can at sight transform the Conformists into such heinous Sinners, a dry Denial
is enough to confute the Man in the Moon. I will not say as you did concerning
the Church of England, that I would give all the Money in my Purse to know what
it is; but, as Caesar said of the ancient Britains, who dwelt in Woods and
Fastnesses, That it is less difficult to overcome them than to find them out;
and when they shall appear, I have so much confidence in the good Nature of Mr.
Baxter, that I may borrow Weapons enough out of his Magazine to turn them all
into Dust; though he thinks that it is no small number of sins so heinous, that
are imposed by Conformity, that he dares not so much as name them, lest he
should displease and render the Conformists such heinous sinners. And p. 31. of
Sacr. Desertion, That (Conformity) is a composition of such heinous Crimes as I
forbear to name, for fear of seeming to be an Accuser of others, and to be
unpeaceaable. This is as if he had told his Superiors to their Faces, That
they were a company of ungodly Persons and cruel Persecutors, that their Sins
were great for number, and heinous in their nature. But I will not name any
particular, for fear of Displeasing, or being thought your Accuser and
Unpeaceable.

In such a case I think it not unreasonable if the Superiors had told Mr.
Baxter that he ought to do it. But Mr. Baxter will excuse himself thus:

Mr. Baxter. That Men ought not to be blamed for not doing Impossibilities.

Answ. If the thing were impossible to be done, it is very blameable to pretend
or attempt the doing of it. But wherein lies the impossibility? 1. You say,
The Law forbids it. 2. You are ipso facto Excommunicate. 3. Your Governors are
against it. 4. It would drive you to Jails and Ruin? 5. We have begged leave
of Parliament Men to publish the Case and Reasons of your dissent. But, good
Sir, is not your preaching in Conventicles forbidden by the same Law under the
like Penalties? and yet those tearing Engines, as you call them, do not make
you forbear printing or preaching; nor do you want the liberty of the Press for
divulging Seditious Pamphlets, and railing against Bishops and Conformity. The
impossibility therefore does not lie in these External Circumstances, but in
the nature of the thing. There is no sinfulness in what is required in
Conformity, and therefore it is impossible for you to show it. You tell us
indeed that you have by your writing discovered the sinfulness of the old
Conformity, and refer us to your public Reply and Petition against it; and
that some Pamphlets, such as Cawdrys, Hickmans, etc. have crept out: but you
confess nothing that is full and satisfactory, no not in any of Mr. Baxter's
Writings; though he talks in general, That in our Liturgy there are some things
that seem to be corrupt, and carry a repugnancy to the Rule of the Gospel, p.
11. of his Savoy Papers, where he spends 148 Pages in Exceptions against the
Liturgy; which the Bishops answer in these few words, p. 45. The Church has
been careful to put nothing into the Liturgy but what is evidently the Word of
God, or has been generally received in the Catholic Church; and if the
contrary can be proved, we wish it out of the Liturgy. And this may answer that
Enquiry of

Mr. Baxter. Which way got you so strong a faith, as to be past doubt, that did
we discover any sinfulness, it would by Authority be taken away. Make this
true, and you shall have the honor of being the greatest healer of our
breaches that ever rose in the days of my remembrance. But if this be not true
--

Answ. The strength of my Faith is built on the ground of my Charity, which
teaches me to hope and believe all good things of my Superiors, especially
until I am assured of the contrary, and when they have made such good Laws, in
Church and State, as many thousands of good Christians of tender Consciences,
do submit to, and they themselves devoutly practice. I cannot think they would
establish any known iniquity by Law, after their Profession which you have seen
under their own hands; that if there were any such thing could be proved, as
they had reason and judgment to discern it, so it was in their power to procure
the amendment, and they wished it out. So that whatever your Faith be to
believe there are such heinous sins in Conformity, I hope my Charity is
agreeable to the Christian Faith, that if any such thing had appeared, it would
have been taken away.

Mr. Baxter. But I shall allege your Authority when we are blamed for
discovering the sinfulness of Conformity.

Answ. You have a greater Authority than mine, the Law of God; Lev. 19.17. Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Brother, and not suffer sin to be upon him. And of
St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them. Therefore, I say again, you ought to have done it, and
to be plain, I see no reason why you have not done it, but because it is
impossible to be done; you find all the Cavils which you have yet used to be
insufficient, and would seem to reserve more cogent ones to keep up the Courage
of your Party, and amuze their Consciences with Noise and Clamor, Fears and
Jealousies, and so perpetuate the Schism. I cannot pass by one odious
Reflection on our Governors, viz.

Mr. Baxter. That near Two thousand Ministers have been near sixteen Years
ejected and silenced, and many years imprisoned and killed, and the People of
the Land divided and distracted by the tearing Engines.

Answ. Such Language ill becomes Mr. Baxter, who, notwithstanding many
Provocations, has tasted so much of the Clemency of our Governors. Had you
lived in the Marian days under Bonner, you durst not have said so much. But who
were those Two thousand? In your Letter to Mr. Bagshaw you speak but of about
Eighteen hundred, and you are not wont to mince the matter: A great number of
them had possessed themselves of other Men's Rights, and it was an Act of
Justice to restore the Owners to their Rights. Mr. Baxter, I hear, was he that
invaded Kidderminster, the Property of one Mr. Dance, whom he confessed to be a
Man of an unblameable Life; but not thought fit for so great a Congregation,
much more to have any Restitution made for all that was taken from him. As for
those that had lawful Titles, some of them were altogether unqualified, as to
Learning or good Lives; the rest ejected themselves for not obeying the Laws.
There were no tearing Engines made use of. The lawless Practices of the
Presbyterians, under the Long Parliament, deserved that name: whenas Mr. White
their Centurist writes, There were about Eighteen thousand Ministers, all
lawful Ministers, illegally ejected, both Universities deprived of their
Scholars, who were driven to great Necessities, not suffered to teach Schools,
no not in a Gentleman's House for the Education of their Children, twelve
Bishops clapped into the Tower at once, the rest Sequestered, without any
Provision or Respect to their Age, Learning or Piety. And I need not prove it
to Mr. Baxter, who knows the truth of what I say, That that one Engine of the
Scottish Covenant destroyed more in one year, both Laity and Clergy, than all
the tearing Engines did ever since they were formed into Laws.

Mr. Baxter. The third passage is p. 69, 70. which though Mr. Baxter has not,
I shall here transcribe, and it may serve to Answer Mr. Baxter's Question; Can
you name, says he, one Presbyter for very many Bishops, that have been the
Heads or Fomenters of Heresy, Schism or Rebellion? and that (for his part) he
knows nothing comparable in shame and mischievous effects to the horrid
Persidiousness, Contention, Schism, and Pride of Bishops. In opposition to this
I said in the place quoted, That Novatus and Novatian, Aerius and Arius,
Donatus and his Fellow Presbyters, who assumed the Episcopal Power to
themselves, had shed more Blood and committed more Outrages than were done
under any instance of Episcopal Ambition; and that our late Schism at home, and
the Wounds made by it are yet so open, that there needs no Rhetoric but our
own Experience to teach us, that the little Finger of the Presbyterians is
heavier than the Episcopal Loins. Let any Man sum up together the Mischiefs
occasioned by the Avarice and Ambition of Bishops for One hundred Years
together in this our Nation, and I dare engage to demonstrate that for
Wickedness in contriving, for Malice and Cruelty in Executing, for Pride and
Arrogance in Usurping, in Obstinacy and Implacableness in endeavoring to
perpetuate unparalled Confusions. Though some Bishops had done amiss, yet our
Presbyterians have exceeded them all: For let me be informed, Whether for a
Juncto of Presbyters, who had often sworn Fidelity to their Prince, and
Obedience to their lawful Ordinaries, to abrogate these Sacred Obligations, and
by dethroning one incomparable Prince, to set up many Tyrants, and by
covenanting against one Bishop in a Diocese, to erect Two or Three hundred, and
expose all the Clergy, that would not partake with them in their sins, to
contempt and misery, be not an unparallel Mischief; Mr. Hales himself, whom Mr.
Baxter so magnifies for his Book of Schism, found their tender Mercies to be
cruel, whom they deprived of that plentiful Estate which he enjoyed under the
Episcopal Government, being reduced to that Extremity, that he was forced to
sell his Books to supply his Necessities. Let me be informed, I pray you,
whether this be not more than any Bishop did, or could be guilty of? Such
Indignities, Perjuries, Usurpations and Cruelties as these Men have acted
against their just, lawful, and excellent Governors in Church and State, I
believe have not been acted since Judas betrayed his Master.

Mr. Baxter. These are great things to be spoken so boldly, says Mr. Baxter.

Answ. And they were bolder Men that acted them, say I. But I am at a loss what
to say of them who were the first Incendiaries, the Boutefews, that blew up the
Coals, and scattered such Wildfire through the Nation, as ran through every
City, Town, and Village in the Nation; let Mr. Baxter speak his own thoughts of
such: They may justly fear of being Firebrands in Hell, for their being
Firebrarnds on Earth.

The passage which Mr. Baxter thought not fit to recite, led me to consider
what Mischief had been occasioned by the Ambition of Factious Presbyters; such
as Novatus and Novatian, Aerius and Arius, Donatus and his Followers of old,
and by a Juncto of Presbyterians in our own days: and he confesses that Arius
and Aerius were not Bishops; and he might have said it of Novatus and Novatian,
Donatus and his Fellows, that they were not Bishops, but seekers of
Bishoprics, and divided because they could not obtain them. Surely, says Mr.
Baxter, they were Prelatical Presbyters: And concludes thus, I will never,
while I breathe, trust a Presbyter that sets himself to get Preferment, no more
than I will trust a -- he might have said, as King James did a Highland or
Border Robber.

I doubt not but the Reader will observe with me what a pitiful shift Mr.
Baxter was put to, when he says, That if Arius or Novatus, Aerius and Donatus,
( which, he says, are all the Presbyters that I name, though I had named
Novatus and Novatian, and could have mentioned many more, if an Answer to a
Letter would have permitted it) were the beginners of any Schism, many hundred
Bishops were the promoters of them all; which is as much as if he had said,
That when these Presbyters had supplanted their Bishops, and assumed both the
Name and Authority of Bishops to themselves, then those Bishops and their
Successors promoted and formented the Schisms and Heresies which the first
Inventers had broached against those Orthodox and Legal Bishops with all manner
of violence and cruelty. And this is that fallacy that runs through Mr.
Baxter's whole History of Episcopacy, wherein all the Tumults and Confusions,
which the Offspring of those ambitious Presbyters had acted, is by him imputed
to Bishops. Whereas in truth they were not otherwise Bishops than of their own
making; and having usurped that title, did with force and bloodshed defend
their several Schisms and Heresies, to the great molestation and disturbance of
the true Bishops. I shall make this appear in what was transacted here at home:
Thus we had an order of Orthodox and Learned Bishops as ever was in the Church
from the Reformation, but were always maligned by the Presbyters: In the Year
1640. this malignity vented it self. Concerning other Particulars, as that of
the Tria Capitula and Philippicus, mentioned by Mr. Baxter under this Head, I
refer the Reader to the former Treatise for an answer.

The Smectymnians write scurrilous Pamphlets against them; the London Rabble
are stirred up to Petition against them; Mr. Baxter himself having in Anno
1640. conceived a dislike of them, began to write his History of Bishops, to
represent them as the Lords of Misrule; twelve Bishops are sent to the Tower,
the Archbishop beheaded, the rest-sequestred, the Nation drawn into a Covenant
against them, their Revenues employed to maintain a War against the King, and
to gratify such Presbyters as had defamed and opposed them. Under those grew
up the several Factions of Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and a Fanatical
Army that set the whole Nation into a Flame, that continued to devour for 20
years together. Now suppose the Supreme Power (i.e.) the Parliament, as Mr.
Baxter says, had advanced some of the most active Presbyters, as
Superintendents, or Bishops and Archbishops, for Mr. Baxter approves of this
last Order as Overseers of Bishops; would it become a true Historian to impute
all the Disorders and Confusions that were acted by and under the several
Factions and thus made Bishops, to that Order which were deposed, prescribed,
and driven into Corners, or exposed to innumerable Affronts and Sufferings
during all that time, and yet this is the manner of Mr. Baxter's dealing with
those more ancient Bishops which he mentions (as a true Historian) throughout
his History of Bishops.

Mr. Baxter. Did you know or not that Novatus was an ill chosen Bishop of Rome,
and Novatian a promoter of his Prelacy?

Answ. I doubt not but Mr. Baxter knew that Novatus was merely a Presbyter, and
that in his time Cornelius was Bishop of Rome, with whom Novatus had a quarrel
for admitting such to his Communion, as in the days of Persecution under
Decius, had denied the Faith, Novatus affirming, That they could not repent
after their Fall; and hereupon he calls his Faction the Cathari. This pure
Presbyter being at Rome, se sends for three Rustic Bishops (as my Author calls
them) to come to him from Italy to Rome, where he caresseth them with plenty of
good Victuals and Wine, and when they had well drank, some of Novatus his Party
prevail with those Bishops to lay their hands on Novatus, and make him a
Bishop; but whether a Bishop of Rome, as Mr. Baxter says, I have not read; but
that Novatus and Novatian, who espoused his Opinion, and promoted his Faction,
to the great disturbance of Cornelius the lawful Bishop, is notorious in
Ecclesiastical History.

Mr. Baxter. As for Donatus, there were two of them, one of them a Bishop; and
the Donatist Schism was merely and basely Prelatical.

Answ. Here I question your Fidelity; and have proved at large in my History of
the Donatists, that the Schism was wholly Presbyterial: for the Bishopric of
Carthage being void, Botrus and Celesius, two Presbyters, sought to supplant
Cecilian, a Person of known Integrity, who was chosen Bishop of that Church:
But Lucilla, a Woman descended from a Noble Family of Spain; abets their
quarrel, and by great Gifts prevail with Botrus and Celesius, who had been
defeated, to appear for Majorinus, who was Domestic Chaplain to Lucilla, and
had been Deacon to Cecilian: these gather a great number of persons, whom they
had drawn from the Communion of Cecilian, to meet at Cirta, where they
pronounce Cecilian deposed as a Traditor, and set up Majorinus to be Bp. of
Carthage, who dying shortly after, Donatus is by his Party chosen to succeed
him; whom Cecilian accused for re-baptizing those that came to his Party from
the Catholic Church, and for degrading Bishops and Priests. And this was the
rise of the Sect of the Donatists, under whom the Arian Heresy spread it self,
and the Crew of Circumcellians arose, as may be seen at large in the History of
the Donatists. This is a second Instance of the Schism begun by Presbyters, and
of Mr. Baxter's fidelity in relating Church History, and imputing the Troubles
caused and continued by Presbyters to the Bishops.

The third instance is Arius a Presbyter of Alexandria in Egypt, who was bred
up under Melitus another Presbyter, from whom Arius was taught, That Christ was
not the Eternal Son of God, but mere Man from both his Parents. This Meletius
held it lawful in times of Persecution to deny Christ, as he had done; and
pleaded, That he had not denied God, but Man. For these Tenets Peter Bp. of
Alexandria Excommunicated them both; but Peter dying, Achillus succeeded him,
under whom Arius reading Lectures in Alexandria, began to publish his Heresy,
and infected great numbers, insomuch that Achillus dying, he became Competitor
for that Bishopric with Alexander, who being a Person of known Abilities and
Integrity, was chosen by a general Suffrage of that Church, by this good
Bishop. Arius was Excommunicated for opposing the Divinity of Christ, and
teaching that he was not from Eternity, nor did partake of the Substance of the
Father, being created in time, and was indeed more excellent than other
Creatures, but not equal with the Father. He challenged to dispute these his
heretical Opinions with Alexander, and a time and place was appointed; but as
Arius was come to the place, an extreme pain in his Bowels seized on him, and
going aside to ease himself, his very Bowels fell from him. But his Name and
Heresy survived in another Arius, or (as History styles him, Arianus homo
potius quam Arius) who opposed Athanasius in the Council of Nice; but upon a
full discussion of the Arian Doctrines by that Council, his Heresy was
condemned, the Books written for it were burnt, and an Edict set forth by
Constantine, threatening Death to such as should conceal any of their Books. Now
how long this Heresy prevailed, how many Catholic Bishops were banished and
murdered for opposing it; how it spread like a Gangreen through all the
Members of the Church, as you have set forth in your History of Bishops, is
mostly true; but your imputing those Confusions to the Catholic Bishops, who
were the Sufferers in all that time, being the defensive Party, I am bold to
say is false: for under the Arian Schism, and by such as took part with them,
as the Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, Macedonians, Acephalites,
Monothelites, who often made havoc of one another, and all united to distress
the true Bishops; all those Mischiefs which you mention in this Letter, and
more largely in your Hist. of Bishops, were put in Execution for 140 years
together, (i.e.) from the days of Constantine to the days of Constantius -- nec
dum finitus Orestes.

Mr. Baxter. Were it not for entering on an unpleasing and unprofitable task, I
would ask you, Who that Juncto of Presbyters was that dethroned the King?

Answ. They were such as the Westminster Assembly, that dispersed their Members
into the Country to animate the People to engage in the War against the King,
and with Mr. Baxter, assisted in carrying on the War from the beginning to the
end, and drew many thousands to engage in that War. Those that encouraged the
Rabble of London to go to Westminster, and demand Justice of him, in such
Tumults, as forced him to leave his Palace for fear of losing his Life: Those
that seized his Towns, Forts, Magazines, and Ships to maintain the War against
him: Those that animated Armies, with whom he was often present in Person, till
they forced him to fly to the Scots: Those that sold and bought him as a
Prisoner of War, and voted no more Addresses to him, but left him to such as at
last barbarously murdered him.

Mr. Baxter. Was it they that petitioned and protested against it?

Answ. The King was dethroned long before any Presbyterians petitioned or
protested against putting him to death: then indeed, when it was too late, the
Ministers of London plead for him in these words; That the woeful Miscarriages
of the King himself, which we cannot but acknowledge to be very many and great
in his Government, have cost the three Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from
his Excellency into a horrid pit of Misery beyond Example; this is as one
Paraphraseth it: We affirm and testify, that besides those of his evil
Counselors, the King's Personal Crimes and fundamental Errors in Government,
too many and great to be mentioned, have cost England, Scotland, and Ireland so
dear, that all the bloodshed, devastations, and rapine might be charged on him,
and for these he is justly cast down from his Throne into so horrid a Pit of
Misery, as to fall under a Sentence of Condemnation. This is such a Petition
and Plea for the King, as those that are made for Peace, which are Arguments
for Separation and Discord. Mr. Love, a great Presbyterian, in his Vxbridge
Sermon, laid a Foundation of this in that Maxim, Melius pereat unus quam
unitas. But Mr. Baxter exceeds all, in representing him as the Head of the
Grotian Religion, which he says were arrant Papists: This is such a Slander as
his barbarous Judges were ashamed to charge him with.

Mr. Baxter. Was it not an Episcopal Parliament, forty or one hundred to one,
that began the War against the King.

Answ. They were indeed Episcopal Men and Conformists for the most part at
their first meeting, but there was a Juncto among them that soon prevailed to
silence and banish the Loyal Members, and then openly declared War against the
King, and ruin to the Bishops. Mr. Baxter was one of those Episcopal conforming
Men; but what he did has been related: and he well knew of what Persuasion the
five Members were, and those whom he Canonizeth as Saints in his Everlasting
Rest: These had sometime been zealous Conformists, and the King's most Loyal
Subjects; but did they continue such? The Bishops that began the Reformation
had been Popish, but when they renounced the Pope's Supremacy and Romish
Doctrines, and settled the Church on a new Foundation for Doctrine and Worship,
no sober Man can say that the Reformation was either begun or carried on by
Popish Bishops. The Case is the same: Those that began our war had been most of
them Episcopal Men and Conformists; but when they imprisoned and sequestered the
Bishops, threw off the Liturgy, and entered into a Covenant against King and
Church, they were neither Episcopal Men nor Conformists. Of this sort were the
Generals, Admirals, and other Officers by Land and Sea,

Mr. Baxter. Whether the Archbishop of York was not the Parliaments
Major General?

Answ. Not at the beginning of the War certainly, nor ever that I heard but
from Mr. Baxter, that he had such a Commission from them. That Archbishop was
with K. Charles at Oxford, and well received by him; nor did he ever appear in
any Hostile Actions till 6 years after the beginning of the War; and the reason
of that was to vindicate a particular right of his own, and not on account of
the war against the King, as has been proved in that Bishop's Life.

Mr. Baxter. Whether the Episcopal Gentry and Ministry did not take the
Engagement more than the Presbyterians?

Answ. I pray Mr. Baxter remember what you were to prove (viz.) who began the
War; and and is this which was done after the King's death (if it had been
true) an Argument to prove that they began the War. I have read in several of
your Books such a Relation of the beginning of our War, which will remain after
you are gone; That the War was begun by Episcopal Men, such as were of
Archbishop Whitgift's mind; That the great Commanders in War by Sea and Land,
were Conformists; and I suppose I have said enough to disprove it: Let me
therefore remind you of a foregoing passage in your Letter, viz. That it is a
part of Satan's work to persuade the World, that no History has any certainty
of Truth, that so Sacred History may be disadvantaged; and now let the
impartial Reader judge, whether Lucian or Mr. Baxter be the truest Historian. I
confess you have engaged me in an unpleasing Work; but in may not be
unprofitable, if what I shall add be duly considered: Let the Troubles at
Frankfort be read over, and the groundless Contests and Animosities of some
Presbyterians against such as adhered to the Doctrine and Worship of the Church
of England, while both Parties were in Exile, and what you your self have
observed of their behavior after they returned home, especially of Knox,
Goodman, and others, how they flew in the face of Authority, and incessantly
woried Q. Elizabeth during her Reign? No sooner were they called home, but some
of them were so intemperate, impatient, and unpeaceable, that some of them
turned to flat Separation, and flew in the Faces of the Prelates with reviling,
etc. p. 150. of Gildas Salvianus. And if the History of the Factious for
Presbytery, during the Reign of King James, and especially of King Charles I.
be impartially read, you will find this odious Comparison incomparably
outdone. This is proper to them, to overthrow whatsoever Estate they are
admitted to, (says Bertius, in Orbis Breviario.) And this is the reason why
Grotius was so condemned for a Papist, because in his Book de Antichristo, he
wrote so much truth against these Men, Circumferamus oculos per omnem
historiam; quod unquam seculum, vidit tot subditorum in Principes bella, sub
religionis titulo, and horum concitatores ubique reperiuntur Ministri
Evangelici (ut quidam se vocant) quod genus hominum, in quae pericula etiam
nunc Optimos Civitatis Amsteladomensis Magistratus conjecerit, videat si cui
libet, de Presbyterorum in reges andacia, librum Jacobi Britanniarum Regis, cui
nomen Donum Regium, videbit eum, ut erat magni Judicij, ea praedixisse, quae
nunc cum dolor and horrore perspicimus. King James spoke by Experience; and
first he tells the Reader in his Preface, These rash heady Preachers think it
their honor to contend with Kings, and perturbe whole Kingdoms. And in p. 41,
42. Take heed my Son to such Puritans, very Pests in the Church and Commonweal;
whom no Deserts can oblige, neither Oaths or Promises bind; breathing nothing
but Sedition and Calumnies, aspiring without measure, railing without reason,
and making their own imaginations, without any warrant of the Word, the square
of their Conscience. I protest before the great God, and since I am here, as
upon my Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that ye shall never find,
with any Highland or Border Thieves, greater ingratitude, and more lies and
vile perjuries, than with these Phanatick Spirits. And suffer not the
Principles of them to brook your Land, if you like to sit at rest; except you
would keep them for trying your patience, as Socrates did an evil Wife. He told
his Parliament, in his Speech March 19. 1603. The third which I call a Sect
rather than Religion, is the Puritan and Novelist, who do not differ so much
from us in points of Religion, as in their confused Forms of Polity and Parity,
being ever discontented with the present Government, and impatient to suffer
any Superiority, which makes their Sect unable to be suffered in any
well-governed Commonwealth. And now you may research your voluminous Baronius
and Binius, and collect the Maxims and Practices of the Jesuits, who are not
much elder than the Presbyterians, and if I do not match them in both from the
Authors before-named; all which will not make up above one Volume of your
twenty, and relate only the History of about six or sevenscore years, for yours
of about sixteen hundred. I shall need to add only your own Theses concerning
Government, and what I said will still appear to be true, That such horrid
things as have been done by that Generation, have not been outdone by any
other since Judas betrayed his Master. By these Relations Mr. Baxter may be
informed, That something has befal'n the Church that for shame and mischievous
effects, has exceeded the Persidiousness, Contention, Schism, and Pride of
Bishops.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHereas near half of Mr. Baxter's Life is filled up with repeated Cavils and
frivolous objections against our Episcopacy and Conformity to the Liturgy and
Discipline of the Church, which have been fully answered by many Worthies of
our Church, to the satisfaction of imprejudiced Readers; yet because nothing
will satisfy his Admirers but what is Mr. Baxter's own sense, I have collected
such Answers as Mr. Baxter himself has given to his own Objections, and
printed them in a little Treatise called, Mr. Baxter's last Legacy to all sober
Dissenters, which I doubt not may give them satisfaction if they deserve that
Title.

FINIS.

