THE NOVELLS OF Gio. Francesco Loredano, A NOBLEMAN OF VENICE. Translated for
diversion into English.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Fox at the Star, and Henry Lord at the Duke of
Monmouth in Westminster Hall. 1682.

GIO. BATTISTA FVSCONI TO THE READER.
THese Novels being carelessly scattered up and down, I thought it my duty
diligently to collect them into one Volume. Flowers bound up together in a
Posie do make a much better show than when they lie strowed abroad here and
there. Accept, Courteous Reader, the Stories of a Writer that knows also how to
compose Histories. The Book would have been much bigger, if the Author, being
employed in more important Studies, had not refused to gratify my Request. May
you live free from enthralling Passions, which is as much as to say happy.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
HAving pleased my self, for some little time in translating, I thought good to
give others an hour or two's diversion in reading of these Amorous Discourses.
If I have detracted any thing from the worth of my Author, by coming short of
the politeness of his Style; I have also added something to his praise, by
publishing his Work to those that understand nothing of his Language. I beg
your acceptance, and bid you farewell.

The Argument.
Aleria a most beautiful Lady, being not in the least moved by the many
Courtships and Addresses of the Marquess Arderico, becomes inclined to love
him, only for that he is highly commended by her Husband. His good word effects
that which all the solicitations and services of the other could not do. The
Marquess on the contrary, being acquainted herewith, upon the very point of
enjoying the fruits of his love, does generously quit his pretension.

NOVEL I.
AMong other the Ladies, in the famous City of Vicenza, which did ravish both
the eyes and hearts of all Men, the beauty of Aleria (of the Noble House of the
Counts of Malosi) did so far exceed that of the rest, that it left no room
neither for detraction nor amendment. The fairest faces gave place to that
aspect which would have been thought Divine, if by her Courtly Carriage she had
not discovered some graceful Tracts of Humanity.

This Lady (who was Courted by those also that despaired of obtaining her)
yielding obedience only to those affections which obliged her to prefer true
merit, did consent to be Married to the Count of Sanca Croce; a Gentlemen both
for Birth and Virtue inferior to none. He had no Quality that was not amiable,
nor any thing in him that was not admirable. The Wedding was celebrated with
that splendour which was befitting their Noble Estate. Those who in the general
Celebration did bury their particular consolation, did not refrain from being
present at this Solemnity, although in others rejoicing, they saw cause of
mourning. Music and dancing, which have power to ravish even those hearts that
are most deeply affected with Melancholy, could not assuage the grief of their
minds, who, together with the beauty of Aleria, did lose the hopes of their
lives. Yet many, by their dextrous ingenuity, making a virtue of necessity, not
being able to subdue their affection, did direct it to other Women. Others
knowing their eyes to have been the instruments of letting in love to their
hearts, resolved to deprive them of such their complacency, by withdrawing them
from their beloved object. They fled away from that Climate, wherein the Sun
did not shine but in favor of others. Some following the rules of him that
taught the Remedy of Love, set themselves to spy faults in that Face which,
being of heavenly beauty, could not be thought exempt from Clouds. Only
Arderico the Marquess of Castle Novo, raising his hopes above the impossibility
of the Enterprise, found that the Solemnity of this day had made his love more
ardent; whilst others had thereby applied remedies to their passion. He, being
as I believe, in an ecstasy of grief, was assisting to all the Offices of that
day; imitating those foolish Flies, which so they may enjoy the light of a
Candle, do not care if they burn themselves in its flame. He endured his
torment with so much impatience, that the least effect of his distracting
amazement was the forgetting of himself. The Feast being over he found new fuel
added to his fire. The absenting himself did not extinguish, but foment his
flames. Wretched Arderico felt his love grow the hotter, for being farther from
the refreshing beauties of Aleria. She, on the contrary, did give such pure
demonstrations of her zealous affection to her Husband, that all hope, except
that of Arderico's, which was devoted to obstinacy, would have turned to
despair. But he nevertheless, loving so much the more for his being less
beloved, let slip no occasion of discovering to her his disease. His eyes were
continually fixed upon her, he assaulted her with sighs, and asked pity of her
by his looks; in sum, he waiting on her in all places, and courting her at all
Balls, there fell out no accident which he did not signalize, either, by some
demonstration of obsequiousness, or testimony of his affection. Yet Aleria,
either not believing, or not caring to be beloved, never looked upon him but
with an indifferent eye. And although the rules of good manners did oblige, her
to yield to him in dancing, and to correspond with him in saluting; yet she did
it without the least acknowledgment of his affection. Arderico having no other
means to insinuate his love into the mind of Aleria, had recourse to his Pen;
and with much ado, his tears intermixing with the Ink, and defacing his
Writing, he formed this Letter.

Fair Lady,
I should think I did deserve the rigors of your disdain for discovering my
affection, if I did not know that every heart stands obliged to love things
that are divine. The rays of your beauty have kindled so great a fire in my
breast, that I should believe the hiding it to be rather an effect of stupidity
than of Virtue. Aleria I love you, and if the ties of Love were so powerful as
those of Religion, I would say I adore you. But what my Pen conceals will be
made manifest in my soul, if you please not to disdain the services of

Your most humble Servant Arderico.


Having sealed the Letter, he bethought him of the best way how to convey it
safe into the hands of Aleria. Her Servants, though gained by the excesses of
his Liberality, yet durst not attempt the affections of a Mistress so chaste,
that she gave not the least motive for temptation. To make use of other persons
he thought it both scandalous and dangerous; wherefore he resolved himself to
be the Porter. He pitched upon a day when she was at Church, perhaps more
adored than adoring. And coming as near to her as well he could, deceiving the
suspicion and observation of many, whilst Aleria was intent upon her mental
Devotions, he conveyed the Billet into her Prayer Book, which by chance she had
laid behind her. There was not any one that perceived it. Aleria her self, when
she took up her Book again, was not at first aware of it. She no sooner saw it
but she was surpised with a blush, being more angry with her self for having
given others an occasion to tempt her, than displeased for having been tempted.
This prudent Lady knew very well that she could not be called chaste, if she did
not resist the allurements of Lovers. Whosoever is chaste merely for necessity,
I think her unworthy of that Character. Aleria having overcome those confusions
which left the marks of Vermilion in her Cheeks, and stifled that curiosity
which is so natural unto Women, when she saw her time, tore the Letter into a
thousand pieces, as if that had been guilty of the faults of him that wrote it.
Arderico feeling his own heart rent in the tearing of that Paper, did despair
of finding, for the future, any means to certify his love unto her. He was
really confounded at her proceedings, who being beloved, did not only not
accept thereof, but gave out signs that she knew not of it. He, poor man,
continued in his slavery, being so much the more unhappy, by how much the less
prospect he had of the hopes of any reward. It happened that Aleria, in company
of her Husband went into the Country for to enjoy that season of the Year
which, bearing more fruits than any other, seems by its deliciousness greatly
to excite the appetites of Men. Arderico, who was the Eliotrope of this Sun,
followed her, not without hopes that the retirements of the Country would
afford him that which the divertisements of the City had denied him; and then
he presumed that he could more easily bribe the Country People, for that the
minds of Men, the baser they are, the sooner they are corrupted. He was scarce
come thither, but he began to surround the house of Aleria, with pretense of
spreading Nets for Birds and hunting of Wild Beasts, whilst his heart was
indeed entangled in the snares of Love, and continually tormented with the
sense of his Passion. One day, either accidentally or willingly, he entered her
Palace, upon color of looking for a Falcon that was fled from off his Fist.
The Count of S. Croce, Aleria's Husband, received him with those demonstrations
of kindness and civility which are usual among Gentlemen; and having commanded
his Servants that they should follow the Hawk, he carried Arderico in to see
his Wife. I know not how to express this encounter, which may better be
conceived by imagination. Let it suffice that Arderico did blush, look pale,
and was affected both with heat and cold at one and the same time. He was, by
courteous invitation, constrained to taste of some fruits, whilst that his eyes
feeding on their beloved beauties, all other Meats were distastful unto him. At
length having recovered his Falcon, after many obliging Complements passed, he
departed a more passionate Lover than when he came thither. He never had seen
Aleria look more favorably, nor had ever received so much courtesy from her
as at that time. Aleria on the other side, being very well satisfied with the
good Behavior of Arderico, asked her Husband what the name of that Gentleman
was whom he had so kindly entertained. The Count smiled at this demand, and
afterward replied, Do not you know Arderico the Marquess of Castle Novo? Is it
possible that you only should be blind, and not see the Sun shine? Pardon me if
it seem strange that you should not come to the knowledge of so Worthy a Man. I
must needs think that your heart is perverted, or your soul degenerated when
you have not had eyes to see the Worth of so conspicuous a Gentleman. All
perfections which are desired in others, are fulfilled in him. By his unerring
Prudence he causes admiration, even in those that hate him. With a free and
disinterested Courage he always take part with that which is just. By the
modesty of his deportment he has overcome all envy. In short, he is inferior
to none in Arms, no one superior to him in Learning, and as to his Nobility he
has no equal. He has all the advantages both of Mind and Fortune; neither is
there any Lady so fair in Vicenza, that would not esteem her self very
fortunate if she were honored but with one look from this Noble Gentleman. And
pray do not you contrariwise, neglect the knowledge of others excellencies, if
you would not have me think you to be of a poor and mean spirit. Aleria
excused her self very coldly, repenting within her self that she had so long
slighted the service of a Man, who for his singular good qualities did deserve
to be loved above all others. She, being fully satisfied with these Encomiums,
grew so passionately in love with Arderico, that she turned wholly Rebel to the
Laws of Honesty. That honesty which could not be subdued by a continual
obsequiousness; which resisted the persuasions of Servants, the flatteries of
Lovers, the assaults of Sensuality, and the powers of Love, was prostituted to
the candid Speech and betrayed by the tongue of him that ought to have guarded
it. That heart that could not be overcome by the eyes, was vanquished by the
ears. Being therefore hurried by that vehemence which does usually agitate the
soul of a Lover, (the Count her Husband being gone to Vicenza about earnest
business) she wrote a Letter in manner following, to the Marquess Arderico.

Sir,
If the demonstrations of your affection do not deceive the ardency of my
desires, I am resolved to run the hazard of complying with your satisfaction. I
blame my self for taking up so precipitous a resolution, but I desire not to be
innocent, when by being faulty I become yours. I would say more, but Love being
a Child knows not how to speak. About three hours within night I will expect
your coming to my Lodgings by way of the Garden-gate which you shall find only
shut to. Let me receive a kind answer, who am

Your most devoted Servant Aleria.


She sent this Letter by a Maiden who was obliged to Fidelity by her excessive
Liberality. This Maid presented it to Arderico, who, believing it to be a
Dream, could not resolve what answer to give; at last, taking Pen and Paper, he
wrote as follows: Dear Aleria,
I would thank you for that kindness which has enriched my poor hopes, if
divine favors did not oblige one rather to a silent acknowledgment, than to
open thankfulness. I will come according to your appointment, about the third
hour of the night, to sacrifice my heart unto you. I shall gladly perform this
duty by night, because all things seeming greater in the night time, I may then
perhaps seem better unto you than really I am: and then, in the dark, you
cannot so easily discern the nakedness of my deserts. In the mean time please
to preserve me as I am,

Your most obliged and affectionate Servant, Arderico.




Having sent away the Letter he began to long for the night with such amorous
dotages as are wont to tyrannize over Lovers. He let not one moment of the hour
appointed slip, before he was at the Chamber of Aleria. Their complements and
endearments are referred to the consideration of those who have been the
subjects of the like entertainment. Aleria was already gotten into Bed,
expecting to give vent in amorous embraces, to those passions which do torment
the minds of Lovers. Arderico being abashed to see himself prevented, began to
strip himself with all diligence. Whilst with an amorous impatience he was
pulling off his Clothes, he asked Aleria the reason, why after so many
slightings of the proofs of his affection, she had so suddenly condescended to
his desires, at a time when he was assigning over all his pretensions unto
desperation. My Love, answered Aleria, the extraordinary Character of your
Merit, so lively represented to me by my Husband, has so entirely subdued my
Spirit, that I did not believe I could live without you; and here she repeated
to him all that her Husband had said. Well then, said Arderico, had neither my
love, nor my service any power to win your heart, if the Voice of the Count
your Husband, sounding forth my praises, had not charmed your Soul? It is even
so replied Aleria. God forbid, added Arderico, putting on his Clothes again,
that I should injure him, who by such generous expressions of favor toward
me, does Violate the Chastity of the most noble Woman. Pardon me Aleria, I
cannot serve you to the prejudice of his Honor who by his Encomiums so much
advances the merit of my Quality. In saying so, he went hastily out of doors,
by this action teaching men the true Worth of Gentility; Husbands that they
ought not to speak too much in praise of other men to their Wives; and
prescribing unto Women, more especialy to those that are Married, not to run
the hazard of settling their affections on a Man who may be changed every moment.

The Argument.
Epidorus a young man of Florence, falls unwarily in Love with a Masquerade
that he did not know, and believing her to be a Noble Lady called Leena, he
very earnestly sues for love unto her. Having obtained his Suit, whilst he
thinks he enjoys her, he finds himself encircled within the Arms of a
Chambermaid whom, in his own defense he is forced to Marry.

NOVEL II.
THere came to Venice, for to recreate himself in time of Carneval, Epidorus a
young Florentine, of a very mean Extraction, but who had, by the avarice of his
Father, gotten to himself some sort of Reputation. This young Man, by the Death
of his Progenitors, was possessed of so great an Estate, that it gave not only
light to the obscurity of his Birth, but made him also ambitious of enjoying
those pleasures which are oftentimes sought after by the greatest Personages.
There was no Feast, Play, nor Public Revelling in Venice, unto which he would
not go. One Evening at a Ball he found himself love-stricken by an imaginary
beauty. The stately Gate and rich Attire of a Masquerade did so bewitch his
fancy, that he confessed himself her Lover before he could see her face.
Neither did the career of his loving Dotages stop here: for, having warily
followed her after she went from the Ball, he saw her go into the House of one
of the chief Gentlemen of that City, who, among other temporal blessings, was
happy in a very beautiful Wife. He imagining that this Masquerade was Leena,
for such was the fair Ladies name of that House, grew more and more in Love,
and his Passion was confirmed when he saw Leena the next day, wear part of
those ornaments which he had observed on the Masquerade. Taking therefore
courage from the difficulty of the Enterprise, he resolved to try all means
possible. Fortune was not averse in offering them unto him, whilst that very
Evening the same Masquerade came again to the Ball. He, after having waited
some time on her, seeing no little correspondence in her eyes, the press of
People leaving no room for observation, accosted her after this fashion. Madam,
i^ my tongue were not afraid of committing a rash offense, it would venture to
disclose the passion that I nourish in my breast, and would intercede for a
love which is so much the greater, by how much the longer it is concealed. If
you knew; said she, the person that is disguised under this Habit, you would
heartily repent your having given so much liberty to your tongue. I do not
rely, answered Epidorus, upon outward appearances, but upon the knowledge of
your singular merit which is matched to an excellent beauty. You, says the
Masquerade, so you get the name of a lover do not care if you are reputed a
Liar. Tell me, how can you judge of the beauty of my face, which you have not
seen otherwise than Masqued? One may very well, replied Epidorus, give judgment
upon the brightness of the Sun, although it be shaded by a Cloud; and my wicked
eyes have forcibly introduced the bright image of your beauty into my heart.
Lady Leena, it is impossible to conceal your self from the affection of a Lover
who has the eyes of Argus. To say that I adore you is the greatest testimony
that my mouth can ut^er, but the least sentiment that my heart ^an express. It
lies in you to make me ^appy. Great enterprises have great diffi^ulties
attending them. But Love, that ^an rob Jove himself of the power of his
Thunder, can also make level even Moun^ains of impossibility. He would have
gone on, if that the Masquerade, with ^ome show of anger, had not interrupted
^is discourse saying, When you spoke to me as to a person unknown, I did bear
with your ignorance; but now seeing that ^ou know me, and yet, with a
presumption ^reater than becomes you, dare still to ^empt me, I cannot but
blame your inso^ence. If I did not fear the prejudice ari^ng to my honor from
one so inferior ^o my Quality, Repentance should be the ^east punishment of
your rashness. But whilst she was speaking these words, her ^ands and her eyes
did betray her tongue, and did assure Epidorus, by all the favors ^ossible,
that those resentments were the ^mpulses of honesty; and not the effects of
^nger. And here the Ball broke up, where^pon it behoved Epidorus to retire
accom^anied with all those inquietudes which do ^ssault the youth and
imprudence of a lover. He expected the next night, which was the last of the
Carnevale, with those passionate desires which are wont to attend an enamoured
Soul. The Stars had scarce made any show of the light they had borrowed from
the Sun, when he went to the usual Ball. A little after came the Masquerade,
very well known, although she had used a great deal of cunning to conceal her
self from the curious eye of Epidorus. He taking her by the hand, endeavored
to give credit to his affection with these words. Fair Leena you may, by your
new disguise very well impose upon the eyes of others, but not upon my hear^
which, with its unusual palpitations and diffusions of heat to all the parts of
my body, does not only know you, but ador^ you as a Goddess. I wish, that with
your yesterday Garments, you may have also laid aside that haughtiness of
Spirit that made you so averse to my Love. Know therefore that cruelty is an
improper attribute for the divinity of your Beauty and that Beauty which is not
communicabl^ to others is directly opposite to the Decree of Heaven. If the
Heavens should enjoin me to love you, answered the Masquerade, why then perhaps
neither the Laws of honesty, the hazard of my life, nor the inconstancy of Men,
could bridle my affection. The beauty of your aspect, added Epidorus, is a
token sent you from Heaven, that admonishes you not to be too sparing of your
favors, since that by enriching your form, it has impoverished all other the
fairest ideas imaginable. Let us not fly so high as Hyperboles, replied the
Masquerade. I, as I know my self not to be so fair; so I would gladly be so,
that I might better please him that will love me. But your cunning and my
simplicity has made me discover the secrets of my heart to a person, who
perhaps laughing at my indiscretion, does go about to deceive my easy nature.
It is not just that my reputation should venture upon such evident dangers. I
have said too much. If my face were to be seen, the blushes which grief and
repentance have caused there, would give sufficient testimony of the same. The
blood which my heart has sent up into my face, is the reproof of my soul, that
threatens those severe punishments, the thoughts only whereof do affright me.
In saying so, she retired among other the Masquerades, leaving Epidorus
oppressed by a number of thoughts, from which he would not quickly have
disengaged himself, if Love, which commonly is not wanting to help the
necessities of Lovers, had not succored him. Taking therefore his Masquerade
again by the hand, he pressed her so hard, and promised her so much, that he
obtained leave for a Conference with her the next night, (which was the first
night in Lent) at a little Window that looked out into a By-street. With these
pleasing hopes he passed away the remainder of that night, expecting the other
with many railing expressions against the Stars, for that they stayed so long
before they came to celebrate the Funeral of the day. Scarce had the light
given place to darkness when he was at the appointed window. Although he
thought to have anticipated the hour, yet he found himself prevented, his
beloved having attended his coming, and accusing him of little love to her
self, because he was not there before her. There passed many Complements
between them, and their amorous conceits were without number. They discoursed
of Constancy, Fidelity and Secrecy, as if they never could have had enough of
it, insomuch that the night, being weary of hearing them, seemed to invite the
day. And the day approaching they departed with promise to meet there as often
as Epidorus should see a little white Cloth hanging out at the VVindow. This
was done two or three times a Week, and gave so great content to Epidorus,
that, in comparison thereof, all other Entertainments were but annoyances unto
him. Yet not believing his happiness to be complete if he did not communicate
it unto others, he yielded so much to indiscretion, as to impart the secret of
his amors unto many of his Confidents. He bragged that he had won the heart of
Leena, which had driven the patience and affection of a Thousand Lovers to
despair. He boasted to be the possessor of that beauty which had obliged even
those men who were addicted to love none but themselves, unto adoration. These
Stories came to the ears of one who being either incredulous or envious,
resolved to watch the proceedings of Epidorus. He overheard him one Evening
when he appointed to enter that night into the possession of his Love. And not
being able to comply with the felicity of one who was in no point superior to
him, but in the gifts of Fortune; being excited by envy, which always conspires
against the satisfaction of others, he let loose the expressions of his Rage in
a Letter which he sent unto the Husband of Leena, who opening it read what
follows: Cordelius,
Not to discover traitorous actions, is to confess ones self an Accomplice in
them. I who, by the excess of your favors, and the obligations that ly upon
me, am destinated to the protection of your honor, cannot be silent when I see
it betrayed into the hands of dishonesty. The night in which those infamies are
acted that obscure your reputation, has not darkness enough to cover your
disgrace. My Zeal implores you to be an eyewitness, that you may confess Leena
to be unchaste, and me your real friend. The searching out of the truth hereof I
refer to your discretion. I am sorry to disturb the repose of your soul with so
unexpected an advice; but he is to be commended who by discovering a mischief,
does give occasion for applying the remedies thereunto.

Your faithful Friend.




This Letter raised an infinite number of thoughts, and all of them cruel in
the mind of Cordelius. He thought upon nothing but Blood, Death and Slaughters.
Yet the love he bore Leena prevailing with him, and prudently weighing what
might be the effects of Malice, he resolved to believe nothing but his own
eyes. He pretended very urgent affairs to go in all haste into the Country, and
departed not without the Tears of Leena, who lamented every moment of his
absence. Cordelius kept himself hid all the rest of that day, and at night went
to spy out the betrayers of his Honor. In the mean time Leena being fallen
into a most sweet sleep, was awaked, not without disturbance, by the calling of
her Nurse. She informed her that Cordelius was just then upon entering into the
embraces of Cinicia her Chambermaid, and that she had told her of it, that she
might be no hindrance to it. Leena was apt enough to believe this, knowing the
Genius of her Husband and the little honesty of her Maid. So much the rather,
for that she had not been without some jealousy before, and had made some
complaint of it. She quickly put on her Clothes, and not being willing that
the Nurse should follow her, that so she might the more freely reprehend the
incontinency of Gordelius, she went toward her Maids Chamber. There she found
her Husband, who, with his Sword ready drawn in his hand, was running upon her
for to kill her. He did not do it, either to let her first see the death of her
Paramour; or else because the Mercy of Heaven would not permit that her
suspected innocence should have undeserved punishment. Leena, although she were
full of anger, yet thought it more safe to use entreaties than reproofs.
Throwing her self at his feet, and intermixing her words with tears, she said,
Sir, if the honest embraces of a Servant do please you better than those of a
Wife, I know not how to oppose your satisfaction. I proffer my self to be the
Procuress of your pleasures, if you will do me the honor to command me. But
that in the loss of my honor I should see also the danger of my life, I cannot
but lament the rigours of my Destiny that has made me so unhappy. Is therefore
the impudent dishonesty of a Serving-Maid more powerful with you than the chaste
delights of a Wife, whose desires are wholly subject to your beck? O that
Cordelius should so much forget himself, and that the Heavens should alter
their influence for to torment me! Here Cordelius interrupted her, saying,
False Woman, thy lies and tears would have persuaded me something, if my eyes
had not been witnesses of thy dishonesty. Prepare thy self to die, for it is
not reason that she should live, who has murdered my Reputation. But first
tell me where you hide that Rascal that has had the impudence to violate my
Bed. Leena not being able to endure these terms which touched her to the very
quick, replied, For to excuse your amorous thefts by specious pretenses, you go
about to accuse my Chastity. This is not consonant to your prudence and my
affection. I am yours, and only yours, Malice it self cannot find that I have
prejudiced your honor, so much as in thought, much less in deed. I do appeal
to your self, at such time as the inordinate desire of enjoying a Servant-maid,
or the displeasure of being intercepted shall not have possessed your soul.
Cordelius, being more highly incensed hereat, with great fury asked her, what
servant? or what amors she spoke of? VVhereto Leena repeating to him all that
the Nurse had told her, and he also hearing it confirmed by her own mouth, ran
presently to the Maids Chamber, and there found her lovingly in Bed with
Epidorus. He was ready to have made him a sacrifice to his fury, had not he
been diverted by the persuasions of his Wife. He was contented at last that
Epidorus should Marry Cinicia, who came to be a servant more through the
injuries of Fortune, than by the qualities of her Descent. Hereunto Epidorus
readily consented, without reply, the fear of Death making him honest whether
he would or no. After this Cordelius embraced Leena, and excused what he had
done in sense of Honor, for that he had heard Epidorus make a Call with a
little whistle, and then saw him brought into the House. Prudent Leena was well
satisfied with these justifications, rejoicing that she had escaped a danger
which was so much the greater in that it was not foreseen, and which, at one
and the same time, did threaten both her Life and Reputation.

This may serve to advertise Husbands not to run headlong into the suspicion of
their Wives dishonesty; may teach Wives not to give too much liberty to their
Maidens; and lastly, may be an example to all those that go about to debauch
the Wives of other Men.

The Argument.
Lovanius coming to a certain House that was accidentally set on fire, is
inflamed with the love of Deadora, who, proving not ungrateful, corresponds
with him, and, to give her self the better opportunity, she wilingly
condescends that her Husband, while she enjoys her lover, should embrace
Aleria her Chambermaid; she falling in love with Lovanius, betrayeth her
Mistress, who transported by jealous fury, opens the way to her own and
others destruction.

NOVEL III.
THere lived as a Student, in the famous Academy of Bologna, Lovanius Son to
the Count of Roccabruna, a young Man who by his bodily perfection and affable
demeanor, did tyrannize over the affections of all those that had the fortune
to know him. He went one day a walking toward the Walls of the City, when he
was stopped in the way by some voices, who crying out Fire, Fire, did pitifully
call for assistance. Among other Women that, being desperately affrighted at
this accident, did exceedingly weep and wail, there was a Gentlewoman, who
though the Roses in her Complexion were turned into Lillies, yet was there left
an appearance of a Garden full of Beauty. This Lady nevertheless, having a
courage greater than the danger, was not at all daunted, though her being
forsaken of all, and unable to remedy it her self, made her a little fearful.
Lovanius seeing no body move, the Neighbors being fled from their Houses, and
there being none but a company of poor Women, who, by their loud shreeking, did
augment the terror and confusion, he resolved to go himself with his servants,
and help to extinguish that fire which, having already gotten head, began with
towering flames to soar aloft. Going therefore into the Palace where the fire
was very furious, after having spoke to Deadora (for this was the Mistress of
the House her name) that she should be of good cheer, and put away all her
fears, he went, with his servants and some others that came to help, to the top
of the House. There he wrought so much with his hands, and commands, that the
Fire in a little while, was lost in a cloud of Smoke. He was scarce come down
from the Roof of the House when he was met by Gelasius the Husband of that Lady
who, hearing of the danger, came running home. Here passed many words between
them, and all of them very courteous, Gelasius was not wanting to offer unto
him the Patronage of that house which he had made his own by preserving it from
being burnt. There came also Deadora to give him thanks in such obliging
manner, that Lovanius felt those flames kindled in his heart which he had a
little before extinguished. He had looked upon her before with sentiments of
pity whilst she, being oppressed by fear, could do nothing but weep and wail;
the waning color of her face having not had force enough to set his soul on
fire: but now that her Courage had restored her wonted beauty, and that the
brightness of her eyes was not clouded with tears, his pity was changed into
love. Thus Lovanius dedicated his affection wholly to this Beauty; which
Deadora soon perceived, and so much the sooner, because in his taking leave, he
inspired his very soul into her with a sigh. Nevertheless she pretended not to
see it, either for to give greater credit unto her honesty, or for that she
would not so soon entrust her self to the fidelity of any man. And although
Lovanius continually waited on her both to Church and at Balls, yet he reaped
no other fruits of his labor than salutes and indifferent looks, which might
rather be imputed unto common civility, than affectionate courtesy. The young
Gentleman, not being able to resist the violent torments of his soul, he gave
vent to his passion by writing these words: Madam,
The flames that burnt your House were destinated to torment my soul. I would
have hid them, but that fire suppressed does break forth with greater violence,
and makes all succors come too late. I would have quenched them, but that they
being supernatural, my tears could do no more than make my grief the more
sensible. I do therefore, Fair Lady, implore that pity for extinguishing my
ardors, which I did heartily contribute without so much as expecting any
entreaty from you. You have reason to have compassion of me, because you have
experienced the damage and dangers that do accompany fires. I hope that a Lady
of your fair quality will not maculate your fame with foul ingratitude. Help
me, I pray you, if for nothing else, for that you may not lose a servant who
loves you as much as is possible for him, though not so much as you deserve.
The hopes of my life depend upon the honor of your answer; I esteeming your
favors to be the true aliment of my being.




Having folded up and sealed this Letter, he besought Fortune to give it a safe
delivery. He thought in himself that the most resolute means were also the most
hazardous. To make use of Women for this purpose, were to stain the reputation
of the Lady, and to provoke her to anger, while he should gain her love. At
length resolving, by a rash action, to overcome all the impediments that
opposed his desire, upon a certain day that Deadora was sitting in the Church
at Prayers, he neatly rolled up the Letter, and threw it into her bosom, so
cleverly that no body perceived it. Deadora being surprised hereat, and seeing
that to make a noise would but bring her into disgrace, she cunningly concealed
the Letter, and returned very much troubled in mind unto her House. As soon as
she was alone her curiosity, and perhaps her love too, induced her to look upon
that Paper. She had not read it over, before she gave her self up for
vanquished. Those expressions were too powerful for the weakness of a Woman's
heart (which is apt to receive any impression) to resist. Her amorous desires
thus tyrannizing over her, she found no other repose than inquietude. She
summoned all the faculties of her Soul to come to counsel with her, which after
a debate did finally Vote for Lovanius. Whereupon, being compelled by that
force which knows nothing of reason, and which works with greatest violence
where it finds most resistance, she returned him this answer.

Lovanius,
If I did not think I should incur your disdain with declaring my self so
easily overcome, I would frankly say that I love you, and that I am yours. But
because I know the inconstancy of Men's minds to be such, as to set little value
upon what is gotten and enjoyed without much labor, I therefore beseech you to
abandon that enterprise which cannot take effect without endangering both my
Life and Reputation. Yet I have a soul so full of gratitude that I cannot but
adventure to give them satisfaction, who have so obligingly afforded me their
succor in time of need. I therefore rest assured that so worthy a Gentleman
who is endowed with all the graces of Nature and of Fortune, will not disturb
the repose of my faithful heart, nor torment the inclinations of a Woman that,
in spite of her heart, confesses her self to be yours. You did so courteously
concern your self in quenching the late fire which exercised its fury only on
things insensible; that it is not just you should now foment it in my soul,
with danger of consuming both my Life and Honor. If I could have shook off
that Yoke which is so much the heavier for that it came rather by Destiny than
by my good will, you should not have been beforehand with me in Writing. Pardon
me if I undecently trample on the Laws of Matrimony, and the honesty becoming
our Sex; since that Reason is the first thing whereof Love depriveth us. But I
fear I have discovered my mind too much to one that perhaps will laugh at my
simplicity.


This Letter, coming privately to the hands of Lovanius, filled him with so
great joy that he was not able to contain himself. He knew very well that those
expressions of Deadora were not feigned, seeing that those repulses were indeed
invitations, and the doubts therein mentioned were no other than assurances of
love. Hence he inferred that the affection of that Lady was greater than he
could have imagined, and therefore, without sending any more Letters, he
brought his business about so well, that he got the opportunity of speaking to
her at a little Window, where they agreed upon the end of their amorous
pretensions. Gelasius, the Husband of Deadora, was so addicted to all Women
that, like a Cameleon that puts on all colors that come near him, he changed
his love and desires with all objects. For to satisfy his greedy Lusts he made
no distinction between Nobility and Beauty. He confessed himself to be as soon
caught by Silver Hairs as by Golden Locks. A Lady of Honor, and the most
arrant Strumpet had a like power over him. That Beauty wherein the most
critical malice could find no fault, had no greater triumph over his affection,
than a face transformed by a thousand blemishes and imperfections. Deadora
being acquainted with the Genius of her Husband, thought of this means to enjoy
her lover. She knew that Aleria her Chambermaid had been solicited by
promises, gifts, and many times with threatenings to comply with him in his
Amorous Debauches. Aleria being assaulted with many unchaste thoughts, would
easily have consented, had not she been withheld by the fear of her Mistress
who, with Argus's Eyes, did watch over the dissolute affections of Gelasius.
Deadora therefore, willing to have the opportunity of being with her Lover, was
content that Aleria in the mean while should entertain her Husband. Which
succeeded happily oftentimes, the hot Season of the Year also concurring in
favor of their loves. Gelasius and Deadora lay in two Chambers apart, so that
Lovanius being brought into a Ground-room, whilst that Gelasius enjoyed Aleria,
he kept company with Deadora; and Aleria in one and the same time did serve to
guard her Mistress, please her Master, and solace her self. But because amorous
felicity is an Ephemera that is born and dies in one day, Fortune was resolved
to precipitate them with as much ease as she had before exalted them. Lovanius
was brought into the house, by Aleria, one evening a little sooner than
ordinary. She, having received him with a thousand Caresses, expressing the
ardor that she nourished in her breast, told him that Deadora, having not quite
supped, could not come yet awhile, but that, in the mean time, she had
commission to entertain him. Lovanius thanked her very kindly, telling her,
this was not the first obligation she had laid upon him. Aleria had not
patience to hear him any more, but, taking him by the hand, said, Mr. Lovanius,
there is no greater unhappiness than to see another gather the fruit of ones
own labor. I have done very much for to promote your love, and have gained
nothing but fears and dangers. Is it possible, in gratitude at least, if not
for love, that I may not merit the favor of your kindness? Certainly I do not
envy the happiness of my Mistress in possessing your whole Heart; I only bewail
the misery of my Fortune which has put me in a condition to be despised, even
by those for whom I continually do services. Having thus spoken she kissed his
Hand, which she held pressed between her own, with so much passion, that
Lovanius, who at first laughed at her folly, being not able to resist any
longer, let himself be overcome by sensuality; so much the rather, because the
Features of Aleria were so excellent, that he rather would have been counted a
fool, than a constant lover who should have let slip the occasion of enjoying
her. Lovanius and Aleria were ingulfed in Amorous Pleasures, when Deadora,
thinking long e're she was called, and perhaps not being without jealousy
(since true Lovers pay this interest for their pleasure) having seen her
Husband in bed, she came softly down into the ground Chamber. There having
found her lover engaged in amorous action, being hurried by a precipitous rage,
without remembering the dangers that were imminent to her Life and Honor, she
began furiously to lay about her both with her hands and tongue. Traitors, said
she, do you thus triumph over my disgrace? are these the rewards of my
confidence and fidelity? I Will handle you in such manner, that by seeing you
buried in my destruction, I will rejoice that my ruin shall not be infested
either by your derision or lasciviousness. These words were accompanied with so
many blows and bites, that fetched blood in many places about Aleria. Lovanius,
in this interim, throwing himself at her feet, entreated her with such sweet
words as would have softened the hardest stones. Sometimes he put her in mind of
the danger their lives were in. Sometimes he excused his own error, promising
amendment. And other times he protested that his body had sinned without the
consent of his soul. Deadora nevertheless, being deaf to these supplications
and humiliations, continued her assaults both in words and deeds; when
Gelasius, with a look full of horror and fierceness, came thither. He had
waking long attended Aleria's coming, whereupon rising for to look after her,
he came where he heard, though not distinctly, the complaints of Deadora, the
cries of Aleria, and the prayers of Lovanius. Gelasius therefore taking a
Poniard in his Hand, ran in a rage whither the noise called him. He had no
sooner seen Lovanius embracing his Wifes knees, but he concluded him to be the
enemy of her Chastity, and the reputation of his House; wherefore, running
furiously on him, he wounded him in such manner in the head, that not being
able to support himself, he fell flat upon the ground, with the Agony of Death
upon him, which also appeared more terrible unto him, because he saw that his
sensualities had prepared a grave, not only for himself, but also for Deadora.
Gelasius seeing Lovanius in a condition not to live long, much less to make any
defense, turning about to his Wife, with a tone so terrible that would have
struck horror into the stoutest heart, he said, Woman, thy offense is so
heinous, that to let it go unpunished would be an effect rather of weakness
than of compassion. Yet, the characters of my former affection being still
imprinted in my mind, I will pardon thee, but on this condition, that seeing
this Adulterer has gotten thy heart, thou will, by the help of this weapon,
tear it from his breast. Deadora taking the Dagger, with an undaunted courage,
greater than is required in any Woman, said unto him, Sir, the errors of love
do deserve some kind of pardon, because they proceed rather from Fate, than out
of choice. But I confess my self unworthy of it, because I could not regulate
my dissoluteness. She spoke these words, and then, making as if she would have
run the Dagger into Lovanius's body, she stabbed her Husband to the heart, who
scarce could say, Cursed Woman, do thou thus, in one moment rob me of my
Honor and my Life? but losing his Speech in a number of groans, in a manner
threatening rather than yielding to death, he unhappily departed this life.
Deadora, having performed this much more generous than just enterprise, she ran
to suck in the last breath of Lovanius who, striving against the pangs of
Death, spoke thus unto her. My dear Deadora, I now dye contented, in that I dye
not unrevenged. Pardon me, I pray you, and let the chastisement of an humane
error terminate with him that has committed it. For Gods sake let not your
anger disturb my ashes. But Oh me! this is the last minute of my life. Give me,
O my Dear, your last kisses for a consolation at this my departure. In ending
these words he ended his days. Deadora, being oppressed with grief, stood
immovable as a Statue; and, after a Deluge of tears, she cried out saying,
Stay a little O thou Soul of my most dear Lovanius. It Is not just that thou
should go alone into the Shades. In saying so, she gave her self a Stab upon
the Heart, and thereupon, in a moment, she pow'red forth her Soul with her
Blood. Aleria, who in the representation of these Tragedies had suffered the
torments of a thousand Deaths, flying from the sight and interrogation of all
those whom the noise had drawn thither in great numbers, and hating at once
both to see her self and the light, retired unto the uppermost part of the
House. Thereby fitting a Cord, and therewith miserably expiring, she gave a
worthy reward to her own immodesty.

From hence it may be gathered, that the joys of all illegitimate love do
terminate in sorrows, and that unchaste affection can have no other than an
unhappy end.

The Argument.
The Countess of Castelnovo, in a certain great exigency, sends for assistance
to the Marquess Oliverio. He being fervently enamoured of her, does most
readily comply with her desires. The Countess having her want supplied, does,
by a neat contrivance, carried on by favor of the night, both save her own
honor, and satisfy the discretion of the Marquess.

NOVELL IV.
IN the City of Alexandria, situate in the Province of Puglia, upon the
Confines of Monferrat, there was a most Noble Gentlewoman whom I will at
present distinguish by no other name than that of the Countess. This Lady was
graced with such singular perfection of Beauty, that she could not be beheld by
Men without ardent love, nor by Women without great envy. The content which
Lovers had in looking upon the most admirable features of her Face, did extort
from them the loss of their liberty. In short, this glorious Sun did dazzle the
hearts no less than the eyes of the Spectators. He was rather deemed a fool
than wise, who could not be subject to such sweet Tyranny, and he was almost
reputed a Sacrilegious Person who did not offer up his heart in Sacrifice to
this idolized Beauty. This Treasury of all the riches of Nature was, by right
of Matrimony, in the possession of the Count de Castelnovo, a Gentleman endued
with all those favors that either Fortune can dispense, or Virtue can obtain:
but, as it was thought, little loved by the Countess, because he, for the most
part, either sojourning at the Courts of Princes, or exercising Commands in
Armies, was more conversant in Martial Affairs than those of Venus. This belief
got so much ground in the hearts of many, as to give them hopes of subduing
that Fortress which was guarded only by beauty that might easily be suborned
with gifts, or vanquished by the power of services and addresses. But they saw
themselves greatly mistaken, for they found such resistance in the Virtue and
Chastity of this Lady, that some of them were constrained wholly to abandon the
Enterprise, others to raise the Siege, and othersome to expect those
opportunities which are the genuine products of time. Only the Marquess
Oliverio, who was the most noble and richest among them, was not a jot moved on
the retreat of the rest. He prosecuted his assaults with so much the more
Vigor, by how much the less hopes he had of Victory. The many denials,
repulses and disdains he met with, were but so many winds that did rather
inflame than extinguish the fire in his heart. And though he could not hope to
make any further progress in the conquest of this Ladies Chastity, yet he made
use of all those means that might make him deserve the character of a true
lover, since he could not attain to that of being beloved. And so much the
rather, for that having, by his liberality gotten the good will of all those
that served her, the poor Gentlewoman had her ears continually filled with the
praises of this Gentleman, since that all the Family were never weary in
setting forth sometimes his Valor, othertimes his Birth, now his Goodness,
then his Riches, one while his handsomness, and other whiles the magnanimity of
so great a Person. And although these so often repeated commendations did
incline her to admire such rare qualities, yet they did not oblige her to any
other love than what Virtue is wont to produce in a Noble Breast. But that
which Oliverio, with all his Love-traps, could not do in a very long time,
Fortune (as the poor Gentleman believed) did bring to pass in a moment. The
Countess had a Brother a Young Man and rich, and let that suffice to denote him
insolent. There was no Riot in the City wherein he was not either interessed or
principal. The Night, which brings quiet and repose, even upon the insatiable
cruelty of Wild Beasts, did make him restless, whilst that, being accompanied
by many like himself, he rambled up and down the City equally distributing his
affronts to all; those only being exempt from his insolences who had the good
luck not to meet him. But, punishment oftentimes attending wicked actions,
while he would, one night, forcibly enter the House of an Honorable Lady, and
was already breaking open the Windows and Doors, he, with four of his
Companions, were taken by the Watch, having neither time, nor courage to make
resistance, since the ill Language wherewith they had menaced this Lady had
raised almost all the Neighborhood. As soon as his being made a Prisoner was
publicly known, complaints came in so fast against him, that he was in great
danger of losing his Life. The Countess, who loved him dearly, and could not
endure to see him subjected to open chastisement, having no ready money, pawned
the greater part of her Jewels to Merchants for a Thousand Ducats. With this
Money she prevailed so much upon the Governor, that he, being dazzled with the
Splendour of her Gold, could not see Justice. So that the young man with his
Companions made their escape by the consent of this Governor who, being afraid
that his Avarice might be discovered, was willing that the Prisoner by flying
should take off the strength of the evidence which would have proved the Judge
also to be guilty. The Countess had not long enjoyed the liberty of her
Brother, but that a Letter came from her Husband which drove her to the vey
brink of Desperation. The Count commanded that, without the least delay she
should come to him to Millan, in her richest attire, for to wait upon the
Empress, who was expected every day to pass that way. The poor Lady being
oppressed by a multitude of thoughts, knew not what resolution to take that
might not be either dishonorable or dangerous. To go to Millan without those
Ornaments which are befitting such occasions, would bring much prejudice upon
the reputation of her Grandeur. And to discover to her Husband the releasing of
her Brother, she could not do it without incurring his displeasure, seeing that
many important differences had happened between them. After many thoughts that
came in her Head, she was forced to yield to necessity, and taking Pen, Ink and
Paper, she writ as follows: My Lord Oliverio,
If I should say I do not love you I should certainly lie, since the confidence
I have in you I cannot but acknowledge it to be the lawful issue of love. I
love you Oliverio, and therefore, although it be a blemish to my Honor, I have
recourse to your favor. I have great occasion for a thousand Ducats for to
redeem my Jewels, because I must be at Milan at the arrival there of the
Empress. If you can lend 'em me until my return, it will oblige my heart to a
perpetual correspondence with you. But Gentlemen of your worth do act by
Principles of Generosity; and then what can be expected from a heart tied up to
the good opinion of the World, and the Fidelity due to Matrimony? Yet I promise
my self that the greatness of your mind will not disdain the service of

Your most devoted Countess.




Having Sealed the Letter, she gave it to a Lacquey, telling him it came from
her Husband, and that he should carry it to the Marquess, she being unwilling
to trust to the silence or infidelity of any Servant. Oliverio had scarce run
over the Letter, but he thought himself to be in a Dream. He could hardly give
credit to his happiness which was so much the greater, by how much the more it
was unexpected. He had so great consolation within himself, that he let drop
some tears for joy. The first surprise, which puts a Man beside himself,
being over, he retunred an answer in these following terms: Madam,
I wish I had a thousand Souls, as well as I have a Thousand Ducats, for to
sacrifice them all unto your Service. I am really to thank you for the honor
you do me in asking so obligingly what you might have commanded as your own.
But I am so much confounded with joy and obligation, that I cannot better
express my self than by silence. Yet I rejoice within my self for that you have
been pleased to soder my sincerity with Gold, and so much the more, because
that your asking of outward Riches makes me believe you will accept the inward
treasures of my heart. I hope that these double Ducats will not argue me to be
double-minded, and I shall esteem it my greatest honor to be owned for

Your most humble and most obliged Servant The Marquess Oliverio.




He sent, without any delay, both the Letter and the Ducats to the Countess,
who, redeeming her Jewels, went immediately to Milan, where she came in the
very nick of time for to meet the Empress. Here she made so fair a show, that
the Empress declared her self much honored by those who sent so beautiful a
person to meet her. The envy of the Ladies was converted into wonder; and it
seemed as if Nature had robbed all other Women of their perfections, for to
bestow them wholly upon her. The Empress, having presented her with a very fair
Necklace, departed from Milan; and she presently returned to Alexandria, where
Oliverio did attend her coming with those impatiences that, like Furies, do
continually torment the souls of Lovers. The Marquess would not be seen at this
Solemnity in Milan, either because he would not give occasion of suspicion to
so many observing eyes; or else that he might avoid the obligation of waiting
upon the Empress. The Countess was no sooner returned but he sent to
congratulate her arrival, and to recommend himself unto her favor. She gave
him to understand, the same evening, that a little after midnight he must come
to a Window that looked out into a little by-Street. Oliverio went accordingly,
and at the hour appointed, heard himself called by the Countess. I cannot
express the passion of Oliverio upon this first encounter, he felt the
extremities both of heat and cold at one and the same time. He did in such
manner confound her praises with his thanks, that he could scarce make himself
intelligible. The Countess answered all he said in words so affectionate and
prudent that, at the same time, she let him know both her affection and
discretion. The Conference ended in this conclusion, that the next night he
should come in at the Garden-gate, but with express provision that he should
have no light. To which the Marquess obligingly answered, that there needed no
light where the Sun shined. He being departed, spent the rest of that night in
a thousand love-frenzies. He no sooner saw the Sun rise, but he wished it set,
and did exclaim oftentimes against the slowness of its course, because it did
not run so fast as he desired. He also blamed the Night which, striving for
Empire with the Day, did stay so long from exercising its Dominion in the Air.
At length the wished for hour came, whereupon he went hastily unto the Garden,
and finding the Door only shut to, he went directly to the Countesses Lodgings.
She, who expected him, taking him by the hand and said, My friend, you must of
necessity, sacrifice this night unto silence, if so be that you have any
respect either for my Reputation or my Life. My Women do lie so near my Chamber
that the least whisper would be overheard by them. And then my love is not so
base as to be entrusted to any servile soul; and the rather, because great
Enjoyments do not admit of speaking. She gave him no time to make any answer,
but brought him into the Chamber, and there told him in his ear that he should
undress and go to Bed, while she would go and see if her Maids were asleep.
Oliverio was scarce lain down when there came into his Arms a Beauty, by so
much the more perfect, by how much the less subject it was to the eyes. What
they here did my Pen dares not publish, lest I should profane the Secrets of
Love. Let it suffice to say that he, being ravished with the sweetness of those
embraces, did bless the time wherein he had endured so many labors, sorrows
and torments, seeing all passed troubles did serve for no other end than to
aggrandize his present content. But, lest the Light should discover their
amorous Theft, Oliverio went away before day, and being enjoined not to use any
words, he took his leave with a multitude of kisses. And then, retiring unto
his own House, he did, by sleep and repose, recruit himself of his late
labors, which yet were so pleasing unto him, that he thought of nothing more
than of repeating them. About Noon he rose up when one of his Servants brought
him a Thousand Ducats with a Letter, which he having opened, in great
displeasure, read what follows: My Lord Oliverio,
I return you the Money you so obligingly lent me, having made use thereof as
long as my occasions required. I do not do this for to take off the obligation
I have to your affection, but that I may not be wanting in what is my duty. And
you may assure your self, that your courtesy shall never be forgotten so long
as I breath. Let this be esteemed by you as an honor that you have brought
under subjection a soul that never knew how to submit to any one before, and be
pleased to accept for

Your very affectionate and most obliged Servant The Countess.




This Letter did so perplex the mind of the Marquess that he, believing it to
be a cheat, did read it over and over many times. He knew not what to imagine,
since that the sweet kisses, and the most endearing embraces of the preceding
night ought not to have begotten such general and cold expressions. After a
great confusion of troubled thoughts, he wrote thus in answer: Fair Lady,
They have reason that say, Money takes away a man's repose, your Ducats have
put me into a mortal inquietude. You ought not, Madam, to have sent me that
which is your own, supposing that it had been mine. And if my demerits or hard
Fortune would have it so; why did you not also send me back my heart, which I
have consecrated to your Beauties? It is a cruel sort of Liberality for you to
send me Gold, which is but a vile excrement of the Earth; and to keep back my
soul which is the very essence of a Man. That I may the better express my
grief, please to take the trouble of coming to the little Window at the same
hour as before. In the mean time pray forget not

Your most humble and most obliged Servant Oliverio.




Having sent the Letter, and with great impatience expected the night, he went
to the place appointed, where he found the Countess. After Salutation the
Marquess fell upon expostulation for her having sent the Money, which he did
with so lively a resentment, that if he shed no tears it was the effect of his
grief which did not admit of evaporation both by the mouth, and by the eyes.
And why, answered the Countess with a gentle smile, would you not have me
restore to you your own? Because, replied Oliverio, since I have received the
honor of your favor, I have nothing that is not absolutely yours. Pray do not
so much embitter our passed sweetnesses. And what sweetnesses were these, I
pray, said the Countess? Is it possible, answered Oliverio, that the
interposition of one only day should so much eclipse your memory, as to forget
those sweet endearments that were both given and received? Is it possible that
those sprightly kisses, which every moment brought our very Souls unto the
confines of our lips, should have instilled the Water of Lethe into your heart?
I shall rather put my self into Oblivion, than forget the pleasure I receive by
such sweet remembrances. The Countess interrupted him, saying, My Lord
Marquess, I will undeceive you, it not being just that your Opinion should
arraign my Honesty, which hitherto has had no other stains than those which it
may have received from your desire and belief. For to please you I put a trick
upon you, thereby to answer, in some measure, both my own obligation and your
affection. Your amorous actions of the last night were with my Chambermaid
Aleria, my Birth, and the Honor of my Husband, not permitting me more. She is
here at hand for to testify unto you the truth hereof. Oliverio did not stay
to hear any further but, being devilish mad went home to his house, devising a
thousand ways how to bring the Fame and Life of the Countess to destruction.
Yet, consulting afterward with reason, he admired the prudence of that Lady
who, without any prejudice to her Honor, could fasten so fine a Jest upon her
Lover, and changed his Sensuality into Friendship and Respect.

Here Ladies of Honor may be instructed how to defend themselves in such hard
cases without hazarding their Reputation; and Gentlemen may be warned not to
attempt the Chastity of a prudent Lady, since they get nothing thereby but
frauds and repulses. It not being blameworthy to make use sometimes of evasions
for to escape the tyranny of necessity.

The Argument.
The Count of Villa Franca, being deceived by finding of a Letter does believe
his Wife to be an Adulteress. And, whilst he goes about to take her in the
fact, he finds out new matter of suspicion. He was near taking a very severe
revenge upon her, when he is informed of her innocence, and given to understand
that the error did arise from a certain likeness of Characters.

NOVEL V.
A Gentleman (who for that he is of High Birth, we will call him by the
borrowed name of the Count de Villa Franca) for to avoid the heat of Summer,
did retire, with his Wife, near to the Euganean Hills, to enjoy the Air of a
little Mount whereupon, in spite of the Dog Days, there was a continual
Spring. Here he passed away his time by spreading Nets for Birds, and setting
traps for Beasts. He robbed his Body of rest, and his eyes of sleep, for to
sacrifice them to the hopes he had of prey. He always got up before Sunrising,
and it seemed that this New Titon did nothing more than make love to Aurora.
One morning among the rest, while he was in search of some young Nightingals
before they were well fledged, he followed his Game to the very outmost
Confines of his Vineyard which, being very great, had no fence either of Walls
or Hedges. And looking narrowly after those little Birds-nests who, by crying
after the old one, did unwittingly betray themselves, he cast his eye upon a
Letter that lay among a company of leaves, and did seem as if it were afraid of
being discovered. He, taking it up and diligently observing the Seal, was on a
sudden agitated with diverse thoughts. Scarce had he opened it but that, seeing
the Character and Subscription to be his Wifes, he grew Horn-mad. After a
little pause, which was accompanied by those tumultuary passions that do
assault a Soul that is governed both by honor and by love; he cursorily read
over the Letter, which contained these expressions: Friend,
She that loves cannot do all that she would. Fortune would not be accounted a
Goddess, if she did not many times drive the patient sufferings of a lover into
desperations. Pardon therefore that impotency, which hitherto has been
accidental, and not voluntary. She that is in love is always more unhappy than
all others, because she coveteth more than others. This night only Fate grants
me the favor of a consolation to my impatiences. They that have authority to
watch over the motions of my affection shall be either absent or consenting. I,
in an Habit different from that of my Sex will convey my self into your
embraces. The love I bear you will not let you run the hazard of any danger, it
being far from being possible. I earnestly desire your answer without delay, to
the end that I may govern my self to your satisfaction, I being, both by
election and obligation,

Your most humble Servant Felicia.




These Characters did so deeply wound the Soul of the Count, that the least
part of his fury was to threaten death. Doubt and uncertainty could get no
place in his mind, who by the Subscription, by the Seal, and by the
Handwriting was too much assured of his Wifes inconstancy. He made such
imprecations against Heaven, the Earth, and Himself with sentiments so vigorous
as would have moved impiety it self unto compassion. At length, considering
that dissimulation was the best means to facilitate his revenge, he returned
hastily into his Lodgings, and there transcribing his Wifes Letter, and
counterfeiting the hand, he Sealed it up and carried it back again to the place
where he found it. Afterward, hiding himself at a convenient distance, as far
as he could well see, he observed a Boy that came to take away that Letter; and
a little after to bring thither another. He was desirous to see it, and found
it, without Seal or Subscription, to speak these words: Fair Lady,
Favors are then most to be prized, when they come least expected. I would
express my thanks, if I could either impart the Sentiments of my Soul unto my
Pen, or could requite in any part, the honor that is intended me. I will wait
upon you that I may not be wanting to your satisfaction. I have no greater
testimony at present of my love than to let you know that I can and will obey
you. The hours will seem ages unto me, and I shall hasten every moment with a
wish that I may the sooner see you. Farewell my dearest, my most beloved, and
my fairest one.

M. O.




The Count, being wholly possessed by rage and passion, and having his thoughts
fixed on revenge, left the Letter in its place, and retired to his own House.
And although the wanness of his face, and the wildness of his looks did
discover the trouble of his mind; yet, covering his grief with a feigned smile,
he said he must go away presently for the City, although the day before he had
not appointed to go till after Dinner. Felicia did not at all contradict him,
but did rather give him some little business in charge, which might detain him
there the day following. These were all accidents that did aggravate his
Suspicion, and did turn all his patience into fury. The Count went to the City
attended by the greatest part of his Servants, and afterward came back with
one only, of whose fidelity and courage he had had most experience. He arrived
at the Village by Starlight; and, setting up his Horses privately in one of the
Countrymen's Stables, he went to watch over the transactions at his own house.
He had not staid long before he heard the skreeking of a Door, and saw a Woman
come out who, notwithstanding the Garments she had put on to disguise her, was
known by him. He thought her undoubtedly to be his Wife, but he would not show
himself until he first saw whither she was designed. He followed her, for to
find out his dishonourer and by his death, to revive his own reputation. She
went not far but that she was met and received, with open arms, by one who
expected her. And although the darkness of the night did secure them from the
curiosity of the eye; yet the kisses and caresses of love were so many and so
endearing, that they would have discovered the amorous theft even to those to
whom jealousy had not lent an hundred eyes and as many ears. Patience and
Prudence had no longer any power over the Counts fury. He thought it Stupidity
and not Virtue to see others triumph in his dishonor, and that even in his own
presence. Laying his hand therefore upon his Sword, with courage equal to his
anger, he said aloud, Traitors can you so securely stain the honor of a
Gentleman? The tone of this voice being very well known by the Woman, did so
fearfully astonish her, that she had like to have fallen into a swoon. But her
feet being winged with fear made her run speedily away, which frustrated the
blovv the Count was giving with his Sword for to take away her life. The Man,
on the other side, being as well versed in Martial, as Venereal Affairs, he
being also enraged to see the course of his pleasures interrupted (the variety
of human accidents perhaps not affording a greater provocation than this)
betook himself to his Arms, with a courage not inferior to the danger. And
then he did so valiantly defend himself, and offend those that set upon him,
that although they were two, yet they could not hope for Victory without great
hazard. The Fray did not last long, because there came up six others in
assistance to the lover; whereupon the Count (being forsaken by his Servant)
was forced to retire. The danger of his life was so apparent that it would have
been rashness, and not Valor to have fought against so much odds. It was easy
for him to retreat, seeing those men had no other end than to defend
themselves, and were not willing, by the slaughter of a Man they knew not, to
run themselves into the hands of Justice. The Count went thence to his own
house so perplexed in mind, that desperation was the least effect of his
passion. He had an intention to have chastised his Wife who had made her escape
from him, not without endangering his life, and without being able to discover
the Murderer of his Honor. The night, which for a few hours did cast a Veil
over his disgraces, was about to usher in the next day with so much the more
shame, by how much he himself had partly been the author of it. To find out
his Wife for to kill her was an hard matter, to find out her Lover for to
revenge himself was perilous, and to cover his dishonor was impossible. These
considerations made him turn many times back with thoughts of losing his life.
He went searching about to no purpose, finding nothing but darkness, and
receiving no other answer to his calls than that of Echoes. He said within
himself, Fortune, why did thou exalt me so much in giving me the
Prerogatives of Riches and Nobility, thus for to precipitate me into the abyss
of infamies which are the more grievous because they are insupportable? Perhaps
you had no other means to exercise your fury upon me, than to wound my
reputation, to blemish the honor of my house, and for ever to disgrace my
Posterity. Whither, vvhither shall I go, to hide me from the scorn of those
who will triumph over my shame? I will fly from the City, I will fly all
Conversation: I will fly the Sun, and I vvish I could fly from my self, that I
might be far from remembering that which, to my greater torment, does kill me in
preserving me alive. In saying so he came near to the Walls of his own House,
when he saw some body that seemed to watch there as a Spy; and certainly
believing that there were the betrayers of his Honor, with a passionate and
angry tone, he called out, Shall not the very Walls of my House be secured from
the perfidiousness of those that have ravished my honor? After your violating
my Wife, will you also violate my Walls by prying into my Secrets? It will be a
little Satisfaction to my great losses for to sacrifice thy life unto my
disdain. With these words he ran upon that Man who, that he might not be
killed, was forced to defend himself. The outcrys of the Assailant, and the
assailed, did awake and raise up the People of the House, who with Arms and
Lights ran toward the noise. They came just in the nick, when the Count had
his enemy under his feet, and was ready to take away his life. Seeing the light
he stopped, for to see if he knew him, and found it was his Servant who, being
fled from the first Quarrel, and yet fearful of his Masters safety, returned,
with two Wounds, unto the House. This sight increased the afflictions of the
Count who, standing like a Statue, knew not what to command, nor what to
resolve upon. Whilst he was in this irresolution he observed, not without
amazement, that his Wife, in a white Sarsenet Veil, was coming down the Stairs.
He assuredly thought that she was returned with an intention to deceive him.
Being hurried therefore by that fury which was enflamed with the sense of
honor, (while Felicia with great anxiety, did ask him how he did) he ran
tovvard her with the Point of a Dagger ready to strike her to the heart.
Whether it were the overhstily desire of revenge, or the Will of God that
desires not the fall of the innocent, the blovv, passing only through her
Garment, went under her Arm without doing any further harm. The Count would
have repeated his Blovvs, if the Maidens had not interposed in defense of their
Mistress. Felicia, prostrating her self on the ground, as well as her tears
would give leave, said unto him. Sir, What fault has made the innocence of
her guilty who has remorse of Conscience for nothing more than for idolizing
you? In these fevv hours that you have been absent, I have sinned in nothing
but in praying for your safety. Pray Sir, let not malignity nor suspicion give
in testimony against my integrity, without first hearing what I have to say.
Do not lose, Sir, by inconsiderate passion the love of her, who if she do not
love you as much as you deserve, yet she loves you as much as she can tell how
to love an amiable thing. The Count, as it were yielding to her persuasion,
being unwilling to admit of any farther impediment to his resolutions, raised
her up and went with her into a Chamber, dismissing every one else. There,
taking the Poniard again into his hand, he spoke to Felicia, lying again
prostrate at his Feet, in this manner, The coloring over of your
perfidiousness with a Lie cannot move me. You are guilty, and guilty of my
dishonor. Your accusers are your own hands, and the Witnesses are my own eyes.
Your opposing the truth will be the increasing of your torment. Honor is a
Goddess that cannot be appeased without a Sacrifice. Confess the violator of my
Bed, and the Betrayer of your honesty, otherwise this Weapon shall, by main
force, extort the confession from your mouth. My Lord, answered Felicia, if I
were accused of any thing but dishonesty, I should dare to speak in my defense,
but in the matter of Honor I know not what to say. Grief checks my tongue, and
tears do choke any words; Wherefore I can only say that I desire my Men, Maids,
and my Accusers themselves may be examined upon that point. In these I place my
defense, seeing that, from the time that you departed yesterday, unto this very
hour, being oppressed with grief of heart which presaged unto me your anger, I
went neither out of my Chamber, nor out of my Bed. Felicia accompanied these
words with so many tears, that if they could not persuade him, yet at least
they did serve to mitigate his displeasure. He called in the Maidservants, and
perceived that one of them was wanting. The Count hereupon grew more jealous,
believing that this was an Artifice of Felicias, and therefore drawing out the
Letter, he said unto her, if I should believe this appearance of innocence, how
will thou excuse this Writing which convinces thee of guiltiness? Do not these
black Characters point to thee the blackness of thy heart? Where will your
boldness find pretenses that can excuse your dishonesty? Felicia took the
Letter and observing it a little, cried out, My Hand has rebelled against my
heart; as I cannot deny to have written it, so I cannot confess to have
indicted it. O God my very eyes are deceived in believing that to be my act
which is but only like mine. The Count's fury was hereat revived, when a Letter
was presented him from a Cosen of his which, because it came by an express, did
require a speedy answer. The Count, opening it, found it contained these words:
Dear Cosen,
This very Night my Sister Felicia went out of my House in Man's Habit. Although
I have no certainty of her design, yet I suspect she is gone aside to the
Marquess Odorico. Pray let it be your care to search out the truth, since your
intimacy with the Marquess will facilitate this business. I would have come my
self if my old indisposition, receiving a new addition by this accident had not
necessitated me to keep my Bed. It requires the more haste, because it is
matter of Honor.

The Count of Castello.




This Letter assuaged the fury of the Count, he being thereby assured of his
Wifes honesty, and the vanity of his own suspicions, seeing the Letter was writ
by her Cosen, and the likeness of Hands did arise from their having both learnt
to write by one and the same Master. He was the more sensible of his error
when he was ascertained by all that Felicia had not been out of her Bed, and
that the Maidservant was gone out to meet her Sweetheart. And he was so much
the more confirmed herein, because the love that passed between his Cousin and
the Marquess was very well known in those parts. Perceiving therefore that the
same Name, and the same Character were the causes of his mistake, embracing his
Wife, he begged her excuse for having, for the sake of his Honor, treated her
with terms unworthy of her Affection and Fidelity.

This may be an example to those that take the mere shadows of things for the
very bodies themselves; and may warn Husbands not to precipitate themselves
into those resolutions which carry with them the hazard of their Lives and good
Names, seeing that Jealousy is able to deceive both the Eyes, and other the
Senses.

It may also teach Wives to be vigilant over their Maidens, since their
dishonesty does often reflect upon the reputation of their Mistresses.

The Argument.
Eudosia does severely censure and watch over the love-motions of her Daughter
Dercella. And, finding a Love-Letter in her hand, is enamoured of her Lover,
whom she inviteth to ly with her, feigning her self to be Dercella. But being
deceived by another, she gives her Daughter the opportunity of enjoying her
own, whereupon both of them are Married.

NOVELL VI.
EVdosia being the Daughter of the Count of Vancastro, was so rich in the
Endowments of Mind, Body and Fortune, that she scarce attained the Age of
Thirteen, before she had raised up pretensions in many to aspire to the
possession of her. And although the great Riches of her Father did move the
Avarice of some Men to obtain her to Wife, yet the excellence of her Beauty did
tyrannically preside over the affections of all: for she, being favored by all
the Graces, was thought not inferior to them in any thing, but their number.
Evander the Noblest, but withal the Eldest of all her Suitors, had the
happiness to gain this Heavenly Beauty. The Fate of these Aurora's betrothing
them most commonly unto Titons. This Match seemed strange in the eyes of the
World, Evander being deemed more fit for his Grave, than for the Nuptial Bed.
He was in the Fifty Third Year of his Age; wherefore by the Wrinckles of his
Brows and the greyness of his Hairs, they thought the union of so fair a Spring
with rugged Winter, that bore no fruit but what was harsh and sower, to be
impracticable. Eudosia, being very young and knowing no better, did easily
comply with the embraces of an old Man, esteeming the chiefest happiness of her
Marriage to consist in the richness of her Cloths, the variety of Jewels, the
abundance of Gold, the great number of Servants, and in the constant assistance
of her Husband who, becoming jealous of her, did think her lost, as often as she
was out of his sight. This continual attendance of Evander did oblige him to
some employments that were greater than the strength of his age could bear;
whereupon the Nuptials were scarce ended, when his Funerals did begin. The
death of Evander was accompanied with such lively sentiments of grief in his
Wife, that weeping, wailing and sighing were the least arguments of her sorrow.
She would have been buried even alive with him, if the knowledge of her being
with Child had not flattered her with the hopes of reviving him in bearing a
Son. But her desire was frustrated by the Birth of a Daughter who, even in her
Cradle, did oblige her beholders to form excellent conceits of her Beauty.
Eudosia would not hearken, much less adhere to any more overtures of Marriage;
she believing that no man living could make her so happy as Evander had done.
She voluntarily confined her self to her House attending to the education of
her Daughter, but in so strict a manner that she was near Thirteen Years old,
and could not boast either to have seen, or have been seen by any Men except
those that waited on her Mother. She went not abroad above two or three times a
Year, and then so veiled and guarded, as if they feared the Air should ravish
her. Her apartment scarce gave any admittance to the bright Eye of Heaven, much
less to the Eyes of any mortal Men; and then the continual Guardianship of her
Mother did not permit her to use any other divertisement than some Childish
Pastimes. Fortune, who commonly intercedes for Lovers, brought it so about that
Eudosia and Dercella (for this was the Daughters name) were, by some great
out-crys which did stir up their curiosity by being very violent, forcibly
drawn to look out at the Window. They saw the life of their Neighbor Assirdus
endangered by many Swords encompassing him, whilst that he did defend himself
with a Courage greater than his Years. The Youth and handsome Shape of Assirdus
did quickly move Eudosia to pity: whereupon, by commanding her Servants to
bring him into the House, she delivered him out of the hands of those
Cutthroats who, having wounded him in the hand, and deeply in the Side, were
very near to have murdered him.

Assirdus, after some few Complements, accepted the invitation of going to Bed.
Here, his Mother being called, he attended the recovery of his Health, the
Chyrurgions not permitting him to go out of that house, for fear that the Air
and Motion might exasperate his Wounds. Dercella, although she never knew, nor
so much as heard of the Name of Love, yet was so much surprised at the first
sight of Assirdus that she fell in love before she was aware of it. And not
being able to withstand the first shock, she sometimes listened to the
discourses of the Physicians; sometimes she inquired how he did of the
Servants, and at other times, though often reproved by her Mother, she came
into his Chamber making many excuses for to see him. The night did more
increase the troubles of her mind which, being agitated by confused thoughts,
could take no rest. And if sometimes she shut her eyes, being weary with
watching, yet was she presently forced to open them again, for to avoid those
fantasms that did torment her sleeping, more than waking. Dercella continued
for the space of some days in these amorous frenzies, until such time as
Assirdus, being pretty well recovered, went away to his own House. He had
several times observed some glances proceeding from the eyes of that Maiden
which were rather witnesses of affection than of compassion: but, not being
well versed in Love-Affairs, he condemned all those thoughts, as idle
suspicions, that might have persuaded him to have been beloved. Yet being
kindled by the sparks of that Beauty which might make all boldness excusable,
he staying at home for the perfect confirmation of his Health, was continually
looking out at a Window that answered to Dercellas apartment. Here he was
easily discovered by her who, being hurried by a thousand impatient affections,
did desire nothing more than to see him. Having found a way to open a Window
directly opposite to that of her Lover, and which her jealous Mother had on
purpose kept shut: She had the opportunity of seeing him at her pleasure, but
not of speaking to him, either because of her own modesty, or for fear of her
Mothers jealousy. He likewise, being struck dumb by an excess of love, did, by
the mediation of his eyes, perform all the offices of his tongue. At last,
overcoming all difficulties, he breathed out his passions by writing in this
manner: Madam,
The love that forcibly tyeth up my tongue with the same violence moves now my
hand, and compels me to exemplify the Vassallage of my heart, which is already
contracted and confirmed to you by my eyes. Indeed force has been very
requisite for to oblige me to make a declaration which, in regard of your
excellent merit, cannot be termed otherwise than rash. Beauty which is the Ray
of Divine Light, will not be addressed in the vulgar terms of humanity. I know
it very well, but cannot tell how to help it. Accept, fair Lady, of these
expressions which come from a soul that glories more in your dominion, than in
its own proper being. Vouchsafe me an answer in favor of those hopes which
only are able to keep alive

Your most devoted and obliged Servant Assirdus.




He easily conveyed this Letter into the hands of Dercella; for, watching the
occasion of her looking out at Window, he gently darted it into her Bosom. This
Virgin being as curious as loving, presently took leave to read it. While her
soul was ravished with the delight of these Characters, she was not aware of
her Mothers seeing of her, who did every minute make the actions of her
daughter subject both to her observation and censure. The first thing Eudosia
did was to tear the Letter out of her hand; loading her afterward with so many
reproaches and menaces, that sighs and tears were the least burden of
Dercellas affliction. But the loss of that Paper, that seemed to prognosticate
the loss of all her love and hopes, was that which most troubled her. Eudosia,
leaving her drowned in tears, went into another Room for to read the Letter,
and to find out how she came by it. And as soon as she saw it came from
Assirdus, she felt a strange commotion in her mind. His Youth and Beauty made
way for her desire to get him to her self. She began to repent of having spent
so many years without enjoyment. She thought all other pleasures, except those
that proceed from Conjugal Love, to be but flashy. On the other side she feared
the censure of the World in retarding a resolution for the space of thirteen
Years. She was afraid of the rashness of her daughter; of the tender age of
Assirdus, and did consider that to Marry a second time, after having so long
mourned for her first Husband, would but expose her to the imputation of Fame
for wilfully losing her liberty. But our affections being mostly governed by
sense, she resolved to venture the loss of all rather than to lose the love of
Assirdus. Wherefore, taking a Pen in Hand, she wrote, in her daughters name, as
follows: Assirdus,
She that yields at the first Onset, does greatly show her own weakness, and
cannot escape the disrepute of Cowardice. Nevertheless they that love well
cannot at all dissemble. Love is a fire which by how much the more it is
suppressed, by so much the more it is enkindled. I do therefore hereby declare
unto you, that I love you heartily, and if I had not been afraid of being
denied, I would have first sued for your love. Therefore if you have a mind to
enter with me into the lawful estate of Matrimony, I do expect you this Night
at the Garden-door which you will find only shut to. Otherwise your affections
are illegitimate, and will be very far from any hopes of enjoying

Dercella.




This Letter being privately delivered into the hands of Assirdus, instead of
rejoicing him, did stir up such a confusion in his thoughts that they robbed
him of his quiet. Were it either the little experience he had in Love-affairs,
or his seeing the possession of that Beauty (which he so much the more prized,
by how much the more difficulty he apprehended in obtaining it) so freely
offered unto him, he confessed himself a penitent for having gone so far.
Whilst he was thus irresolute and doubtful, the Count of Bell'ombra, a young
Gentleman of High Birth, though of low Fortune, came to see him. At first sight
he discovered some passion in Assirdus, whereupon he very earnestly pressed him
to tell the occasion. Assirdus being as easy to discover his disturbances, as
to be disturbed, told this Count all the motives that troubled his mind,
praying him, as a friend, to give him his best advice. The Count perceiving
that this might be an occasion of advancing his own condition, being willing to
take her to himself that Fortune offered to another, persuaded Assirdus not to
venture upon the rash invitation of a Girl more worthy to be slighted than
beloved, seeing that she did so easily prostitute het self to the pleasure of a
Lover. That the introducing of a presupposed Husband by Night was a manifest
token of her having entertained others. That he, not well foreseeing the
danger, might run the hazard of being trepanned if, by following his sensual
appetite, he should accept of the invitation. To these he added so many other
considerations, that being joined to the aversion Assirdus had in himself, made
him resolve wholly to quit the enterprise, and so much the rather because his
Mother would very hardly have given him leave to go abroad. A little after the
Count, upon pretense of some business, taking his leave, went at night to the
Garden-Gate of Eudosia who, believing him to be Assirdus, received him with
open Arms; he also being no less deceived in supposing her to be Dercella,
after some short Complements in a very low voice, as fearful of being
overheard, they retired, without any light, into a Ground-chamber where, upon a
very rich Couch, they gave place to one another amorous embraces. In the mean
time Dercella, believing her Mother to be immersed in sleep, and not in
pleasures, rose out of her hated, because restless Bed, and went to the Window
just in the nick when Assirdus, being no less disquieted, came thither also.
Dercella did send forth frequent sighs, both for the injuries received of her
Mother, and because so unlucky a beginning made her wish to see the end of her
love. Assirdus persuading himself that those sighs did arise from the default
of his Correspondence, enforcing himself, said, Lady, I know not which to blame
most either my bad fortune, or my little merit that make me unworthy to partake
of the favors of Love. Dercella, believing that he did upbraid her not
corresponding with him, replied, Love overcomes all difficulties, and if it
acts unlike it self in me, I must blame my Fate that makes me love without
hope. There is no love without hope, answered he, seeing the latter is the very
substance of the former. And what (said he) would you have me hope, when all
things conspire to make me despair? Why then, replied he, is not reciprocal
love sufficient to give you true content? But who, added she, can give me
assurance hereof? since the promises and words of Lovers are commonly accounted
but Wind. I, answered Assirdus, by dedicating my self unto your service. These,
said Dercella, are words which are soon dissolved into the same air whereof
they are formed. I would give you the proof of them, replied he, if I thought
you would not condemn my rashness. And what would you do, said she? I would,
with the help of a Plank, answered he, come over to your Chamber, there to
conclude our Loves, and save my heart from the Rack of hopes and fears.
Hereupon Dercella paused a little, as if she were afraid either to refuse, or
receive this offer, and then said she I cannot so suddenly take any resolution,
upon a proposal of so great a consequence. He, who by the power of Love had
cast off all fear, and put on a courage which was augmented by seeing himself
excessively beloved, replied, He that uses overmuch circumspection is not in
love, which admits of no long consultations, for that all delays, especially in
amorous affairs, are dangerous. Here is no medium, either you must give your
assent, or confess you do not love me. Dercella answered, although I cannot
express the desire I have to be yours; yet I will never consent that you pass
out of your Window into mine, that I may not at once see both my Reputation and
your life endangered. Assirdus, looking upon these expressions to be rather
consenting than dissenting, placing a Board on Dercellas Window, went over
thereupon into her Chamber. Here after some slight reproofs and feigned
repulses which served instead of so many invitations, Dercella, being overcome
by his importunities, gave him leave to reap that pleasure which is most
grateful to Lovers.

In this interim Eudosia had given, in some part, satisfaction to the
provocations of sense when, fearing that her actions might be discovered, she
left the Count asleep, and went softly to visit all the corners of her House.
At last she came to her Daughters Chamber just as the Lovers, by a murmuring
prologue of kisses, were preparing to act a loving Comedy. It seemed strange
that her Daughter, in so tender an age, should dare encounter the arms of a
Lover. Yet, being persuaded that the errors of Love deserved compassion, and
knowing her self to be guilty of the same fault, she resolved to dissemble that
of others, for not to discover her own. However she had a mind to know her
Daughters Sweetheart, to see if the worthiness of her choice did make any
amends for the boldness of her attempt. Scarce did she cast her Eye upon
Assirdus but, believing him to be her own Lover, she gave her self wholly up to
Fury like one possessed with a Legion of Devils. She scratched her face, tore her
hair, beat her breast, and did all things that might show her rage, and express
her grief. Lastly, with railing and reproachful language she uttered her
passion saying.

Perfidious man! after having enjoyed the Mother art thou come also to betray
the innocence of my Daughter? Why did Nature and Fortune make this wicked
Traitor so amiable? Are these the promises you made me but even now? Does this
Treachery confirm your Fidelity? Oh Heavens! I shall believe you stand still,
and that your influences are blind, if you do not dart your Thunderbolts at
this impious Villain.

Dercella hearing these words of her Mother, and thinking she was imposed upon
by Assirdus, fell a weeping, and with such lively expressions of grief, as
would have softened the hardest heart, she said,

Why, O Cruel Man, have thou betrayed a poor, simple and innocent Girl? Why
have thou deceived me by a piece of Treachery which is the more execrable, for
having been hid under the Mask of Love? Where, where, O inhumane Wretch, have
thou learnt such unnatural Cruelty, that even savage Beasts are not guilty of.
Pray Mother pardon that rashness which did not think, by its Sensuality, of
offending the Laws of Nature, nor the satisfaction of her that gave me my
being.

She would have gone in if Assirdus, who hitherto had been as immovable as a
Stock, had not interrupted her, saying, Dercella, Whosoever doubts of my
Fidelity, may as well doubt of her own Sensibility. I do declare my self yours,
and offer my self ready to confirm my declaration by a lawful Marriage, which
shall be no longer in effecting than you are in consenting. Eudosia was much
more enraged at these words, whereupon, redoubling her outcrys, she furiously
ran to satisfy her anger by the force of her hands. Dercella, love not
permitting her to see Assirdus wronged without defending him, interposed for to
pacify her Mother; but she, growing more and more outrageous, was near upon
some mischievous resolution, if the sudden appearing of the Count had not staid
her and struck her dumb. He had impatiently, for some time, waited the return
of his beloved, but not seeing her come, he went out of the Chamber to seek
her; not without fear that this her staying might portend some disaster. As
soon as he heard the out-crys his fears were increased, so that he came hastily
in where Eudosia, by scratching and biting, was giving vent to her furious
passion.

They were all amazed at this appearance, and the Count was much astonished at
the sight of Assirdus; whereupon Eudosia began to ask him how he got into the
House. To which the Count answered, by the invitation of Dercella. Thou lie,
said she; and except Assirdus, there is no man can brag of having my love. The
lie, replied he, from a Girl, makes no matter; and the rather, because this
Writing does declare you guilty. In saying so, he drew forth a Letter, and
being about to read it, he was interrupted by Assirdus, who spoke unto him, O
unfaithful friend, this Letter belongs to me. It is true, added the Count, but
you refusing to come hither, I supplied your place, and have enjoyed her with a
promise of Marriage. Then, answered Assirdus, shall Dercella have two Husbands?
I also having enjoyed her by the same promise. Eudosia now perceiving that,
whilst she went about to deceive others, she her self was deceived and, being
unwilling that the publication of this accident should be an occasion of
Town-talk, spoke thus to the Count and to Assirdus. Sirs, if you will, as
becomes Gentlemen, keep to your words of Marriage, I will see that you shall
have the same persons that you have enjoyed. For my part, said the Count, I do
think my self honored in confirming what I promised. Assirdus said the same;
yet were they both very much concerned, knowing that Dercella could be Wife but
to one of them. The wonder ceased when Eudosia discovered that she was the
Author of this Letter, and had submitted to the Count, supposing him to be
Assirdus. The Count, who had no greater end than to enrich himself: and
therefore made no distinction between the Mother and the Daughter, showed
himself well contented. And hereupon the Weddings were celebrated with
extraordinary Mirth and Jollity: Giving to understand, that who so keep
themselves within the bounds of honesty, may always expect a good end to be the
consequent of their just desires.

The Argument.
Arsinda, being left a Widow, promises to marry the Count of Rocca Battuta.
But, being cozened with a Letter counterfeited by the Marquess Odorico, she
refuses the former, and makes a Contract with the latter. At length, the fraud
being discovered by one of her Maidens, she will not have the Marquess, but
hastneth away to celebrate the Counts Funeral whom she believed to be dead. Yet
finding him alive, and being followed by the Marquess, they all come to an
untimely end.

NOVEL VII.
ARsinda, who in the City of Lisbon was Mistress of all those Prerogatives that
do make an accomplished Woman, having ^een two years married, was left to bewail
^he fatal cutting of that Knot which she wished might never have been loosned.
But although she did, with admirable expressions of sorrow, honor the exequies
of her Husband, yet it was not long before she repented the sacrificing of so
many tears to those unhappy ashes, and persuaded her self that they were but
vain kind of demonstrations which, being derided of all those that observed
them, did hurt to the living, and no good to the dead. Harkening therefore to
the incitements of sense, and the proposals of her Relations who invited her to
marry again, she tied her heart, no less than her word to Daletes the Count of
Rocca Battuta. And although Women do many times err in their choice, yet she
was esteemed the more prudent and virtuous for choosing a Gentleman that was so
excellently well qualified.

The Nuptials were concluded on by the authority of those that had most power
over them, and Arsinda, making use of that liberty which is usual with Widows,
did one day privately introduce the Count into her Garden, there to express
that content which she now began inwardly to enjoy. At this meeting there was
no demonstration either of love or respect wanting. The Count did declare how
much he was honored in being preferred before others: and Arsinda extolled his
merit which had constrained her to make him sole owner of her heart. While they
were thus contending with these affectionate declarations, there came in a Page
who delivered a Letter into the hands of Arsinda. She, not so much as looking
upon the Seal, with a loving confidence, gave it to the Count. He, receiving it
very courteously, opened it, and saw that, without any subscription, it said
thus, Fair Lady,
Your excuses are more courtly, than necessary, and I am more fit to receive,
than to deserve your favors. I know that experience does assure me of your
affection, but my heart, being jealous even of its own desires, does sigh to
see this day, which not only denis me, but communicates unto another those
beauties which are (not mine, though I am) permitted to enjoy them. I should be
afraid that the just title of the Count would condemn my possession as
tyrannical (I being but a paramour) if the power of the Will did not surpass
that of the Law. Do not, O fair one, in company of your Spouse, lose the memory
of your Gallant, who is more deserving of your love, because less desiring to
impose upon you the ties of Matrimony, and whose ambition is not to be your
companion, but your servant.




The Count made an end of reading this Letter with many signs of impatience,
which brought such a confusion of disdainful thoughts into Arsindas mind that
she became speechless. The blood flushed into her face, not to show any
guiltiness, but that it might not suffocate her heart which, by a greater
palpitation than ordinary, did show the resentments due to the rashness of that
Paper. The Count, taking this silence for a confession of her fault, with an
odious, because feigned smile that began and ended in the same minute, said
unto her, Madam, Your promise of Marriage to me was needless, since (for ought
I understand) Gallants are more pleasing to you than Husbands. These words
making Arsinda to reflect more upon her own innocence, than upon the Counts
jealousy, she did not suffer him to say any more but, with a no less free,
than scornful behavior, after many sharp reproofs, she even told him he
himself was the Author of that Letter. And, without taking leave, she retired
into her Chamber, leaving the mind of the Count cruelly tormented between Love
and Jealousy. The Count therefore supposing that the expressions of Arsinda
were the more feigned, for being so vehement, and not being able to induce in
himself a belief of her innocence, he let himself fall into the hands of
desperation; his anger being arrived at that pitch that he could no longer
endure her either as a Mistress, or an enemy. Without mentioning therefore to
any body the madness of his resolution, he took Horse and departed from the
City, hating all those things which might reduce to his memory the infidelity
of her, whom he was forced to adore, though he thought her inconstant. Being
carried on more swiftly by the rage of despair, than by the Speed of his Horse,
the night approaching, he was constrained to take shelter in an Inn. Here, with
no less hatred to himself, than to the conversation of others, neglecting to
bespeak any Supper, he shut himself into a Chamber alone, with an intent there
to give vent to, rather than allay the fierceness of his passion. Being alone
he abandoned himself up to sorrow, to the end that, by by the Streams of his
eyes, he might, in some measure disburthen the overflowing oppression of his
heart. At length, being weary of Solemnizing, with a Deluge of tears, the
Funeral of his hopes, he thought of raising himself from misery, by humbling
himself before that Idol, whose displeasure brought more terror to his soul
than any other sort of chastisement. So, taking Pen in hand he wrote as
follows: Fair Lady,
The heart is not subject to the faultrings of the tongue; and repentance is
the amendment of errors. In confidence whereof my desires are flattered with
the hopes of finding you to day as compassionate, as yesterday I found you
cruel. I beseech you therefore, O Fair One, to bury in oblivion the extravagant
excursions of a poor soul that did dote upon the ravishing delights of your
converse; and be pleased to re-establish me in your affection, which will be
the more dear unto me, because I having most justly lost it, you may the more
graciously restore it unto me. Although I could excuse my fault, yet I do freely
confess it for to give the greater merit to your pardon, whereof my rashness
had made me unworthy. Upon this sovereign act of your benignity does depend the
life of

Your most devoted and obliged Servant Rocca Battuta.




Recommending this Letter to the Host both for its delivery, and for an answer,
he returned to his former affliction, thinking what effects his Writing might
produce. Whilst, by tormenting thoughts, he felt the Tyranny both of hope and
fear, he heard a mournful noise made by some sorrowful person. Being a little
comforted by these doleful tones, and applying others unhappiness as a Plaster
to his own Wounds, he drew near to a Partition of Boards that divided the Room.
There he heard one speak some words indistinctly, which did blame Love and
Fortune as the authors of his oppression. It now seemed that his passion was
alleviated by the mixture of another's misfortune, when a little after there
came into the Chamber, whence these sorrowful complaints did proceed, a Man
crying out, Victory, my Lord Marquess Odorico, Victory. By my ingenuity Rocca
Battuta is wholly battered down, and you to morrow shall take possession of
Arsinda, these Nuptials staying for nothing but your arrival in the City. The
Marquess who, by exceeding patience, had repelled his grief, could not resist
the assaults of these joyful tidings. He cried out like a Madman in conceits
expressive of his great content. Why then (said he) shall Arsinda be mine? Is
it possible that I shall be the Primum Mobile of that amorous Heaven which sent
forth nothing but lightnings to set fire on my faithful affection? O Fortune! I
will offer Sacrifices to thy honor. O God of Love I thank thee. And if
heretofore I have rashly offended the sovereignty of thy power, I do now repent
me of it, since that Arsinda is to be mine. The Count being out of all
patience, and not considering that these accidents might carry him to some
precipice, with a loud voice he made himself to be heard in these terms.
Traitors, your Treachery is discovered and, if Heaven does not favor
injustice, or if my Sword has not lost its edge, shall be punished. In
uttering these words he ran furiously into the Hall with his Sword naked in his
hand, while the Marquess with equal fury came to meet him. Here they began a
duel with all the rage that hatred and jealousy could infuse into them. The
Count, with a few blows, would have worsted the Marquess, if two Soldiers of
his had not interposed in his defense. The Fight being so unequal, the Count
was necessitated to take his life as a gift from them, although his generous
mind scorned to ask it, and his passionate heart abhorred to receive it. Being
deeply wounded in two places he was, by the Innkeeper, recommended to the
Chyrurgeons; whilst he, disdaining to live without his beloved, and hating to
see her in the possession of his enemy, thought there was no more proper remedy
for his grief, than despair. The anguish of his wounds was much exasperated by
the answer of Arsinda which, coming from a Lady that generously insisted upon
her honor, did bring nothing but the expressions of an alienated affection,
and implacable aversion. Her Letter spoke in this manner: Sir,
He that has the heart to injure a Lady of honor, may also have the courage to
endure her resentments. Thus much I thought good to intimate unto you, more for
the sake of good manners, than for your deserts. I am sorry I cannot adjust the
desires of my heart to the weakness of my Sex, thereby to chastise the
excursions of a tongue no less rash, than infamous. Do not abuse my patience by
any more Letters; for, if you do, rest assured that they, being burnt into
ashes, will the longer preserve the most just disdain of

Arsinda.




This Letter, being indiscreetly given into the hands of the Count at a time
when, being very ill of his late hurts and a Fever that attended them, but
much more languishing under the oppression of his mind, it caused such a
desperate alteration in him, that his attendants thought him to be upon the
point of Death. He did often aggravate his malady by lamentable exclamations
which no man could hear without commiseration.

Whilst he was struggling with the agonies of death being given over both by
Chyrurgions and Physicians, the Marquess was enjoying the Visits and
Congratulations of his Friends and Acquaintance. With these he boasted of his
powerful ingenuity in fraudulently and cunningly subduing a Woman's heart, which
commonly (he said) was termed the very seat of Artifice and Deceit. Hereupon he
was requested to trace the success of his amors from the beginning. To this he
most readily assented in saying thus,

Sirs, I do willingly repeat the transactions of my love, because the
remembrance of them seems sweet unto me. I did, a good while since, set my
whole affection upon Arsinda, but very unsuccessfully, because Women do not so
much correspond with their Lovers, as with the capricious humor of their own
Genius. They love not him that deserves best, but him that complieth best with
their imperfections; so that it is even become a Proverbial Saying, That the
choice of Women ordinarily falls upon the worst. In short I was rejected, and
Rocca Battuta was the man pitched upon for a Husband, with that resentment which
may better be imagined than described. Seeing the merits of my Birth and Love
excluded, I had recourse unto Stratagems that are no less necessary in Love,
than in Arms. Thus I got the Victory; for Rocca Battuta, being cheated by my
counterfeit Letter, quitted the Field, and left me alone to triumph.

These words were overheard by a Maiden to whom Arsinda confided all her
secrets, who by chance came then to the Marquess his house for to complement
him from her Mistress. The Damsel would not stay to hearken any more, knowing
very well that Arsinda had condescended to this Marriage more in obedience to
the impulses of anger, than in compliance to the inclinations of her heart. She
therefore speedily ran away to Arsinda, to whom she imparted what she had heard
from the Marquess Odorico's own mouth. Here I am at a stand, for to express the
commotions of Arsinda's mind. She grew pale, dumb, wept, and did all things
incident to a soul overwhelmed with passion and grief. She had condemned her
self to marry the Marquess, only to revenge the injuries of the Count, and for
fear that what had passed betwixt him and her might hinder her Fortunes; for
she always had a great aversion to the Marquess for that he was not only
ill-favored, but also ill-natured. And now, that she knew him to be
treacherous, her hatred was grown to that height, that she could not endure to
hear his Name, much less to see him. Preferring therefore satisfaction before
all other interest, she took Pen and Ink and wrote thus: Sir,
To deceive the deceiver is no deceit. For this reason I recant all those
promises I made to be yours. I never thought of being stolen away, nor shall
your treachery triumph over my simplicity. Yet you may believe that my eyes do,
by showring down tears, strive to clear up the cloudiness of my soul, which
would rather (if possible) lose its being, than ever consent to the tying of a
knot that was contrived by fraud, and not by love. Do not provoke me by any new
guiles, lest you turn my patience into fury. Perhaps you may be caught in your
own gins, and may feel what effects the most just resentment of a Woman
unjustly offended can produce.

Arsinda.




Having sent this Letter to the Marquess, she began to revolve in her mind the
satisfactions due to the Count, when one of her Maids presented her a Letter,
saying that it was brought by a Page to the Count, who, being upon his
departure out of this World, could neither make an end of it, nor seal it. She
took it with great eagerness, and saw that the Contents were as follow: Madam,
I make use of another hand because my own is not able to govern a Pen. Excuse
me Arsinda, it proceeding from weakness, and not from want of respect in me. I
dye, and dye unhappily in that I am deprived of your gracious favor. If my
ashes could obtain the least affectionate pity, I believe it would convert
those horrors that are preached up to be most terrible, into happiness. Pardon
him, O fair Lady, who can never offend you more, and who did offend you more to
obey the excess of his love, than to bring any prejudice to your honor. But my
Speech failing me makes me incapable of pleading any farther in my own defense.
I dye Arsinda, and I dye for you; having nothing more to add to these
characters but my sighs for to soften the heart of Arsinda.




Arsinda had scarce run over the Letter but, letting it fall from her hands,
she also, not being able to resist the violence of a grief that so sensibly
struck to her heart, fell into a Swoon. Being brought to life again by some
remedies that her Maidens applied, she thus began to bemoan her self:

O God! is it possible that I should not sink under the weight of insupportable
sorrow? How can my soul, tormented by such fierce passions, do otherwise than
abandon me? Those torments are but slight that do not kill. And yet my grief,
which is upon the very brink of desperation, is not able to take away my life.
Could thou my beloved Daletes, poisoned by my unjust disdain, dye? and cannot
I, at the doleful news of thy death, and the craft of a Traitor, leave off to
live? There is not a more precious thing in the World than a faithful man, and
I have lost him before I knew him. But to what purpose do I aggravate my
sorrows, by usurping those tears that are most justly due to his Hearse. Yes,
yes, I am resolved at least to pay my last office to the greatness of his
Merits, and my obligations; and they that see the dolorous e^fects of it shall
not condemn me. Away with all delay. Let Us go to honor him dying, whom we
despised living.

Therefore calling for her Coach, she went, with all the speed imaginable,
along with him that brought the Letter, unto the Inn where the Count was
lodged: as if she were resolved to join her self to him in the Grave, since
that Fortune had denied her a more desirable union. As soon as she was alighted
from her Coach, she was presently conducted (without asking any question) into
the Counts Chamber. He lay there ready to give up the Ghost, deprived of his
Senses, and raving with his tongue. Now he accused Arsinda as unfaithful and
ungrateful; then he condemned himself, asking her pardon, as if she had been
present. No sooner had Arsinda heard him speak but, whether surprised more by
wonder or by horror I know not, she swooned away, neither her Maiden nor the
Counts servant being able to support her. The Count on the other side,
believing Arsinda to be a false appearance, or else the effect of his intense
desire and fervent imagination, made no end of weeping and wailing.

But afterward, being assured that it was Arsinda no more angry, nor yet
wedded to the Marquess, his heart was transported with so much unexpected joy
that, without coming any more to himself, he breathed out his last. This happened
in the Arms of Arsinda, whose Destiny had recalled her to life, to reserve her
for a more miserable death. I want words to express her passion. The tearing of
her hair, scratching of her face, and beating of her breast were the weakest
proofs she gave of her sorrow. She oftentimes sought for a Knife to kill her
self, but was prevented by those that stood by her. In this interim came into
the Chamber the Marquess Odorico who, having notice of her departure, had
followed her with an intention to carry her away by force and ravish her.
Scarce did Arsinda set her eye upon him, but she cried out, Behold, O wicked
man, the triumph of thy perfidiousness. Odorico, taking her in his Arms, did
endeavor forcibly to remove her from those unhappy objects that did so much
disquiet her. But Arsinda, being imboldned by a desperate resolution, snatched
away a Weapon that hung by the Marquess his side, did give him so hearty and
fatal a stab, that she at once eased him both of his love and life. At the same
time, taking also revenge on her self, with a deep wound she opened her own
breast, making a large passage for that soul to escape thence which was not
able to resist the violence of passion.

To such unhappy ends do they come who do not bridle their immoderate
affections, nor hearken to reason, but, being led away by sensuality, do wholly
give themselves up to its complacency.

The Argument.
Giacintha being, in a Dream, enamoured with Don Pietro de Ponzes, obliges him
to undeceive his Cosen Leonora who intended him for her Husband. Whereupon
Leonora, in despair, kills her self; having first given the Father of
Giacincintha to understand the loving intreagues of his Daughter; which makes
Don Garzia, with his Son Ardelius, to pursue Don Piedro who, being forced to
kill Ardelius, flies into Flanders. Giaccintha believing Don Pietro to be dead
enters into a Nunnery; but seeing her Father and her Husband both killed by one
another Sword, she suddenly dies with grief.

NOVEL VIII.
GIacintha was born at Baeza a City in Andalusia, having Riches and Nobility
well matched to her singular Beauty. She was not out of the Cradle when her
Mother was laid in the Grave, who left a great Estate to be divided betwixt her
and her only Brother named Ardelius. Scarce had she attained the age of Fifteen
(when many pretenders began to sue either for her Riches, Beauties, or both)
when one night in a Dream, she really lamented the imaginary loss of her life.
She fancied that she saw, walking in a very pleasant Grove, a Man of a more
hansom Garb and Stature than ever she had seen before. His face was partly
mufled up in his Cloak which, being finely embroidered, did make him look more
brave and gallant. Giacintha feeling her self touched with curiosity, had a mind
to see if his face did correspond with the other parts of his body, which at
first sight, did seem to make a most admirable composure. With a bashful
boldness she therefore pulled away that part of his Cloak which he had thrown
over his face; but on the contrary it seemed that this Man, as a chastisement
of her rashness, did, with a Dagger, strike her so sensibly through the heart,
that the pain thereof making her cry out aloud, waked all her servants, who
presently ran to her succor, and to free her from those frightful dreams.
Giacintha was no sooner delivered from this representation of danger, but she
was possessed with a real affliction of mind, wherein the idea of this person had
made such a deep impression, that no time could possibly obliterate it. She
desired to encounter with a Man that had those noble and amiable Features, and
did let her self be so far transported by the strength of imagination, that she
was in love before she knew with whom. Her flames were increased because, not
knowing the cause of them, she could not make the effect to cease. These
perplexing thoughts did so much disturb her repose that, despairing to obtain
the love of a Chimera, she was near upon losing both her health and life. And,
in bewailing her self from time to time, she spoke thus,

Where is it possible to find a more miserable and unhappy wretch than my self?
I love a Dream, and am ready to run mad after a mere fantasme. I adore a
shadow, and therefore do excuse the folly of Pigmaleon; and do pity thy dotages
O Xerxes: Thou lovedst a Plane-Tree, and the other fell in love with a Statue;
yet these were bodily substances that might be both seen and felt. If they had
no return of love, yet had they possession of the things beloved. These
monstrous loves gave some satisfaction to the senses of seeing and touching.
But my ravings are founded upon an impossibility, and have nothing in them more
than vain fancy. Shame and confusion will be the product of my loves which will
either not be believed by the World, or else will be styled mad and foolish.
Certainly there is no greater unhappiness than to adore what cannot be seen,
and what depends merely upon nocturnal illusions. The original of my love
springs only from fond imagination, neither has it any other being than a
phantome; wherefore I lament and torment my self, and I know not for what, nor
for whom; I fear that which is not, and I hope for that which is impossible.

With these passionate exhalations Giacintha did continually perplex her self,
when one day, standing in a Balcony, she saw a Cavalier, in a traveling Habit,
going into the next Palace, adjoining to hers. She, being intense upon her
thoughts, could not easily be diverted by any kind of curiosity; yet letting
her eye fall upon the brave Equipage, gallant Train, and goodly Presence of
that Gentleman, she knew him to be the same that had wounded her in a dream,
and that with absolute tyranny did rule over all the faculties of her soul.
This was Don Pietro di Ponzes a Young Man who, although he had not completed
the fourth luster of his Age, yet had with reputation worthily exercised all
Military Offices, and was returned home to enjoy the honor of them at Court,
and to see his Father who, being very old, was afraid of dying before he could
embrace him. He neither knew, nor was he known by Giacintha (though his Sister
Isabella was her great Acquaintance) for when Don Pietro went for Flanders she
was but a little Girl. The God of Love brought it so about that this young
couple did sacrifice their whole affections unto the Shrine of his Divinity.
Giacintha was with Isabella to congratulate the safe return of her Brother, who
was present at this Complement, which made it not difficult for her, by
glancing words and eyes, to declare the passion of her heart. In brief there
passed not many days but, by the mediation of Isabella, these two Lovers were
contracted with a mutual promise of Matrimony. But Fortune for the most part
envying the happiness of Lovers ordered the matter so that a Cosen of Don
Piedro's, called Leonora, who was more than hansom, and extremely rich, fell
grievously in love with him. Don Piedro perceived it but, his heart being
otherwise engaged, made as if he saw it not, and that with so much caution that
Leonora was ready to despair. At last, seeing her self despised, or at
leastwise not well accepted of, she took to her Bed, leaving the Physicians
little hopes of her recovery, the wounds of her heart proving to be incurable.
The Mother of Leonora having the experience of many years, did easily know that
her Daughters sickness proceeded from love. She therefore by the help of one of
her Maidens, penetrating into the certainty and original of it, applied her
whole endeavors to find out the remedy. She sends for Don Piedro and, in words
bedewed with tears and sighs, she offers him her Daughter, telling him
punctually the occasion of her indisposition. She urged her entreaties by
letting him know that he could not meet with a more rich or a more honorable
Match. The Laws of good breeding compelled. Don Piedro to make a courteous
answer. And, hoping that the time requisite for treating and getting the
consent of her friends, might administer some cure to this Malady, he remitted
the conclusion to the sole will of his Father, to whom, as his duty was, he
entirely referred himself. After this he went in to see his Cosen, which filled
her full of hopes that do easily take place in the breasts of young Virgins.
Leonora in the mean time, taking courage from the words (tho they were not
binding) and continued visits from Don Piedro, in a very short time recovered
her former health. Giacintha on the other side, wanting many of his Visits, did
most miserably afflict her self, and frequently inculpate the Loyalty of Don
Pietro. He, not being able to endure her resentments, thought of weakening her
jealousy by discovering the whole truth unto her. Hereupon Giacintha being in
a great rage, with a furious tone said unto him. Never speak to me, nor presume
to see me more, if you do not make your Kinswoman know that you are my Spouse,
and cannot be hers. Neither my Heart, nor my Honor will suffer any Rival. In
saying so she made a motion to be gone, but was stopped by Don Piedro who, with
horrible imprecations asserted his own constancy, and promised, the next day to
undeceive his Cosen. Giacintha being willing to lay a further obligation upon
Don Piedro for the performance of his promises, made her self sure to him by an
Oath. Don Piedro in these delightsome amors having lost all that
circumspection that before made him cautious, went to see his Cosen who, having
wholly chased away her disease, was only attending the perfect consummation of
her recovery. He was received in the most affectionate manner that a loving
soul could put in practice. But the appearing of some trouble in his looks gave
occasion to Leonora to ask him the cause of it. After a little slight denial
Don Piedro said, It is not justice Madam, that I should betray your good
affection, and falsify my own promises. My behavior has hitherto been rather
feigned, than candid. I had a mind to recover you, but I cannot satisfy you.
Bear with my Fortune that has obliged me to another. I have passed my word,
and am contracted to Giacintha, nor can I disengage my self without losing my
life. It Is enough answered Leonora, yet had you better have letten me dye than
to revive in me the tyranny of passion. Patience, the heart that cannot bend
may break. Having said this, she went out of the Chamber and retired into a
Closet, where she let loose the reins of her anger which thus dictated unto
her; Sir,
The injuries that are done to honor do call for revenge even from those that
have no interest therein. For this reason I counsel you to look well to the
guard of your House whose Honor is endangered by Don Pietro de Ponzes. If,
blinded by destiny, you should think this to be a Forgery, your own eyes, when
circumspect, will give you testimony of the truth hereof.




She sealed the Letter without subscribing it, and sent it by a Footman
belonging to the Father of Giacintha. This done she returned into her Closet
for to write another, while Don Pietro, being doubtful what resolutions an
incensed Woman might take, made haste away. Afterward Leonora went out of the
Closet to her Mother, begging her Blessing for that she was afraid she should
never see her more. Her Mother chid her, saying. O Daughter, do not use these
hateful expressions to me, unless you intend to shorten my days. Leonora with
tears in her eyes left her Mother. She had not gone far but, sending forth a
deep sigh, she fell down dead. All the House ran to her succor and, believing
her to be only in a Swoon, they applied all things proper to bring her to her
self again. All their endeavors were in vain, and the Doctor being come knew
her to be dead indeed. In stripping off her Cloths there fell from her Bosom a
Letter which, being directed to her Mother, spoke thus: Dear Mother,
I my self have undertaken to chastise the intemperance of my sensual appetite,
by taking Poison to expel my immoderate affection. I thought Death would be
more pleasing to me, than to see my Cosen in the Arms of another Woman. I
beseech you pardon the displeasure which this my resolution shall have given
you, by judging it necessary to terminate the disquiet of my heart. Adieu,
dearest Mother, adieu.

Your unfortunate Leonora.




This unhappy accident occasioned great disturbance in the minds of her Mother
and Kindred, and some there were, unacquainted with her Love-affair, that did
so far err in their judgment, as to impute this her sudden death unto her great
riches. Giacintha knowing her self to be unwillingly guilty of this
Woman-slaughter, had a mind to have some affectionate discourse about it with
Don Pietro. Whereupon she sends privately to tell him, that she desired to see
him that very night. Don Pietro went accordingly and was, as at other times,
conducted into a low Chamber, by a servant, who afterward stood as Sentinel at
the Door. Giaccintha was scarce come into the room, when Don Garzia, who by the
Letter that did tax his honor was made very vigilant, was at the apartment of
his Daughter. But not finding her there, he went on to that of his Son, where
they both armed themselves for to revenge the affront done unto their
Reputation. They could not do this so silently but that some of the Servants
gave notice thereof to the Lovers, who thereby had the opportunity of getting
away before they were assaulted. Don Pietro carried Giacintha to an Aunt of
hers in a Monastery; and he, by retiring, secured himself from the Persecution
which he feared, of Justice. Don Garzia, being wounded in the most sensible
part of his Soul, did fully resolve to revenge, this disgrace by himself. He
was so far from preferring his complaints to the Judges, that he seemed not to
reserve the least sense of this injury. He answered those that spoke to him of
it in such a manner that did rather favor of stolidity than of revenge.

Nevertheless Don Pietro was not wanting in his due circumspection, hoping at
length by Marrying Giacintha, by exercising acts of modesty, and by the
interposition of time to appease the implacable rage of Don Garzia. In the mean
time, to shelter himself from Justice, he took Sanctuary in a little Grove
belonging to a Nunnery, where he staid the longer, because in the night time,
by means of the Gardner, he had the opportunity of discoursing with Giacintha
through an iron-barred Window. Don Garzia, having intimation hereof, got
admittance one Night, by the mediation of Gold, and with Sword in Hand,
together with his Son, set upon Don Piedro. He, fearing to violate the
privilege of the Monastery, and unwilling to hazard the lives of his intended
Father and Brother-in-law, betook himself to flight. He was hotly pursued by
Ardelius; wherefore to stop his fury, and save himself, Don Piedro facing
about, was forced to run him into the side. Ardelius thereupon suddenly fell
down, his Soul, together with his Blood, expiring in the same moment, Don
Garzia could not come up time enough either to succor his Son, or apprehend
his enemy. The daylight, discovering this sad accident, raised up great
murmurings, in so much as Don Piedro, having privately taken leave of
Giacintha, for to secure himself, departed for Flanders, which is the Asylum of
all wicked and unfortunate men. Don Garzia, not being able, at present, to
sacrifice the blood of Don Piedro to his revenge, went about to alleviate his
sorrow by tormenting the soul of Giacintha. He therefore, being very lavish of
his Gold, to bring this to effect, contrived it so that all the Letters of Don
Piedro were brought to his hands. There was a Month past wherein Giacintha was
tortured with the impatience of hearing from Don Piedro, when one day, being at
the Window with her Husband's Father, she took some comfort in showing her a
Letter which came from Barcellona, whither Don Piedro went designing thence for
Naples, and so for Flanders. She having hastily unfolded the Letter found what
follows: Dear Sir,
It Is not without extreme and hearty sorrow, that I send you the unhappy News
of the loss of your Son Signor Don Piedro. He going late out of a Gaming-house
last Night was killed by many Wounds he received in his Breast; no body
knowing, nor so much as suspecting who should be the aggressors. It grieves me
that I should write you so ungrateful a Letter, but my affection and obligation
could not exempt me from this Office. To morrow he will be buried with that
Solemnity that is due to his Birth and my grief. I pray God in his Mercy to
moderate your affliction, and to give you that consolation which such an
unlucky and cruel chance does deserve. You shall be informed of his concerns by
a better opportunity, in the mean time please to know that I am

Your most devoted servant Il Capitan Diego di Mara.




This Captain was an intimate friend of Don Pietro's who went with him into
Flanders. But the Letter was forged by Don Garzia, not only to triumph in the
grief of Giacintha, but also to divert her correspondence with Don Piedro; and
it succeeded as he would have it. For Don Piedro, coming unto Naples, and
finding no Letters neither from Giacintha, nor his Father, according as they
had agreed, without staying long, embarked for Flanders. There, for diversion
of his troubled thoughts, he betook himself to Gaming and Courting of Women, in
such manner, that for Six Years time he neither regarded his Spouse, nor his
Country. In this interim the unfortunate Giacintha being drowned in tears, and
believing that the advice of Don Piedro's Death was true, made her tender
affection submit to hard necessity, by listing her self a Nun in the same
Monastery where she had taken refuge. Here, truly humbling her self, she led a
life more Divine than Humane. Don Piedro, on the other hand, being surfeited
with the love of many, fixed his whole delight upon one only Woman who, being
either more fair or more cunning than the rest, had made her self absolute
Mistress of his Heart. While thus Don Piedro thought of bringing his amorous
hopes to perfection, he saw them all blasted in the wilful resolution of his
beloved who sent him this Letter; Signor Don Piedro,
Your pretensions are very troublesome unto me. My free choice and my Destiny
do both forbid me to be yours, I being already espoused to the Count Aurelius.
And although my heart shall always preserve indelible the memory of your kind
expressions; yet I would not have you, by this declaration, to bring the least
prejudice upon my honesty, or my Husband's Reputation. Be pleased to accept of
this acknowledgment, which is all you can expect from

Your most humble and most obliged Servant Anna Maria.




This Paper did raise up the spirits of Don Piedro to such a pitch that he was,
for some little time, beside himself. At length, coming to himself again, and
believing that he could not better heal this latter Wound of Love, than by
opening the former, he returned back to Barza.

Before he saw his own House he went to the Nunnery to see Giacintha. Under
pretense of bringing her some Letters from Flanders, he made her be called and,
giving her to understand that he was Don Piedro, he caused such a sudden change
in her that she was ready to have fainted away. Giacintha, recovering this
oppression of Spirit, occasioned by such surprising joy, did presently revive
her former affection, which became the more ardent for being suppressed by the
tie of Religion. Yet this pair of Lovers thought it not difficult to obtain a
Dispensation; since that the Bond of Matrimony did preeede that of Devotion,
and Giacintha was no more at her own disposal, for that she had taken upon her
a Religious Habit, supposing her self to be freed from the obligation of
Marriage by the pretended death of Don Piedro. They were contriving to bring
about their amorous desires to a successful end, when Don Garzia, being
informed of Don Peedro's return, and of the entertainments he had with his
Daughter, thought he had offended the Courage of his Mind by so long
forbearance. And, aspiring to wash off the Stains of his Reputation by a bloody
revenge; being full of rancour, he ran to the Grates of the Monastery. There he
found his Daughter having her hands between those of Don Piedro, and holding a
very strict conference with him. His defiance, threatening, laying hand on his
Sword, and mortally wounding of Don Piedro was all done in a trice. Don Garzia
would in like manner have exercised his fury upon Giacintha if he had not been
prevented by Don Piedro who, struggling with approaching death, did so much
reinforce himself as that, either to save his Beloved, or revenge himself, he
struck Don Garzia with a Dagger to the heart. Don Garzia fell down dead; and at
the same time Don Piedro also unhappily left this life. Giacintha, at so
dolorous a Spectacle, stood like a Stock. Tears, which do usually, in some
measure, assuage grief, in her did augment it. Words, which by their expression
do commonly make sorrow more supportable, in her, by the greatness of the
mischief, were stifled before they could be uttered. Her eyes therefore not
being able to behold so dismal a Tragedy, and her heart not being strong enough
to resist such cruel tortures, which robbed her in the same moment, both of her
Father and Husband, seeing her losses to be desperate and irrecoverable, being
overcome by deadly grief, she fell down to the ground, and unfortunately gave
up the Ghost.

By this it appears, that Women, in pleasing the inordinate appetites of their
Senses, and in disobeying the Will and Commands of their Parents, do oftentimes
prepare a funeral for their own, and others happiness: and that Men, by
standing on the Punctilio's of Honor, and by exercising the desires of
revenge, do ruin the greatness of their Families, and leave behind them an
unhappy and deplored memory to Posterity.

The Argument.
Don Diego Saranda, being disgusted by a certain Lady, resolves to love no
more; and therefore makes it his business to rail against Women. Which being
reproved in him by Isabella he falls in love with her. And having received two
kind invitations to come to her House, is diverted by some accidents of Fire
and Sword. So that, being fearful of hazarding any farther his life, he intends
to quit the enterprise: but, being again encouraged by Isabella, he is admitted
into her Bed. Where a new occasion of disgust arising, he departs without
enjoying her.

NOVEL IX.
DOn Diego di Saranda, a Gentleman of excellent Merit and Virtue, coming to
Genoua, and taking a private Lodging where he might least be known, began to
evaporate his passionate Invectives in this manner. He that builds his hopes
upon the hearts and promises of a Woman may boast of a foundation more unstable
than the Waves. Woman, he that had the wit to call thee Woe man did describe
but a little part of thy nature. For the precipices of thy inconstancy, the
insatiety of thy affections, and the Hellish torments that thou make thy
Lovers to endure, cannot be comprehended in the single word Woe. He that called
thee Heaven, had regard perhaps to thy Thunders and malign influences. And who
so idolizes thee with the name of Deity, does it more in contemplation of the
pride of thy Sex, and the folly of men, than of any desert of thine. The
Astrologers had great reason to make the House of Women common with that of
domestic enemies, and to place the House of Death near to that of a Wife: for
you betray with your smiles, entrap by your tears, and kill with your
wantonness.

Enough, no more, Signor Don Diego, for God's sake, replied a Lady,
interrupting him, that was very well known unto him, whom we, out of respect to
her Quality, will call by the borrowed name of Isabella. It misbecomes all men,
continued she, to reproach the Female Sex, which, though naturally it be more
weak, yet is it more noble than that of yours. He that rails at Womankind,
either does not know their Merit, or is unworthy to be acquainted with it.
Gentlemen, like you, ought to draw their Swords against those that scandalize
Women, and not to arm their tongues with injurious words against the reputation
of those who have contributed to their Being.

Madam, answered Don Diego, my grief tyrannizing over my tongue, has made me
utter some odd conceits which though they are the product of anger, yet are
they not the offspring of falsehood: But I neither can, nor will dispute this
matter with you, because neither my modesty, nor the respect I owe you will
permit it. But if you had had that experience of a man, that I have met with in
a Woman, sure I am you would wish for a tongue of Thunder and Lightning that
might strike dead and reduce all Mankind into Ashes; and would exclaim against
Dame Nature for necessitating you to obey so odious a subject.

Tell me, I pray you (said Isabella again) the injury that has thus excited
your hatred against Women. Certainly it ought to be very great seeing it
extorts from you revenge even against those also that have not in the least
offended you.

In answer to this Don Diego says, I will give you a brief relation of my
dolorous adventures, because I am sure thereby to obtain both compassion to my
malady, and excuse for my hatred against Women. It is now almost five years
since I first dedicated my affection unto a certain beautiful and noble Lady.
This Lady seeming to accept of my love, made me so proud that I scornfully
despised all other amors; and you, Madam, can be my witness herein, seeing I
continually refused the favor of your love, declaring that my ambition was
rather to languish for the love of one, than to enjoy the correspondence of a
thousand others. Seeing that my most humble service was not unpleasing to her,
after a long and faithful attendance I sued for the reward unto which Lovers do
constantly aspire. There followed many delays masked under the pretenses of
Honor and Caution, when no longer ago than yesterday, I received a challenge
to meet my sweet Mistress, at night in Venus field. I am not able to tell you
my unspeakable consolation. I as earnestly desired the setting of the Sun, as
Batts and Owls do desire darkness. I came to the appointed place and gave the
sign prescribed me; but was answered by nothing but mocks and scoffs,
upbraiding my credulity in believing that a Lady of her esteem should prostrate
her Honor to a Lover; and yet, with these eyes, I beheld her Gallant
triumphing in my scorn, and, with his arms about her Neck, deriding my Love and
Constancy. Don Diego did aggravate these passages with so much passion, that
Isabella, taking pity of him, broke off his Story saying. And now Signor Don
Diego, why do you blame the Female Sex if, by the ill placing of your
affections, you have met with derision instead of reward? You should lay the
blame on her that offended you, and not include in a particular injury a
general revenge against those that are innocent. Without doubt you are wholly
in the fault who, by neglecting the advantages offered you, have indiscreetly
fled from her that loved you, and blindly pursued her that hated you. This Don
Diego is a Judgment from Heaven. Acknowledge it, and repent, for it is always
good to change Counsels, when you may reap profit thereby. I am the same that
ever I was, and as I have long set a great value upon your merit; so I will
endeavor all I can to recompense it.

If I did believe, answered Don Diego, that my blind constancy did not make me
unworthy of your favor, I would muster up all my Spirits, and sacrifice the
whole strength of my heart unto your Beauty; and by my past ardors you may
guess how fervent my future love will he.

It Is enough, Don Diego, replied Isabella. I am yours, and you shall always
find me so. Your past aversion has but refined my affection. If this Night you
will put on the Habit of a Gardner, and come to my House, I will make you to
know that Women are not at all blameworthy; and that the defect is in Men who
love without distinction, as being guided more by Passion than Discretion.

Having thus spoken, she left Don Diego, I know not whether more joyful of his
new Adventure, or fearful of some new misfortune. For, calling to mind his late
slighting of this Lady, he thought it impossible she should preserve so much
kindness for him as that, instead of revenge, she should bestow upon him those
favors, which are the the reward of long and faithful services, and a loving
correspondence. But his sensual appetite prevailing above all other
considerations, he went, as soon as 'twas Night, to the House of Isabella. She
received him most affectionately, and afterward conducted him, unseen, into a
Ground-room which, by a back pair of Stairs, did lead into her own Chamber.
Here she prayed him to dispense with staying a little, till her Maidens (who
were naturally prying into these kind of secrets) being retired, might give a
better opportunity for their amorous Thefts. After this Isabella, thinking it
long ever she were with Don Diego, feigned her self not very well, whereupon
she dismissed her Servants, and allowed some time for their going to sleep. In
the mean time Don Diego, thinking every moment that did delay his satisfaction
to be very tedious, did believe that he was betrayed. He saw the Room, where he
was, besieged by enraging flames; and it seemed to him that the Fire did
upbraid his incontinency and, by the purity of its ardor, threaten to
extinguish the impurity of his desires And the rather, for that there came in
to his mind the past ill opinions he had of Women, and he persuaded himself
that this was a trick put upon him by Isabella, which indeed was but a mere
accident. The Servants had carelessly left fire in the next Room which, having
lain hid a Day and a Night, broke out with so much fury that the poor lover was
near being sacrificed. He would have cried out, but he durst not for fear
(being found in that place) of being killed either as a Thief or an Adulterer.
He tried to get out but could not, Isabella having secured him by fast locking
of the Door. His fear was increased by the confused noise of those in the House
who cried out Fire, Fire, and hearing them already ask for the Key of his
Chamber, he knew not what excuse to make to those that should find him there.
But his danger did not admit of long consultation, since he already began to
feel the difference between the elementary and imaginary ^lames. In these
streights he heard a little Door opening into the Room which he had not till
then observed. And now he gave himself for lost; being he could not on the
sudden bethink himself of any pretense that might serve to cover his
guiltiness. He was ^n some measure refreshed by the com^ng of Isabella who,
taking him by the ^and, hastily drew him (trembling) out ^y the same private
way that he went ^n, saying to him, Don Diego you are very unfortunate in your
amors, seeing that the House is on fire. I do not ^ow wonder at other Women
for having refused you. Get you among the Crowd of those that run to the fire,
that so you may go away unespied; and we will order our business better for the
future. This succeeded happily ^o Don Diego; for he, making as if he were drawn
thither by the noise, having put off the Gardners Coat, did manfully assist in
putting out the fire, which without his help would certainly ^ave dilated its
Violences much farther. After this he received public Thanks from Isabella
who, in very affectionate and respectful terms, did express he^ own Gratitude,
and her Husbands obligation unto him. Don Diego departe^ more enamoured than
before, his inordinate affection gaining strength by this accidental
opposition; so that he continued to give fresh testimonies o^ his respects
toward Isabella who, being desirous to bring her amorous practice to
perfection, sent him the following Letter: My Dear,
It behoved me to moderate the ardency of my affection in the presence o^ my
Husband. He is newly gone into the Country, and I do in this Paper enclose my
heart to you. If the Fire o^ our House has not extinguished tha^ of your
Breast I shall expect you about the Third Hour of the Night. (...) desire that
you would disguise you^self under the Habit of Austin my Servant, and so by
help of the Ke^ herewith sent you, you may enter the House without any the
least suspicion* In the mean time please to accept of her Services who
professes her self to be

Your most devoted and obliged Servant. Isabella.




Don Diego, upon the receipt of this Letter, thought himself in Heaven;
wherefore his reading and kissing it over and over, and the putting of it up in
his Bosom were the least demonstrations of his joyful affection. After this,
taking Pen and Paper, he sent this answer: My dear heart,
I, being equally confounded by the greatness of your favor, and the smallness
of my desert, cannot tell how to express my obligations. I will come, in the
silent time of the Night, and sacrifice my heart unto you. I have nothing more
valuable, nor more proportionable to my desire, and Love it self pretends to no
more. It is great reason that I should transform my self into the likeness of
what I shall always be,

Your most humble, and most obliged Servant Don Diego.




At length the Night came that was so often called upon by him, whereupon, in
the Disguise, and at the hour appointed he went to the House of Isabella. He
was near opening the Door when he saw himself assaulted by four Men who, with
Cudgels in their hands, began to bang him soundly. These were some debauched
Youths who, having been affronted (as they pretended) by Austin, did there lie
in wait to beat him, and taking Don Diego, by his Clothes, to be Austin, they
did sorely rib-baste him. Don Diego, not being used to take blows, drew out a
Pistol, and, discharging it, lightly wounded one of them in the side. He would
have returned his salute with a kind of short Gun which, if it had taken fire,
would certainly have cooled Don Diego's hot desire. The rest of the aggressors
did likewise discharge their Pistols at Don Diego but, by great chance, none of
them did hit him. Yet he had fallen a Sacrifice to their anger (for they had
all thrown away their Sticks and drawn their Swords) if Isabella, crying aloud
out at a Window, had not hastened all the men in her House to succor him that
was assaulted; whereupon these young Men, fearing to be known and not being
willing to venture any further, ran all away, and gave Don Diego the
opportunity of retiring, who, being unwilling that the pleasures of his Sense
should any longer triumph in the dangers of his life, wrote to Isabella as
follows: Madam,
Fortune having always been my Foe, does oblige me to take new measures, unless
I should have a mind unfortunately to end my days. He that will not take
warning from Fire and Sword deserves to be destroyed by Thunder, which my
rashness is not so forward as to provoke; nor do I suppose that your Love would
have me subjected to the Wrath of Heaven. And as I shall always rejoice in the
thoughts of being your servant, so I will never cancel the obligation you have
laid upon me. Do not condemn (O Fair Lady) that heart which, because it is
humane, is awfully overruled by Divine Prodigies. To rebel against the
Government of Heaven is not proper for one that is a Slave to Love, and that
thinks his happiness depends upon the Starry influence of his Mistresses eyes.
Yet, in my heart, I will unalterably preserve the great esteem I have for your
Merit, and the favor showed to

Your most obliged and most faithful Servant D. Diego.




Upon the receipt of this Letter Isabella saw that her hopes were turning into
despair. She knew that Carnal Appetites grew more violent for being
interrupted, wherefore she believed that the excuses of Don Diego proceeded
rather from want of love, than for fear. At length she returned him this
following medley of Love, Jealousy, Anger and Reproof, Viz. Sir,
It Is no wonder that you meet with such ill success in your Amors, since that
Fortune hates the pusillanimous, and loves the courageous. The enjoyments of
Love are not attained to without labor and danger. He that prognosticates evil
to himself deserves to have it; and the fear of Predictions does often
facilitate their access. Yet I, who am acquainted with the generosity of your
heart, and the greatness of your Spirit, cannot think you will be frighted at
Chimera's and Bug-Bears which do frighten (and that but seldom too) none but
Women and Children. He is no true Lover that can change at every Chance; and it
argues a debased mind to be easily overcome by difficulties. But your Valor
may be abused by the encouragement of a Woman, who though her Sex be weaker,
yet her Love is stronger than yours.

This Evening by means of the Revellings that are to be at my House, you may go
into my Chamber, and shut your self in the Closet which you will find left open
for that purpose. I hope this Night to make you know that the soft pleasures of
Love are sweetened by hazards and hardships. In the mean time preserve me as I am

Your most cordial Lover and Servant Isabella.




In reading of this Letter Don Diego felt in himself a great conturbation of
Spirit. The Beautys of Isabella which, by gentle reproofs, did sue for his
Love, did make the greatest danger seem contemptible unto him; but the
accidental encounters of Fire and Sword did confirm in him his reflections on
Reason and Prudence. At last, Sense got the upper hand, and made him resolve
that, postponing all other considerations, he would for the sake of Isabella,
and to please his own inclinations, expose himself to the most imminent perils.
And though his mind misgave him, promising him no good effect in this Affair;
yet he was resolute in performing it, and went and shut himself unseen, into
Isabellas Closet. Here he stayed a long time, expecting her with extraordinary
impatience, and did often reprove or approve his design, according to the
various dictates of Sense and Reason. After a great while Isabella came and,
with a multitude of sweet Kisses, ravished the heart of Don Diego, in such sort
that, being intoxicated with these delicious endearments, he clear forgot all
his past misfortunes. Isabella for to attain the desired end of all Lovers,
began to undress, desiring Don Diego to do the like. He, in obeying her, prayed
her to shut the Chamber Door, that none of her Maidens, who are wont to watch
over their Mistresses actions, might perceive them. Let me alone for that, said
Isabella, you are a very cautious and fearful Lover. I, that hazard my Life, my
Estate, and my good Name, do think of nothing but of serving you, and you, by
needless circumspections, do imbitter the sweetness of our affections. I see
how pure your Love is, that has a mixture of so much fear. Don Diego blushed at
these words and, without reply, stripping all off, he went into Bed.

At the same time Isabella had likewise put off her Clothes, but instead of
running into the Embraces of Don Diego, who lay with open arms impatiently
expecting her, she went to a little Side-Table, for to set up and accommodate a
Mouse-Trapp. And were it either for making too much haste, or something else
that happened amiss, she let the wire that held up the trap fall several times
from her hand. Don Diego's Patience being worn out in attendance, and fearing
that some Servant might come at the clattering of that noise, said, Madam, what
are you doing? Why do you spend so much precious time in vain? Are those
amorous desires cooled that were so ardent in you a little while ago?

To which Isabella answered, My Dear, who so is not a true Enemy, cannot be a
true Friend. I must revenge me of a certain Mouse that has done me a thousand
injuries; and more especially the last Night did gnaw me a Peach which for its
goodliness, and for the Persons sake that gave it was much valued by me.

Why then, replied Don Diego, will you let a Lover languish while you take
revenge of a poor Mouse? Pray lay aside revenging, and let us fall to loving.
And then again he renewed his instances, that she would leave the Trap, and
come to Bed.

But Isabella being obstinate, and making as if she did not hear him, he became
highly incensed. Whereupon his passed fears being awakened, and being also
afraid that the Noise might call some of her Servants thither, he said, Madam
Isabella,
Since that you had rather entrap a silly Mouse, than oblige a Lover; I also
will now let my Reason prevail over my Sense, and will no longer bestow my
affection upon one who prefers an inconsiderable Revenge before it.




Whereunto Isabella answering nothing, he, hastily putting on some, and making
a bundle of the rest of his Clothes, departed the Chamber, and so went out of
the House, looking afterward upon Isabella with a very indifferent Eye. She
therefore either despising this his resolution, or recanting the too much
indulgence of her own inclination, cared no more for him.

Such is the mutability of humane affections. Whereupon we may conclude that
the minds of Women are many times inconstant, and sometimes overcome by
dishonesty and revenge: and that no wise men ought ever to adventure their
Lives in the vain pursuit of unlawful pleasures, or sensual enjoyments.

FINIS.

