THE CHARACTER OF A SEPARATIST: OR, Sensuality the Ground OF SEPARATION.

To which is Added, THE PHARISEES LESSON, On Matthew. IX. xiii. AND AN
EXAMINATION OF Mr. HALES TREATISE of SCHISM.

By THOMAS LONG, B. D. and Prebendary of St. PETER'S EXON.

I differ from my Brethren in many things of considerable moment; yet if, I
should zealously press my judgment on others, so as to disturb the Peace of the
Church, and separate from my Brethren, I should fear I should prove a
Firebrand in Hell, for being a Fire brand in the Church -- I charge you, if
God should give me up to any factious Church-rending course, that you forsake
me, and follow me not a step.

Mr. Baxter's Epistle Dedicatory to the Saints Rest. LONDON, Printed for Walter
Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

To the Worshipful Sir THOMAS CARRY Knight. RECORDER of the CITY OF EXETER: AND
JUDGE of the SESSIONS FOR THE COUNTY of DEVON.
THE Design of this Treatise being to prove, that Schism is a work of the
flesh, it cannot be improper to submit it to the cognizance of a Magistrate,
the Peace of the State being equally violated thereby, as the unity of the
Church; and, when the Veil of the Temple is rent, there usually follows an
Earthquake through the whole Land. -- Turn tua res agitur: the same persons
that despise Aaron, do affront Moses: And indeed in a Church and Kingdom so
knit and consolidated, as ours are, (Where the King is through God's good
providence, a Nursing-father to the Church, and not only professes himself to
be of its communion, but has graciously obliged himself by Oath, to defend the
rights and privileges thereof, and to that end has established many good
Laws, not only by Statute, but by Canons Ecclesiastical (which are also the
King's Laws:) and where the Church on her part, as to external peace and order,
entirely acknowledges her dependence on the King, as Defender of the faith,
which she professes, and in all causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, supreme Moderator and Governor, and by the
indispensable Laws of God is so obliged to the duty of Allegiance, that neither
she, nor any of her children ever did, nor can deny that, without denying their
own Doctrine and Profession: and long and certain experience has taught us,
that whoever retained themselves in the communion of the Church, did yield due
obedience to the King, and contrariwise as many as withdrew from the communion
of the Church, were professed enemies to the King) It is impossible, I say, to
conceive how a Schism should be maintained in such a Church, without actual
Sedition in the State. In this Tertullus the Orator was right, when he called
the Authors of a new Sect, Ringleaders of Sedition, and (...), a very pest;
for Schism, like the Plague of Leprosy eats into the Walls and Timber of the
House; and as Optatus observes of the Schism of the Donatists, what Family is
there, where either the Wife is not withdrawn from her Husband? or Children
from their Parents? or Servants from their Masters? And the Divisions of
private Families produce public mischiefs: for as a Family which consists of
diverse persons, being divided, cannot stand; so a Kingdom, which consists of
diverse Families, being divided, will come to ruin: as when the several twists
of a Cable, which holds the Ship at Anchor, is by little Vermin eaten through,
the ship is exposed to the violence of every wind and storm. When the Church
loses a Member, the King does not only lose a subject, but gains an enemy:
when either Laymen make use of schismatical Meetings, or Religious men of
seditious tumults, the peace of the Church and State are equally endangered.

Secondly, It cannot be denied, that the very act of separation, is a bidding
Pertinaciae Schismatis non est alia ratio quam odium fraternum. S. August.
contr Parm. l. 1. c. 4.
farewell to all charitable Opinions, and amicable conversation toward those,
from whom the separation is made: And when they who first separated from the
Church of England, did on the very same grounds dissent from the brethren of
that separation, and withdrew into new Sects, they were professed enemies unto
all, but that Faction to which they adhered: For no separation is held
justifiable, but from such, in whose communion the dissenters do apprehend (at
least) that they cannot serve God as they ought, but that they should sin in
doing as the rules of that communion do require. And if so, how should they
scruple to disobey the King's Laws, when they think them contrary to God's
Laws? or how should they care to be at peace with them, who are in their
apprehensions enemies to truth? Their hatred will rather increase, and become
implacable, and they will call it Zeal, how bitter and fierce soever it be. For
when Men think their opinions and passions warranted by Religion, they also
think themselves bound, by their greatest hopes and fears, to prosecute them to
the utmost of their power: and as the mistaken Disciples did, to call for fire
from Heaven, on all those that dissent from them, and that they should do God
good service in slaying of them. The differences that have been raised among us
about things indifferent, have caused the loss of more of the blood and spirits
of this Nation, as well as of true piety, than the persecution of all its
professed enemies: Long have we languished under that issue of blood, which was
opened by punctilio's of Religion: for our controversies did not concern the
fundamentals of Religion, but only the dress and garments of external worship,
and yet how great a matter did a little fire kindle, when it was blown from a
coal taken from the Altar? for they who, as the Priests of God, should weep
between the Porch and the Altar, Joel 2.17. and not only by their tears, but by
their blood too, endeavor to extinguish the flame, did as the Priests of Mars
scatter fire in every corner of the Temple, and warmed themselves at the
flames, which they had kindled. What if the matters contended for were vile,
and inconsiderable? they had the Art to set them off by glorious Names -- The
Cause and Covenant of God, the Kingdom and Scepter of Christ; and in such a
cause, they are bound, as they think, not only to leave, but in a literal
sense, to hate Father and Mother: All moderation is lukewarmness, and they will
be cruel, that they may not be accounted cold, as the Royal Martyr foretold, p.
69. of his (...). Many persons do at this day look upon The Covenant, as a holy
and harmless Instrument for Reformation, but who among all the Covenanters was
there, that did not think himself bound to oppose the King in reforming the
Church? But I am sure, says that Royal Person, The right method of reforming
the Church, cannot consist with that of disturbing the State, nor can Religion
be justly advanced by depressing Loyalty, which is one of the chiefest
ingredients and ornaments of true Religion, for next to Fear God, is Honor the
King: and yet no Artillery Yard did ever discipline more Men for War, nor any
Magazine furnish them with keener Weapons, than the Tongues and Pens of some
Disciplinarians have done.

Thirdly, I would willingly be informed, what company of persons in any Age,
did openly separate from an Established Church, wherein they might serve God
without sinning by communicating with it, and did not also trouble and disturb
the State.

The multitude cannot look through the Vizor and see how they are acted by the
ambition and covetousness of a few malcontents, who under a seeming Zeal for
the Truth, have real designs against peace: and do expose the Temporal and
Eternal welfare of their followers, for the accomplishing of their own ungodly
Lusts: not unlike the Ape that burnt the Cats foot in the fire to pluck out her
beloved Nuts.

Fourthly, Nor can it be otherwise thought but that Schismatical persons among
us do drive Seditious designs, if it be considered, that there is no pious duty
or laudable exercise of piety and devotion, but it may be done more solemnly in
the public Assemblies, than in any private Conventicles whatsoever. Non licet
^^de sepa^are ubi ^^iect in belius ^mmuta^^g, Aug. ^^ontra ^^resc. l. 2. ^.28.
(...) 230. of ^chism.
And what Reason can there be, as Mr. Hales says, why they should do that
secretly and suspiciously which they may do warrantably in the public
Congregations, except they are afraid their Devotions will be less acceptable,
when they serve God with Reverence, as well as with godly Fear? It is beyond
question, that there may be such corruptions in Doctrine, and such Idolatrous
practices required in Worship, as may justify a Separation; but neither of
these can be pretended against our Church. The Covenanters indeed did pretend a
necessity of reforming our Doctrine, but to this day have not mentioned any one
Article, that needed it; but while the Covenant was warm upon their Spirits,
they required, that all persons admitted into any Benefice should subscribe our
Articles, having first read them publicly, and professed their consent to
them, as long as the House of Lords had the Power of admission committed to
them; and even now in cool blood, all parties that have any thing of Sobriety
do make the Doctrine of the Church of England the Standard by which they
authorize their own. And if the present Dissenters were Christians indeed, the
great and uncontroverted Fundamentals of Religion wherein they agree with us in
judgment, might reconcile their affections in those lesser things, wherein they
differ. Opinionum diversitas and Opinantium unitas non sunt (...), Hales of
Schism, p. 215. How unreasonable and irreligious a thing it is to contend for
Ceremonies to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy
and Faith, is I hope satisfactorily evinced in another discourse hereunto
annexed.

Fifthly, I shall therefore propose another Argument to prove that Schism as it
is now practiced among us, is inseparable from Sedition, because if men did
dissent purely upon the account of Judgment, and Conscience, they would dissent
soberly and peaceably, and as the Nonconformists in Mr. Balls days join with us
in somethings which they cannot but allow, though they refused to communicate
in other things which they suspected; and concerning those things also, they
would in all humility and meekness seek satisfaction, and distrust their own
Opinions, which they find to be contrary to the judgment of their Superiors
whom they cannot but acknowledge to be very learned and good men. For as
Erasmus on Romans 14. Dignitatis ratio poscit, ut imperitior peritiori
obtemperet, We owe so much to the Authority and wisdom of our Superiors that
in things doubtful and suspected (and he instanceth in things far more
obnoxious than our Ceremonies) they who have less knowledge ought to obey him
that has more; and he gives this reason, because if it be a crime of
Arrogance, to despise the Superstition of the weak, and of him that erreth in
Simplicity; of how much more intolerable Arrogance is it, if he that is more
weak in Faith and Knowledge, do judge and condemn them, that are better than
himself? according to the vulgar rule of unlearned persons, who judge all
unjust which themselves do not practice: and the Apostle tells such that the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (i. e.) the spirit and temper of the
Gospel consists not in being solicitous about such things which are left to our
Christian liberty, but about the promoting of righteousness, and peace, To.
14.17.
and joy in the Holy Ghost, which are indispensably enjoined; so that sober and
conscientious Dissenters, would rather according to the Will of God suffer
patiently for well-doing, than studiously promote discord and division, and all
those evils which the Apostle says do accompany it.

I cannot forbear to commend that excellent advice of S. Augustine to such
persons. Epistle 56. If thou art questioned (says he) concerning points of
subtilty and controversies, tell them, thou know not what to Answers,
because thy Learning lies not that way; if thou art urged to declare what thou
know, and wherein thy learning lies, Responde, to nosse, quomodo sine
istis, homo possit esse beatus. Answer thou, I have learned how a man may be
happy without the understanding of such points. And Mr. Hales observed that
when scruples of Conscience began to be made or pretended, then Schisms began
to break in. Treatise of Schism, p. 217.

And now let any indifferent man judge; concerning such as instead of
dissenting peaceably and seeking satisfaction meekly, in such punctilio's, of
the nature of which they may be safely ignorant, and as the Jews say of some of
their questions, refer the resolution of them until Elias come, do not only
renounce all Communion in the established Worship; but contrary to the known
Laws of God, and the King, disturb the public peace, rail at their Brethren,
defame and resist their Superiors, are deaf to all arguments, and will not be
persuaded when they are over-convinced, but instead of patiently enduring what
is not in their power to amend, as S. Augustine advises, do with equal pride
and impatience attempt the casting off of all Government, whether such are men
of tender Consciences, or of carnal, and by consequence of Seditious principles.

Sixthly, Which will yet more evidently appear, if it be considered that
Schisms are ordinarily contrived, and abetted, by discontented and ambitious
persons, whose seditious and Traitorous designs against the State, do want the
Midwifry of Schism, to give them Birth and Maturity. The Vow at Hebron was a
means to form an Army against David, 2 Samuel 15.7.
and Come see my zeal, the Motto of Jehu's standard, 2 Kings 10.16.
which drew many after them, who went in the simplicity of their hearts to
their own destruction. And if men's practices may be judged of by their
principles, the doctrines that are infused into the spirits of the people at
such meetings, will sufficiently prove that their designs are seditious. For
when men do extol their new Discipline as the Kingdom and Scepter of Christ,
and affirm that all the Scepters of the Earth must bow to it, or be broken in
pieces; that Dominion is founded in grace; that wicked men are Usurpers and
have forfeited all that they have, and it is no more robbery to deprive them of
it than for the Israelites to rob the Egyptians; when they assert the nullity
of former Oaths for obedience to lawful powers by framing New Covenants, and
imposing on the subjects contrary to the command of their lawful Prince; that
good intentions may justify unlawful actions, and they may do evil that good
may come thereof; that Christian liberty does free the Believing wife from the
unbelieving husband, the godly child from his ungodly Parents, and the faithful
servant from his Infidel master; When their preaching is of cursing and lies,
despising Dominions, speaking evil of Dignities, vindictive groans against
their Brethren, complaints of the decay of Religion, of oppression of the
Godly, cursing all Neuters that do not help them against the Lords Anointed, or
that do their work negligently, and withhold their Swords from blood: How
spiritual soever such men may be thought, the weapons of their warfare are
carnal (i.e.) they are seditious; such men are not Ambassadors of the Gospel of
Peace, but of the Evangelium Armatum, every line whereof as Draco's Laws is
written in blood. When King Richard the First had taken prisoner a Bishop, that
was in Arms against him, the Pope sends to him to deliver his Son, but the King
sends the Pope the Bishops Armor, and asks him if that were his Sons coat? I
would fain know of them that profess themselves the children of Peace, if these
be the garments of their Ghostly Fathers that begat them. The great sorceress
Medea persuaded the daughters of Peleus, that the way to recover their aged
Father to youth and strength was to cut him in pieces and boil him according to
her Art. None but a people that have been bewitched could be persuaded that the
way to restore our Church to strength and beauty, was to divide it into so many
seditious Sects.

And now I suppose that I have given the World and you, Honored Sir,
sufficient Reason for this address to so eminent a Magistrate, seeing they that
murmur against the sons of Aaron, that they take too much upon them, are found
to have Rebelled against Moses also; and the same persons that renounced
communion with the Church of which they were once Members, and withdrew into
Conventicles, cried out, We have no part in David, 2 Samuel 20.1.
neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse, every man to his Tents O
Israel. As St. Augustine observed of the Donatists, Quid est Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? aut quid nobis cum regibus seculi? quos nunquam nisi invidos sensit
Christianitas, August. l. 2. ad Peril. c. 92. If the Magistrate may punish
murder, oppression, robbery and sedition, why may he not restrain such
practices as give occasion to all these, unless we would have him do what God
says he ought not (i.e.) to bear the sword in vain? Clamate si audetis, (says
St. Augustine) puniantur adulteria, puniantur homicidia, sola Sacrilegia
volumus impunita. There is great reason then that the Ministers of the Gospel
should apply themselves to the Ministers of the Laws. Israel will never prevail
against her enemies, except Moses's hand be lifted up as well as Aaron's, those
Royal Oaks must support our feeble Vines, or they will be trod under foot by
unreasonable Men. You are Custodes utriusque tabulae, under God and the King,
Defenders of our Faith as well as our Laws.

Sed quis custodiet ipsos Custodes? But who shall protect them, that should
protect us against the obloquies and strivings of an unruly People? even that
God, who having set Joshua over the murmuring Israelites, assured him, Joshua
1.5, and 6. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee, I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee: Be strong and of a good courage. And now, if ever, our
Magistrates ought to be Men of courage, as well as fearing God, when the
execution of the Laws is termed persecution, and such as will not tamely permit
their Religion and Liberties to be invaded, are accounted enemies to the Godly
Party. Chap. 4. of tumults.
But as the Royal Martyr observed, Nothing does more portend Gods displeasure
against a Nation, than when he suffers the confluence and clamours of the
Vulgar to pass all boundaries of Laws and reverence to Authority.

I say not this, Honored Sir, to provoke you to greater activity for the
public welfare, who have not only done more and better than others, but have
prevailed beyond expectation. I only pay a grateful acknowledgment for what
you have already done, and exhibit a Noble example to others, of one who
prefers the public Peace above his private interest, and does his duty to God
and the King with as much resolution, as others neglect or oppose it; and if
there were but five such Magistrates in a County, they would through God's
blessing, redeem an unworthy Nation from those flames which threaten a
Conflagration, like that of Sodom and Gomorrha.

I cannot omit, Great Sir, your constant respects to men of my Profession
without respect of Persons; you love a Clergyman eo nomine, not only the
worthy Dignitaries of our Church, but (I may say it in a better sense than a
great Lawyer was wont to say) you love a poor Clergyman with all your heart,
and have deservedly acquired among us, the Title of Deliciae Cleri, the
Clergies delight.

And now it is time to beg your pardon for this and many other Troubles by
which I have trespassed upon your Patience, beseeching God to preserve the
Peace of our Jerusalem, and that You and yours may Prosper as you Love it.

I am Sir, Your Humblest Servant, Tho. Long.
Exon April 1677.
THE PICTURE AND CHARACTER OF A SEPARATIST: SHOWING That Sensuality is the
Ground OF SEPARATION.

Vt nihil aeque arguit Ingenium Spiritus Christi, ac studium conservandae
socictatis, and unionis, in quo charitas elucet; Sic etiam, nullum est
evidentius argumentum pravitatis humani ingenii, (unde etiam inter carnis
opera, contentiones nominantur) quam tumultuandi and rixandi studium.

Cameron. de Ecclesia, Cap. de Schismate. I differ from my Brethren in many
things of considerable moment; yet if I should zealously press my judgment on
others, so as to disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my
Brethren, I should fear I should prove a Firebrand in Hell, for being a Fire
brand in the Church -- I charge you, if God should give me up to any factious
Church-rending course, that you forsake me, and follow me not a step.

Mr. Baxter's Epistle Dedicatory to the Saints Rest. LONDON, Printed for Walter
Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho. Tomkyns R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto Divina Providentia
Archi-Ep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Sept. 27. 1673.
The Picture of Schismatics, as Mr. Calvin (calls it in the Margent, and)
describes it in the 4th. Book of his Institutions, Chapter 1. Section 16th.
ALthough this Temptation (of refusing to Communicate with others, because we
judge them wicked) may sometime invade good Men, through an inconsiderate zeal
for Holiness; yet we shall find that this too great morosity does arise rather
from pride and disdain, and a false opinion of Sanctity, than from true Piety,
or an endeavor after it: Wherefore they that are more audacious than others to
make Separation from the Church, and are as Standard-bearers, they for the most
part have no other reason, than that by the contempt of all, they may show
themselves better than others. Wherefore Augustine says well, and prudently,
Whereas the good frame and manner of Ecclesiastical Discipline ought especially
to respect the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, which the Apostle
commands to be mutually preserved by long-suffering, and which not being
preserved, the application of Medicine is not only superfluous, but dangerous;
and so can never produce the effect of a Medicine; They are wicked Children,
who not so much through hatred of other Men's iniquities, as by a love of their
own contentions, do affect either to withdraw, or at least to divide the weak
People, whom they have ensnared by the reputation of their Names. These are
swollen with pride, furious in their perverseness, treacherous in calumnies,
turbulent in seditions, using a shadow of rigid severity, lest it should appear
that they want the light of truth. And those things which are commanded in the
Scripture to be done with all moderation, for the correction of the faults of
our Brethren, (the sincerity of Love, and unity of Peace being still preserved)
they make use of, for the Sacrilege of Schism, and an occasion of Separation.
Wherefore to good and peaceable Men he gives this Counsel, That they mercifully
correct what they may, and patiently bear with what they cannot amend, and in
love bewail and lament, until God do amend and correct all, or at the Harvest
do root out the Weeds, and winnow the Chaff. With these Weapons all good Men
study to arm themselves, lest while they seem stout and resolute Champions of
Holiness, they revolt from the Kingdom of God, which is the only Kingdom of
Righteousness.

For, because God has chosen to have the Communion of his Church observed in
this external society; He who through hatred of the wicked, shall violate the
Symbol of that Society, does enter into that Path, wherein a falling from the
Communion of Saints is most obvious.

1. Let them consider therefore, That in a great Multitude, there may be many
truly holy and innocent in the eyes of God, whom they cannot discern.

2ly, That of them that seem diseased, there are many that are not in love, or
well pleased with their Vices, but being now and then awakened, by a serious
fear of God, do endeavor after greater integrity.

3ly, That we ought not to judge of Men by one fact, seeing that the most holy,
sometime fall most grievously.

4ly, That it is of more moment to unite the Church, as well by the Ministry of
the Word, as by the administration of the Holy Mysteries, than that by the
fault of a few, all those blessings should be frustrated.

5ly, Let them consider, that in estimating of the Church, the Judgment of God
is to be preferred to the judgment of Man.

TO THE BRETHREN OF THE SEPARATION.
IT was not long since, that the Sins of Rebellion and Sacrilege were so
successful, that they did not only cast off their old names, but commenced
Virtues; and it was dangerous to discourse, whether there were such sins or no:
Prosperous wickedness has never wanted its Apologists, who know how to call
evil good, and good evil. The case is almost the same, concerning the Sin of
Schism and Separation: And now men question, whether there be any such thing,
as the Church of England, because they make no question of separating from it:
But St. Paul assures us, that there was a Church at Corinth, that there was
envying, and strife, and divisions among them, and that they were but carnal
Gospellers, that were the Authors of such disorders; Yet theirs were but
venial, in respect of ours, which I know not whether I may call Mortal, or
Immortal discords; for when we hoped that the chief Authors being laid in their
Graves, their practices would have been buried with them, and that we who had
labored in the fire of Contention, and suffered under the dismal effects of
it, for Twenty Years together, would have trembled at every spark of it;
Behold, how like the Infelix lolium, like Wormwood, and Hemlock, the Seeds of
Dissension are grown up in every Furrow of the Field, and those sparks are
blown up into such Flames, as have seized, if not upon all, yet upon the most
eminent Houses of God in the Land. The Corinthians were but Children in this
work; they wrangled about their Ministers, as Boys about their Masters, who was
the best Teacher among them: Apollos, who (as the Scholiast observes) was their
first Bishop, had a considerable Party, and if they did rob Peter, it was to
cloth Paul; but with us nothing will serve, but a total extirpation of the
Bishops, and Pastors of the Church, to raise a Presbytery upon their ruins:
And yet Men will not be persuaded there is any such sin as Schism in the Land;
or at least think themselves much injured, if it be imputed to them. If Men
would dissent peaceably, and (according to the Apostles rule, Romans 14.22. Have
thou faith, (that is an opinion of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Rites and
Customs in the Church) have it to thy self before God) not propagate their
private Opinions, to the disturbance of the public peace, they might deserve
that indulgence, which his most Gracious Majesty has allowed them; but when
they shall practically condemn themselves, and pragmatically misguide others,
in opposing those things, which themselves have allowed; the Apostle accounts
them unhappy men, as having the brand of Heretics, (...), visibly upon them,
by continuing obstinately in that error, which themselves, as well as the
Churches of God have exploded.

As for the separated Ministers, the more learned and sober of them, did
frequent our Assemblies, join with us in our Liturgies and Communion; though in
the quality of lay Men; and I cannot doubt, but that they were well assured,
that it was their duty so to do, and to encourage others, to the public
worship of God so celebrated. If it was their duty to frequent it then, it
cannot be their duty, but their sin, not only to desert, but to create a scorn
and contempt of it now, and by erecting a Babel of confusion, seek to down with
Sion, down with it to the ground. I have only this query to demand of such,
Whether, if they did well in communicating with us themselves, they do not ill
in withdrawing others from our Communion? I believe it is their own judgment,
as well as mine, that if they might be dispensed with, as to the renouncing the
Covenant, Reordination, Assent and Consent, the Surplice and the Cross, they
might then conform to our Liturgy and Discipline, and few of them would scruple
to conform, as public Ministers in all other things. Why then do those very
Men, (some of which have published as much to the World, and the most part are
convinced in Judgment and Conscience, that they themselves might thus conform)
why do they so industriously seduce the People from their duty of communicating
in their several Parishes, with their own Ministers, seeing that none of them
are concerned in the things which are scrupled at, in order to the conformity
of public Ministers? They are not troubled with Covenant, Reordination, etc.
nor with any thing, that has so much as a color of justifying a Separation. I
am heartily sorry, that any Persons have so entangled themselves, in Nets of
their own weaving, that they cannot, without loss of their reputation,
disingage themselves; but that loss is not so great, as the mischief will be,
if they shall ensnare others, and seek to salve their own reputation, by the
hazard of the salvation of others. Consider therefore, I beseech you, where the
blame and guilt will lie; if on your principles and practices, the People whom
you have separated from the Church of England, wherein they might serve God
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, shall within a short time forsake
your Assemblies also, and unite themselves to other Teachers, and Conventicles,
in which they think (whether right or wrong) they may serve God in purer
Ordinances, and at last, to live without, and above Ordinances; if these
Delusions do spring from your Principles and practices, as undoubtedly they do,
Is not the guilt of all these Confusions imputable to you, and may not the loss
of those Souls be required at your hands? If therefore in some private
respects, there be a Vae si non, a woe unto you, if you preach not; there may
be in respect of the public, a Vae infinitely greater, if Men shall still go
on in the way of Kain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward,
and perish in the gainsaying of Core. It is not the spot of a Servant of God,
but an indelible brand, which the Spirit of God has fixed on Jeroboam, that he
made Israel to sin.

In our Polemical Debates with the Church of Rome, it has been our
unhappiness, that as soon as we have beaten them out of one strong hold, they
have fled to another, from their Universality, and constancy in the received
faith, to the Spirit of Infallibility, annexed to the Succession of their
Popes, either personally, or in Cathedra, with his Conclave, or in a Council;
when these were shattered, they retreat to their invisible Fort of Traditions;
but when all these have by the Canon of Scripture, and Apostolical Men, been so
levelled to the ground, that scarce one stone is left upon another; we see the
Grandeur, and Temporal Principality of the Court of Rome, is at the bottom,
which the Sword of the Spirit, and the Weapons of Christianity, in the hands of
Men, are not able to remove. It is even so, in our Controversies with
Separatists: when their pretenses of Idolatrous Worship, and Antichristian
Government, and Superstitious Rites, an imperfect Liturgy, and scandalous
Communicants, have been confuted, they retreat to other pretenses, of having
purer Ordinances, of preserving their Christian Liberty, and freedom of
Conscience, which admit of nothing to be imposed, as to the Worship of God, but
what is expressed in his Word: when the weakness of these are discovered, there
is something still at the bottom, (viz.) They would be uppermost; they cannot
forgo their reputation of extraordinary knowledge, and Zeal for God, which
alone can bear them out in their former actions, and make the People still
believe, that what they did, was according to Conscience, and not upon design
and interest. The contrary whereof will by this Discourse, appear to be the
ground of all Separations from any Church so duly constituted, as our Church of
England is.

If it be objected, there are great sins amongst us; we grant it, and do not
only importune God, for his Names sake to pardon our iniquities, for they are
great, but wish for more assistance, for amending of them: we are unwilling to
recriminate, as the Prophet Oded did, 2 Chronicles. 28.9, 10. Are there not with
you, even with you also, sins against the Lord your God? I shall rather commend
to you that ancient Arabian Proverb, Deus altissimus aspicit, and tegit;
Vicinus vero nilvidet, and tamen nil nisi naevos crepat. The most high God sees
all our iniquities, and he covers them all; we that see nothing in comparison,
are always blaming, and troubling our Neighbors. If the Contagion of sin has
invaded the Multitude, St. Augustine.
the severe mercy of Divine Discipline is necessary to cure us: but the
counsel, and enterprise of separation is both vain and pernicious, yea
sacrilegious; because, such are the effects of Pride and wickedness, as that
they do ever trouble the good, which are weak, more than chastise the stubborn,
which are wicked. None of us can be ignorant of the prejudices and animosities,
that are raised by such practices, in the generality of the people, of what
persuasion soever: Your Disciples do (ipso facto) censure them from whom they
separate, as profane, carnal, cruel, and unconscionable Men. They again do
suppose, that some among you are discontented and implacable, proud and
ambitious; and such as deserve that black character, which St. Paul has given,
2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, verses, etc. And by these contests we weaken our selves,
harden and animate our grand enemies, and give them great advantages against us.

Let us therefore rather follow the things that make for peace, and wherewith
we may edify one another, for we cannot but know, after so long and sad
experience, as we have had, that these things will be bitterness in the latter
end; endeavor to deserve that character, which St. Augustine gives of a
peaceable man, Quisquis vel quod potest arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrigere
non potest, (salvo pacis vinculo) excludit, vel quod (salvo pacis vinculo)
excludere non potest, equitate improbat, firmitate supportat, hic pacificus
est, Ad Parmen. l. 2. c. 1. And again, The things which are evil displease all
good Men, and they hinder, and suppress them as much as they may, but when they
may not, they endure, and grieve for them, and for peace's sake, laudably
tolerate, what they do not think laudable but damnable; nor do they forsake the
Field of Christ, because of the Weeds, nor his Floor, for the Chaff, nor the
great House of God, because of some less honorable Vessels that are therein.
If I seem to contend too earnestly, and rebuke too sharply, it was not my
nature or indignation, but the subject that prompted me to it. Some Grounds
will produce Briers and Thorns, though the Husbandman use his utmost care to
prevent them. The good Samaritan used Wine, as well as Oil, on the Man that was
casually wounded, going from Jerusalem to Jericho; And when the Prince of Peace
dealt with the seducing and sacrilegious Pharisees, that lay in wait to divert
poor souls, and would neither enter into the way of peace, nor suffer them that
were entering, to go therein; he acts like a Boanerges, and denounces Hell and
Damnation, Matthew. 23.33. from which the good Lord deliver us all. Amen.

THE PICTURE and CHARACTER OF A SEPARATIST: Showing That Sensuality is the
Ground OF SEPARATION.
St. Jude, v, 19. These are they that separate themselves, sensual, having not
the Spirit.


GOD threatens the Watchmen of Israel, that if they saw the Sword come, Ezekiel.
33 6.
and they did not blow the Trumpet, that the People might be warned, if the
Sword came, and took away any person from among them, though he were taken away
in his iniquity, yet his blood should be required at the Watchman's hands. Our
Savior likewise informs us, that they who see the Wolf coming, Joh. 10.13.
and leave the Sheep to be caught, or scattered by him, are Hirelings, and no
good Shepherds; for such should give their lives for the Sheep. Now there is no
Sword so dreadful, as that twoedged Sword of Division and Error, that destroys
Bodies and Souls; no Wolves so ravenous, as those that prey upon Christ's
Flock: and should those whom God has made his Watchmen and Shepherds, not warn
the People of the approach of such, they might justly hear, what as yet has
been unjustly spoken of too many, that they are Thieves and Robbers, and dumb
Dogs. For as much then as we know by sad experience, what St. Paul foretold by
a Spirit of Prophecy, Acts 20.29
that grievous Wolves should enter into the Church of God, not sparing the
Flock; and does plainly describe them, to be certain Men, that should arise
among our selves, speaking perverse things, (i.e.) false and forced Doctrines,
to draw away Disciples after them; we should be unaccountably defective in our
duty to God, and in our love to those Souls, which Christ purchased with his
Blood, not to acquaint them with their present danger, Vnum signum habetis,
quare non manetis in uno Ovili? August. ad plebem.
and exhort them to contain themselves within the Fold of their great Shepherd,
who bought them, and has provided green Pastures, and set his own mark upon
them; and teach them how to know and avoid those Wolves, which for the most
part put on sheeps clothing, that with the less suspicion they may prey upon
the Sheep. This I have thought fit to premise, because the iniquity of some
Men, who cannot endure sound Doctrine, may exact an Apology for a Discourse of
this nature.

Our Apostle in this Epistle exhibiteth the effigies of a Separatist, and in
this little Tablet of the Text, I shall present to your view, both the Picture
and the Character of such Men. The Picture of King Charles the First, was by an
ingenious hand pourtrayed in such Lines, as did contain in express words the
whole Book of the Psalms, so that at one view, you might behold the form of
his Body, and the Image of his Divine Soul. You have in this Text, First, the
Picture, or external Lineaments of a Separatist; for the better resembling
whereof, if I use some dark colors, as shades, to represent his proper
complexion and features, I shall borrow them from the Scriptures, or
unquestionable Artists, by whose help I hope to strike the Original to the
life; so that I shall not be troubled, as he that had drawn a Cock, to drive
away all living Cocks from it, lest they should disgrace his work, but rather
invite them all to use it as a Glass, to see their Faces, and correct their
imperfections by it; Nor shall I need for the information of others to write
under the Hieroglyphick, These are they, etc.

2ly, I shall give you a Character of the Genius, or internal disposition of a
Separatist, and that, First, Ex ore suo, for his word is Spiritualis, having
the Spirit; 2ly, From the Apostle, who had the gift to discern spirits, and he
affixeth the word Animalis, Sensual, having not the Spirit. First, of the
Picture, to which the Relative in the Text, does only point us, and therefore I
shall be enforced to imitate a piece of Art, to bring it into the Text. There
was a French Nobleman, that had the Heads of his Children so graved and painted
on one Table, that by the help of a Glass they reflected the countenance of
their Father on another. I shall in like manner collect the several Heads and
qualities described in the Context, which with very little Art will so reflect
the picture of a Separatist on the Text, that he that runs may read, These are
they, etc.

The Romish Artists, who have very good skill in painting, will describe a
Separatist in the form of an English Bishop, such as Cranmer, or Ridley, who
left the Communion of the Papacy, and retained no resemblance of his Fatherhood
the Pope, or of that Stepmother the Church of Rome. Separation is indeed such
a deformed and illegitimate birth, that it is never acknowledged by its own
Parents, but laid at other Men's Doors; And it concerns us to enquire, who are
the peccant Parties, that we may clear our selves from the charge and
imputation.

First then we say, that we have no otherwise separated from the Church of
Rome, than that Church has separated from the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Apostolical Government and Worship. If there be any thing truly ancient
and Catholic in that Church, the same is still legible in every part of our
constitution; we have forsaken the corruptions and innovations, which of later
Years invaded that Church; and the time, manner, and methods, by which strange
Doctrines, and practices, like Hay and Stuble, were laid on the ancient
Foundation, so that the whole Building is become another Babel, for confusion
and corruption have been particularly discovered. The superfluous and unsound
additions, are the only things that we have left. Bishop Jewel's Apology.
And for the truth of this, we have appealed to the suffrages of the Fathers of
the first Six Hundred Years, whom that Church does yet admit of as authentic
Witnesses, to be our Compurgators. Great corruptions there were in that Church,
before the convening of the Council of Trent, which was near the time of our
Reformation. The Ceremonies were (as St. Augustine complained) as burdensome as
those of the Jewish Church. But then they imposed such new Articles of Faith to
be believed as necessary to Salvation, (such as the Infallibility and Supremacy
of the Pope, the Worshipping of Images and Saints, the Doctrine of Merit and
Supererogation, Transubstantiation and half Communion, Pardons and Purgatory,
etc.) that it grew morally impossible for us to retain any longer Communion
with them, as Brethren, unless we would renounce our fellowship with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. We do still hold and teach, that the
condition of our Communion was made sinful, (viz) by professing false*
Doctrines, believing lies, and joining in Idolatrous Worship, and so it was
unlawful and intolerable; and they who practice such things themselves, and
would impose them on others, are actually in Separation from the true Church;
to which, they still adhere, who continue constantly in the Apostles Doctrine,
Acts 1.42.
and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and Prayer. Besides, we do still
profess, that if the Church of Rome will not constrain us, Calvin. Melancthon.
Dr. Jackson.
to profess such Points of Doctrine, or to adventure on such practices, as are
contrary to the faith and love of God, we are still ready to give them the
right hand of fellowship. Hitherto then we are Recti in Curia, the Church of
England is not guilty of Separation.

But we have certain Friends in a Corner, that will prove us to be altogether
as guilty, as we say the Church of Rome is: And the Charge is as high. That we
have Antichristian Bishops, and they do impose Popish, and Superstitious
Ceremonies, which have no warrant from the Word of God, and such as tender
Consciences cannot comply with; and therefore, though we abhor Idols, yet we
commit Sacrilege, in forcing Thousands of the People from our Communion. This
is a strong accusation indeed, and prosecuted with great heat; And like the
Vipor that came out of the Fire, on St. Paul's hand, if it should stick, nemo
nobis molestias exhibeat; Sic enim sentit Ecclesia Dei ab origin. Epiphan. in
Anachor.
it would argue extraordinary guilt. But you shall see it fall off, of its own
accord. For (First) the Office, both name and thing, is agreeable to the
Scripture, and truly Apostolical; practiced in the Universal Church, and
justified, even by those who only want power, and opportunity to erect the
same. (2ly,) As to the impositions, those must be either of false Doctrines, or
sinful practices: but if our Doctrine comprehend all fundamental truths,
necessary to Salvation, if we disclaim all errors destructive to faith, or good
manners; it is the duty of our Governors to see that we profess and own such
Doctrines against all opposition. The malice of our most inveterate Enemies,
has not hitherto proved any error in our Doctrine; some of them have derided
the Sons of the Church, by the name of Orthodox, but this is one mark of
Separatists: they are (...), v. 18. Now if our fame be unspotted, as to the
main part of our constitution, we may be presumed not so guilty in those dark
and frivolous circumstances, that are urged against us: as that our Liturgy is
taken out of the Mass, whereas we agree not in any material part with that, but
wherein that does agree with the Scripture, and the Primitive Church; and we
should renounce almost all our Religion, if we should disclaim all that that
contains. But in a word, if in the Church of England, we do profess a sound
faith, and an holy life; if the. Word be purely preached, and the Sacraments
rightly administered, Vbi mihi licet in melius commutari, non licet inde
separare. St. Aug. contra Cresc. l. 3. c. 36.
there is no just cause of making Separation: for the pretense of imposing
Ceremonies, where the Doctrinals are sound, is too weak a Plea to justify
Separation. And therefore the (...), they that forsake our Communion are
Separatists. The word signifies, a throwing down of Bounds and Enclosures, like
Ecclesiastical Levellers, that would lay all in common; Fideles a fidelibus
separare (as Clemens Alexandrinus) forcing open the Church Doors, and
destroying her Pale, not only to let out the Flock, but to let in Wolves and
Foxes. Calvin gives the Reason of it, Extra terminos Ecclesiae alios educere.
Quia Disciplinae jugum far nequeant, they are such Sons of Belial, that
though with the Pharisees, they endeavor to lay the heaviest Yokes on other
Men's Necks, they can endure none themselves. The like term is given to the
disterminating Angels (the (...) quasi solum and in universim vastatores) that
having got the power of the Air, throw down Churches, and Kingdoms, and
whatsoever is sacred. But this devastation is not presently made by a few
Malcontents, they must first gather a Party, that if nothing else make them
considerable, their Numbers may. Our Apostle therefore notes diverse previous
actions, in order to their Separation: As (first) that they are (...),
Murmurers, v. 16. When a few pragmatical persons are either chastised according
to their demerits, or not preferred above their deserts, they secretly whisper
their own discontents, and cherish the prejudices of others, as Absalom did in
Israel, 2 Samuel 15.3. See thy matter is good, but there is none deputed of the
King to hear thee; and presently it follows, O that I were King in Israel. The
Prophet David observed this snarling humor in others, Psalm. 59.
and so did St. James, c. 3.9. (...), Grudge not one against another, Brethren;
they could not forbear their vindictive groans even in their Assemblies, as if
they were displeased with God, as well as their Brethren, that they could not
be avenged on them. (2ly,) They are (...), complainers, unsatisfied with the
condition, which God in his providence thought most fit for them, seeking to
raise themselves upon the ruin of others; hence it is, that their discourse is
for the most part of the preferment of unworthy and wicked Men, when Men of
merit and pretty are neglected; and where God's eye is good, theirs is evil.
Thus Core and his Accomplices complained of Moses and Aaron, as if every one in
their Faction was as holy as they; but because God had raised them to that
dignity, the Scripture notes, that their murmuring was not against them, (only)
but against the Lord, Exodus 16.8. From complaining, they go on (3ly,) to utter
(...), great swelling words, either (first) in public remonstrances and
authoritative admonitions, such as were frequent in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, a first, second, and third Admonition, to the Council and the
Parliament, and then they boast of their Numbers, (viz.) a Thousand Ministers,
and an Hundred Thousand People, the greater part whereof never heard of their
design, nor could the chief Agents agree, what it was that they desired: the
pretense was a reformation of Doctrine, Government, and Worship; but when the
particulars were inquired into, it appeared, it was not the Alteration of any
thing that was amiss, but the subversion of all that had been with great
wisdom and moderation established. When T. C. and some others had framed a new
Liturgy, it was no sooner showed to the Brethren, but they desired amendments;
and when it was amended, others gave in new exceptions: So that, as Calvin
observes, they are such (Quibus nunquam satisfiet, etiamsi Probi homines
benign se impendant) no concessions will satisfy them, nor any kindness
oblige them: of which they gave an instance, when some of them, having
petitioned, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, that the Cross in Baptism might be
dispensed with; and some of her Majesty's Council promised, that that would be
granted, on condition they would conform in other things, replied, as Men of
Resolution, that they must not leave a hoof behind.

Or (2ly,) these great words, are words of Opposition and contradiction, such
as Core used against Moses and Aaron ( v. 11.) which our Apostle calls
blasphemy, v. 10. it being a speaking evil, not only of the Persons, but the
very offices and dignities, which God had appointed in his Church. It is indeed
the property of Schismatics, like young Sophisters, (Argumento victi,
calumnias meditantur, and convicti de persidia, ad maledicta se conferunt) When
reason and argument fails, they maintain the contest with passion, and
contradiction, which are always an argument of a wicked Man, as well as of a
weak cause. Detractio est hominis vilis, and sua quaerentis: as those Creatures
which are most infirm, are most querulous, so they that first accuse others,
are usually most criminous themselves. It is now become a Principle among some
Men, which surely they learnt from no other spirit, but that of contradiction;
That they ought not to do many things (which they might otherwise safely do)
because they are commanded. Hence it is, that when they are commanded to fast,
they feast: and when the Festivals are appointed, they set apart the days for
fasting. When Archbishop Laud admonished the Clergy to cut their Hair shorter,
those of the Faction, that had been precise enough in that respect before,
suffered their Hair to grow to an immoderate length; and who can wonder, that
they should contradict others, who have so frequently both in Principles and
practices contradicted themselves? of which I shall say only, as St. James
does, James 1.8.
The double minded man is unstable in all his ways.

Or (3ly,) their great swelling words, are such, as that King mentioned in
Daniel ( c. 11.36.) spoke, That would do according to his will, and exalt and
magnify himself, and speak (...), mavelous things. Thus Simon Magus boasted
himself to be the very power of God; his Disciples said of him, and of Helena
his Concubine, that they were superior to them that made the World. And all his
Proselytes called themselves Gnostics, Men of extraordinary knowledge. Thus
the Montanists boasted of their Founder, that either he was the very paraclete,
or at least, that the Holy Ghost did reveal, both more and greater mysteries by
Montanus, than Christ had done in his Gospels. Next, the Donatists, appropriate
all holiness and perfection to themselves, excluding all who were not of their
Number, from the Church and Salvation. In later times, one Henry Nicholas
boasted that he was greater than Moses, or Christ; for Moses (said he) brought
in the Law of Hope, and Jesus the Law of Faith, but I, the Law of Love; when as
in truth, he and his Family of Love, knew no other Law, but their Lust. There
is scarce any Faction so mean, but they assume to themselves the title of the
Elect, and peculiar People of God, with a scorn and contempt of others, like
that of the Jews against the Gentiles; This People that knows not the Law, is
accursed. Some talk of no less than a Fifth Monarchy, in which Christ shall
Reign personally among them; of putting an end to the Pope's Vicegerency, and
slaying Gog and Magog. Every ones inventions are named the Kingdom and Scepter
of Christ, and thought worthy to have all the Scepters of the Earth to bow to
them. Our Savior foretold of these things, Matthew. 24.26. and cautioneth us
against them; If they shall say unto you, behold he is in the Desert, in the
Cells of Monks and Hermits go not forth; he is neither in conclavibus, nor in
penetralibus, in the Conclaves of Rome, or Conventicles of Sectaries. But as
St. Bernard says, In festo Michael.
No man that speaks by the Spirit can call Jesus, Anathema, that is, as he
interprets it, a separated Person; so there is no doubt, but the Spirit of God
is departed from him, who is departed from the Unity of the Church.

4ly, Or else these swelling words, are in St. Peter's sense, words of vanity,
2 Pet. 2.18
that make a great sound, but no signification. Our Apostle compares them, to
Clouds that fly aloft in the Air, and look black and big, as if they would
abundantly Water the Earth, and make it fruitful: So do many Sectaries,
presuming with the prophet Elijah, 1 King 17.1.
As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew
nor rain these three years, but according to my word. And yet they are dry,
empty Clouds, that spend themselves in noisome Vapors and Whirlwinds, and
hinder the benign influence of the Sun of Righteousness. The Apostle calls them
Stars too; and no wonder, for Satan can transform himself to an Angel of light:
but though they get into a higher sphere, and shine awhile with borrowed
light, yet are they but wandering stars, always irregular, and excentrick in
their motions, and generally of a malign aspect on sublunary things; and having
blazed awhile, to the wonder of their Beholders, and not only portended
Plagues and Wars, but disposed the minds and manners of Men to them, they leave
their Sphere, and expire in blackness and darkness for ever. These are they
that separate, etc. Our translation reads, that separate themselves; but the
Separatist will not be so limited, the old translation fits them better, These
are Sect-makers, it is their Trade to compass Sea and Land, Rev. 12.4.
for multiplying of Disciples; and with the Dragon, they attempt to draw even
the Stars from Heaven, Mar. 13.22
and to deceive, if it be possible, the very Elect. St. Paul discovers their
Methods, how They creep into Houses, and lead Captive ((...)) silly Women, weak
and wanton Girls, led away with diverse lusts, that are not only ignorant, but
almost incapable of better understanding. And thus as the great Tempter, they
begin with the weaker Vessels, and having captivated the Wife, they have a more
easy access to the breasts of the Husband. Sampson himself cannot stand before
the Philistines, when they plow with his Heyfer. Thus the Arians, by one
Eusebius, a Chief Eunuch, first seduced the Empress, and by her the Emperor
Constantius, to be of their persuasion. And the great artifice that they employ
to this end, is noted by our Apostle, to be their having Men's persons in
admiration; (...), for their own profit, that is, by flattering insinuations,
and excessive praises of their Persons and parts, their Office and Authority,
Delectant homines eae faccre quibus non solum non metuitur reprehensor, sed
laudatus operator.
extolling their Virtues, and extenuating their Vices, they skrue themselves
into their affections, till they make merchandise of them; 2 Pet. 2.3.
This is Grotius's Observation, and if you think it too severe, Calvin will
avouch it. A quibus sperant aliquid commodi, As Tacitus says of Otho, Omnia
serviliter pro imperio fecit.
iis sordide blandiuntur; they basely fawn upon every one, from whom they hope
for a Pension. And most Men are of Micah's opinion, that the Lord will bless
them, when they have such a Levite for their Priest, Judge. 17.13.
though he be one of their own consecrating. Irenaeus tells us, how one Mark a
Valentinian, inveagled a Matron of good note; l. 1. c. 89.
I desire (says he) that you may partake of my grace, for there is a place for
your greatness in my heart; we ought to meet, and be united in one, that you
may first receive grace from me, and by me; See Josephus what power the
Pharisees had upon the chief Women in Jerusalem, l. 17. c. 3.
fit your felf therefore to receive me, as the Bride does the Bridegroom, that
you may be as I, and I as you: behold grace is descending upon you, open your
Mouth and Prophecy: After this (says our Author) she thinks her self a
Prophetess, returns great thanks to Mark, for communicating his grace to her,
and she studies to reward him, not only by a liberal portion of her Wealth, by
which he was greatly enriched, but by a perpetual adhering to him, and
communicating with him, even in things not fit to be named. It is no great
wonder, considering what persons they attempt, and what arts they use, 2 Pet.
2.2.
if (as it was foretold) many do follow their pernicious ways, and that by
reason of these the way of truth be evil spoken of. This gives occasion to our
Adversaries to say of us, In Orbis Breviario.
as Bertius of the Calvinists, This is proper to them, to overthrow whatever
estate they are admitted into, never to be at rest until they are uppermost, to
be scoffers, turbulent, factious disputers, ungrateful, proud above what can be
spoken, or believed. And this is another feature of the Separatists, to be
mockers, deriding all that is sacred, and holy, in church, or State, they
despise Dominions, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. The Church
was seldom without an Ishmael, such as mocked the Messengers of God, 2 Chronicles.
36.16.
and abused his Prophets, and despised his Word, until the wrath of the Lord
arose, and until there was no Remedy. Thus Jeremy complained, that they mocked
at the Sabbaths of Sion: Lament. 1.7.
Mock-altars and Ordinances, and Calves were set up at Dan and Bethel, by
Jeroboam, to bring contempt upon the Worship of God. Such mockings as these the
Apostle calls cruel, and joins them with scourgings; they were no small part of
our Savior's sufferings, and the Disciples are not above their Lord and
Master. You know with what bitter terms, the Pharisees, whose name signifies
Separatists, did reproach the Person, and slander the footsteps of the Lord's
anointed: it was a small matter for a Soldier, or two, to spit in his Face,
their hard speeches pierced his very Soul; to be called a glutton, and
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, was but a Prologue to the
Tragedy they intended; they prosecute him as a Deceiver, as a Traitor, as one
that had a Devil, and by Beelzebub did cast out Devils, as one that subverted
the Law and the Prophets, all Religion and good Discipline in the Churches of
God. We may not greatly wonder therefore, if in our Age the Church of God be
called Babylon, and her Ministers Baal's Priests, and her Worship
Antichristian. Though Michael in the heat of contention with the Devil, v. 9.
brought not one railing accusation against him; yet in cool blood, without any
provocation these mockers cease not to load their Superiors and Governors, with
hard words, shall I say, or as our Apostle adds, with ungodly deeds, such as I
want words to express. But this is no otherwise, than what St. Paul foretold,
Act. 20.29.
That grievous Wolves should enter into the Church, not sparing the Flock, and
that of our own selves should Men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them; that they may as the Vipers are said to do, eat their way
through the Bowels of the Church: These are they that separate. You would think
that it is from some Den of Dragons, from Tigers, or Cannibals, or some thing
worse than themselves, that these do fly; But our Apostle gives us another
description of them, that they were such as were sanctified by God the Father,
and called, such as contended only for the Faith that was once delivered to the
Saints, and against those only, that turned the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and let the pretenses be never so specious, The terminus a quo,
denominates a Separatist. Mr Cawdry.
the forsaking of such a Society will denominate them Separatists: And we shall
need no other evidence, but what comes from their own Mouths, (for they all
grant that a true Church, wherewith we may retain Communion without sin, or
intolerable persecution, ought to be communicated with) to prove them guilty.

In the Preface of the Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, (a Book made by the
then London-Ministers) they tell us, Ann. 1647.
That Parochial Churches are received as true visible Churches of Christ, and
most convenient for edification; that gathering Churches out of Churches, has
no footsteps in Scripture; that it is contrary to Apostolical practice, and is
the scattering of Churches, the Daughter of Schism, the Mother of Confusion,
and Stepmother to Edification: and therefore they condemn the Independents, for
gathering Churches out of other true visible Churches of Christ, without any
leave, or consent of Pastor, or Flock; yea against their wills, receiving such
as tender themselves; yea too often by themselves, or others, directly or
indirectly seducing Disciples after them. Mr. Cawdry says, that they who
separate, must prove the Church from which they depart, to be heretical and
corrupt, or else they are schismatical, for Schism is Schism, (says he)
though our Churches be not so pure as they ought, or would be: Again, to
separate Men in judgment in a Church, is Schism, but from a Church is much
worse; and again, Schism is a causless separation from the Communion, and
Worship of a true Church: and if the National Church of England be proved a
true Church, (as most grant it is) then Dr. Owen cannot be excused from
Schism. P. 60.


John Goodwin being yet a Presbyterian, in a Letter to Tho. Goodman, says, that
to forsake the true Church of Christ, and the Ministry thereof, wherein they
have converted, and built up so many; setting up new Churches, without the
consent of those, from which they departed, and to the scandal and grief of so
many godly Ministers, and Christians, and the scandal of all the reformed
Churches, and this, under a pretense of spiritual Power, and Liberty, purchased
by Christ; had need of a clear and full proof, and not to be built on slight
and weak grounds, flattering similitudes, witty allusions, remote consequences,
strained and forced interpretations, from hard and much controverted
Scriptures; and (in his Sion College visited) he acknowledges, that strangers
of all parts did confirm, that there was more of the truth, and power of
Religion in England, under the late Prelatical Government, than in all the
reformed Churches besides. This is the Presbyterian confession. Heart
Divisions. p. 163.
Mr. Buroughs shall speak first for the Independent. -- Thus, Though there be
corruption in a Church, yet to gather into a new Church, which may be more
pure, and in some respects more comfortable, is a Schism; For, First, We never
find the Saints of God in Scripture, to have done so. 2ly, There would be no
continuance in Church fellowship, if this be admitted; for what Church is so
pure, and has all things so comfortable, but within a while another Church
will be more pure, and other things more comfortable there? and the general
peace of the Church should be more regarded by us, than some comfortable
accommodations to our selves. 3ly, Supposing you cannot communicate with a
Church without sin, or bondage, yet you are not presently to withdraw, to
gather into another, or join to another: you are bound to give so much respect
to the Church, as to continue with much long-suffering, to seek the good of
that Church, to remove the sin that is upon it, you must bear much with a
Brother, much more with a Church. 4ly, Whatever things, Christians that live in
the same place, do differ in, if they may stand with grace, they can have no
encouragement from Scripture, to divide themselves into little pieces: (and
reddit rationem, etc.) Christ stands much upon the Union of his Saints in one,
in all ways, by all means, that may be. Opinionum varietas, and opinantium
unitas non sunt (...). So far Mr. Buroughs; And the Brethren of New- England,
in their Answer to the 32d. Question, say, That where People do with common and
mutual consent, gather into settled Congregations ordinarily, every Lord's Day,
to hear, and teach the Word of God, and profess their subjection thereunto, and
bind themselves, and Children, as in Baptism they do, to continue therein,
such Congregations are true Churches, notwithstanding sundry defects, and
dangerous corruptions found in them, wherein we follow the judgment of Calvin,
l. 4. c. 1. 9, 10. and of Whitaker, De notis Ecclesiae, c. 17.

By this it appears, that the Church and Congregations of England, being a true
Church and Congregations, to separate from them, and gather new Churches, on
pretense of purer Ordinances, is Schism, or such Separation as it is reported,
T. C. called the white Devil of Separation. But it may be these Men wrote thus,
when their interest led them to it; and if they did believe it to be true, they
would not now practice to the contrary. I shall therefore, for farther
confirmation, give you the judgment of two Persons uninteressed, and beyond
exception. The first is Mr. Perkins, in his Comment on the Text; he proposes
this question, What if there be errors in the Church, or things amiss, may we
not separate our selves? Answ. Things that may be amiss in the Church, must be
distinguished; some faults concern the matter, some the manner of Religion; the
former respect Doctrine, the later the manners of Men. First, for things amiss
in the manners of Men, we may not separate, but with Lot, have our righteous
hearts vexed and grieved with the wicked conversation of those among whom we
live. The Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses Chair, teaching Moses
Doctrine, must be heard, however their manners may not be imitated, Matthew.
23.1. 2ly, If the Church err in matter of Religion, we must consider, whether
the error be in a more weighty, and substantial point, or in matter of less
importance: for the foundation being kept, we may not separate our selves, 1
Cor. 3.15. If the error be about the foundation, we must consider whether the
Church err through humane frailty, or obstinacy: if of frailty, we may not
separate; the Church of Galatia, through frailty was quickly turned to another
Gospel, and erred in the foundation, holding justification by works; yet St.
Paul writes to it, as to a Church of God. So the Church of Corinth overthrew
the Article of the Resurrection, yet Paul behaved himself accordingly to it.
But if the Church err obstinately in the foundation of Religion, then with
good conscience separation may be made, 1 Timothy 4.5. Of this, we have an
Example, Act. 19.9. and 1 Chronicles. 11.14, 16. Whence we see, that no Man may with
good conscience separate himself from the Church of England, seeing it
teaches, believes, and obeys the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: So
far Mr. Perkins.

The next is Cameron. Schism (says he) is either a rash, or an unjust
separation, p. 322.
upon the account of Religion. It is with Schism, as with Error: a light Error
continued in with obstinacy, becomes Heresy. So there is a Schism which may
not be called unjust, but only rash, being grounded on a light cause; but if
pertinacy be added, when the levity of the cause does appear, it becomes truly,
and ((...)) an eminent Schism. This rash Schism may be known, either (a
priori) from its previous cause, for no Man being compelled to it, (if we will
speak the truth) it proceeds from self-love, therefore also hatred follows upon
it. Schismatici pastores sunt qui fratribus suis odium and invidiam conciliare
student. Cameron.
Nor would any rash Schism be made, if we had Charity, which is the most
perfect bond, and is not easily provoked, and thinks no evil. It is therefore
a manifest note of hatred, which hatred may arise, either from an offense
really given, or only taken; as when a Man is grieved, that another is
preferred before him. Again, a Schism is made rashly, either by the chief
Authors, upon a light occasion, as if when an Ulcer does appear upon any
Member, the Surgeon should presently think of cutting off that Member,
without applying other means, or expecting what Nature may do. But we may
suppose that the Schism be made upon the occasion of Heresy, and then the
separation. may be thought to be just, and not rash, To which I answer, that as
Judges, who in too great passion, do condemn a Malefactor, that is really
guilty, may be unjust, because they are acted rather by a certain ferity of
mind, than by the love of Justice: so that separation, which proceeds from
hatred, though it may have just causes, yet is unjust. Again, the rashness of
separation appears, a posteriori, when it is made on a light occasion, (that
is,) where there is not a great and intolerable Persecution, nor Heresy, nor
Idolatry. For, First, If the Persecution be tolerable, that is, if it do not
concern our Lives, or things necessary thereunto, we may not catch at an
opportunity of departing: for as they that delight in a Civil War, though they
have the better cause, and just occasions; yet because they are glad of such
occasions, they are Murderers and Enemies of their Country.

2ly, Separation is rash, if the Error in the Church from which he departs, be
neither Heresy, nor Superstition: for if the Error be tolerable, as a
Superstitious Rite may be, we may not separate; as a sick Man is not to be
forsaken, unless his Disease be deadly, and contagious, and then not without
grief. Lastly, Separation is rash, when it is made because of corruption of
manners; to which purpose our Savior said, they sit in Moses Chair, therefore
do whatever they say unto you. This is the meaning of our Savior; Wherever
the Purity of Doctrine does remain, there God has a Church, though overspread
with many scandals.

Now an unjust Schism, is that, which is made, where there is no Persecution,
or Heresy, no Error, Superstition, or Idolatry, none, or but few scandals;
such was the Schism of the Donatists. And this is the greatest degree of
Schism: and it is either negative, which is a bare departure only, without
gathering of new Congregations; or positive, when another Church is erected,
which does separately use Ecclesiastical Laws, and the administration of the
Word of God and Sacraments, which the Scripture calls, setting up of Altar
against Altar; for, though a peaceable departure from the Church may be lawful
and just, yet if new associations be entered into, it is unjust; for this cannot
be done, unless there be real hatred between Brethren, contrary to
Christianity; for the end of the Commandment is charity. It must therefore be
considered again and again, whether the cause of this separation be of so great
moment, as that the glory of God, and Salvation depends upon it: so Cameron.

I shall add to these, that saying of Bishop Davenant, I boldly affirm, De
pace, p. 24.
that such as are in an Error, and yet are prepared to entertain Brotherly
Communion, are more excusable before God, than they that do maintain true
Opinions, (in Controversies not fundamental) but refuse Communion with such
true Churches as do desire it. And therefore when they that separate, do plead
that they agree with us in the fundamentals of Faith, they do not excuse, but
aggravate their Schism in violating the unity of that Church, which is sound in
the Faith. St. Aug. contra Faustum. l. 20. c. 2.
For it is not diversity of Faith, but the breach of Unity that makes a
Schismatic. Yea, suppose (says Mr. Ball, c. 10. p. 197.) They hold many of
the same Ordinances, as Prayers, and Preaching, Tercul of Jovinian. Quaedam
probat, quaedam improbat. (i) Omnia improbat dum quaedam probat.
but come not to the Communion, this makes them Separatists, for they account
none to be of their Communion, who join not with them in the Lord's Supper;
Sacramentorum communione sociamur, says St. Aug. contra Donat. Now all these
circumstances considered, (viz.) that our Church is sound in the Faith, not
guilty of intolerable Persecution, or Idolatrous Superstition, nor notoriously
scandalous, I say, for Persons, not only to separate from us, but (contrary to
the Apostles practice, on greater occasions, contrary to the judgment of all
ancient, and modern Divines, contrary to their own paeinciples, and the common
rule of justice, of doing that to others, which we would have done to our
selves, contrary to the public Oaths, and protestation of Such as were
ordained by Bishops.
many that practice it, and which, if it be admitted, will be the ruin of
their own Churches, as well as ours) to raise new Churches, distinct in
Ordinances and Communion from ours, Bucer on Zephany, says it does more hurt
than drinking and whoring.
is the greatest degree of Schism; A sin, which no pretense of greater purity
of Ordinances, or more powerful preaching, nor a life that is Angelical, nor
Martyrdom it self can warrant or expiate. It may make both the Ears of those
that are guilty to tingle, when they shall hear how the Ancients aggravate this
sin, and what judgments they denounce against it. That it is a work of the
flesh, contrary to the Law of Charity, and the mother of confusion, we learn
from the Scripture, that it puts us out of the Communion of the Church, and so
of the promises, and privileges thereunto belonging, that it is a greater
scandal than corruption in manners, and in diverse respects worse than Heresy.
These are common themes, wherein Men of all Persuasions do agree, and yet few
do observe them. S. Chrysostom.
The contentious are worse than they that pierced the Body of Christ, for he
gave his Natural Body for the preservation of his Mystical Body, which they
rent and wound. And as our Savior told the Pharisees, I dare confidently say,
a private murderer shall make an easier answer, than a public disturber.
Bishop Hall in his mischief of Schism.
the Publicans and Harlots should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, rather than
they; who were so filled with prejudice, and resolved upon their lusts, that
they were averse from all good counsels, which he offered to them.

And if the severity of the punishment does argue the greatness of the sin, the
Woes which our Apostle threatens to such, v. 11. and the blackness of darkness
which is reserved for them for ever, v. 13. may convince us, how heinous the
sin is. Be not deceived, (says Ignatius) if any one follow him that makes a
Schism, Ad Philad.
he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and he adds a Reason, if any one
walk about in a strange Opinion, he is an Enemy to the Passion, that is, he is
a carnal Man. By this only sin, (says St. Augustine) that a man is separated
from the unity of Christ's Church, contra Donat.
he shall not obtain eternal life. Though they be consumed in the Flames, or
devoured by Beasts, this will not be the crowning of their Faith, but a
punishment of their perfidiousness, says St. Cyprian. De Simpl. elericorum.
And St. Paul says as much, (...), to the Sons of contention, God will render
indignation and wrath, Romans 2.8.
tribulation and anguish.

But it is very preposterous to condemn any Malefactor, before we have heard
what he can say for himself, and therefore (though his flying for it, might
argue his guiltiness, yet) we shall patiently hear all that the Separatist can
plead for himself; and the crime is so great, that he knows no ordinary Plea
will defend him, and therefore he pretends no less than a Commission from
Heaven, the Authority of God's own Spirit; Having the Spirit, is the pretense;
having not the Spirit, is the charge; sub judice lis est. And we have our
Savior's Commission for trial of any such pretenders, though they think
themselves exempt from all Ecclesiastical Judicature; 1 St. John 4.1. Try the
Spirits, that is, the Teachers, and their Doctrines; the Reason is, For there
are many false Prophets gone abroad into the World: And if we are to try them,
there is doubtless a Law and Rule by which to proceed, and that is the Word of
God, which being written by Holy Men, as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost,
so is it able to make the man of God perfect; seeing it was confirmed by God's
own testimony in sundry Miracles, as the Gift of Tongues and Prophecy, of
dispossessing Devils, and healing all Diseases; No pretense of revelation can
gain equal authority with it, unless it bring an equal testimony, that is, the
power of doing Wonders. Nobis curiositate non opus est post Christum, Tertul.
de Praescript. c. 8.
nec disquisitione post Evangelium. Certainly they have not the Spirit in that
degree that the Apostles had, and therefore we do them no injury, to bring them
to such an authentic Judge, as is the Word of God; wherein there is not one
sentence to countenance such as separate from any Church of God, where the
means of Salvation, the Word and Sacraments are rightly administered, although
many corruptions be crept into it. By the Example of Christ and his Apostles,
retaining themselves within the Communion of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding
their pollutions, the error of such, as in imitation of the Cathari of old, and
the Anabaptists now refuse to partake of the Lord's Supper, if they see the
same administered to such, as they suppose wicked Men, is for ever confuted and
condemned, says Contr. Anabap.
Spanhemius. To him, I add the judgment of Instit. l. 4. c. 1. S. 18.
Mr. Calvin, If it was the religious care of the Prophets, not to alienate
themselves from the Church, notwithstanding the many and great sins, not of a
few persons, but almost of all the People, We do arrogate too much to our
selves, if we dare presently to withdraw from the unity of the Church, because
the manners of all that are in it, do not satisfy our judgments, and are not
answerable to their Christian Profession. St. John gives us three Rules for
trial of the Spirits. 1. By their confessing Christ to be come in the Flesh:
The 2d. By cleaving to the Apostolical Communion, v. 6. Whosoever hears not
us, is not of God, hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error:
3ly, By mutual love, and charity; v. 7, 8. God is love, and he that loves not,
knows not God. These two later testimonies utterly destroy the pretense of
Separatists to that Spirit of God which spoke by the Apostles, for as much as
they do act in opposition to it: Estius in locum.
And the Ancients, who according to the vulgar Edition do read, the first note
thus, Omnis spiritus qui solvit Jesum, that is, Sermon of Concision.
as Dr. Done paraphraseth it, Every spirit that breaks Jesus in pieces, and
makes Religion serve turns, is not of God: in which sense Estius thinks it may
also be taken, that not only they deny Christ, that deny his Humane or Divine
Nature, or the Doctrine taught by him, but such as rent and divide the Church,
which is his Mystical Body, by making Sects and Divisions, these have not the
Spirit of God, but of Autichrist. When the Ancient Separatists pretended to
extraordinary Operations of the Spirit, the Plea was more plausible, for the
gift of Tongues and Prophecy, of Healing, etc. was not fully ceased. But if
our Apostle denied it to those ancient Separatists, some of which, as Thendas
and Simon Magus did very strange things, lying wonders at least, it will be a
difficult task for later Separatists to prove, that Divine revelations and
immediate Inspirations of the Spirit are continued, when all the other
extraordinary gifts are expired. Yet as Grotius observes, Jactant se miras
habere Inspirationes: In locum.
They still boast of wonderful operations, and inspirations of the Holy Ghost.
But to join in issue, The gifts of the spirit are twofold; either first, for
the edification of the Church; or secondly, for the sanctification of the
particular members, both of these are to be continued in the Church to the end
of the World. nomen Spiritualis pro eo qui spiritus dono se praedium jactat ad
obeundum Prophetiae munus.
Those for edification of the Church in general are mentioned by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.8. When Christ escended up on high -- He gave some Apostles, 1 Cor.
14.37.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, etc. The distinct Offices of the Ministry are those gifts, of which all
are not capable. Are all Apostles, says the Apostle? that is in effect, All
are not Apostles; but those that truly succeed the Apostles are to continue
successively to the Worlds end; till we all come in the unity of the knowledge
and faith of the Son of God, etc. So Matthew. 28.20. Lo I am with you always. How
is Christ present, but by his Spirit? How with his Apostles, but in their
Successors? And this is the import of that phrase used by the Church, in the
consecration of Ministers -- Receive the Holy Ghost; wherein neither the power
of Miracles, nor the special grace of the Spirit, but only an authority to
administer holy things in the Church of God is to be understood. And it is
strange how they who are most forward to blame the Church, for not following
precisely the words of Christ in other Institutions, can quarrel as her (as
they do) for observing them in this, when as without these words, that power
cannot be duly and authoritatively derived. It is true, that the Church not
seeing the hearts of Men, may confer this authority on unworthy Men, but so did
Christ (who knew all that was in his heart) on Judas, whose Ministry was
authentic, though his Person was vile: he might be an instrument of saving
others, himself being a Castaway. If they that separate are partakers of this
Holy Calling, they are beholding to the ordinary Pastors of the Church for it,
from whom they now separate, and this will but aggravate their guilt. If they
have a calling extraordinary, they ought to evidence it, not by an idle
pretense to Revelations and Inspirations, much less by swelling words of
vanity, an apt and fluent cadency of words and canting expressions, but by the
demonstration of the Spirit and power suitable to the pretense, that is, by the
gift of Tongues and Miracles, not by praying extempore only, but in a strange
tongue too, as the Apostles could, for so we are to understand that in 1 Cor.
14.15. I will pray with the Spirit; which was (Singular linguarum Donum) in a
strange Language; but then the Apostle would pray, (...), not with his
understanding, but to the understanding of the hearers, which many Separatists
do not. When the Spirit gave the Apostles the gift of utterance, they did
(...), (not talk confidently, or impertinently, but) uttered words of truth and
soberness; in short and Divine Apothegmes: as when Isaiah's Lips were touched
with a Coal from the Altar, Isay 6.6.
he had Linguam cruditam; so Christ assisting his Apostles, Acts 2.4.
gave them not Os only, but sapientiam also, a Mouth and Wisdom, such as their
Enemies could not resist, Luke 21.15.
or gainsay in their interpretation of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God.
Now, that they have a more legitimate calling to the office, or greater
abilities to perform it, will be easily confuted; because they generally
disclaim that ordination, which from the Apostles has been successively
derived to us, by the constant order of Bishops: and this being the ordinary
lawful calling, the blessing of God attends the Administration of Holy things
by them, and no other; so that although they should be inferior in external
Gifts and Learning to them that do separate, (the contrary whereof is
notoriously known) yet the blessing of God is appropriated to the Ministry of
those, whom he has sent and commissioned thereunto: And therefore they cannot,
in the second place, with the least probability pretend to a greater measure of
the sanctifying graces of the Spirit, notwithstanding their talk of the
personal indwelling of the Holy Ghost. It is true, that he that is joined to
the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. not essentially the same spirit with the
Lord, but mystically by the influence of that spirit, which renders him humble
and holy, meek and gentle, loving and obedient, which graces of the spirit
being eminently in Christ, are in some good measure communicated to all his
sanctified Members, Ephesians 4.16.
that are united to his Body: which graces whether they do abound most in
Separatists, or those that contain themselves in the Communion of Apostolical
Churches, will appear anon. In the mean time, we shall prosecute our Enquiry,
whether they that separate have any such extraordinary inspirations and
revelations of the Spirit, as they pretend unto: For certain it is, that
generally Separatists of all persuasions do boast of some such extraordinary
influences, which yet keep them at as great a distance among themselves, as
from the true Church of God; let them therefore agree which of them have these
effects from the true Spirit of God: In the mean time we shall make it appear,
that none of them can have any such Operations: Each Faction proclaiming the
other to be, Sine ratione Philosophos, sine visione Prophetas, sine missione
Apostolos, sine instructione didascalos.

And first, Papists ought to have the precedence, who challenge more than a
double portion of such Revelations. They chain the spirit of infallibility to
the Pope's Chair, so that whatever he pronounces ex Cathedra, in matters of
Faith, must be received with equal authority and credit, as if it had been
evidently commanded by the written Word. Yea, though it should differ from some
plain Doctrines therein delivered; for so do many of the Trent Articles, as
Purgatory, and Prayers to Saints and Angels, and Transubstantiation; which
either owe their original to pretended Revelations, or at least have no better
proof for the confirmation of them. But certainly, the Infallible Spirit cannot
contradict it self: and when St. Peter says one thing, and his pretended
Successors affirm the contrary; when Nicolas the 4th. defines contrary to Pope
John the 22th. they were not both infallible. If such a Church can justly claim
any spirit, it is the spirit of contradiction, as when it owns the Revelation
of St. Bridget, that the Virgin Mary was not conceived in Original Sin, and the
Revelation of St. Catharine, that she was: and institutes a Holy Day to
celebrate her conception, upon such a fabulous contradicted relation. Yet not
only the observation of days, the Canonization of Saints, the foundation of
many Orders in that Church, as of the Jesuits by Ignatius, the Franciscans,
Benedictines, and others, but even Articles of Faith have had their rise from
such pretensions.

If any of our Sectaries that pretend to inspiration, are willing to know their
Fathers, or to find out a Church, with which they may hold Communion, now that
they are departed from us, I think the very worst among them may find a Founder
and Foundation in no meaner Church than the Church of Rome. And did the Pope of
Rome use the same Methods, as the Church of England, to disclaim and
discountenance all fanatic Factions, and manifest their folly to all Men, it
would appear that there are more Sects, and they as erroneous in Doctrine, and
vicious in their Lives, as any in England, or Amsterdam: but as long as they
own his Supremacy, and serve the interest of his Court, it is not much
considered, what becomes of the Gospel, and the Church of God.

It were easy to run a Parallel betwixt our Sectarie, and such as have been,
or still are in the Church of Rome, who run beyond the Line of the greatest
Separatists that are among us.

Have we some that deny the King's Supremacy, and hold it lawful to depose and
murder Kings? See Fowlis lives, etc.
We owe these Tenets and practices to the Church of Rome. Have we some that
will show no respect to their Superior?? St. Ignatius would not move his Hat to
the Magistrates. Have we some that play fast and loose with Oaths of
Allegiance, and enter into holy Leagues, and contrive Massacres of their
Brethren? this we owe to the Church of Rome. Have we some that condemn our
Church as carnal, and Antichristian? The Beguini.
so had they such as called their Church, the Whore of Babylon, that they were
all carnal and blind, and their Fraternity only the true Church, in which
Salvation was to be had. Have we some that despise humane learning, and make
ignorance the Mother of Devotion? so had the Church of Rome, as St. Gregory
says of St. Bennet, that he hated Learning, yet was knowingly ignorant, and
wisely unlearned.

Have we some that can discern the precious from the vile, and tell who are the
Elect, and who Reprobate? Philip Nereus, and St. Catharine had the faculty to
smell Souls, and tell as perfectly which was clean, and which unclean, as Noah
could judge of the Creatures that came into the Ark; and Juliana could discover
the thoughts of her Neighbors hearts.

Have we some that talk of being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, and
having the root of the matter in them? St. Bonaventure says of St. Francis,
that he was wholly swallowed up in God: And Hugh Paulin de Cressay, in his
Preface to Sta Sophia, talks of being closed in the Midhead of God, and being
oned with him.

Have we some, who by seeking God in Prayer, pretend to receive immediate
resolution of all their doubts, and direction in all difficult cases?
Orlandinus says of Ignatius and his Followers, that in matters of debate, they
were wont to join in Prayer to God, and after that, what Opinion the most were
of, that they resolved to put in practice, as being the mind of God.

Have we some that slight the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and talk of
immediate impulses of the Spirit, to which they ought rather to attend; that
talk of such a state of perfection, in which they cannot sin; of living above
Ordinances and Duties? The Fratricelli did the same things, and so did the
Disciples of one Almarinus, a Student in Paris, who taught that the Government
of Christ according to the Gospel is expired, and now the Church is to be
governed by the spirit: The Word and Sacraments are to cease, and all Men to be
saved by immediate operations of the Spirit, without outward exercises.

Doubtless the Enthusiasts that called themselves the Family of love, and held
that God would behold no iniquity in his People; took their Principles from
some in the Church of Rome, who hold that nothing is sinful, that is acted upon
a principle of love, be it Fornication, or Adultery: that prescribed the means
to attain supernatural irradiations from God, which are to be received in the
pure fund of the Soul, so that they may have a real and experimental perception
of the Divine presence, in the depth and center of the spirit; And when the
doing, or not doing an external work, is proposed, either of which is lawful,
they must hearken to the immediate impulses of the spirit within them; and It
is the great perfection of a Christian (say the Jesuits in their spiritual
exercises, printed A. D. 1574.) to keep himself indifferent to do what God
shall reveal to him, and not to determine himself to do what God has already
revealed, and taught in his Holy Gospel. And yet all these pretend, (and so did
Mahomet too) that the spirit did reveal all these Doctrines and practices to
them; But it was the same spirit, that wrought in Simon Magus and the
Gnostics, that sought the ruin of the Gospel, and to that end disposed them
to all error and uncleanness. As for the good Spirit of God, that holy, meek,
obedient, humble Spirit; it is clear, as the Apostle says, they have it not.

Excellent is the discourse of Mr. Calvin against all such Popish and fanatic
pretenders, Instit. l. 1. c. 9.
to which I refer, having given the Reader a former account. But I suppose all
that separate have not entertained such loose Principles: Some plead only for a
greater purity of Ordinances, and dare not pretend to extraordinary
inspirations of the spirit, except it be in the gift of prayer, which (whatever
the Ministers may know to the contrary) the People do generally believe, and no
care is taken to undeceive them: but upon this false supposition, is that great
clamor raised, of limiting, and quenching the spirit, and depriving the People
of God of the benefit of their Ministers gifts, by injoyning them the use of a
Liturgy: for the silencing of which, I desire it may be considered, that if God
have given the spirit of Prayer to any particular Men, it may much more be
presumed, that he has given it to the Governors of his Church, agreeing
together in those things, Matthew. 18.19.
which are fit to be desired of God, for the public welfare of his Church; and
therefore the Scripture tells us, that in the exercise of such gifts, the
spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.
that God may not appear to be the author of confusion, but of peace in all his
Churches. Nor can any reason be given, why the Church, that is to guide us in
Doctrine, as all do agree, should not also lead us in our Devotion, and public
Prayer, which is a part of our Doctrine. And unless the Objectors have more
extraordinary impulses of the spirit in prayer, than the Confessors and Martyrs
in the Church of God have had for 1500. Years together; I see no reason why we
should exchange a well composed Liturgy, (by which they were always contented
to Worship God in public) for a License to pray ex tempore. Doubtless the
harmony of all the Churches of God, in the matter and manner of making our
supplications, would be a special means to make them effectual: if that may not
be had, yet we that join with the Church in Doctrine, and other parts of Divine
Worship, ought not to dissent in this. To obey is better than Sacrifice; this
very act of obeying our spiritual Pastors, Quanto obedientiores sumus
praepositis nostris, tanto obediet Deus Orationibus nostris.
will add Incense to our Sacrifices; for as Eusebius Emissenus says, By how
much the more obedient we are to our Governors in the Church, so much the more
ready will God be to hear our Prayers: Aug. ad Monachos Hom. 3.
One petition of an obedient Person is sooner granted, than a thousand of those
that are disobedient. Luther said that he had rather obey than work miracles:
it is certainly more to the edification of the Church, in humility and
obedience to invocate God, in the public Prayers of the Church, than by a use
of the most excellent gifts, to draw the People, 1 Cor. 14.5.
first to admiration of men's persons, then to division, and separation, as it
often happens. Sure we are, God promised his spirit, and blessing to his
Church, and we may be as sure, he will not give them to those that despise his
Church. Let us suppose, that some private Minister may have immediate
inspirations, how can he assure his hearers of it, or what particular promise
is there of a blessing to such, more than to them that pray by the ordinary
assistance of the spirit? The Prayers of Cornelius, and other devout
Christians, were doubtless more acceptable to God, than the Prayers of some
that had extraordinary gifts, 1 Cor. 14.17
which as the Apostle intimates, were not used to edification. It is an
excellent observation of Mr. Hooker, Ecclesiastical Polity. l. 5. S. 10.
If every Man should follow what he imagines the spirit to reveal to him, or
to some other, of whom he has an high esteem, nothing but confusion would
ensue, under pretense of being guided by the Spirit. The gifts and graces
whereof do so naturally tend all, to common peace, that where such singularity
is, they whose hearts it possesses, ought to suspect it the more, in as much
as if it did come from God, and should for that cause prevail with others, the
same God which reveals it to them, would also give them power of confirming
it to others, either with miraculous operation, or with strong invincible
remonstrance of sound reason, such as whereby it might appear, that God would
have all Men's judgments give place unto it; whereas now the Error and
insufficiency of their arguments, makes it a strong presumption against them,
that God has not moved their hearts to think such things, as he has not
enabled them to prove: But instead of God's approving the conceits of such Men
by miraculous testimonies, he has by little less than a Miracle confuted them,
by suffering those Pretenders, who by the exercise of such gifts have disturbed
the Peace and Unity of the Church, to fall into manifest impieties: for do not
such in many of the Factions, despise the Word of God, and follow rather their
own delusions? Do not such contemn the Prayer which our blessed Savior taught
us, as if they had more of the Spirit than he? Do not such pretend to more of
the spirit, than all the Churches of God, who explode these pretenses? Have not
notorious sinners deluded the People of God in all Ages, by such dangerous
suggestions? Were not the Pharisees excellent at it, and the Messalians, of
whom Theodoret tells us, that they gave themselves wholly to Prayer, and had
strange raptures and visions? But the Church judged them to be Heretics, for
despising their Communion, and neglecting other Ordinances: and this censure it
appears they did deserve; for Flamianus a Bishop of Antioch, prevailed with one
of their number, called Adelphius, to discover some of their mysteries to this
effect. They held that all Men brought an evil spirit into the World with them,
which could not be cast out, but by Prayer; which being done, the good spirit
takes possession, and restifies his presence, both by inward and visible signs;
and then they need no Sacraments, nor Scriptures, nor Sermons, but only to
attend their Prayers: but at last it appeared, that many of them were possessed
by the Devil, who made these revelations to them. So true is that of St.
Augustine, Dum sequuntur homines proprium sensum, mox delabuntur ad Daemonem.
We have had sad instances in these later Ages: Of Basilides a most implacable
Tyrant; Swinckfield an Antiscripturist; Hacket a Blasphemer; Dame Oliver a
Witch, and many others, led by the same spirit, who were in their several times
and places, greatly admired for this (as they call it) inspired gift of Prayer.
And it is the righteous judgment of God, that when Men despising the ordinary
means and methods of obtaining grace and salvation in his Church, do turn aside
to ways of their own choosing, he does give them up to be punished by their own
delusions: and having departed first from the unity, next they fall from the
faith, and then fall into unreasonable and damnable opinions and practices,
such as may affright us all from having any Man's person in admiration, for
such gifts as these: for these Reasons, the Church of God to secure the public
worship of God, from the prophanations of such presumptuous Men, has in all
Ages used a prescript form of Prayer, which no doubt (says Mr. Hooker)
proceeded from God, Li. 5. S. 25.
and ought by us to be acknowledged a work of his singular care and providence,
that the Church ever held a form of Common Prayer, though not evermore the
same, yet for the most part retaining the same analogy: so that if the
Liturgies of all the ancient Churches were compared, it might be perceived that
they had all one original, and that they never used the extemporal dictates of
any Man's wit in Churches well settled, but public forms, wherein all might
join with one heart and mouth, Romans 15.6.
to glorify God. And for these Reasons most sober Men have wished, that all
the Churches of God might join in one Liturgy: And this, if any, would be to
pray in the Holy Ghost. To which the Apostle exhorts us, as to a duty, in the
like manner, as to build up our selves in our most holy faith, and keeping our
selves in the love of God; all which being gifts of God, are to be obtained and
improved, by the use of those means, which God has appointed for that end,
(viz.) reading, hearing, and meditating in his Word, attending to the matter,
forms and phrases consecrated in the Scriptures: for the spirit does
collaborantem adjuvare, help the infirmities of the industrious, diligent and
humble Christian, not of the careless and presumptuous sinner. Two ways does
the Spirit assist us; first, in the matter of our Devotions, Romans 8.26 and 27.
directing us to pray for spiritual things, that we ask such things as be
agreeable to the will of God, that is, to his revealed will; 2ly, The spirit
assists us, as to the manner of praying, that we ask in faith, and go to God as
our Father, in, and by Christ; v. 15.
this is to cry, Abba Father. The spirit excites holy affections, by
consideration of the precious promises of God, in whose favor is life, and in
whose Presence there are joys for evermore; and thus to pray for spiritual
things in a spiritual manner, in faith and fervency, is to pray in the Holy
Ghost, let the form be what it will; for being thus composed according to the
spirits own directory, that is, the Word of God, here is no limiting of the
spirit, but a conforming to it: and if the manner of our Prayers be such, as
the spirit also directs, in humility and faith, in fervency and charity, such a
short petition as that of the Publican, shall avail more than all the long
prayers, and loud congratulations of the Pharisees. I doubt not, but those
Primitive Christians, who did in the Congregation cast themselves prostrate,
through the apprehensions of the Divine Majesty, and answered the Collects of
the Church, with an Amen, like a clap of Thunder, did pray in the spirit. And
so did St. Augustine with the Congregation in his days. St. August. confess.
How much did I weep (says he) in the melodious Hymns and Songs of the Church,
being mightily moved by the consent of Voices, which flowing through my Ears,
conveyed thy truth into my Heart, and stirred up pious affections, till the
tears flowed down. The holy People lay prostrate in the Church, being prepared
to dye with their Bishop thy Servant; my Mother also thine Handmaid, being
eminent for her watching and prayers, did live upon her Devotion; and we that
were cold and dull, were excited and comforted by the influence of thy holy
spirit. Here was humility and unity, faith and fervency, watchfulness and
perseverance, and these are the best signs of the spirit of prayer: but when
Men ask such things, as are not consistent with the will of God, when they ask
things to be consumed by their lusts, when they pray against their Governors
and Brethren, instead of praying for their Enemies, and use less reverence to
the God of Heaven, than to mortal Men, it is as clear as any demonstration in
Euclide, that they have not the spirit of God, to assist them in that duty,
wherein they are most confident of it, and that for the reason given in the 2d.
part of the Text, because they are sensual.

The second part of the Character.
That sensuality is the ground of separation, notwithstanding the pretenses of
the spirit, will be no difficult task to prove: and therefore I shall not take
into the personal impurities of some deluded Sectaries, and thence reflect upon
the whole Party, (which is their own practice, but a pitiful one: for, Si
insectari personas sit causae deploratae indicium, eorum causa est
deploratissima) but shall only consider the principles on which they act, the
means which they use, and the ends, which in all Ages they have designed; all
which will prove them ((...), that is) to be sensual. The signification of
which word will best appear, by the Antithesis in the Text; for if they have
not the spirit of God, to authorize, or act them, in what they do, it must be
from some lower principle, and that is either corrupt and carnal reason, (for
right reason is from God) or from mere sensuality, that is, such sentiments and
motions as are common to the Beasts with us. In this sense, Tertullian being
yet a Montanist, (who called themselves Spirituales) used the word against the
Catholics, whom he called (...), which St. Jude more plainly expresses by
walking after their own lusts; for in such Men, v. 18.
both Reason and Religion are made subservient to the sensual faculties of the
Soul, to promote worldly and carnal interest. There is in the will and
affections of such Men, a vicious inclination to make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof. Now the lusts of Men, are by St. John
distinguished into three sorts, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes,
and the pride of life, the three Idols of the worldlings, under the names of
Pleasure, Prosit and Honor, which, though every one cannot pursue severally at
once, yet as opportunity serves, they are well-willers to them all. And certain
it is (as both the Scripture, and Philosophy observes) our Lusts do make us
degenerate into Beasts; and as the Beasts differ in their dispositions,
according to their several kinds, so do sinners, according to their several
lusts, resemble some beasts more than others; Quem non vincit gula vicit
philautia.
some are like Swine, for their filthy conversation; others like Goats and
Satyrs for uncleanness; others like Foxes and Wolves, for subtilty and
cruelty; and, in uno homine mill ferae. When Reason it self, as well as the
irascible and concupiscible faculties of the Soul, are acted by the sensual and
fleshly appetite, no Beast is more hurtful and brutish than a Man.

And now, I have but one supposition to be granted, and I hope our greatest
Enemies will be so charitable as not to deny it. That in the Church of England,
we do profess a sound Faith; and may lead a godly life: This I will not take
pains to prove now, having spoken to it at large. I only add this, That I
believe, as many Learned and Pious Men have both by their Lives and Deaths,
their Pious Works and Writings, as much honored and defended the Church of God
Militant, and are now added to the Church Triumphant, from the Church of
England, since the Reformation, as from any National Church, of the like
extent, ever since the Apostles days: nor did any of the noble army of Martyrs,
and Confessors, now in Heaven, hold Communion with a better established Church,
while they were Militant here below. We want nothing, but humble, devout and
thankful hearts, to make us an happy People. To which end, I recommend to you
the advice of St. Augustine to Dioscorus, dissuading him from curious
questions. If any (says he) shall propose to you questions of subtilty, tell
them, It is not your study; if they ask, What then is it, that you do study?
Answer them thus, I have learnt, how, without the knowledge of such things, a
Man may be happy.

Now if we may not only communicate with this Church without sin, but have all
things necessary to a holy and happy life administered, it must be levity and
inconstancy, some carnal, sensual, or worse designs, that hurry us to a
Separation. I wish they that have been chief actors, would examine their
Consciences, what they have added to their own inward peace, and spiritual
comforts, by all the troubles and distractions, which they have occasioned to
their Brethren; and where they think the account of all the rapine, bloodshed
and confusion, (besides the present hatred and fierce animosities) that have so
long overflown us, and now threaten another Deluge, will be charged at the last
day. But to my purpose, which is to prove Sensuality to be the ground of
Separation. De unitate Ecclesia. S. 8.
Let no Man think (says St. Cyprian) that good Men can be drawn from the
bosom of the Church; the Wind cannot dissipate the solid Wheat, to which St.
Augustine adds, that by the very act of separating, we show our selves to be
Chaff and no Wheat. But that I may as much as is possible, remove all prejudice
against my discourse, I shall first acquaint you with what the Scripture says
concerning Separatists. The first were the Pharisees, whose Motto was, Stand
off, I am holier than thou; who challenged not only the Keys of Knowledge, but
of Heaven also, to let in and shut out whom they pleased; (insomuch as they
said, that if but two Men of all the World were to be saved, one of them must
be a Pharisee) what painted Sepulchers does our Savior discover them to be?
proving them to be guilty of greater sins, denouncing against them greater
judgments, Matthew. 23.
and representing them at a greater distance from the Kingdom of Heaven, than
Harlots and Publicans. St. Paul gives the like description of some in the
Church of Rome. Romans 16.17, 18.
Mark them that cause divisions among you. Why? what of them? they are
Gnostics, Men of more than ordinary Knowledge and Piety. No, says the Apostle,
if you do inspect them narrowly, you shall find, that though they pretend the
Kingdom and Scepter of Christ, they do not serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own bellies, and that by vile arts too, for with good words, and fair
speeches, they deceive the hearts of the simple. The like Persons we find in
the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.3.
whom St. Paul charge with carnality, and proves it too: There are among you
envying, and strife, and divisions; and can you deny that you are carnal? No
conclusion can result more naturally from proper premises, than this of being
carnal, where envy, strife and division do abound. Yet these were not full
grown Separatists, they had only laid the foundation of a Faction, in their
partiality for some, and prejudice against other Ministers, the worst of which
was too good for such an unthankful People. St. Paul tells us, Gal. 5.11. that
the works of the flesh are manifest, that is, it is evident and undeniable,
that these are the works of the flesh, as adultery, fornication,
lasciviousness; so are Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation,
wrath, strife, seditions, herefies, envyings, the certain issues of a carnal
mind. The Apostle also acquaints Timothy upon what Principles such Men act, and
what arts they use, they suppose that gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6.5.
and to compass this, they begin to teach otherwise than the Apostles did, they
would not conform to the wholesome words of Christ, or the Doctrine preached by
the Apostles, which was according to godliness, but in their pride and
ignorance, would dote about questions, and strife of words, to the stirring up
of envy, strife, railing, and evil surmising. And he acquaints Timothy, that
the same thing should come to pass in the later days, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, etc.
when Men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, should under a
form of godliness, See Titus 1.10.
practice all manner of iniquities, and yet draw Parties after them, resist the
truth, and them that defend it, and lead captive silly Women, etc. and that
these were lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. St. James goes a degree
beyond all this, that, if there be but envy, James 3.14, 15.
and strife in our hearts, though it do not break forth into open separation,
all our pretenses to true wisdom and piety are but lies; for this wisdom is
earthly, sensual, and devilish. St. Peter gives us the like description, 2 Pet.
2.10.
as St. Jude does, and it seems to be the joint design of all the Apostles, to
continue in all Churches the Picture of a Separatist, to forewarn the People of
the deceitfulness and danger, Phil. 3.18. Col. 2.18.
that such Persons and practices might involve them in. And now to come nearer
home, I doubt not, but many will be of the same judgment with me in this, That
the defection which some learned Men, and others, have made from our Church, to
the Church of Rome, while the late Persecution did endure, could not be for
greater purity, but in hopes of better preferment, and the reputation of being
accounted Men of Learning, and tender consciences; whereas, if the Church could
have satisfied their expectation of Dignities and preferment, they would never
have courted another Mistress, whose Wealth, and gaudy Dresses did not so much
exceed, as her Virtues and comeliness were inferior to the Church of England.
And as for the ordinary sort of Romish Proselytes, they were doubtless possessed
with an opinion of an easier Religion, that would indulge them in more
licentiousness, and at easy rates grant them pardon for sins to come, as well
as what were past. Most Men would choose a Religion, which they may enjoy with
their Lusts, and wherein they may hope to go to Heaven, without that strictness
of life, and sincere and universal obedience, which is required in the
Protestant Churches. And it is altogether as evident, that many who divide
themselves into lesser Factions among us, (though purity, and conscience, and
Christian liberty be pretended) do please themselves with some other
apprehensions, than what are really consistent with the graces of the Holy
Spirit: of which I shall instance in these particulars. First, They are
Animalia Gloriae, so they were described by Tertullian: Qui gloriae and
principatus gratia, Contr. Per. c. 3.
novas and falsas opiniones sequuntur. Pride, and too high an opinion of their
own parts and piety, has diverted many from the unity of the Church: for this
Pharisaical leven, does not only swell them, but renders them sour, and
bitter, to contemn their Brethren, and scorn their Governors, Regis quisque in
se animum habot (as Galvin observes of such Men) they have ambition to be
uppermost, and to that end, will rather make themselves head of a small
Faction, than continue Members of the most honorable Society. (...), is their
design; and to that end is it, that with Core, etc. they are so troublesome to
their Rulers: Spotswood's History.
and as it is observed of the Scottish Clergy, although none pleaded more for
purity than they, while they were under Episcopal Jurisdiction, yet none acted
more against it, when they had shaken off that Discipline, griping, not only
the Crosier, but the Scepter too, with both their hands. It Is not the
Superiority, that they dislike, but that it is in other Men's hands; for it is
true of such, what Zanchy observed of some Lutheran Churches, they only changed
the good Greek work of Bishop, into a bad Latin one of Superintendent; and in
some places, where they neither retained the good Greek, nor the bad Latin
word, yet they kept the power of Bishops still. Now what greater symptoms of
pride are there, than the despising of our Superiors, and contempt of our
equals, the vaunting of what we have not, and a vain glorying of what we have?
That description which I have formerly given out of Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 1.
S. 16.
shows, that it is not piety, but pride, that is predominant in such: to which
I shall add, Vt omnium contemptu oftentent se esse aliis moliores.
that in his Book de Scandalis, St. Augustine (says he) does truly name pride,
the Mother of all Heresies; for never was there any Master of error, Vt sibi
placeant and praepositos superbo tumore contemnant. St. Cyprian, l. 3. Ep. 19.
whom a wicked ambition did not raise up to his own ruin. We know that God is
a faithful teacher of such as are humble; they therefore that swell with
arrogance, it is no wonder that they are driven up and down with wild
speculations, being banished from this School. As many, as in our Age have
fallen from the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, and made themselves Authors of
false Opinions, we find them all infected with the disease of pride, and from
thence to have created witty torments, as well to themselves, as others: And
again, Call. contra Labertinos.
They are victorious by nothing but their impudence, for there is not one of
them, but desires to be uppermost.

The temper of a holy Man is known by this, (says Cameron) He indures
injuries, Cameron. de Schismate.
to the loss of his Name and Reputation, that the Church may not be divided;
whereas wicked and mercenary Men, if any touch them but with his little finger,
or in any respect diminishes their fame, presently, either under pretense of
severity in the Ecclesiastical Discipline, or of preserving the purity of
Doctrine, (whereas in truth they study only their own interest) they dare to
stir up Tumults, and bring all to confusion, A Doctore glorioso. Pastore
contentioso and inuttlibus quaestionibus liberet Ecclesiam Dominus.
lest forsooth they should abate any thing of their reputation. Methinks I see
them represented in that reply of Naaman the Leper, when he was advised to wash
in Jordan, 2 King. 5.12
that he might be whole; Are not Abana and Pharphar Rivers of Damascus, better
than all the Waters of Israel? May I not wash in them and be clean? So do they
contend for their own inventions against the institutions of God: Are not our
own Discipline and Ordinances better, not as good only? Jordan is but a
standing Water, to these Rivers: put all the Waters in Israel together, Abana
and Pharphar, their Government and Discipline exceeds them all. But though he
turned away in a rage, yet was he not to be cured, until he was washed in
Jordan. And this pride, and desire of vain glory, begets that obstinacy, which
Alphonsus a Castro observes to make them inflexible, so that though they be
foiled never so often, they will still contend. How often and irrefragably did
St. Augustine confute the Donatists, yet could he not silence them, but being
puffed up with a furious pride, did still boast that they alone were the Church
of God, when as there was not any one Doctrine in the Catholic Church that
they could justly cavil at. The same pride is observed in our Adversaries of
Rome, who though there be not any Doctrine maintained in our Church, but some
famous Doctors of their own have defended; nor any refused by us, but some very
learned Men of their own have confuted the same: yet do they still condemn us
for Heretics, and notwithstanding the infinite contradictions among
themselves, pretend still to a spirit of infallibility. And if it be considered
by impartial, and uninteresled Persons, how many eminent Men in our Church, for
learning, piety, and moderation, have been causlesly, impudently, and
uncessantly vexed, reviled and opposed, by fierce, implacable and unreasonable
Men; it will appear, they are acted by no other spirit, but that of
contradiction and perverseness, which manifests it self in all their practices
and writings, and proves them professed enemies to all good government and
order. I cannot think Abailardus was a wise Man, that resolved to persist in
his Opinion, when he was convinced that all the Fathers were against him; Qui
custode remoto, Gaudet equis canibusque.
nor that such Boys as Horace speaks of, that cast off their Tutors, and become
ungovernable, will ever make wise or good Men.

From this Pride, proceed emulation and envy, not only a secret grudging, but
an open discontent, at the deserved advancement of others, as if all that
honor which is granted to such, were taken from themselves. They are indeed
unsatisfied not only with their own, but with other Men's conditions. Thus as
our Apostle observes, they go in the way of Cain, who envyed his Brother on no
other account, but because his person and services were better accepted. Thus
Aerius being denied a Bishopric, for which he was Competitor with a more
worthy Person, vented his Opinion, that a Bishop and Presbyter did differ in
nothing; St. August. de Haeres. ad Quod vult Deuxe, 69.
hoping that though he could not raise himself to that dignity, he might
degrade it to his own quality. The like did Donatus: Cecilian was preferred to
the Bishopric of Carthage, for which he was a Candidate, and upon his
disappointment he presently breaks out into a Schism, and adds Heresy to it.
When ambitious Men meet with a repulse, and their pride has not that vent, and
airy applause, which it expected, it spends it self in envious and malicious
thoughts; and as Cowards when they are desperate, grow valiant, so are
discontented persons, to their own ruin, if not of the Church, that they may,
if it be possible, do as Sampson did, bury their Adversaries under the same
ruin that they draw upon themselves.

And hence arises hatred, another manifest fruit of the flesh: Contra Donat.
l. 1. c. 11
for, as St. Augustine notes, none will make Schisms in the Church of God, but
such as are blinded with the hatred of their Brethren: and the Schoolmen
observe that Schism is a Vice wholly opposite to, and inconsistent with
Charity. The same I have quoted from Cameron. The very act of separation, is an
accusation of those, from whom we depart, of some reigning sins, as Idolatry,
and gross superstition, or intolerable Persecution: For as much as no other
pretense can warrant that separation; and then what charitable thoughts can
they entertain of such? They that forsake the Assemblies, do provoke to
somewhat else, than to love and good works. And how dwells the love of God in
them, 1 John 4.20.
that profess such contempt and hatred of their Brethren? These have been the
effects of former separations, and God alone that can bring light out of
darkness, can turn our present confusions to peace and establishment.

But Pride does not always go without profit. Our Apostle tells us more than
once, that they design reward and advantage to themselves: So, they have gone
in the way of Balaam for reward: v. 11. And v. 16. (...), St. Peter 2.2.14.
says, -- they have their hearts exercised with covetous practices. How did
Balaam, under the Name of a Prophet, travel up and down from Country to
Country, from Altar to Altar, to curse those whom God had blessed, and to bless
those whom God had cursed; and all for that which he seemed to scorn, a Reward?
How inflexible so-ever such are to others, they will cringe and fawn upon their
Benefactors, and have not their persons only, but sometime their Vices too in
admiration for advantage. We know who had many such Chaplains, and what it was
made Demas forsakes St. Paul, and others, to make shipwreck of Faith and a good
Conscience: we know also who they were, that devoured Widows houses; and they
that first make them Widows, and then devour their Houses, and when opportunity
serves, can take the Houses of God into their possession too, are no better.
This is the business of Heretics, says Tertullian, Non Ethnicos convertendi
sed nostra evertendi; De Praescript.
nostra suffodiunt ut sua aedificent. St. Cyprian says of Novatian, that he
was Avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus, even mad with an insatiable
appetite of covetousness: 2 Pet. 2.
And Doctor Ames, that Avaritia plerunque est haerefe^^ comes, and fomes, matter
and nutrix.

And who is there that has in these later days prevaricated from the Church,
but in hopes at least to mend his condition? which whether it were designed by
those that now set up new Churches, they best know, and we are sure, it is
effected, to such a degree, that now Simeon and Levi have gotten the Portion of
Benjamin in this place; and I believe in many others, they have double to the
fixed Ministers. And as to the meaner sort of People, they make merchandise
too, though not of such precious Ware as their Leaders, yet gain is a principal
ingredient to their godliness. Which of them has not made some improvement of
Trade from the Faction to which he adheres, with whom he deals with the less
suspicion, as well as to the greater advantage? So that it is obvious to every
observer, that the Conventicles are generally made a Sanctuary for such idle
and discontented Men, as have justly exposed themselves to poverty, infamy, and
contempt among their more sober and industrious Neighbors. As it is in the
case of Sedition in the State; Such as are in distress, and in debt, and
discontented, gather themselves to the Rebel party, in hope to mend their
fortunes; so certain it is, that the hopes of sharing the Churches Patrimony,
has invited many desperate Persons to make her a Sacrifice, that they might
feast themselves upon her Substance. It was gain that caused Demetrius and the
Craftsmen, to decry St. Paul, and to be so loud in their Acclamations, Acts
19.28
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

The next instance of Sensuality, is pleasure; and this is seated either in the
Soul or Body: for there are pleasures intellectual, which do hugely transport
carnal Men, when they reflect upon their parts and endowments, what applause
they have gotten from the People, with whom they are the only Rabbis, nos
numerus sumus and magno dominamut Atridae.
and every ipse dixit, is as authentic as the Gospel; when as the Fly on the
Wheel, they conceit what a dust they can raise, and are able to overthrow in a
few days all those constitutions, which many wise Men have been establishing
for many Ages. Doubtless Themistocles's Son did glory much among his Mates,
when he told them, how he could rule all Athens: For, I rule my Mother, (says
he) and my Mother rules my Father, and my Father rules the City; thus can they
model the Women, and the Women the Men, and so whole Cities and Churches have
been new modelled after their inventions. Certainly Children please themselves
in counterfeited Diamonds, as much as Men in those that are true; and so do
some persons in their feigned graces, and the estimation they get by them: and
such delight they take in being honored among the People, that neither life it
self, nor all the concernments of Body and Soul, have been so dear unto them.
Every Faction will boast of their Martyrs, and those Martyrs certainly did
please themselves with some strange conceits, which did harden them to undergo
so great torments; though it be most true, that it is not the punishment, nor
the patience of him that suffers, makes a Martyr, non est inferior gloria
sustincre Martyrium ne scindatur Ecclesia, quam ne idolis immoletur. St. Aug.
de Ver. Rel. c. 5.
but the cause. And Dionysius Alexandrinus, St. Augustine, and other Fathers
have determined, that they who suffer Martyrdom, to preserve the Church of God
from being rent by Schisms, are more acceptable to God, than they who choose
to dye rather than to worship Idols; because these suffer only to save their
own Souls, the other to save the whole Church: And on the contrary to them that
raise contentions, and acquiesce not in the truth, there is for the same Reason
a greater measure of Wrath reserved, than for other Sinners, of whom St.
Cyprian says, Occidi possunt, Coronari non possunt, for they are the Devil's
Martyrs. Now although these pleasures be originally intellectual, yet as Rivers
partake both of the name, and nature of the grounds through which they run, so
(because both Reason and Religion are made subservient to carnal ends, and
lusts, and the virtues of these Men, as those of Epicurus, are but the
Handmaids of pleasure) the end may denominate the Actions. Belshazzar's sin
was not the less sensual, for causing the Vessels of the Sanctuary to minister
to his excess. Nor are they less sensual, who make their reputation, reason and
religion, to serve their passions and carnal interests. A Man (says Lactantius)
would choose to dye rather than to have the shape and body of a Beast, though
he should retain a humane Soul still. How much more should we abhor, to have
our Bodies (which are not merely humane, for we are the temple of God) to be as
the Egyptian Temples possessed and filled with Crocodiles, and Serpents, and
destructive Spirits? If in Pride, Envy, and Revenge, there be any thing that is
less sensual, it is the more devilish. It was a happiness to have the Devil
cast out of the Men, though he presently entered into the Herd of Swine: but
when the unclean Spirit, shall by a few counterfeit formalities, be exorcised
out of the Body, that he may the more freely debauch the Soul, this is by
Beelzebub to cast out Devils.

Obj. But what Pride or pleasure can there be in being persecuted? in forsaking
Houses, and Lands, and Callings, and many conveniences, for Religions sake?

Ans. 1. I might answer this Objection, as St. Augustine did the Donatists,
when they urged it. When a distempered sick Man railes at his Keepers and
Physicians, and seeks by all means to hurt them, and they cause him to be
bound, who is the Persecutor? This St. Augustine resolves, Non persequitur
medicus Phreneticum sed Phreneticus medicum: The distracted Man, that would do
mischief to his Physician and Friends too, is the Persecutor, though he be in
Bonds.

2. But secondly, if Men be once thoroughly possessed of a good opinion of the
Religion in which they have been educated, or the Faction which they have
espoused* such of them as are of bold and zealous Spirits, will even dare to
dye for it, be it never so false and impious. Do not some Men that are
possessed by their Lusts, sacrifice their estates, health and life, as really,
though not as solemnly as the Heathen did to Ceres, Bacchus and Venus, that is,
to Gluttony, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, to each of which there fall a
Thousand Sacrifices to one that offers up himself to the true God: and yet how
do these sinners, like Baal's Priests, not only Sacrifice their Cattle and
substance, 1 King. 18.28.
but their very Souls too, and cut, and lance their Bodies, embrace diseases
and rottenness? So in things Civil, as well as impious, few Roman spirits, but
would dare to dye for the reputation, of being lovers of their Country, and
Gods. And the Turks, at the command of their Emperor, expose themselves to all
dangers. We may not wonder then, if Men that are persuaded (as in all Factions
there may be some) that they know more of the will of God, and enjoy more of
the love, and of the spirit of God, than others do, think it their duty, to act
more for the glory of God, as well in suppressing the persuasions of others, as
in propagating their own, and then act as violently as Saul, or any of the
Pharisees ever did. Nor can the Heathen do, or suffer more for the service of
their Idols, than some Christians have in the worship of their fond and false
imaginations.

But all the active Zealots in a Faction, are not really persuaded, that their
Religion is the best, there are some, that with the Pharisees, make it only a
pretense to other designs of Pride and Vainglory, Avarice and Luxury, Malice
and Revenge. They fast, and pray, and pay tithes, and give alms, and all, as
our Savior observes, to be seen of men: and they have their reward; (that is)
the vain applause which they aimed at. And as those that are dexterous in
deluding others by a cunning and nimble turn of their hands, are greatly
pleased, not only with the gain that they get, but with the easy methods and
activity, by which they cause the common People to admire them: So many
Impostors do greatly please themselves, to see by what sleights, Ephesians. 4.14.
and cunning craftiness, as by diverse Winds of Doctrine, they can carry some
weak Christians to and fro, whithersoever it pleases them.

What is pleasure, but the satisfying and enjoying of those Lusts, Opinions and
Humors, to which we devote our selves, and which have gotten a Dominion and
Power over us? And this makes that variety and difference of pleasure, that is
in the World, answerable to the constitutions, education, custom, and
persuasions of Men. It would be a torment to a sober, as well as to a pious
Man, to wallow in such unclean and beastly Lusts, wherein others think
themselves very happy. Those that are Sanguine and Jovial, are delighted with
fleshly lusts, chambering, and wantonness, an Hawk, or Hound, or what is worse:
The Choleric take pleasure in doing mischief, vexing and disquieting of
others, though to their own great trouble; and they that are melancholy, in
growing froward, and discontented at every supposed fault, that agrees not with
their fancies. Now of what Religion soever these Men be, if they have not true
grace, and the power of godliness, to mortify these Lusts, and change their
Natures, all their religious exercises will be made but a pretense, and an
Engine the better to compass their sensual designs. And like some platted
Pictures, which at your first entrance to a Room, present you with the face of
a Man, by that time that you have walked about it, you see nothing but a Beast
or a Serpent. A famous painter was once desired to describe an Horse and his
Rider, tumbling on the Ground together. He draws the Horse stretching himself
in a full career, the Rider sitting close, bowing himself to the very Mane,
forcing him on with all his might, and scarce Man or Horse to be seen, for the
Cloud of Dust which they raised, at the sight whereof, he was told, that he had
mistaken the design: No, says the Painter, and with a turn of his hand,
reversing the picture, there appeared the Man and Horse grovelling on the
Ground, wallowing in the Dust, and the Beast uppermost. He that would describe
a sensual Person, needs not borrow from the History of the Rich Glutton, nor
the Prodigal Son, seeding with the Swine; I suppose it may be better done, by
the History of Jehu the Son of Nimshi, a Person known by his furious marching.
The Trumpet by which he gathered and animated his Troops, was his own Mouth,
Come see my zeal for the Lord, whereas the Kingdom was in his Eye. And to that
he is resolved to wade through the Bloud-Royal of the Kings of Israel and
Judah. To this end, as he prevents all addresses to King Joram, so he is deaf
to all the Messages of Peace, and imbrues his hands, not only in the Blood of
his Sovereign, but causes the Heads of Seventy of the Sons of Ahab, to be cut
off; and all his great Men, 2 Kings 10.1.
and his Kinsmen, and his priests, v. 11.
and Two and Forty Brethren of Ahaziah King of Judah, to be slain: And to
strengthen his Party, v. 14.
joins with Jehonadah the Son of Rechab, and proclaims, Ahab served Baal a
little, but Jehu shall serve him much: v. 18.
He appoints Sacrifices and solemn Assemblies, until he had gotten them under
his Power, and then destroys them all. Was not he a sensual Man, v. 25.
whose very Sword was drunk with such Royal blood, and glutted with the Flesh
of Priests and Nobles, and all under a pretense of Zeal for the Lord? Yet this
is the Character which the Scripture gives him, From the Sins of Jeroboam, the
Son of Nebat, v. 29.
who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not, to wit, the Golden Calves, that
were in Bethel, and that were in Dan, but took no heed to walk in the ways of
the Lord.

Though the Swine be an unclean Creature, and now and then wallows in the Mire,
yet it only defiles it self, and is soon surfeited with a few Acorns: But the
ravenous Wolf, that knows how to put on Sheeps clothing, and hunts up and down,
from one Flock to another, and devours the Younglings, and Weaklings of the
Flock, and is nourished by rapine and blood, and incessantly troubles, and
injures the good Shepherd, is doubtless the most sensual and pernicious Beast.
And for these Reasons it was, that the Ancients have deservedly declaimed
against this Sin of making Sects and Divisions, as the greatest evil, Quovis
bello externo gravius malum. Constantine, vide Eusebius. in ejus vita.
Though War be as the opening of Pandora's Box, that gives License to all
Plagues, against our Bodies, and Estates, this is more dangerous, as tolerating
those evils, that will destroy Souls and Bodies: as that Italian Murderer,
that forced his Enemy to renounce his Religion first, and slew him afterward.

Now as to the pleasures of the Body, which Bishop Tailor distinguishes, to be
either of the upper, or the lower Belly, that is, of intemperance, or
incontinence: They that separate, have been no great strangers to either of
them; for they turn the grace of God into lasciviousness. Why did Balaam rove
up and down, v. 4.
from one Country and City to another, but for the variety of entertainment he
met with? and by his Doctrine you may learn what his practice was; numb. 23.1.
as he taught Balac to raise new Altars, so he taught him to commit fornication
too. Rev. 2.14.
And this was the Doctrine and practice of the Nicolaitans in the 15 Verse.
It Is Tertullian's observation of Hermogenes, that he was Totus adulter, and
praedicationis, Adv^rsus Hermog. c. 1.
and carnis: That he was an Adulterer, both of the Word, and of the Flesh. A
large Catalogue we have of such Persons, from the Ancients, Simon Magus and his
Helena, Montanus and his Maximilla, Carpocrates and his Marcellina, Apelles and
his Philumena, Donatus and his Lucilia, Priscillian and his Galla. And among
the Popes, we read of Sergius his Marozia, Gregory the 7th. his Matilda,
Alexander the 6th. his Lucretia, She governed the Church, ab Anno 1644. ad
Annum 1655.
Leo the 10th. his Magdalena, Paul the Third his Constantia, and Innocent 10th.
his Donna Olympia. No wonder then if the Stews have a Toleration under such
Masters, or that John of Leyden allowed community of Wives, having 13. to his
own share; the Principles of Separation led them to it: for they held there
could be no Adultery among them, Gastius de Anabap.
having but one spirit, which united them to one Body. How far our late
Generation went in this way of Balaam, is too well known, and farther they were
going, as appears by a Book of one of the greatest Scholars among them,
pleading for the lawfulness of Divorces, and marrying again, on very small
occasions. In a word, he that reads Epiphanius, of the impurities of the
Gnostics, and Clemens Alexandrinus of the Carpocratians, or later Writers of
the Anabaptists, and the Family of Love, will think them Votaries to Venus,
rather than Disciples of the Holy Jesus: It is for Love of such Carcasses, that
the Crow leaves the Ark. And if such sensual Persons could but peaceably
forsake our Communion, I might with the more confidence affirm, that they have
left the best reformed Church in the World. But St. Jude takes notice of their
intemperance also, v. 12. These are spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they
feast with you, [or upon you] feeding themselves without fear. The Christians
kept their Love Feasts, for the maintenance of Unity among themselves, and to
make provision for the Poor; among whom the Gnostics thrust themselves, that
they might Sacrifice Ventri and Veneri, counting it pleasure to riot in the Day
time, says St. Peter, 2 Pet 2.13, 14.
seeking occasion to deceive silly Women, as Oecumenius observes, and therefore
to their Feasting, St. Peter joins, having eyes full of Adultery. Of some of
them St. Paul notes, 1 Cor. 11.21.
that they would be drunken, even at the Lord's Supper. And though gluttony be
not so visible, yet doubtless it is as great a sin, especially when it is made
a design, and Men serve not the Lord Jesus, as much as their own hellies: Phil.
3.
of such the Apostle could not speak without weeping, because they made their
Bellies their God. St. Augustine confesses he was far from drunkenness, but
Gluttony did sometimes creep upon him: This sin brings not that present shame
and punishment, which the other makes us obnoxious to, and therefore Men do
more freely indulge to it; they can feast without fear. Calvin observes of
Quintine, and others in his Age (who from a mean condition, Cubicularii and
Ostiarii p. 436.
became Teachers and Doctors, for this reason, that they might live the more
plentifully and delicately, and not labor so servilely in their Callings, for
a bare maintenance) they saw how luxuriously the Monks and Friars lived by
singing, 2 Samuel 1.36. Put me I pray thee into one of the Priest's Offices, that
I may eat a morset of Bread.
and begging from Door to Door, and if they could do so by prating, it was
better than hard working. Besides, such Persons have a conceit, that they only
have a right to the Creatures, and cannot offend in the use of them; and hence
it is, that the same measures of Meat, Drink, and Apparel, which they condemn
as superfluity and excess in others, they can without scruple indulge to
themselves, as if God did love them so well, that they could never love
themselves, or despise others enough: So that our Ecclesiastical, as well as
Secular Wars, come from the same Fountain, which St. James has observed, James
4.1.
Even our Lusts that war in our Members.

The next instance of Sensuality, which disposes Men to a Separation, is a
Supine laziness, and neglect to enquire into the Principles of Religion; and
this makes them fit matter for Seducers to work upon: For as they that attempt
them, are described to be crafty and deceitful workers; 2 Cor. 11.13. Ephesians. 4.14.
so they that are seduced, are observed to be ignorant, unwary Christians.
Thus, Romans 16.18. they beguile the hearts of the simple: And again, 2 Timothy 3.6.
they lead captive silly Women laden with iniquity, ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now such Perssons are affected with
shows, as much as substance; and as in a Fabric where the foundation is not
well laid, the whole Building easily falls asunder, so where Persons were never
well catechized, and built upon sound Principles of Religion, they must needs
be unstable, and so, easily drawn into separation. In all Religions, the
Multitude take up their Persuasions from the Country, and Parents, of whom they
are born, and educated; and had the most of us been born, and instructed by
Turkish, or Popish Parents, we had been of the same Religion, without doubting
of, or inquiring into the grounds of it: and in all those Religions, as we see
also in our own, some Persons are more disposed, by the constitutions of their
Bodies, to fervor and zeal in the Religion which they do profess, Perit
judicium cum res transit in affectum.
above others; or if they be not naturally inclined to more devotion, yet being
brought up under strict Discipline, and receiving early impressions, of fears
and hopes, of great privileges and advantages in the mode of Worship, which
their Parents and Teachers commend unto them, they are so rooted in a good
Opinion of their own, and so prejudiced against all others, that little less
than a Miracle can remove them. We have an instance in St. Paul, bred up at the
Feet of Gamaliel, and according to the strictest Sect of the Pharisees; his
natural temper inclined him to a fervency and diligence in what he did, and
accordingly he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of
the Lord: Acts 9.1.
He begged the employment, Acts 26.9.
and haled Men and Women to Prison; And in all this, he acted according to a
good Conscience, as he thought, until in a miraculous manner, it pleased God to
show him the error of his ways. Thus in the Papacy, where the people from their
infancy, are persuaded of the great Holiness, Infallibility, and Power of the
Pope, and are awed with the story of Purgatory, and relieved again by cheap
Pardons and Indulgences, and are also kept from the use of such means, as might
better inform them, they are not only ignorant of their own, but also so
prejudiced against another Religion, never inquiring into the grounds of
either, that it must be an act of more than ordinary grace, to convert such
Persons. It is even so among us, where there are several Modes of Worship, or
perhaps only prejudices in our Parents, or Teachers, against the public
Worship professed among us, and such Parents inform their Children, of
Profaneness in the generality of the People, of Superstition in the
administration of holy things, of Antichristianisme in the Government, what
good Men they are, that cannot in point of Conscience conform to them, but
choose rather to lose all they have, how Devout they are in their Prayers,
Powerful in their Preaching, Holy in their Lives; How hard a task is it to
Undeceive such People, who are verily persuaded, that all that has been told
them is true, and having never doubted, and inquired into the truth of them,
have continued in their prejudices against the one, and in Communion with the
other, and (as they believe) are greatly edified in knowledge and grace, and as
St. Paul, acting zealously according to his knowledge and Conscience, before
his Conversion, thought verily, Acts 26.9.
that he ought to do all those things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth;
and that he did God good service in it. Now, what is the most probable means to
convert such a one? Should any of the Apostles have gone to Saul, and upbraided
him with hypocrisy, and dissimulation, Saul was guilty of no such thing: he
acted according to his knowledge and Conscience, and such a Method would have
confirmed him in his present persuasion, that he acted for, and they against
the truth. The same Method therefore, that our Savior used in Readiness
conversion, is the most probable for the undeceiving of such prejudiced
Persons, To convince them, It is Jesus whom they persecute, that the Pharisees,
under whom they were educated, made Religion only a Cloak to hide their gross
impieties, that their preciseness about Ceremonies, and tithing Mint, Annise,
and Cummin, was but a pretense to blind Men from charging them with the neglect
of the weightier matters of the Law, and there needs no other help to discover
false Teachers, than that of our Savior; by their fruits ye shall know them:
for as when we see a Wolf, though in Sheeps clothing, begin to scatter and
worrey the Flock, we may conclude him to be a Wolf; so when we see Men live in
Envy and Malice, and to be the Authors of Confusion, and every Evil thing, we
may conclude they have not the Spirit which they pretend to. And as for the
Multitude, Christ instructs them in plain and easy Precepts of Repentance,
faith, and new obedience, and vindicates the Law of God, from the gross and
false interpretations of the Pharisees, who, notwithstanding the good Opinion
that the People had of them, were indeed grand Hypocrites, proud, censorious,
malicious: And therefore they ought to shake off that heavy Yoke, that was
imposed upon their Consciences, and to be of a meek and teachable Spirit, to
search the Scriptures, and consider what was written in the Law and the
Prophets, of doing justly, loving mercy, Micah 6.8,
and walking humbly with God. To these our Savior recalls the deceived People,
Matthew. 5.
in that most Heavenly Sermon on the Mount, and that great Commandment, of
loving the Lord our God with all our Heart, Matthew. 22.37.
and with all our Soul, and with all our Mind; and in the other, which is like
unto it, to love our Neighbors as our selves, and doing to all Men, as we
would, they should do unto us: on which Golden Rule, hang all the Law, and the
Prophets. I doubt not, but as among the Pharisees of old, so among the Papists,
and other Sectaries now, there are many chief Leaders, that know themselves to
be in Error, and that, if they should acquaint the People with their own
convictions, they should retain very few Proselytes; and therefore it was, and
is their constant care, to keep the People under ignorance and prejudice still,
either wholly to deny the use of the Scriptures, and other good works, or so to
wrest the one, and defame the other, that it is almost the same thing, as if
they were wholly denied to them. We read in the 2d. of Sam. 15. how Absalom
under pretense of a Vow, and with fair speeches, stole the hearts of the
People, and led them into Rebellion against his own Father; he carries out at
once, Two Hundred Men from Jerusalem, who as the Text says, went in the
simplicity of their hearts, not knowing any thing. Cameron does excuse such
Persons, as are unawares seduced, by the instance of one, that unwittingly
marries his own Sister; which though it be really Incest, yet relate, in
respect that he did it ignorantly, it is not so to him, unless he continues in
it after full information. How far they were excusable from Rebellion and
Separation, that engaged in the first unhappy Wars, is by this time known to
most of them. But as they were rank Rebels that continued with Absalom, when
they saw him to be guided by the Counsel of Achitophel, to form Armies, and
fight pitched Battails, against his Father David, whom he so pursued, that ( v.
30.) you find David, and the Men that were with him, going up to the Mount
Olivet, barefooted, and weeping; in which distress Shimei perpetually curses
him, (v. 7.) Come out thou bloody Man, and thou Man of Belial, Chapter 16.7. and v.
13. cast dust and stones at him: So they, that having been Spectators, and for
the most part Agents, or Patients, in the horrid effects of our late most
unhappy Divisions, which were begun on pretense of reforming Church Affairs,
and introducing a better Discipline, shall again engage in the like Divisions,
and foment Discord and Separation, which (St. James tells us, as well as our
own experience) will bring in confusion, and every evil thing, are Separatists
in the highest degree. Besides, the generality of the People, who are now
separated, were reconciled to the Communion of our Church, which was done,
either upon good information and sound knowledge of the lawfulness of holding
Communion with us, or in a way of dissimulation and hypocrisy: If upon the
account of a right information, then they sin in the Separation, that is now
made; If upon the consideration of other vile ends, and secular motives, they
were hypocrites in so doing, and such in all probability they continue still.
It was undoubtedly their duty before they departed, to have consulted with
those spiritual Guides, under whose Ministry they were, for the resolution of
their doubts, and trial of the Grounds of their intended Separation, which
being wholly neglected, it argues, at least, great rashness, and supine
negligence, and consequently that Sensuality, and not Piety, was the ground of
their Separation.

And as the Religion of some Men, is framed according to their Natural
constitutions and continual education; so bodily Distempers, and accidental
infirmities and afflictions, have a great influence to the persuasions of
others. Thus a discontented spirit, disappointment of hopes, decay of Trade, a
Sedentary calling, and laboring in the Fire, may raise such melancholy
fancies, and so strongly imprint them on the Spirits of Men, as to make them
really believe absurd and impossible things, as if they were real truths: for
Melancholy is of the nature of Wine; if sends up hot and flatulent Vapors into
the Brain, and there creates strange Imaginations, and inableth Men with
confident and eloquent Language, to express their fancies; and this temper, as
it disposes Men mostly to tamper with matters of Religion, so the vehemence
wherewith they are acted, makes them believe themselves (as has been commonly
supposed of eminent Poets and Orators, and as the Turks at this day do think of
distracted Men) to be inspired. Some Persons, overcome with the passion of
jealousy, do believe and act, as if all their imaginations and suspicions were
true, and will not be convinced by the most demonstrative Arguments to the
contrary. So in Melancholy Distempers, as many have thought themselves Kings
and Emperors, so others have fancied themselves great Prophets, sent from God
to reform the World, and they declaim against the Corruptions of the Churches,
and contrive new Models for rectifying of all that they fancy amiss: For,
though Mahomet, and some other Politicians, were mere Impostors, and pretended
to inspirations merely upon design; yet doubtless others, who have imagined
very strange things (as that they were the Messiah sent from God, that they
were the very Spirit of God, or at least had that Spirit dwelling personally in
them) have been fully persuaded that these apprehensions were true, and have
both acted and suffered, lived and dyed in the attestation of them. As that
Learned Doctor of Divinity, Francis. de la Cruz. Acosta de Noviss. Temporibus
l. 2. c. 11.
of whom Acosta gives us this memorable History. That by familiarity with a
mean Woman, who pretended to Trances and Visions, he was so seduced, as to
refer the most weighty Points of Divinity to her determination, and to receive
all her Answers as Oracles; though she a simple Woman, and he a Learned and
religious Man: at last, this Man would take upon him to do Miracles, So
Commenius was deceived by Daubritius: See Baxter's Cure. p. 164.
and vented strange Opinions, and Prophecies; pretending, not only that he had
an Angel, but GOD himself familiar with him; he affirmed that he should be a
King, and a Pope too, that the Apostolic See should be translated to Peru,
where he lived, that Holiness was granted to him above all the Apostles, and
Angels, that as Christ was the Redeemer of the World, as to sufficiency, so he
must redeem it as to efficacy. That GOD had offered him Hypostatical Union; and
an Hundred such Vagaries, he firmly held; and yet this Man (our Author says)
was as perfect in his Senses, as to soundness of Brain, as he himself, when he
wrote of him; wherefore the Bishop of Quinto, with Acosta, and other Divines,
were appointed to dispute with him, concerning his Opinions. Who began to
allege, that his Doctrine being above Humane Reason, could not be proved, but
by Scripture, and Miracles. As for Scripture, I have proved it (says he) by
more clear and pregnant Testimonies, than those, by which ever Paul did prove
Jesus the true Messiah. As for Miracles, he had done some so great, (as he
pretended) that the Resurrection of Christ was not greater, in as much as he
had been verily, and truly dead, and was raised again. And in the Conference
for two days time, though he had not had any Book in the Prison, where he was
five Years, his very Breviary being taken from him, yet did he quote places of
Scripture out of the Prophets, the Psalms, Apocalypse, and other Books, so many
and so long, that his very Memory caused Admiration: As for Miracles, he told
them (as by Prophecy) that John of Austria was vanquished by the Turks: That
Philip King of Spain had lost most part of his Kingdom: That Pope Gregory was
deposed by a Council, and another to be chosen at Rome; all which he affirmed,
not only to be true, but to be known to them to be so, though indeed they knew
them all to be false. And when for these things, he was condemned to be burned,
and led out as a public Spectacle, he ceased not to look up to Heaven,
expecting (as it seems the Devil had promised him) that fire would come from
thence to consume his Adversaries.

From this History we may argue, concerning imaginations and persuasions less
wild and strange, and yet such as we know to be truly and really believed by
them upon whom they are wrought; and I need not instance in the Paroxysmes and
persuasions of Enthusiasts, and Quakers, whether proceeding from Melancholy
Distempers, (which may go very far) or from Diabolical suggestions, who are yet
so confident of the truth and Divinity of them, as that many of them would dye
for that belief, but in the confidence of other more sober persons, who believe
themselves the Elect People of God, and to be as well assured of their
Salvation, as if they had read their Names written in the Book of Life, who yet
live in such manifest contradiction to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, in Envy,
Hatred, Malice, Disobedience, Lying, Slandering, and are Implacable, Unnatural,
Unholy, that if the Scriptures be true, their presumptions must needs be false.

The miscarriages of such as have pretended to extraordinary impulses of the
Spirit, have been so notoriously impious, that it is easy to fill a Volume
with such Relations; I shall only give an instance or two, in our own Country.
And whereas it has been pleaded to the prejudice of the Magistrates, who have
exemplarily punished such Enthusiasts, that they were distracted Persons, and
therefore deserved pity, rather than such severe Penalties; I do confess, that
in some of them, as it is said of Swinckfield, there wanted Caput regulatum, a
staid Head, but in the most there was wanting Cor bonum, a good Heart, and a
humble Spirit: As in Coppinger, and Arthington, who came into Cheap Side, and
getting up into a Cart, proclaimed, that they had News from Heaven, which was,
That Hacket their Prophet did represent Christ, and was partaker of his
glorious Body, in his principal Spirit; and that they two were his Prophets,
the one of Mercy, the other of Judgment, being called and sent of God, to
assist him in his great work; when they were apprehended, and examined by
Persons of Honor, and of great Learning, they gave ready and pertinent answers
to every question, upon which they were examined; by which it appeared, they
were under no other distraction, than what a violent Prosecution of the
Discipline, which they contended for, had betrayed them into. About the same
time, one Peter Bourchet was possessed with an Opinion, that it was lawful to
slay any, that did oppose the Evangelical truth, (as he called his own fancy)
and because Sir Christopher Hatton, one of the Privy Council, was adjudged an
Adversary thereunto, he resolved to murder him, but by a mistake, meeting with
the famous Sir John Hawkins, he struck at him, for which he was committed to
the Tower, and being there, finds an opportunity, with a Firebrand taken from
the Hearth, to knock out the Brains of one of his Keepers, for which being
condemned of Murder, he had his right Hand cut off, and dyed on the Gallows,
in a sullen and silent humor. See Cambden's Annals, p. 242.

You see then, that there were just and necessary causes, of making severe Laws
against such practices, and by an Act of Parliament, for restraining the
Queen's Majesty's Subjects in obedience, it was forbidden, under the Penalty of
Banishment, that any Person should be present at, or persuade others to those
unlawful Meetings or Conventicles. The Primitive Church did the like, as in the
Canons of the Apostles it was ordained: Can. 30.
That if any Presbyter contemning his own Bishop, shall make a separate
Congregation, and erect another Altar, his own Bishop not being condemned of
any irreligion, or injustice, let him be deposed, as one that is an ambitious,
and a tyrannical Person, and in like manner, all that adhere to him; and let
the lay People be excommunicated after the Bishop's third Admonition.

When Eusebius Bishop of Sebastia, cast off the Discipline of the Church, and
contemned the Presbyters, because they were married, and under pretense of
greater strictness of life, fasted on the Lord, days, and kept private
Meetings, drawing away Women from their Husbands, and both Men and Women to
greater impurities, the Bishops met in the Council of Gangra, Anno 325. and
there agreed, That if any one should teach, that the House of God is to be
despised, and the Assemblies that are held in it, Let him be accursed; If any
shall take upon him, to teach privately at home, and making light of the
Church, shall do those things, which belong only to the Church, without the
presence of the Priest, and approbation of the Bishop, let him be accursed. And
as all good Men cannot but bewail those great mischiefs and desolations, which
by the practices of such outrageous and disorderly Persons, have in all Ages
invaded the Church of God; so they ought highly to commend, and submit unto
such wholesome Laws, as have been made by their pious and prudent Governors, to
stop the beginnings of such evils; seeing as the Scripture, and experience do
teach us, Wicked Men and Seducers do wax worse and worse. And thus I have in
some measure proved my Position. That Sensuality is the Ground of Separation.
And now that you know the Men and their communication; I shall apply all in the
words of St. Peter: Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, 1
Pet. 3.17.
beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: In which words you have first a Caution, then a Direction.

The Caution, to beware of being seduced by the Errors of wicked Men. And your
knowledge of the sin, and danger of such Errors, will certainly be a
preservative against them; for as Solomon says, in vain is a snare laid in the
sight of any Bird, and you will easily baffle all the arguments and
expectations of such Sophisters, if you consider what conclusions must
necessarily follow upon their premises: They tempt you to Division and
Separation, (that is) without any just or warrantable cause to leave a Church
of Christ, rightly established in all Points of Faith and a Holy Life, wherein
you have all, and only that allowed for Doctrine, which the Scripture
approves, and for Government and Worship, nothing but what in the judgment,
and by the practice of the Church of God in all Ages, has been determined to
be agreeable to the Scripture. I demand therefore, First, What real evil shall
you avoid by leaving the Church, and adhering to Conventicles? Is there less
pride and contention, less hypocrisy and dissimulation, less censuring and
slandering, less lying and defrauding amongst them, than amongst us? Or
(Secondly) What real grace or virtue is practiced by them more, than by the
Conformists, if at least they conform in heart and life, as well as in
profession, to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, under which we may be
as piously devout toward God, as just and righteous to Men, as sober and
temperate in respect of our selves, as liberal in works of Charity, as our
Humane infirmities will permit; and in a word, Whatsoever things are true,
honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report, Phil. 4.8.
whatever is virtuous and praise worthy, these things you may both learn, and
receive, and hear, and see in all the Doctrines, Constitutions and Offices of
the Church. If you respect the means of saving knowledge, where are the
Scriptures more frequently read? more plainly and solidly expounded? more
rationally and affectionately applied, than by the Ministers of the Church,
whose works praise them in all the Churches of God?

Now as there is no real good to be obtained, or evil to be avoided by
deserting the Church: So in the next place, consider the many real evils that
will necessarily follow upon Separation. First, The great scandal we bring upon
our Religion. 2ly, The great advantages we give to the enemes of it. 3ly, The
hard censures and evil thoughts of the whole Church which we desert. 4ly, Our
own great sin: for in the words of Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 62.
It is to rent and wound the Great and Glorious Body of Christ, and as much as
in us lies, to destroy it; and while we pretend Peace, to maintain War; to
strain at a Gnat, and swallow Camels. Nor can any Reformation that may be hoped
for, expiate the sin, Mr. Edwards reckons 180. Errors.
or outweigh the mischief of Schism. The experience which the Assembly noted
on Philippians 1.1. in the Preface to their Annotations, 1645. should persuade
us; And Mr. Case tells the Parliament, That the Errors in the Bishops Days were
but trifles, but now the Nation is filled with the Doctrine of Devils.
for when Religion is by choice or force propagated in corners, (then say they)
Many Heretical Doctrines are hatched and preached, and printed too, which had
not been conceived or published, if the Authors had continued in the Public
Assemblies: And every one knows it to be a truth, which Master Cawdrey
observes, Cawdrey contra Owen, p. 14.
that Toleration had done more hurt in Seven Years, than was done under
Conformity in Seventy Years before. The Rule which the Spirit of God gives us
for finding out a false Prophet, will be of very good use to discover a
Separatist: If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and
gives thee a sign, Deutr. 13. 1, 2, 3.
or a wonder: and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee, saying, let us go after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us
serve them: Thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, or that
Dreamer of Dreams, for the Lord your God proves you to know whether you love
the Lord your God, with all your Heart, and with all your Soul. If the end be
Idolatry, or any certain impiety, to which false Prophets do entice you,
although they appear as Angels of Light, Men of wonderful knowledge and
holiness, yet are they but Messengers of Satan, by whom God does prove you,
whether you are well rooted and grounded in the true faith and love of God and
his Commandments, and are not with every blast of wind to be turned out of the
way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in, v. 5. The ways of God are
ways of Peace and Holiness, but to despise the Churches of God, to disobey our
Governors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, to hate and slander our
Brethren, to slight the Discipline, and neglect the Prayers of the Church, and
our Lord's Prayer too, has been ever in the Church of God accounted Schism,
and that Schism Damnable.

And because it is a Rule among the Ancients, that to reduce Schisms and
Heresies to their beginning is a means to refute them; I entreat you but to
look so far back, as the Year 1640. before which time our Union at home made us
a terror to our Enemies, and the glory of the Protestant Churches abroad; and
to give me your impartial Opinion of those Men, who under pretense of reforming
us in Doctrine and Worship, and taking off evil Counselors from the King,
(than whom, if any Christian Prince had fewer, yet none was less influenced by
them, to the prejudice either of the Church or State) did involve us under such
a Deluge of Confusion and Bloodshed, Rebellion and Irreligion, for Twenty Years
together. I grant that many of them might be Men of good affections, that never
thought of the events that would follow, but then they should have thought of
those Duties that were incumbent on them; To fear God and the King, and not to
meddle with them that were given to change: especially when they saw they were
actually engaged in a most Unnatural War. Let the Histories of Presbytery and
Independency be read over, and then tell me, if the same things were to be
acted over again, Could you with a good Conscience be Actors in such a Tragedy?
Let me tell you then, that it is your duty to beware of such Agents and
Counsels, as do tend to the like Disorders and Confusions, lest notwithstanding
the fair pretenses of Men of the same spirit, (and it may be of some of the
same Men) notwithstanding the good intentions that you now profess, which may
make you abhor such practices, as much as Hazael did, ( Is thy Servant a Dog, 2
Kings 8.13.
that he should do such things?) you be by degrees drawn to the like impieties.
For Schism is a fruitful evil; it is always laboring in the birth of other
mischiefs: they that separate, fly from the Church, as the Parthians from
their Enemies, still shooting back their Arrows, and maintaining War against
them: but they fight against a Rock, under which they shall one day fall and
perish. The Heathen had this Notion of their Jupiter, Quos perdere vult
dementat prius. Spiritual infatuation is the forerunner of Destruction: He
that is perverse in his way despises the Lord; Pro. 14.2.
for as much as he despises that reproof and instruction, which God sends him
for his amendment: This is a Brand of the Sons of Belial, that are marked out
for destruction, as the Sons of Eli, They hearkened not to the voice of their
Father, 1 Samuel 2.25
because the Lord would stay them.

2ly, For Counsel and Direction, St. Peter exhorts us to grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is Sensuality that is
the cause of Separation, (viz) pride and Ambition, Envy and Uncharitableness,
ignorance and negligence to be well informed concerning our duties. Mortify
therefore these and all other fleshly lusts: study Christ and him crucified,
that you may, Phil. 3.9, 10.
as St. Paul did, know him and the power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death. No such
charm against Separation as a true mortification of fleshly lusts and desires.
Study therefore to exceed others in Humility and Charity, in a meek and quiet
spirit, which in the sight of God, is of more esteem, than all those furious
Zealots, that know not what spirit they are of. And in the words of St. Jude,
build up your selves on your most holy faith; the Doctrine of Christ dying for
your sins, and rising for your Justification, and still making Intercession for
you: In his Name pray unto God, with such fervor and hope, faith, humility,
and perseverance, that you may be kept in the love of GOD, and a comfortable
expectation of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life.

The wifest and best of us are but Men, compassed about with many infirmities,
what through ignorance and interest, passion and prejudice, in many things we
offend all; and all the means and diligence we can use, without the special
grace of God, will be too little to undeceive us, and set us in the right way,
which grace he has promised only to the humble and meek: Psalm. 25.9.
The meek he will guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way. It Is
the first Lesson that Christ teaches his Disciples, and that by his Example,
as well as Precept; Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; Mat. 11.29
and ye shall find rest unto your Souls. I conclude with those Pathetical
persuasions of Saint Paul, which I beseech God to imprint upon all our hearts:
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, Phil. 2.3.
if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;
Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better than themselves. And again, Put on, Col. 3.12.
as the Elect of God, holy and beloved bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another; if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so
also do ye; And, above all things put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness, and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye
are called in one body, and be ye thankful.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce this Treatise of Schism was in the Press, I met with a Book of
Miscellanies under Mr. Hales's Name, in which was a TRACT concerning Schism,
much applauded by the Separatists, both Schism and Heresy, p. 191.
to be (as he calls them) but two Theological Scarcrows: but upon my first
reading it, I apprehended it to be so far from being unanswerable, that it did
sufficiently confute it self, which I doubt not will appear to all judicious
Readers, upon this Analysis of the TRACT, which follows.

Q. WHat is the benefit of Communion?

Answ. Communion is the strength and ground of all society, Sacred and Civil:
whoever therefore causes a breach, if in civil occasions, is guilty of
Sedition, or Rebellion; if in Ecclesiastical differences, is guilty of Schism;
so that Schism is an Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition is a Lay-schisme, p.
193.

Q. What is the definition of Schism?

Answ. Schism is an unnecessary separation of Christians, p. 195.
from that part of the visible Church of which they were once Members.

Q. When is Separation necessary?

Answ. Separation is then necessary, when nothing will save us from the guilt
of Conscience, but open separation, p. 195.

Q. When is Schism complete?

Answ. These two things make Schism complete. First, The choice of a Bishop in
opposition to the former. 2ly, The erecting a new Church and Oratory, p. 196.
for the dividing Party to meet in publicly. As in the late famous
controversy in Holland, de Praedestinatione, as long as the disagreeing
Parties went no further than disputes, the Schism was unhatched; but as soon
as one Party swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a
Church (by putting a new Pulpit in it) for the separating Party to meet in,
what before was a Controversy became a formal Schism, p. 197.

Q. What is the danger of Schism?

Answ. What the Ancients spoke by way of censure of Schism in general, is most
true, (and they spoke most strange things of it) for they saw, p. 198.
that unadvisedly, and upon fancy, to break the knot of union betwixt man and
man (especially among Christians, upon whom the tie of love and communion does
especially rest) was a crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing absolves a Man
from the guilt of it, but true and unpretended Conscience. And p. 192. Heresy
and Schism are things of great moment, the one offending against Truth, the
other against Charity, and both are deadly.

Q. Was the Schism of the Donatists any way excusable?

Answ. No, they were complete Schismatics, upon the grounds before mentioned,
p. 196.
nor was there any necessary cause for their Separation, for the occasion of
the Schism was an Opinion, that where good and bad were mixed, there could be
no Church, p. 205.
by reason of pollution evaporating (as it were) from sinners, which blasted
the righteous, and made all unciean, whereas in his Congregations, he pretended
that wicked persons found no shelter, p. 206.

Q. How was this Schism of the Donatists refuted?

Answ. By this one maxim of St. Augustine (which was irrefragably asserted)
Vnitatem Ecclesiae per totum orbem dispersae propter nonnullorum peccata non
esse deserendam, That the unity of the Catholic Church is not to be forsaken,
for the sins of some that are within it, p. 206.

Q. Though in this Schism the Donatist was the Schismatic, p. 208.
yet might not any one communicate with them, if occasion so required? if so be
they did not flatter them in their Schism; for why might it not be lawful to
go to Church with the Donatist, if occasion so required since neither Nature,
nor Religion suggest the contrary? why may I not be present at such public
Meetings as pretend Holiness, p. 209.
so there be nothing done but what true Devotion and Piety brook? Yea, why may
I not go to an Arian Church, if occasion require, p. 215.
so there be no Arianism expressed in the Liturgy?

Answ. 1. You may not communicate with such, because of the danger of Schism
before mentioned. 2ly, Because it is not lawful, no not for prayer, hearing,
conference, or any other religious office whatsoever, for People to Assemble,
otherwise than by public order is allowed; for, why should Men desire to do
that suspiciously, in private, which may be performed warrantably in public?
p. 229, 230.

Q. But what if they to whose care the execution of the public service is
committed, do some things unseemly, suspicious, or unlawful? p. 209.
if their Garments be censured, as, or indeed be superstitious? what if the
Gesture of Adoration be used at the Altar? what if the Homilist or Preacher
deliver any Doctrine, of the truth of which we are not well persuaded?

Answ. Yet for all this, we may not separate, except we be constrained to bear
a part in them our selves: p. 210.
The Priests under Eli had so ill demeaned themselves about the daily
Sacrifice, that they made it to stink, yet the People refused not to come to
the Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifices to the Priests; for in Schisms
which concern fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusal of Communion, but
only the requiring of the execution of some unlawful or suspected Act.

Q. What may we do when some Persons in a Church teach erroneous Doctrines, p.
214.
suppose of Arius and Nestorius, concerning the Trinity, or the Person of our
Savior?

Answ. What to do in this case is not a point of any great depth of
understanding to discover, p. 215.
so be it distemper and partiality do not intervene. I do not see, that
Opinionum varietas and Opinantium unitas, are (...), or that Men of different
Opinions in Christian Religion, may not hold communion (in Sacris) in the
public Worship: (This Argument holds, a fortiori, if I may keep communion with
such as teach false Doctrines, much more with such as practice only suspected
Ceremonies.) p. 226.

Q. What is your Opinion of Conventicles?

Answ. It evidently appears that all Meetings upon unnecessary occasions of
Separation, are to be so styled; p. 227.
so that in this sense a Conventicle is nothing else but a Congregation of
Schismatics.

Q. Is not this name sometime fixed upon good and honest Meetings? p. 227.

Answ. It is, and that perchance, not without good reason; For first, it has
been at all times confessed necessary, that God should have, p. 227.
not only inward and private devotion, when Men either in their Hearts, or
Closets, or within their private Walls, pray, praise, confess, and acknowledge;
but that all these things should be done in public, by troops and shoals of
Men, from whence proceeded public Temples, Altars, forms of Service, appointed
Times, and the like, which are required for open Assemblies.

Q. What is the reason of the severe censures and Laws against private Meetings?

Answ. When it was espied that ill affected persons abused private Meetings,
whether religious, p. 228.
or civil, to evil ends, religiousness to gross impiety (and the Meetings of
Christians under Pagan Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in
open view, were charged with foul imputations, as by the report of Christians
themselves it plainly appears: as also civil Meetings under pretense of
Friendship, and neighbourly visits, sheltered treasonable attempts against
Princes, and Common-weals) Hence both Church and State joined, p. 229.
and jointly gave order for forms, times, places of public Concourse, whether
for civil or religious ends; and all other Meetings whatsoever besides those,
of which both time and place were limited, they censured for routs, and riots,
and unlawful Assemblies in the State, and in the Church, for Conventicles.

Q. Is it not lawful then, for Prayer, hearing, conference, and other religious
Offices, p. 229.
for People to Assemble, otherwise than by public Order is allowed?

Answ. No; for why should Men desire to do that suspiciously in private, which
warrantably may be performed in public, p. 230.

Q. I pray you Sir, What general Rules are fit to be observed for the
discovering and avoiding of Schism.

Answ. Take heed of entertaining scruples of Conscience, about things of little
moment, for when scruples of Conscience began to be made, or pretended, then
Schisms began to break in, p. 217.

Q. What other Rule is necessary to be observed?

Answ. That you do not endeavor to advance one Bishop against another, (much
more a Presbyter against the Bishop) which in St. Cyprian's language, p. 222.
is Erigere Altar contra Altar, to set up Altar against Altar, to which he
imputes the Original of all Church disorders, and if you read him, you would
think he thought no other Church-tumult to be a Schism, but this; For the
general practice of the Church, p. 221.
was, never to admit more than one Bishop at once in one See, but it fell out
among the Ancients, sometime by occasion of difference in Opinion, sometimes
because of difference among those who were interessed in the choice of Bishops,
that two Bishops, and sometime more were set up, and all Parties striving to
maintain their own Bishop, made themselves several Congregations and Churches,
each refusing to participate with others. p. 223.
And seeing it is a thing very convenient for the Peace of the Church, to have
but one Bishop in a See, at once; Their punishment sleeps not, who
unnecessarily or wantonly go about to infringe it.

FINIS.
MISERICORDIAM VOLO: OR, THE Pharisees LESSON.

SHOWING The Impiety and Unreasonableness of contending for outward Forms and
Ceremonies, to the Violation of Obedience, Charity, and the Public Peace.

Hand dubitem affirmare eos qui falluntur and tamen fraternam communionem cum
aliis retinere parati sunt, esse coram Deo magis excusatos, quam qui veras
opiniones in iis controversiis tuentur, and mutuam communionem cum aliis
Ecclesiis etiam desiderantibus, aspernantur.

Davenant. pro pace Ecclesiae, p. 24. LONDON. Printed for Walter Kettilby at
the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

THE PREFACE Concerning the Ceremonies of the Church.
IT is granted by all sober Protestants, that the Church has power of making
Canons and Constitutions, for Decency and Order in the public worship of God;
and not only to prescribe the necessary circumstances of time and place; but
also to continue and establish those ancient rites of the Christian Church,
which were practiced in the primitive times, and are in themselves of an
indifferent nature; which authority of the Church was asserted in the Augustan
confession, and particularly by Mr. Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. S. 27. See T.
C. l. 1. p. 27.
and other worthy persons in the Reformation. Which our Reformers also did
assume to themselves, as is declared in the 20th. Article; and has been
practiced and defended against all Dissenters, Acts 15.28. 1 Corinthians. 11.16.
as well by Scripture, as by Antiquity, and right reason: and therefore those
persons that condemn the Ceremonies of the Church, which the Martyrs and
Confessors of our Church, did establish upon mature deliberation, do reflect
too severely upon those Worthies, who with equal prudence and constancy, did
commend them to us. And the Royal Martyr was so tender of their reputation,
Exact collect. p. 26.
that in his answer to the Parliaments Remonstrance, he promises to reform the
Ceremonies with these cautions. 1. That the Reformation were pursued with such
modesty and submission, that the quiet of the Kingdom were not disturbed: 2.
Nor the decency and comeliness of God's service discountenanced: 3. Nor the
pious, sober, and devout actions of those reverend persons, who were the first
laborers in the blessed Reformation, be scandalized and defamed. And some that
are not friends to Ceremonies, have vindicated those persons in this respect.
Saines care for Church Communion. p. 334.
What shall we say of reverend Ridley, (says Master Crofton) hearty Hooper,
sincere Sanders, trusty Tailor, and most brave Bradford, with the cloud of
Witnesses that served God by the Liturgy to their last breath, even in their
most personal and dying devotions, and suffered also for so doing, having the
same objected against them by their Persecutors, and also pressed the people,
and their choicest friends, to adhere to it, and serve God by it. And however
some succeeding Christians have desired some reformation of the Liturgy, they
have constantly, and with due devotion served God in the use thereof, and
defended the same against the censorious Brownists, and rigid Separatists. --
And the first reformation had the perfection of substance, though not of
degrees, Gods true worship was restored to a right order of ministration, the
Ordinances of God did then truly exist, as to their substance, and salvably as
to their Ministerial mode toward the people; otherwise those holy Men had not
wherein to rejoice before God and the World. And certainly they did not entayl
a Popish, Superstitious, or Idolatrous Yoke (as some call the Ceremonies) on
the Church of God. Mr. Cartwright was one of the first Opposers of the
Ceremonies, and instead of acquainting you with the Answers of Archbishop
Whitgift, and judicious Hooker, to his arguments, it will be sufficient to say,
that Mr. Cartwright himself has said enough to confure the dissenters of our
times, for first he opposed them, only as inconvenient, not unlawful: and
persuaded Ministers rather to wear the Garments than cease their Ministry, 2d.
Reply. p. 262.
and in his Evangelical Harmony, on Luke 22. ( a v. 14. ad 19.) he says, that
kneeling in the receiving of the Sacrament being incommodious in its own
nature, and made more incommodious by Popish Superstition, p. 877. Edit. ult.
is not so to be rejected, that for the sake thereof we should abstain from the
Sacrament, because the thing is not in its own nature unlawful -- And what his
judgment was in the case of Separation, appears in a Letter of his to Mr.
Harrison lately published: And in another Letter to his Sister Anne Stubs,
reproving her for stumbling at this stone, that because of some defects in a
Church, instead of concluding that Church to be imperfect, she concluded it to
be no Church. The wise and holy Mr. Hildersham, Bradshaw, Paget, Ball, Gifford,
and other learned Nonconformists of old did foresee and greatly fear this
Spirit (says Mr. Baxter. Cure of Divisions. p. 188.
) But this Spirit being very troublesome and pragmatical, the most learned of
the dissenters did always endeavor to moderate it, as well by their quiet and
peaceable practice, as by their learned and earnest arguments, and exhortations
to unity in the public Worship. And accordingly when King James, shortly after
his entry into the Throne, had appointed the conference at Hampton Court, where
Doctor Raynolds, Dr. Chaderton, Dr. Spark, and others were appointed to
discourse the matters in controversy, with some Episcopal Divines: They were
so far from affirming the ceremonies to be unlawful, that they would not have
it known that any of that party were so weak, as to affirm it; and Dr. Raynolds
was so far satisfied, that before his death he solemnly declared himself to be
of the communion of the Church of England, and desired absolution according to
the form appointed in the Liturgy. About this time Bishop Morton, Doctor
Burges, Mr. Sprint, and others did most rationally, and irrefragably assert the
innocence of the Ceremonies, and the necessity of the Ministers conforming
rather than to suffer deprivation, and of the peoples, rather than to be
deprived of the Ordinances of Christ. I intend not a History of the
transactions in this business, and therefore shall only give you a brief
account of it, from the beginning of our unhappy troubles. The Long Parliament
in their Petition, and Remonstrance joined with it, December 15. 1642. inform
us of some Malignant parties, whose proceedings evidently appeared to be,
mainly, for the advantage and increase of Popery, and were composed, set up,
and acted, by the subtle practice of the Jesuits, and other Engineers and
Factors for Rome, who had so far prevailed, as to corrupt diverse of the Bishops
and others, in prime places of the Church, and p. 20. they intimate, that
Idolatry, Exact Collect.
and Popish Ceremonies were introduced to the Church, by command of the
Bishops; and the people were not only debarred the Church, but expelled the
Kingdom. And that those were counted fittest for Ecclesiastical preferment, and
soonest attained it, who were most officious in promoting Superstition, most
virulent in railing against Godliness and honesty. We desire (say they) to
unburthen the Consciences of men, of needless and Superstitious Ceremonies,
suppress Innovations, and take away the monuments of Idolatry. To this His
Majesty of Blessed Memory answered thus. The fears for Religion, may happily be,
not only as it may be innovated by the Romish party, but as it is accompanied
with some Ceremonies, at which some tender Consciences really are, or pretend
to be scandalized. Concerning Religion, as there may be any suspicion of
favor, or inclination to the Papists, we are willing to declare to all the
World, that as we have been from our childhood brought up in, and practiced the
Religion now established, so it is well known, we have (not contented simply
with the principles of our Education) given a good proportion of our time and
pains, to the examination of the grounds of this Religion, as it is different
from that of Rome, and are from our Soul so fully satisfied, and assured that
it is the most pure, and agreeable to the Sacred Word of God, of any Religion
now practiced in the Christian world, that as we believe we can maintain the
same by unanswerable Reasons, so we hope we should readily seal to it by the
effusion of our Blood, if it pleased God to call us to that Sacrifice. And
therefore nothing can be so acceptable to us, as any proposition which may
contribute to the advancement of it here, or the propagation of it abroad,
being the only means of drawing down the Blessings of God upon our selves and
this Nation. And we have been extremely unfortunate if this Profession of ours
be wanting to our people -- For differences among our selves, for matters
indifferent in their own nature, we shall, in tenderness to any number of our
loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the advice of our Parliament, that
some Law may be made, for the exemption of tender Consciences from punishment,
or persecution, for such Ceremonies, and in such cases, which by the judgment
of most men are held to be matters indifferent, and of some to be absolutely
unlawful. (Provided etc. as before mentioned, under the three cautions.) To
that clause which concerns corruptions (as you style them) in Religion, in
Church Government, and in Discipline, and the removing such unnecessary
Ceremonies, as weak Consciences might check at: That for any illegal
Innovations which may have crept in, we shall willingly concur in the removal
of them, but we are very sorry to hear in such general terms, corruption in
Religion objected, since we are persuaded in Conscience, that no Church on
Earth can be found, that professes the true Religion with more purity of
Doctrine, than the Church of England does, nor where the Government and
Discipline are jointly more beautified and free from Superstition, than as they
are here established by Law, which by the Grace of God we will with constancy
maintain, while we live, in their purity and glory, not only against all
invasions of Popery, but also from the irreverence of those Schismatics and
Separatists, wherewith of late this Kingdom and City abound, to the great
dishonor and hazard of Church and State. Doubtless they had very much of the
nature of the Adder in them, who instead of being charmed into a quiet and meek
submission by these most pious, gracious, sincere Reasons and condescensions,
did precipitate themselves, and the three Nations to those horrible confusions,
which that Prophetic, as well as Royal Spirit foretold, for immediately after,
the people of the Land being frighted by frequent remonstrances of fears and
jealousies of Popery and Superstition, run themselves into certain snares as to
their Estates, by the insatiable oppression of their new Masters, and their
Lives, by their want of Loyalty, and as to their Consciences by illegal Oaths
and Covenants, till the beauty of Religion was destroyed for want of Order and
Reverence, and the substance of it devoured by Sects and Heresies of all kinds.
And this mostly for Reformation of Ceremonies, for the Doctrine needed it not.
I do even tremble to relate in a corner, what a Preacher who was then of great
repute, spoke in the most eminent meeting of the Nation (the present
Parliament, Anno 1656.) in these words. Worthy Patriots, you that are Rulers,
in this present Parliament -- Praised be God, who has delivered us from
Prelatical innovations, Altargenu-flexions and cringings, with crossings, and
all that Popish trash, and trumpery; and truly, I speak no more, than what I
have often thought, and said -- The removal of these insupportable burdens,
countervails for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late
distractions; nor did I as yet ever hear of any godly men, that desired (were
it possible) to purchase their friends, or money again, at so dear a rate, as
the return of these, to have those Soul-burthening Antichristian yokes imposed
upon us; if any such here be, I am sure, that desire is no part of their
godliness, and I profess my self in that, to be none of the number.] Can any
that bears the name of a Christian hear such things without horror, especially
when he shall seriously consider what a deluge of blood had overflown the land,
The King being Murdered about Eight years before, and the Sword, and the Axe
having glutted themselves with the Blood of many Noble Heroes, and learned
Clergymen? And besides the many thousands that dyed for their Religion, and
Loyalty, there were very many that perished also in Rebellion, against God and
the King. He had little charity for his Brethren, that would not on such easy
conditions, redeem them from the grave and hell; if we may argue from a
Parable, Dives had more charity in that place of Torment, than was in this
Preachers breast, and if this be a mark of godliness, Satan needs not to be
transformed, to pass for an Angel of light, sure I am nothing can be more
opposite to this Evangelical truth, which the Text that is before us commends,
(viz.) of preferring mercy before Sacrifice. I commend it therefore to your
serious consideration, whether those persons, who so pertinaciously insist upon
the abolishing of our Ceremonies, as to increase our divisions, and engage us
again in Blood and confusion, are not acted by a like Spirit of perverseness,
that delighting it self to live in the fire of contention takes pleasure in
drawing others and tormenting them in the like flames.

At the happy return of our Dear Sovereign, who after the example of his
Martyred Father, was careful to see the Church established in its beauty, we
found this evil Spirit so violently to oppose as if it had taken seven worse
than it self, to secure the possession which it had in the hearts of the
people, being in danger of being cast out: then was Nehustan sent abroad to
persuade the people, that the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and other things used in the
Church of England, ought not to be imposed, nor retained, but utterly
extirpated, and laid aside, and that every one in his place ought to do his
part to the abolishing of it, and not sit still in the midst of such
defilements and snares, but discover their hatred of them, decline their use,
and endeavor the rooting of them out; and all upon this ground, that things
which have been abused in false Worship must be laid aside. Gilaspy.
Then comes another Boreas from the North (whence most of our evils came)
called a Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies, which he explains to
be, a contending for the purity of Christ, against the corruptions of
Antichrist, and this Spirit, as if he were indeed of the triumphant party,
leads in chains no meaner persons, than Hooker, Morton, Burges, Sprint,
Paybody, Andrews, Saravia, Tilen, Spotswood, Lindsey, Forbes, etc. who were all
particularly confuted, and vanquished by him, as he boasted. But this pitiful
man dealt very mercifully with them, for their chains were such as fell off of
their own accord: and so do those viperous appellations which he endeavors to
fix on the Church, and her practices, calling them Popish, Antichristian, Idle
and Idolized, Prefaco, p. 6.
for thus he bespeaks the Church of Scotland: Oh thou fairest among Women, what
have thou to do with the inveagling appurtenances and habiliments of Babylon
the whore etc. But his Arguments are as impotent as his Obloquy, the naming of
which is confutation enough, at least, if the Reader will but turn his
negatives into affirmatives, and his affirmatives into negatives, the weakness
of the man, and his manner of arguing will be manifest to all.

As First, when he says we are not to account the Ceremonies matters of small
importance] contrary to the sense of ours, and all the Reformed Churches which
account them things indifferent and not worth the contending for. Secondly, Let
not (says he) the pretense of peace and unity cool your fervor, or make you
spare to oppose your selves to those idle and Idolized Ceremonies] contrary to
the Text, and to Romans 14.17. Thirdly, beware also you be not deceived with a
pretense of the Churches consent, and of Uniformity, as well with the ancient
Church as with the now Reformed Churches in the forms and customs of both] as
if the consent of the Ancient Church before Popery, and all the Reformed since,
were one of the snares to be avoided. Fourthly, moreover, because the foredeck
and hindeck of all our opposites probations, do resolve and rest finally into
the authority of a law -- therefore we certiorate you with Calvin, that Si
acquievistis imperio, pessimo laqueo vos induistis] as if there were no
difference between the establishing of iniquity by a Law (of which Galvin
speaks) and the laws of our Superiors for -- decency and order. Fifthly, do not
reckon it enough to bear within the enclosure of your secret thoughts, a
certain dislike of the Ceremonies, and other abuses now set on foot; Contrary
to S. Paul, To. 14.22
except by profession and action you evidence the same, and so show your Faith
by your fact: principally prayers and supplications are the weapons of our
Spiritual warfare, but as they ought to be done, so the atchieving of other
secundary means, ought not to be left undone. These are the chief of his
arguments, which he sums up in the Epistle dedicated to all and every one in
the Reformed Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland, and you may judge by
these, of the validity of the whole Book which consists of 336. pages, wherein
is nothing objected, or asserted, but what has been abundantly confuted by
cogent reasons and arguments. After this Scottish Pipe march many English
Reformado's headed by Dr. Owen, whose chief objection is, that the ceremonies
are unwritten and unscriptural inventions of Men, Evangelical love. p. 212.
and that Christ's warrant and authority must be shown, for what is imposed in
the worship of God. The ridiculousness of this objection has been clearly
demonstrated by the Reverend Bishop Sanderson, and others. Then Mr. Hickman
sends forth his Apology, and his Bonasus Vapulans, who inveighs against the
ceremonies, especially for being significant, and instanceth in the sign of the
Cross, which is made a sign of dedication to God, in Token that, etc. Whereas
others of his party do oppose them, because they are not significative enough.

To him succeeds the Author of the Rehearsal, who says that the Conformists
defining a Sacrament to be an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace (Omitting the chief part of the definition [ viz. ordained by
Christ himself]) do make the ceremonies of a Sacramental nature. To these the
learned Ritchel in his Tract de Ceremoniis, gives satisfactory answers to all
unprejudiced Readers, and Durel, Parker Mr. Calvin and Mr. Baxter have done the
same. 41.61. p. 90, 454.
, and others have done no less. It will be but labor in vain, to repeat here
all the solid replies to those empty objections. One such argument from
Scripture, as our Savior urges in the Text, against those that on pretense of
contending for their own, against the established rites and customs of the
Church, do violate the laws of Obedience, Love, and Peace, will silence them
all, if they be not possessed with a spirit of contradiction. For if we should
suppose that the rites and ceremonies were as expressly set down in the Gospel
to be used, or for born in the public worship of God, as the rites and
circumstances concerning Sacrifices, were in the ceremonial law: yet as the
Sacrifices themselves, much more the modes of preparing and offering them,
might be used or omitted, for the performance of moral duties; so doubtless, if
things of an external, ceremonial nature, had been commanded, or forbidden in
express terms, they might yet be observed, or omitted, as the substantial
service of God, and obedience to his greater commands, for charity and peace
might be best performed. But these things being not determined particularly by
the Gospel, but left under general rules, for decency and order, may doubtless
be determined by a lawful authority, such as that of our Church, under our
Gracious Sovereign, is, and being so determined and imposed, there is an
advantage on the side of Authority, against a scrupulous conscience, which
ought to overruled the practice of such who are members of that Church. It
remains only that I endeavor to remove an objection or two against what is
here said.

Object. 1. If the ceremonies be things of such indifferency, Why do not they
who are in authority, dispense with the use of them, or totally lay them aside
for the sake of peace and unity?

Answ. 1. The Magistrate does but his duty in providing for the solemnity of
Divine worship, according to those general rules for decency and order
prescribed by the Apostles. 2ly, What the Magistrate does, is not only
agreeable to his private discretion and conscience, (for he practices the same
things that he prescribes) but according to the deliberate determinations of
the most wise and pious persons of the Nation, in their solemn Assemblies, and
doubtless (as St. Ambrose wrote to St. Augustine) if they had known any thing
better, they would have practiced that. 3ly, It will very much impair the
authority and reputation of Magistrates, so to comply with the importune
clamours of scrupulous persons, as to alter or abrogate their laws and
constitutions, as often as discontented or seduced persons shall demand it. And
though it be very uncertain that the craving party will be satisfied, when they
are indulged in all that they desire, yet it is certain that others will be
encouraged to make new supplications, and so create perpetual disturbances. And
the gratifying of a few weaklings, or malcontents, may give just cause of
offense, to a greater and better party, who are desirous to worship God in the
beauty of holiness, and are really grieved at the irreverence and disorders
which are, and have been too observable in the Meetings of dissenting parties.
4ly, Hereby the Magistrate should tacitly confess himself guilty of all those
accusations that have been charged upon him, and his predecessors, of imposing
unlawful, superstitious and Popish ceremonies, and persecuting the godly and
conscientious people, that could not conform to them. And 5ly, It would greatly
defame those worthy Martyrs, who not only thought fit to retain them, and gave
cogent arguments for the lawful use of them, but sealed the established worship
and discipline with their blood, not only in the Marian days, but under the
late Usurpation also. 6ly, It is an unreasonable thing, to demand that, which
they themselves would deny, if they were in the Magistrates place; for let me
ask them, whether they, being well persuaded of their discipline and order (
viz. that it is agreeable to the Word of God, to antiquity and reason) would
comply with the desires of dissenting parties, to make such alterations, as
should from time to time be required by others, contrary to their own judgments
and consciences? and to this we need no other answer, than the practice of the
Objectors, when they were in Authority. And who can doubt, but that they, who
being subjects, do assume to themselves a power of directing and prescribing to
the Magistrate, if they were in the Magistrates place would take it very ill to
be directed by their Subjects. 7ly, If the established ceremonies were removed,
others of a like nature would succeed, as unscriptural, and symbolical as they,
(such as sitting at the Sacrament, and lifting up the hands to Heaven,) it
being impossible almost to perform divine service, with any decency, without
such: and seeing that for many centuries of the Primitive Church, wherein other
ceremonies have been complained of by Saint Augustine, and others, no man ever
objected against the ceremonies which are used in our Church, and which were by
those famous Reformers and Martyrs retained in our Liturgy, it is no argument
of a meek or quiet spirit, to make objections, and cause divisions upon
pretense of Superstition in the Liturgy and ceremonies, and to expect that the
Church to salve their reputation should betray her own, and by abrogating her
sanctions, give the world more reason than yet has been given, to believe,
that the Church of England, even from the first Reformation, has been in a
dangerous error, and the Factions that opposed her, have had truth and justice
on their side.

In the second Objection, Papists and Sectaries jointly say, That other
dissenters may as well justify their separation from us, on pretense of the
Ceremonies retained by our Church, as we can justify our separation from the
Church of Rome by reason of the Ceremonies enjoined by her. To which I shall
not need to make any other answer, than a short appeal to the Consciences of
all unprejudiced persons, Whether the Church of England, requiring the use of
three Ceremonies declared by her self to be indifferent, and acknowledged by
her enemies not to be unlawful, can be thought by any sober person to give as
great, and just a cause of Separation from her, as all that load of
Superstition in the Church of Rome, of which St. Augustine complained in his
days, that the Jewish yoke was less heavy. To require Prayers in an unknown
Tongue, and to Saints and Angels is doubtless more offensive, than to use a
solemn plain form of words, taken either from the Scripture, or the ancient
Liturgies of the Church. What is the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, and kneeling
at the Sacrament for devotion, if compared to their Adoration of the
transubstantiated Host, worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, their
doctrines of the Popes Supremacy, and Infallibility, of Purgatory and
Indulgences, besides the innumerable ceremonies daily practiced by them? And as
the Sectaries will not condemn the Church of England, for receding from these
extremes, so neither can the Romanists blame her for want of moderation, in
retaining both purity of Doctrine, and decency of Worship, and abhorring those
other extremes of Sacrilege and profanation of holy things, of Rebellion and
Blood shed, though under pretense of Religion, wherewith with both they and the
Sectaries have defiled themselves. It was the pious care of the Pilots of our
Church, to conduct their Successors (between the two rocks of Superstition and
Idolatry on one hand, and irreverence and irreligion on the other) in the same
course in which (I hope we all believe) they themselves went to Heaven. And the
Governors of the Church have ever since taken caution of all its Ministers, not
to depart from the same, either in their public ministrations or doctrines, so
that the people need not doubt of their security in such good old ways,
wherein, as the ancient Martyrs did, they may even in the midst of outward
troubles, find peace in their Souls. But as for those that give themselves up
to the guidance of Unstable men, (who have degenerated not only from the
moderation, and charity of the ancient Nonconformists, but even from their own
principles, and neither are what they lately were, nor have given their
followers any security, that they will continue to be what now they are) They
must needs be like children, tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
There are perhaps some weak persons among us, whose Consciences are really
offended at the use of our Ceremonies, these we ought to regard so far, that if
it were in our power, we should rather omit the use of the Ceremonies, than
give them offense. But as we are forbid to give any offense to private persons,
so much more to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32.
by our disobedience. And whereas those that have real scruples of Conscience
will be diligent to enquire, and ready to receive satisfaction, from their more
learned Brethren, it cannot be presumed that there are many such among us, who
have the arguments and examples of the first Reformers and Martyrs, the sense
and Harmony of the Reformed Churches abroad, the deliberate constitutions of
the Church and State at home, to instruct them in the necessity of Obedience in
such indifferent things; and if weak persons will attend rather to the wicked
suggestions of a few discontented and turbulent men, Qui obstruunt pectora
hominum, ut ante nos odisse incipiant, quam nosse, that so Lord it over the
Consciences of weak persons, as to make them hate their Brethren, they know not
for what; if they neglect to hear the Church, and despise instruction, and
choose their own delusions, they are no longer weak Brethren, but resolved
adversaries, and of such Christ says, See Calv. Institut. l. 3. c. 19. S. 11.
Matthew. 15.14. Let them alone, they be blind Leaders of the blind. And that
most dissenters among us are of this kind, may appear from that ready
conformity, which they practiced before the late Indulgence, and since that
upon the test, which argues, their revolt to proceed from humor, or interest
rather than from Conscience. And as Mr. Calvin says, S. 13.
If such weak persons never grow so strong as to digest inoffensive and slender
food, it is certain they were never well nursed with Milk. I conclude therefore
with Peter Martyr: We must not always yield to the weak in things indifferent,
Loc. Com. 2. l. 4. c. 32.
but so long only, until they have been well instructed, after which, if they
are still scrupulous, their infirmity deserves no farther respect, for then
it is not Scandalum pusillorum sed Pharisaeorum. Calv. ubi supra S. 12.
And the Church has a necessity of vindicating her liberty when by the unjust
actions of false Apostles it is questioned and endangered in the Consciences of
her weak Children.

MISERICORDIAM VOLO: OR THE PHARISEES LESSON.
Matthew. ix. 13. But go ye, and learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and
not Sacrifice.


TO find the genuine sense of these words, it will be convenient to consult the
Context, from v. 9. where our Savior calls Matthew, a Publican of no small
reputation and wealth, to follow him who had not a house where to rest his
head. A strange effect (by virtue of two words) wrought on such a Subject; of
which we are obliged to say something, Ne arreptitiam and enthysiasticam
conversionem expectemus, (says Jansenius in Locum) lest we also should expect
(what too many pretend unto) an instantaneous and impulsive power to work
irresistibly upon us for our Conversion. Julian and Porphyry do both object
this very instance, to overthrow the credit of the Gospel, as if the whole
History of it were fictitious and false, or at least to prove that they were no
other than giddy and fanatic persons, that followed our Savior: In locum.
Of this S. Hierome takes notice, and answers thus, Fulgor ipse and Majestas
Divinitatis occultae, quae etiam in humana facie relucebat, ex primo ad se
videntes trahere poterat aspectu. Si enim in magnete, etc.

But this reply is not thought sufficient by learned Men, to silence the
objection, to which it is answered more satisfactorily, as follows. That S.
Matthew was brought up in the Jewish Religion, wherein that he was a good
proficient, appears, as from many passages in that Gospel, so especially by the
Hebrew Tongue, wherein he wrote it. In his time the coming of the Messiah was
generally expected by that Nation, and our Savior having entered on his public
Office, proclaims himself to be that Messiah, and proves it, not only by the
Divine Doctrine which he taught, but by the Miracles wrought by him, such as no
other Man did. One was newly effected on the Paralytick Man, v. 2d. whose
bodily Disease being cured by two words, Arise, and walk, was applied by our
Savior to persuade the People, that he could as easily and graciously pardon
their sins. Now St. Matthew living in Capernaum where this was done, could not
be ignorant of the fact, nor can we probably suppose him negligent, to certify
himself of the real truth of that and other Miracles, which our Savior wrought
in Capernaum; and comparing the predictions of the Prophets, (with which he was
well acquainted) with the several circumstances of the time and place, and the
mighty deeds of the promised Messiah, he was persuaded to believe him to be the
Christ; of which (it is also probable that) our Savior more fully convinced
him by some particular arguments, besides the general Doctrine which he taught
in that City, although only the close of that Discourse be recorded; so that he
was not converted as St. Paul was, by a Miracle from Heaven, but by the
ordinary rational method, by which it pleases God to draw other sinners to
himself, Opening their eyes, Acts 26.18.
and turning them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto
God. It is no Thus we find that Xenophon became the Disciple of Socrates; for
meeting him in a narrow passage, Xenophon asked him this short question, (...);
(i.) How the necessaries of life might be obtained? to which having answered
satisfactorily, he demanded again, (...): (i.) Where Men might be made good and
virtuous? Socrates answered, (...), (i.) Come and learn, whereupon Xenophon
followed him, and became his Disciple. Diog, Lacrtias in vita Xenophont.
wonder then, that Saint Matthew follows such an effectual call, and without
farther consultation with flesh and blood, leaves all and follows his Savior.
We say not then that our Conversion is the work of an instant, nor that it
comes with such observation, that we can ordinarily point at the time and
place, and say, Lo here, or lo there it was; the work is done gradually, and
not in a moment, rationally and not violently, in a soft calm voice, and not in
a Whirlwind, that carries us irresistibly, and in a manner unaccountable, to an
estate of grace. Whatever impulses some Men may have on their spirits, to
believe themselves thus sanctified, they will find at last that God was not in
that Wind, for although it be violent, it is not long, and though it might
shake the heart, yet it does not sweep it, it is a work of time and Christian
circumspection, to make our calling and election sure. St. Matthew having found
the Messiah, and become his Disciple, partly in gratitude to his Savior, and
partly in charity to his neighbors, that they might partake of the same grace
with himself, invites them to his House, where, as St. Mark says, Chapter 2.15. As
Jesus sat at meat, many publicans and sinners sat also with Jesus, and his
Disciples. The Pharisees observing our Savior too familiar (as they thought)
with Publicans and sinners, insinuate this objection to his Disciples, Why
eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? v. 11. To this our Savior
replyeth by a threefold Argument; The first of Reason, in a proverbial speech,
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick: The 2d. from
Scripture, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: The 3d. from the end of his
coming, which was, not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance. The
Text is the second of these Arguments, and I cannot omit a short remark upon
our Savior's Preface; for, whereas he conversed in a familiar manner with the
Publicans and Sinners, he turns off the Pharisees, who pretended to more
knowledge and piety than others, with an imputation of Ignorance, and
Uncharitableness, facessite, Get you home, and study your own duty to God, and
your neighbors, and trouble not your selves or others about such niceties of
the Law. Go learn what that means, etc. By Mercy we are to understand,
Quicquid humanitatis fratri debemus, all those offices of Humanity, or
Christianity, which we owe to our selves or Brethren, whether in respect of
their Souls, or Bodies, goods, or good names; and by Sacrifice (which being the
chief part of God's public Worship among the Jews, is put for the whole) Totum
externum cultum, all the Paedagogy of the Jewish Discipline, of which only the
Pharisees were zealous, to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: And now I shall need only to entreat you to read
over the whole Verse in Hosea 6.6. from whence the Text is taken, for a full
exposition of it, where it is thus written, I desired meroy, and not sacrifice,
and the knowledge of God, more than burnt-offerings; the latter part whereof,
being exegetical of the former gives us this sense, I desired mercy, more than
sacrifice, for the Hebrews wanting the terms of comparison, do use the
negative, (...) and (...) or the preposition (...) which signifies prae, as in
Proverbs 8.10. I desired instruction, (...) and not silver; and knowledge (...)
rather than fine gold: where the negative is not exclusive, but comparative,
for when two things come into comparison, it is usual with the Hebrews, to deny
of that which is less, and to affirm of that which is more excellent. And this
may help us to understand many places of Scripture, which without this
knowledge of the Hebrew Idiom, seem very difficult, as Jeremy 7.22. I spoke not
to your Fathers concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices, but this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall
be my People, which cannot be understood, as if God had not commanded them
concerning Sacrifices, but that he did not require them chiefly, or
principally; Obedience being the duty which was most aimed at: So in the New
Testament, John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: So St.
Paul says, Christ sent me not to baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17.
but to preach the Gospel; and Romans 9.16. It is not in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; where our endeavors are not
excluded, but the grace of God preferred. Sacrifice then, as it imports the
public worship of God, is not excluded. God that made our Souls and Bodies,
requires that we should glorify him in our Souls and in our Bodies which are
his, and that we may serve him acceptably, 1 Cor. 6, 20.
he requires outward reverence, Heb. 12* 28.
as well as inward fear; and therefore to forsake the assembling of our selves,
or in our Assemblies not to use that solemn Unity and reverence which may
manifest our awful apprehensions of that great Majesty, with whom we have to
do, and which may add a beauty to holiness, is a gloss besides this Text, as if
God had said, Sacrificium nolo, I care not whether ye worship me publicly or
no, whether it be at Jerusalem, or on mount Gerizim, whether ye keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, whether ye agree in those things which ye
shall ask, or pray pro and con, or whether ye pray sitting or standing by your
selves apart, as the Pharisee did, as if God were indeed the Author of
confusion, and not of Peace and Order.

Secondly, When God says Misericordiam volo, He does not exclude Justice, 1
Cor. 14.33.
for though his tender Mercy be over all his works, yet the Judge of all the
earth will do right. Mercy and Judgment were the two great strings that sounded
so harmoniously in David's Harp, Psalm. 101.1. God requires of us, first to do
justice, and then to love mercy, Micah 6.8. If private persons may defend their
just rights, without violation of the rules of Charity, much more may such as
are public persons, who may not show mercy, but with a Salvo to the public
peace and truth. By the Laws of God and man we are to give the precedence to
acts of Justice, before the works of Mercy. He does not hate his flesh, that
suffers a gangreen'd member to be cut off, I wish they were even cut off that
trouble you, Gal. 5.12.
says the meekest Apostle. When particular offenders grow obstinate, and
incorrigible, it is an act of Mercy to make them a Sacrifice to the public
justice. If the offense be not capital, his punishment may be a means to
reclaim him; if it be, the example of his sufferings may deter others from the
like sins, when they shall hear, Deutr. 13.11.
and fear and do no more so wickedly: and so it may prove a means of preventing
the judgments of God from falling down upon the Land. God himself will not be
merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59.5.
though he have said Misericordiam volo, I will have mercy, etc. Which words
commend unto us this seasonable and necessary instruction, that

Pharisaical temper, contrary to the Will of God.

For the proof of which position, I shall weigh Mercy and Sacrifice in the
balance of the Sanctuary, that you may clearly see of what different esteems
they are in the sight of God. And first, of Sacrifice, whose Antiquity might
justly gain a great veneration among that people; for though I do not think it
as ancient, as the state of Innocence, (as Bellarmine and Greg. de Valentia
(the better to countenance their Sacrifice of the Mass) do affirm, Bellar. de
missa l. 1. c. 20. Valent. de missae Sacrif. l. 1. c. 4.) yet it is almost as
old as Adam, who taught his Sons to offer both of the fruits of the earth, and
the fatlings of the Flock, which was done, as some learned men affirm,
immediately upon that Covenant made to the promised seed, which was solemnized
by Sacrifices, as the Apostle intimates. Hebr. 9.18. and 22. And the Skins
wherewith we find Adam and Eve clothed, shortly after the fall, and which were
afterward made the Priests portion, Levit. 8.8. were given them by God, (he
having first had the flesh in Sacrifice) to be Symbolum propitiationis a sign
of that Propitiation by which their sins were covered.

Secondly, Sacrifices were of greater esteem for their Institution, than their
Antiquity, God himself having commanded the several sorts of them, and the
particular circumstances concerning them. As first the Peace Offering, for the
fruits of the earth. Secondly, the Sin-offering, for Atonement and pardon of
Transgressions. Thirdly, the Burnt-offering, as an acknowledgment of Homage to
God the Sovereign Lord of all. The book of Leviticus is but a Directory for
these.

Thirdly, They were very considerable for their usefulness. First, as they were
to be Signa innocentiae, testimonies and declarations of Innocence. For as the
creatures offered unto God ought to be only such as were clean for their kind,
so particularly they ought to be without spot or blemish; and no beasts or
birds of prey, but the Ox and the Lamb; the Turtle and the Dove, harmless and
useful creatures only, must be brought to the Altar, and the offerer was to lay
his hands on the beast, either to profess his innocence, that he was not guilty
of bribes or of blood, of fraud or violence, or if he were, then to confess his
sins, and deprecate the wrath of God by virtue of that Covenant, whereof the
Sacrifice was a testimony, and so it was propitiatory. They were, Secondly,
Eucharistical pledges, and earnests of their gratitude, expressing their
readiness to forgo all, or to return it to him from whom they received it.
Thirdly, they were Admonitions to the guilty persons, to repent of their sins,
or else that they must perish as those beasts did.

Fourthly, By external Sacrifices they were minded of their internal duties, as
mactare propriam voluntatem, to mortify all beastly lusts and affections.

Fifthly, They were fences and boundaries to the Religion, God commanding the
Jews to Sacrifice those very beasts which their Idolatrous neighbors did
worship (as the Ox, the Sheep, and Dove, which were worshipped as Gods, among
the Egyptians and Zabii) to maintain a greater detestation of Idolatry in their
hearts.

Sixthly, They were as so many penalties, and forfeitures, taken on that people
upon every trespass, which also served, not only as a present punishment, but a
future terror, minding them that they had forfeited their own lives and Souls,
which God was pleased to spare, expecting better obedience, even a living
Sacrifice.

And yet all this notwithstanding, though Sacrifices were venerable for their
Antiquity, more for their usefulness, as well to the Religion in general, as to
the Reformation of particular persons, but most of all, for its divine
Instution, the Levitical Law being but a Rubric or directory for the
Sacrifices, Misericordiam volo, etc. I will have mercy.

For if hypocritical Jews should have amassed all these Sacrifices in one, as
the Prophet Jer. 7.21. speaks, Put your burnt-offerings to your Sacrifices and
eat flesh; If they should go with their Flocks, and herds to seek the Lord,
Hos. 5.6. If they should have presented a Sacrifice as magnificent as that of
Solomon, 22000 Oxen, and 120000 Sheep; If they should have invented more costly
ones, 1 Kings 8.63.
thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of Oil, their firstborn for their
transgression, the fruit of their bodies, for the sin of their Souls; yet to do
justice, and to love mercy, is preferred to them all, Mic. 6.8.

For though Sacrifices were commanded, yet not for any intrinsical goodness in
them, but with respect to some greater good. Eze. 20.25. I gave them Statutes
that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live, they were not
originally good, as the duties of the Moral Law, these were commanded because
they were good, the other good only because they were commanded, they did not
make the Offerer, but he made them acceptable, as in the case of Cain and Abel.
Thus God speaks to wicked men, Psalm. 50. that gave their mouths to evil, ver.
19, 20.
and did sit and speak against their Brother and slander their own mothers son,
I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or burnt-offerings, Offer to God
Thanksgiving, etc. And Psalm. 51.16. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I
give it thee. The Sacrifices of God, are a broken Spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Solomon tells us [after that he
had presented that costly Sacrifice] To do justice and judgment, is more
acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice, Prove. 21.3. for it is true of the house
of God, what he says of ours, Better is a dry morsel with quietness, than a
house full of Sacrifices with strife, Prove. 17.1. In this therefore, the young
Scribe was better instructed than these Pharisees, for he consented with our
Savior, Mark 12.33. That to love the Lord, with all our heart, etc. and our
neighbors as our selves, is more than all whole burnt-offerings, and
Sacrifice, In a word, our Savior has told us, that whatever our gift be that
we bring to the Altar, if we remember, that our Brother has ought against us,
(i.) if we are conscious of any injury, or unkindness, wherewith he may charge
us, it is our duty to go first, and be reconciled to our Brother, before we
presume to offer our gift, though it be of prayer, or praise; God will never
accept of a peace offering, from them that live in enmity with their Brethren.

And now if I should put into this scale, the whole Economy of the Jewish
discipline, their Oblations and Incense, their New Moons and Sabbaths, their
calling of Assemblies (for Feasts or Fasts,) and their Prayers too, as Isai.
1.11. they would for want of mercy be found too light. To what purpose are
they? says God, v. 11. Who has required this at your hands? v. 12. Bring no
more vain Oblations, incense is an abomination to me, I cannot away with it, it
is iniquity even your solemn meetings, ver. 13. they were esteemed but mock
services by God, for want of mercy to their Brethren.

Two other instances I shall add, because they seem of great weight.

First, That of Circumcision, which is called Gods Covenant with Abraham by
which he promised to be his God and the God of his seed, Genesis 17.10. and the
Apostle-calls it a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. And as God
instituted it, so he commanded the observation of it by a severe Sanction. The
Uncircumcised was to be cut off, Genesis 17.14. And the Rabbis tell us, that as
God appointed destroying Angels to that end, so he assigned guardian Angels to
every one that was Circumcised. Certain it is, that they bearing the marks and
tokens of Gods Covenant in their flesh, did boast themselves to be Gods
peculiar people. And as our Apostle intimates, they preferred it to the Cross
of Christ which the Apostle, though he himself was Circumcised, abhors with an
absit, Gal. 6. ver. 14. But it was a saying among the Jews, that Circumcision
was equal to the keeping of the whole Law, and that Heaven and Earth could not
stand if Circumcision were omitted, therefore they made the eight days before
Circumcision to be a preparation for that solemnityat which they invited their
friends as witnesses and Sponsors for the child, that he should observe the
Statutes of the God of Israel, and in the later times, had always an empty
Chair set for Elias, expecting that he should descend from Heaven to be a
witness of the Circumcision; and yet in truth it was as the Apostle says, a a
burden which neither they nor their Fathers could bear, and therefore God
himself dispensed with the use of it to this people forty years together in the
wilderness; Acts 15.10.
and though St. Paul was Circumcised, and to make his own and Timothy's
ministry the more acceptable to that people, Acts 16.1.
took Timothy and Circumcised him, yet he teaches them that if they were
Circumcised (i. e.) with an intention to obtain Salvation by the works of the
Law, Christ should profit them nothing: And Galatians 6.15. (to them that were)
in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision availed any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but a new creature; by which he understands, Gal. 5.6. faith
which works by love: And in the 1 Cor. 7.19. a keeping the Commandments of
God: so that circumcision was not to be contended for, when the propagation of
the Gospel, or Charity came into competition with it.

A second instance shall be that of the Jewish Sabbath, of the profanation
whereof the Pharisees complained to Christ of his Disciples, Matthew. 12.2. and
for whose vindication our Savior urges again the right understanding of this
Text, v. 7. If ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless. Many of Christ's
Disciples (as well as himself) were circumcised, and so obliged to sanctify
the Sabbath according to the Commandment, and great were the punishments which
God threatened and inflicted on the transgressors, such as struck a terror to
them, which made them run into superstition, insomuch that they would not go
out of their places, nor dress their meat, nor carry a stick, nor defend
themselves against their enemies on that day. And the crime for which the
Disciples were complained of, was rather for transgressing their tradition,
than any precept of God; for if the fault was their walking through the
Cornfields, it does not appear that they exceeded 2000. Cubits, which was
allowed by them for a Sabbath Days Journey; if plucking the ears of Corn, that
was approved by the Law, Deuteronomy. 23.25. If for eating (which seems most
probable, because our Savior answered the objection by the instance of David's
eating the shewbread) yet being hungry, their necessity might excuse them, nor
was this forbidden (though perhaps contrary to a superstitious practice of
theirs, for which the Heathen upbraided them, (i.e.) their Sabbathdays Fasts)
therefore Christ vindicates, them, as guiltless upon the plea in the Text, I
will have mercy, etc. As if he had said, You Pharisees do not understand the
substantial and spiritual part of your own Law, for as long as there is not
contumacy or contempt in the neglect of Ceremonial Precepts, but the excuse of
a just necessity, or the rational consideration of a greater good to outweigh
that neglect, God will not impute it as a sin. Of this our Savior convinces
them by the instance of David, v. 4. and of the Priests in the Temple,
profaning the Sabbath by dressing the Sacrifices, for they were wont to say --
In the Temple there is no Sabbath. If then the service of the Temple excused
the Priests for profaning the Sabbath; the service of Christ who tells them of
himself, that he was greater than the Temple, v. 6. might excuse his Disciples,
who being Prophets and Preachers of the Kingdom of Heaven, were greater than
the Priests of the Law, as our Savior said of John the Baptist, Matthew. 11.11.

Now a Prophet even under the Law, was above the Law of the Temple, and might
sacrifice in any place, as Elias did, and therefore it could not be unlawful
for Christ's Disciples, so earnestly attending his work, that they became
hungry, having no other provision, to eat a few grains of Corn for their
present relief. Again, our Savior tells them, v. 8. that the Son of Man is
Lord of the Sabbath, which that he speaks of himself as the Messiah (who had
power to abrogate and alter the Sabbath) is the opinion of some, though not so
clear, because Matthew. 16.20. he would not have it yet known that he was the
Messiah, and if our Savior had made this his argument he needed not to have
used any other. Others therefore think that by the Son of Man is meant every
Son of Man, for Christ himself was not blamed but his Disciples, whom he
pronounces guiltless for this reason, The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath,
which S. Mark expresses more plainly to this purpose, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath
was made for man: and so the argument stands thus, That which was made for
another thing is to give place to that for which it was made, but the Sabbath
was made for man, ergo, etc. Now though the Jews were so superstitious, that
even in the time of the Maccabees, they would not defend themselves against
their enemies on the Sabbathday, yet shortly after they began to grow wiser,
and would not only desend their own Lives, but assault their enemies, and do
any necessary work; for they had dearly been taught this Maxim, Periculum
vitae dissolvit Sabbatum, that the danger of losing Life did dissolve the
Sabbath: And as Seldom, de Jure Gentium, l. 2. c. 10. they held that in case of
sickness, a Jew might not only eat forbidden Meats, but for recovery of health,
or avoidance of any great danger, he might break any commandment, except these
three, (viz.) Idolatry, Murder, and Incest; and I have heard from the mouth of
a modern Jew, an odd interpretation of that Text, Pro. 4.4. which he
interpreting the copulative, by a discretive, reads, Keep the commandments, but
live; i. e. so keep the commandments, as to be careful of preserving thy life
in keeping of them. But to return in our Savior's time, it was practiced by
them, as a thing lawful on the Sabbathday, Luke 13.15.
to pluck an Ox or an Ass out of a Ditch, or to lead them to Water, and to
permit Merchants and Carriers to travel about their necessary affairs on that
Day. So that the sum of all is this, that when two Laws seemed to interfere, so
as both could not be kept, the lesser must yield to the greater, the ritual and
ceremonial, to the moral or evangelical, which is the sense of the Text: I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice.

But it may be objected, What is this of the contention of the Jews for
Ceremonies, to the contending of Christians against them, when they are imposed
contrary to their Christian liberty?

Answ. These Objectors do no more understand their Christian liberty, than the
Pharisees did the right meaning of the Text, which equally concludes against
them that contend against Ceremonies, as them that contend for them, to the
breach of Charity, Obedience, and Public Peace, which as I have already proved
against the Jews out of their Law, so I shall prove it (contra Gentes) against
contentious Christians out of the Gospel. -- Christian liberty is the restoring
of Mankind by Christ to such an estate as it was in, before the Ceremonial Law
was imposed, so that now every Creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.4. nothing is
of it self unclean, Titus 1.15. but all things are lawful, 1 Cor. 6.11. (i.e.)
it is lawful for a Christian to do those things, against which nothing of
moment can be alleged from the Scriptures, or right reason, to prove them
unlawful. Those Men therefore go the wrong way, and puzle their own and other
Men's consciences, who argue, It is not commanded, therefore I may not do it;
whereas they ought to argue, It is not forbidden, therefore I may do it without
prejudice to my Christian liberty: although it may be truly said, that it is
commanded of God (in genere) from 1 Cor. 14.40. and (in specie) by authority,
to which we are bound to yield obedience for conscience sake, not as if the
commands of our Superiors did immediately bind the conscience in such cases,
but by virtue of God's commands for obedience to the higher powers. The truth
of all this will appear, from the Apostles own practice, Acts 15.28. who
imposed on the Primitive Christians such things as were in their nature
indifferent, to be observed as necessary, bono pacis, so Piscator, Non semper
and ubique, nec per se and simpliciter ad salutem necessaria, sed ad pacem
Ecclesiae and witandas offenfiones, ut aleretur mutua benevolentia inter
Judaeos and Gentiles: The sense whereof I shall give you from the English
Annotations on the place, The word necessary is not referred to the Ceremonies,
but the present occasion, and persons whose Salvation and Unity was necessary.
Now who dares say, they were not bound to observe those Canons, when the
Apostles say, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, as well as to them, to lay
these things upon them, as necessary to be observed for the time and ends above
mentioned?

Again, we find St. Paul commending the Corinthians, 1 Epistle, Chapter 11. v. 2.
for keeping the Ordinances which he delivered them, that is, say our
Annotators, particular Ordinances for comeliness and good order, which belonged
to Ecclesiastical Polity, and were afterward called Canous, against which, if
any but only seemed to be contentious by disputing against them, the Apostle
silenced them by that, in Verse. 16. We have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God, that is, say the same Annotators, to contend about matters of
this nature; but willingly and cheerfully to obey those that have the
oversight of us in the Lord. And it is fit to consider the nature of the
matter treated of, which was, how Men and Women ought to behave themselves at
public Prayers, which behavior the Apostle would have to agree with those
signs and gestures of reverence, which Subjects are wont to yield to their
Princes: Cameron. in loc.
and although the Jews worshipped with their Heads covered, which was esteemed
a sign of reverence among them, as also do the Turks to this day sit covered,
and bowing their Bodies at their Devotions, as they are wont to do in the
presence of their Rulers; yet the Apostle being to plant the Church among the
Romans, and Grecians, with whom the uncovering of the Head was a token of
reverence, he appoints the same behavior in the Worship of God. And this was
practiced by the Christians in Tertullian's days, Apologet.
who prayed Capite nudo, expansis manibus, with bare Heads, and Hands lifted
up, and this Tertullian calls legem Dei, God's Law, Quaeris legem Dei? habes
communem istam in publico mundi and in naturalibus tabulis ad quas and
Apostolus provocare solet cum in velamine faciei, inquit, Non natura vos docet?
For by Nature here, as Grotius observes, such general customs as had obtained
among the Gentiles are intended, Non est hoc plane Natural, sed quod long
lateque receptum, Grotius in loc.
ut Jurisconsulti dant nomen Juris Naturalis, Juri Gentium. Our Apostle then in
this place does, as with a twoedged Sword, cut off all disputations,
contentions, against decent Ceremonies in the Worship of God, 1. By his
Apostolical injunction. 2ly, By the custom of the Churches of God: and to
contend about such things, and disturb the peace of the Church is as
unreasonable, as irreligious a thing, which is my second argument, The
unreasonableness of contending for Ceremonies, to the neglect of Moral duties.

1. For it agrees with the sentiments of Mankind, as Plato discovers them,
(...). The Gods respect not our Sacrifices, but our Souls: And we our selves
acknowledge not them for our Friends, or Servants, who only complement us, or
put us off with eye-service, or a little lip-labor, Quin demus Superis --
Compositum Jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus -- Mentis; and incoctum
Generoso pectus honesto: Haec cedo ut admoveam templis, and far litabo.

2. Because the works of Mercy are (...), the resemblances of the Divine
nature, and life: Be ye merciful, says our Savior, Luke 6.36. as your
Heavenly Father is merciful. In Divinitate nil divinius, in humanitate nil
humanius.
Lactantius* tells us, Summa Religionis est eum imitari quem colis, it is the
perfection of Religion, to be like him, whom we worship. Now God is love, and
he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And he
that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he, (i. e.) he cannot,
love his God whom he has not seen, 1 John 4.20. God has made our charity, and
our peace, as well as our holiness, Heb. 12.14
conditions, without which we shall not see God: The Prophet Hosea, to instruct
us in the mercifulness of God, c. 6.6.
commends to us the knowledge of God; did we know God better, we would love our
Brethren more; 1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is
love. It is spoken of Josiah, that he judged the cause of the poor and needy,
was not this to know me, says the Lord? Jer. 22.16.

Heu! primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris Naturam nescire Deum.

Sil. Ital. We are mostly prepossest with unreasonable and uncharitable
Opinions, and passions, which do not only dispose us to think amiss of our
Brethren, but of God also, as if he were such as our selves, as the Indians
being black, See Jer. 9.24.
paint their Gods so too. That Man must needs be very unmerciful, that can
think his God to be so, and sure it is, that if God should be as unmerciful
toward others, as we fancy him, or as we are, there are but few that would be
saved, except those of the same fraternity with our selves. Jam. 3.15.
But such black thoughts are fruits of the spirit of Darkness; the fruits of
the best spirit, are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
Gal. 5.22.
etc. I shall ever suspect that Religion, that teaches Men to love God, and
hate their Brethren with all their heart.

It is no wonder if the Stoics, that deny the Deity, and ascribe all to an
inexorable fate, do also unman Humanity, and unbowel Virtue, teaching that a
wise Man ought to cast away all compassion, and making that a defect of the
Soul, viz. bearing one another burdens, which a better Philosopher says, Gal.
6.2.
is to fulfill the Law of Christ. Well might Cicero reject them; (neque enim
audiendi sunt, qui virtutem duram, and ferream esse volunt) as not fit to be
heard, who would transform Virtue, which is of a gentle, tender, tractable, and
yielding quality, into a rigid, stupid, implacable, and unsociable
constitution: Such wise Men have as little brains, as bowels, seeing St. James
tells us, that the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality and without hypocrisy. And thus, though I have but casually let
fall some drops of Mercy into the other scale, you may perceive how much they
do outweigh the whole Jewish Discipline and Sacrifices. The treasures of Mercy
are as boundless as the Ocean, and therefore I shall not attempt to contract
them within this scale. My thoughts are not your thoughts, Is. 55.8.
neither are my ways your ways; for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth,
so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts, says
the Lord. What great things the mercy of God will effect for such as love him,
may partly appear by the things he works in them, and by them, whom he causes
to partake of his own spirit, and so sheds abroad his love into their hearts,
that they can extend it again throughout the whole World, and be merciful, as
their Heavenly Father is merciful, even in that great instance of making (as
instruments) the sun of righteousness to shine, and the Dew of Heaven to fall
upon the just and the unjust, and by their compassionate desires, and faithful
prayers, their tender mercies are over all the works of God. How gladly could I
cast my self into this Ocean, as Aristotle to Euripus, and say, Quoniam ego non
Comprehendam te, tu Comprehendes me; because I cannot comprehend thy mercies,
Lord, let me be comprehended of them!

But as every dust of Gold is Gold, so every act of mercy is precious, and
therefore I shall not need to mention the infinite perfections of Divine mercy,
nor those Heroic deeds of merciful Men, whose love has been more strong than
Death; but confine my self within those ordinary bounds of Charity, wherein
every Christian may and ought to converse with other, such as the Apostle
names, 1 Cor. 13.4. To be long-suffering, and kind, not to envy, or vaunt
themselves, not to be puffed up, and seek their own, not to be easily provoked,
not to think or speak evil: any of these defects will, as the want of Salt to
the Sacrifice, make it corrupt, and become unsavory. Every malicious thought
will be as so much fire, to make them evaporate into smoke. So the Apostle
assures us, 1 Cor. 13.
Though I spoke with the tongue of men and Angels, though I had the gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and knowledge, and had all Faith, and
have not Charity, it profits me nothing. The bare omission of the meanest
acts of Charity, such as our Savior mentions, Matthew 25.25. is sufficient
to exclude our Souls as well as our Services from Heaven. The Pharisees then,
had little reason to insist so exactly on a Levitical Ceremony of touching and
accompanying with unclean persons; when they admitted that pride and contempt
of their brethren, that envy against Christ, which rendered them by far the more
unclean. A principle which has much troubled the Church of God in all ages,
when Pharisaical men, first censure and condemn their Brethren, and then
separate from them, and grow in hatred against them, when they have no other
reason to think ill of their Brethren, but because they think too well of
themselves; and by their zeal for the externals of Religion, seek to palliate
their neglect of the most essential duties. To these our Savior commends the
Lesson in the Text (as well as to those ancient Pharisees) Go learn what that
means, etc.

Having endeavored to convince your understanding of the truth of the
proposition in general, I shall apply it as effectually as I can for the cure
of our present distempers, for we also do trouble our selves, and others, about
many-inconsiderable circumstances of external Worship, to the neglect of those
moral duties of Humility, Charity and peace, which are of the very Essence of
Religion. And I doubt not but if we would lay aside our pride, prejudice, and
carnal interest, and as newborn Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word,
that we might grow thereby, this plain Lesson of our Savior, touching the Love
of Mercy, would more edify us as well in holiness, as in peace and love, than
all the public declamations or private insinuations of contentious persons,
whose zeal (like the little impotent heat in Insects, which not being
sufficient to form sound vitals within, runs out into many weak and useless
members and produces (an Ephemeron) an Animal that endures but for a day)
running out into many nice circumstances, may have something of the show, but
very little of the substance and life of Religion. To such I do in the fear of
God propose this method of learning the Lesson in the Text.

First, That our Agreement in the Substantials of Religion, and the liberty to
profess and practice all things necessary to Godliness and Salvation, ought to
be an indissoluble bond of peace and unity to us all. As the lower Spears,
though they have a proper tendency of their own, yet yield to the motion of the
higher Orb; so though we have some fond conceits, and small concerns of our
own, we should forsake them to comply with the great ends of Religion, Mercy,
and Peace. We agree in the substance of the Gospel, in the Creed, and
Commandments, in the Ministry, and the Sacraments; we are built on the
Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.
and on this Foundation we may build as high as Heaven, why should our Pride
and Contention pull down the Judgment of Babel upon us? Methinks there should
be no place left for discord among Brethren that are united by so many
Obligations, one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4.5.
one Baptism, one God, one Father of all: but though we all pretend to meet in
the same Center, yet the Leaders in every Faction (as the Lines that are
protracted to the greatest length) are farthest from reconciliation.

Though others murmur and will not be content with Manna except they may have
their fleshpots too, Let us bless God, that he has established truth and
righteousness among us by a Law. Ps. 127.20
He has not dealt so with other Nations, nor was it so with us of late days,
and we may justly fear that our ingratitude and contentions may reduce us to
the like confusion.

Secondly, If God himself will dispense with all the externals of his Worship,
to show us mercy, we need not fear his displeasure, if we either omit some
things that please us, or admit some other things that displease us in the
outward administrations, for the freer exercise of mercy and peace: better it
is to submit to a doubtful inconvenience, than to run into a certain mischief.
And it will never be accounted among our infirmities, that we were not more
careful of the public Worship of God, than he himself.

Thirdly, Neither the external circumstances of Worship which are enjoined, nor
those which are contended for, in opposition to them, have any positive command
from God, or our Savior; for our Savior has not prescribed the circumstances
of Divine Worship, foreseeing (as Mr. Calvin says) that the same Rites would
not agree with the several Nations, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. n. 30.
and Ages, wherein the Church should be planted; and if we consider that
whereas the Two Sacraments only are positively instituted in the New Testament,
there have been so great controversies moved about them; that many large
Volumes have been written, and many bloody Battles fought by men of contrary
minds, it will appear a great mercy, that other things did not come under
precept; for then, greater pretenses for maintaining differences would have
been pleaded; which now have no color, for as much as the matters in dispute
fall not under any command, and if there be no command, it follows that they
are left at liberty, but by offending against plain Commands, for obedience and
peace, our sin and condemnation are the greater.

Fourthly, This shall be a Fourth consideration, that whatever cannot be
referred to Faith or good manners, and is neither commanded nor forbidden, that
may be done or omitted, as is most conducible to the great ends of peace,
Charity, and Unity. To evince the indifferency of an action, these things are
sufficient, First, that there be no command injoyning or forbidding it. 2ly.
That it be declared by the Magistrate imposing it, that it is not intended as a
part of Divine Worship, as having an antecedent necessity, (and so becomes an
indispensable duty,) but for Order, Decency and Unity, and therefore as the
Casuists say, extra contemptum and scandalum, if the Superiors authority be not
despised, nor our Brethren scandalized, the practice of such things may be
omitted, as you know the Ceremonies may be, in case of necessity, and in
private duties, which could not be if they were not things indifferent. So
that, that part of the Churches declaration, that says, she has power to add,
alter, or abrogate such Rites, manifestly declares their indifferency, as
Calvin also affirms, speaking of the Sacramental Bread, whether it be Levened
or unlevened, and the Wine, whether Red or White, whether delivered into every
man's hand by the Deacon, or not. Haec indifferentia sunt and in Ecclesiae
liberate posita. The Institutions and practice of the Church are a sufficient
rule for such practices. The not prescribing them in Scripture, argues that it
was as unnecessary as impossible to be done: for as to that rule of the
Apostle, To. 14.23
that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, it imports not, that we either should
have a command for every action in the Word of God, or that the thing done, is
in it self pleasing to God, but, if it be not forbidden, nor really evil, but
is in order to other good ends, it may or may not be done, (without a
Superstitious fear of offending God,) by virtue of our Christian liberty.

Fifthly, In all things not determined by the Word of God, we are bound to obey
the Magistrate, by virtue of the general Commands of God, and otherwise the
Magistrate should have no authority at all, Romans 13.
for those things which are good in their own nature, are commanded by God, and
therefore the Magistrate must have power in things not commanded, or he has
none at all: and so in things forbidden, which will more plainly appear by what
follows,

For, Sixthly, If I may do, or not do things in their nature indifferent,
rather than offend a weak Brother, (which is the Nonconformists Plea to the
Conformists) much more ought I so to do, or not do, rather than offend a
Christian Magistrate, or disturb the public peace, because public offenses
are more carefully to be avoided than private, and when the Magistrates command
is added (whether he be Civil or Ecclesiastical) that which was but lawful
before, becomes, pro hic and nunc, necessary, as a means to peace or
edification, Acts 15.20. It is certainly more sinful, to oppose the command of
many wise men (and such perhaps as are entrusted by us) or which is the same
thing to go against their judgment, and offend their Consciences, than to go
against the judgment, and offend the Consciences of a few weak Brethren, who
neither have the advantages to inform themselves of the nature of things, nor
that authority, or concern, to provide for the public peace, as their
Superiors have, but may be easily imposed on, by crafty men that lay in wait
to deceive. Judge in your selves Brethren how intolerable would that Servant be
in your Family that should be always quarrelling at his Masters habit, or the
directions given him for his work; and though he have good and wholesome food in
plenty, yet dislikes the Cookery, and being reproved for his pride and
curiosity, is obstinate and instigates his fellow servants to desert the
Family. But herein the Apostles example may direct us better how far we may, or
may not do things indifferent, (and such as have some appearance of evil in
them to others) rather than to give offense to a Brother, as in the case of
meats, which had been declared unclean by the Law, (but that difference was by
the Gospel abrogated) and were much more accounted polluted by having been
offered unto Idols, yet the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.8.
meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better,
neither if we eat not are we the worse, it is grace and not meat by which the
heart is established; our Christian liberty is an Amulet against any corruption
in such things, for though the practice be determined, the judgment is free,
there is libertas ad oppositum. So in the case of Circumcision before
mentioned, which was so abrogated, that S. Paul says, if ye be circumcised (i.
e. with an opinion says, if ye be circumcised (i. e. with an opinion of the
legal necessity of it) Christ shall profit you nothing: Gal. 5.2.
Yet to the Jews, that he might win them, he became as a Jew, and then used
Circumcision, Acts 16.3. and to them that were without the Law, as without Law,
that he might win the Gentiles, and then he would not Circumcise, and in all
this he was Christ's Freeman, though he made himself a servant to all.

The Apostle knew that his Christian liberty was founded in freedom of Judgment
and not of practice, and that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision were any
thing, 1 Cor. 7.19.
but the keeping of the Commandments. Now no actions of ours that are required
in obedience to our Superiors about the Public Worship, are so obnoxious to
censure and scandal, as these were, but are under our Christian liberty. And as
we ought to serve one another in love, in obedience to Gods commands; so ought
we in obedience of the same, to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, and not use our liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness, or an
occasion to the flesh, to cast off either our Love to our Brethren or Obedience
to Magistrates. For to what end has God, according to his promise, raised up
Kings, to be Nursing Fathers to his Church, or what possibility is there, that
they should provide for its peace, if they have not power in these External
things? If therefore the things commanded be indifferent, it is certain that
obedience to the Magistrate is no indifferent thing, but as necessary, as peace
and unity, which cannot otherwise be preserved.

Seventhly, The means are always, as subservient, so inferior to the end: Now
the end of the Commandment is Charity, as the Apostle says, Col. 3.14.
and therefore both he, and St. Peter require charity above all things, 1 Pet.
4.8. When therefore these externals of religion, become apples of contention,
they are forbidden fruit, which cannot be enjoyed without the breach of the
great Commandment: and if they had each of them a particular precept; yet when
lesser duties come in competition with greater, they cease to oblige. Private
Laws yield to public, humane Laws to the Laws of God; and among God's Laws,
Positive Precepts yield to those that are moral and natural; A Vow, or an Oath
concerning a thing lawful, if it hinder Majus bonum Natural, cease to
oblige. The Corban might not be pleaded in Bar, to the relieving of Parents;
much less may any Covenant oblige, against the Peace of the Church, and the
Public Parent (as some still plead, for that which they call the National
Covenant.) Those things therefore which are matters of Discipline, and external
order, how precisely soever enjoined, ought to give place to those that are the
more substantial parts of Religion, such as mercy and obedience to Magistrates,
charity, peace, and unity among Christians; and as we may disuse some things
which have been generally received in the Church of God, (as were the kiss of
charity, the love feasts, and anointing of the Sick) so certainly we may use
some other things, which are enjoined by our Superiors, for the sake of Order,
and Unity. When St. Paul had established the Doctrine of Faith in the Church of
Corinth, he tells them, 1 Cor. 11.16.
that if about rites and ceremonies, Any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God: that is, the custom of the Church is
a sufficient Plea against such contentious persons. Thus when the Council of
Nice had composed the Articles of Faith in that Creed, they all with one
consent approved of the Ancient rites and customs: (...). And Sozomen says, it
was ever esteemed an unreasonable thing for those that agreed in the
Substantials of Religion, L. 7. c. 19.
(...), to separate from each other, for customs, and matters of doubtful
disputation.

And it is generally agreed, that the Churches, which are sui Juris, agreeing
in the same Faith, may differ in Rites and Ceremonies, which they have power to
alter, or abrogate, and therefore Calvin says, they are Mali filii, wicked
Sons, that will disturb the Peace of the Church, their Mother, for such
external rites, and as the Pharisees in the Text seek to withdraw the Disciples
by such objections against their Master, Why eats your Master with Publicans
and Sinners? And yet certain it is, that the Authors of Sects and Divisions
among us, have no better grounds for all the disorders and confusion, the proud
contempt, and unchristian censures, the slander and vexation, that have been as
so many evil spirits raised among us; and I desire, that such as are yet in the
fault, would not only consider the insufficiency of the grounds, but also the
mischievous consequences of our divisions, how directly opposite to our
Savior's rule in the Text, I will have mercy, etc.

Now, that there are Divisions among us, may be proved by the same arguments,
that the Apostle uses to prove, that there were Divisions in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.4.
(viz.) when one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, etc. which
Divisions, as they cannot be warranted, but on a supposition of some great
corruption in our Doctrine, or Worship, or some grand profaneness in our
Members; so are they not raised without such thoughts in the hearts of those
that do separate from us, as Mr. Newcomen observed in his Sermon at St. Paul's,
Febr. 8. 1646. p. 40. Who are they that brand their Brethren with the title of
Proud, Time-servers, Prelatical, Tyrannical, Antichristian, but such as
separate? Who will say that they are of the same opinion in Fundamentals, and
that their differences are, but in minutioribus; but, Why do they in matters of
lesser moment transgress the Apostles rule? Why do they not keep their opinions
private, and have their faith to themselves before God? Why do they upon so
small differences, withdraw from Communion with us, and gather themselves into
distinct and separate Churches? This is certainly a pharisaical leaven, that
ferments and imbitters our spirits, and though the effects of it may be hid for
a time, yet on every heat and agitation it spreads through the whole lump, and
swells Men with Pride, and an unsociable sowrness of Spirit.

And though the things wherein we differ, seem to be but small, and have a show
of piety, yet the consequences are so notoriously and really evil, that the
most zealous pretenses for the Discipline of Christ, are too narrow a Plaster
to cover or cure the festred rancor and malice toward his members. Ceremonies
are no fit matter to exercise our zeal and contention, but obedience and
charity. Yet as the Ordinances and Rites that were retained by the believing
Jews and Gentiles, were still a Wall of separation between them, and the
Apostle calls it the enmity, Ephesians. 2.15.
so is it with us: The Jews and Samaritans differed chiefly about the place
wherein they ought to Worship, upon which there grew a mortal hatred between
them, so as that there was no commerce between them, they would not salute one
another. -- Nec monstrare vias eadem nisi Sacra colenti; and it was accounted
all one to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devil. So when once Men swerve from
the center and basis of charity, there is no consistency, but Men fall, first
to vain jangling, and that increases to more ungodliness, for where bitter
envying, or (as the original word is) zeal is, there is confusion, and every
evil thing. Behold, says St. James, how great a matter a little fire kindles;
if Men snatch a Coal from the Altar, it is blown up and down by popular breath,
until it be raised into a flame, and has this property at least of the fire of
the Sanctuary, that the busy Levites will not permit it to go out.

I know it will be troublesome to others, for it is a terror to my self to
recount, what cataracts and inundations of blood, our Church-divisions, that at
first, as the Prophets Cloud, were but as a hand-breadth, have rained down upon
the whole Land. I shall give it you therefore in a Foreign instance, namely of
the Donatists in Africa: who, because Cecilian their Bishop had admitted some
to his Communion, whom they accused for Traditors, first withdrew from the
Church, which as they pretended ought to consist of such only as were (...),
holy, and without blemish: and because they had read in the Canticles, that
Christ caused his Flock to rest sub meridie, they concluded, that their Party
in the South of Africa, was that Flock; and hereupon they are very industrious
to gather Congregations, and pick up one of a Family, and two or three of a
Village, which, as Optatus observes, were generally of the weaker sort. Aut
exivit Vxor and resedit Maritus, etc. The Wife is withdrawn from her Husband,
the Son or Daughter from their Parents. And my Optatus.
Author sets down the Method which those Seducers used, Cai Sei! or Caia Seia!
bonus homo, sed traditor, libera animam tuam: Thou good Man, or good Woman,
thou art among Idolaters, and Superstitious persons, thou have good affections,
but they are not rightly placed, come out of Babylon, and deliver thy Soul:
When they had thus increased their Party, they built Basilicas non necessarias,
more Churches than were necessary, and their Sermons were generally Satyrs
against the Catholics, and though they were frequently confuted in private
disputations, and condemned by many Synods at home, and several Councils
abroad, and diverse Edicts of the Emperors, yet never would they acquiesce, or
be reconciled, but vexed the Churches of Africa for more than a Hundred Years,
increasing their Numbers, and subdividing into Factions, as the Primianists and
Maximianists, the Rogatians and Callidians, Luciferians and Circumcellians, and
all of them Donatists; and the Circumcellians were a Generation of Zealots, so
fierce and implacable, that Domitian himself did not use more cruelty in
shedding Christians blood, nor Julian, who was in Rempublicam Christianam
ingeniose nequam, could ever contrive more mischievous Instruments to destroy
Christianity withal, than these Donatists were, and therefore he countenanced
them against the Catholics. And when at last their grievances, and the grounds
of the Schism came to be inquired into, in the Conference of Carthage, they
could object nothing against the Catholics, but what here the Pharisees did
against Christ, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? And can any
Christian Spirit think, that this Plea for a Levitical Ceremony, will justify
such barbarous cruelties and bloody Sacrifices before him, who has said, I
will have Mercy and not Sacrifice? For let it be considered, that we live in a
Church, which is established on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; a Church, wherein nothing is
forbidden which the Word of God commands, nor any thing commanded, which that
forbids; a Church, whose Constitutions are truly Ancient and Apostolical, for
which it is envied by her Adversaries, though blamed by those that should be
her Friends. In a word, a Church, wherein we may be as holy, devout, and
charitable, as flesh and blood will permit us. This Church is protected by a
Gracious King, settled on the Throne of his Fathers by many miracles of
Providence, ready to gratify the just desires of all good Men. And what
sufficient reason can be given, to disturb the peace of such a Church, or to
disobey the commands of such a King, for the preservation of peace and unity,
under whom all things are lawful, except (libertas pereundi) a license to undo
our selves and others?

That there are some such imperfections in the Church, as discontented Persons
may quarrel at, is no strange thing, and if causless and frivolous objections
may be a ground for Separation, there can never be a firm peace in any Church,
seeing that ignorance, and interest, Tanta est imperitiae morositas ut vel in
rebus probatissimis habeat semper quid reprehendat. Call.
and malice will still prevail in the hearts of some Men: but that such things
may be tolerated, and submitted to, rather than to destroy the foundations of
peace and unity, and rent the Body of Christ, is the judgment of all sober
Christians. Our Savior did not withdraw himself and his Disciples from the
Jewish Synagogues, because there was a High Priest, and the Scribes and
Pharisees sat in Moses Chair: A tolerable Sore is better than a dangerous
remedy. Mr. Hooker.
Nor did the Apostle persuade the Christians to forsake the Church of Corinth,
wherein were many profane Persons, and great abuses, but he dissuaded them from
their divisions, which had given occasion to those scandals. And if the Church
in imitation of her Master, do retain some sinful persons in her Communion, in
hope to reform them, it is no charitable course to seduce her Disciples, as
here the Pharisees did, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners?

If the Church did impose such Sacrifices, as the Church of Rome does, for the
Living, and the Dead; a few Pence at the Pope's shrine, for Sins past, present,
and to come; if it did require that daily Mock-sacrifice of the Body and Blood
of Christ, in the Mass, of which they themselves can have no great esteem,
seeing they order it to give place to the (...) or Worship of the Cross, on a
certain day set apart for that end, on which, (says Durand ( Rationale l. 6.
c. 77.) Hora nona convenit ad adorandam crucem vacare,) they must be wholly
intent upon the Worshipping of the Cross, as if that were indeed the Altar that
did Sanctify the Sacrifice; or if they did impose such gaudy and numerous
Ceremonies as should quite hide and obscure the substance of Worship and
Devotion, that it might be said of the Church as the Poet says of his gaudy
Girl -- Pars minima est ipsa puella sui; Then we might have cause not only to
recede, but to resist, as the Martyrs did: but to contend as Hugh Broughton,
and Mr. Ainsworth did, to Separation and enmity upon a needless controversy,
whether Aarons Ephod were of a Blew color, or Sea-water-green, and Tragoedias
agere in nugis, to act Tragedies upon no other ground than our own fears or
jealousies, and to use our Christian Brethren, as the Heathen did their
Predecessors, wrap them up in the skins of Wolves or Bears by defaming,
slandering and condemning them, as Profane and Antichristian persons, and then
bait and devour them; this is to deal worse with them than the Pharisees did
with Christ.

Suppose there were a better Government and discipline revealed than ever yet
was known, or practiced in the Church; suppose the Presbytery were agreeable to
the pattern in the Mount, as some phrase it, (and if they had said to the
pattern of the air, it had been alike intelligible) yet if it could not be
erected without Rebellion and Rapine, without the effusion of Christian blood,
and rasing the foundations of Churches and Kingdoms, that were well established
in the truth, and peace of Christ, the Text does warrant the rejection of it, I
will have mercy and not Sacrifice.

But wherein, I pray, does the Discipline opposed by Presbyterians, etc. to the
Peace and Unity of the Church, exceed or parallel that which is already
established? or is it as venerable for antiquity as the Jewish Sacrifices were?
is there any thing of such beauty as the Temple, and the several Orders of the
Priesthood? is it such a prop to the Royal Tribe as the Priesthood was, or does
it serve the Ends of Religion, as the Sacrifices did? Alas very little of all
this will appear, it is but an invention of yesterday, that like Jonah's gourd
sprung up in a night, and has a worm always gnawing at the root, and yet men
think they do well to be angry, and to contend for it, even to the death of
their Brethren.

Has not God said I hate robbery though it be for burnt-offerings? will God be
well-pleased with such as sacrifice their Loyalty and Charity, and all moral
virtues, to a pretended Reformation of Ceremonies? This Mask is so worn out
that a Pharisee would be ashamed of it, and yet a late Gentleman has taken it
up, and though his business was to cast fire into the several parts of the
Nation, especially into the Churches, yet makes himself very merry, and tells
us in his Rehearsal, that the good Old Cause was (not only good enough but) too
good to be fought for: but God forbid, that others should be of his mind, to
think only so well of it, as to fight for it again, for it is so impossible,
that any Cause fought for with such horrid circumstances as that was, should be
good, that if an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8.
(much less when only one transformed into an Angel of light) should assert it,
I have warrant enough not to believe him.

The Sacrifices and Discipline of the Law were termed by the Apostle (...), 2
Cor. 3.7. the ministration of death, because without shedding of blood ((...))
there was no remission. Heb. 9.22.
And if in this, the Discipline contended for do resemble the Jewish
Sacrifices, in the shedding the blood, not of Beasts, but of Christians, and
cutting and dividing the very body of Christ, in fire and smoke, and making
whole Kingdoms burnt-offerings, we may be assured the God of Mercy cannot be
well-pleased with such Sacrifices.

The Honor of God, the Success of the Gospel, and Salvation of Souls, is not
concerned in the erecting of such a Discipline, nor in contending about
Ceremonies, which are not otherwise hurtful to those great ends, but by our
needless contentions about them. If we could order our Conversations according
to the Doctrine of the Church, we need not fear of displeasing God by
Conforming our Devotions to the Liturgy of the Church, for the Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost:
he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
men.

There is no Reason we should be thus disjoined and mutually branded. By. Hall
in a Sermon. of the mischief of Faction, p. 83.
This man is right (ye say) that man is not right, this sound, that rotten; and
how so, dear Christians, what for Ceremonies and circumstances, for Rotchets,
or Rounds, or Squares? Let me tell you he is right that has a right heart to
his God what Form soever he is for. The Kingdom of God does not stand in meats
or drinks, in stuffs or colors or fashions, in noises or gestures, it stands
in Holiness and Righteousness, in Godliness and Charity, in Peace and
Obedience, and if we have happily attained unto these, God does not stand upon
trifles and niceties of indifferency, and why should we? Away then with all
false jealousies and uncharitable glosses of each others actions and estates.
Let us all in the fear of God be entreated in the bowels of our Dear Redeemer,
as we Love our Selves, our Land, our Church, the Gospel, to combine our
counsels and endeavors to the holding of the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, and labor and study, not how to widen, and gall, and rankle, but how
to salve and heal these unhappy sores of the Church and State. And as Mr.
Calvin says, Epist. ad Catech. Genev.
When we shall come to that great Tribunal, where we are to render an account
of our Ministry, There shall be no question concerning Ceremonies, neither
shall this conformity in outward things be brought to examination, but the
lawful use of our liberty, and that shall be adjudged lawful that conduces
most to edification. Let therefore all our care, circumspection and diligence
tend to this, which we may know so far to succeed, as we become Proficients in
the serious fear of God, in sincere piety, and unfeigned Sanctity of manners.

I know you will all join with me, to condemn those pitiful pretenses which are
still to be heard from the mouths of some profane persons, to excuse their not
frequenting of the Lords Supper, a Sacrament which may assure them of infinite
comfort, and blessings, if they did not obicem ponere, make themselves
incapable. They pretend a grudge against a neighbor, on a punctilio of profit
or reputation, or perhaps a pet against their Minister, for demanding his Dues,
or reproving their Vices, and therefore they cannot come. It is the very same
that is pleaded against the Communion of the Church, in whose Peace and
Communion they might have Peace and Salvation; they have some perverse Opinions
of their Brethren, or Minister, some point of Reputation, profit, or trade lies
in the way, or some strange reports have been whispered in their ears, by
Schismatical persons, the truth whereof they had never time to examine, nor
discretion to judge of; and yet there are such invincible prejudices created
within them, that they cannot be reconciled, Non amo te, nec possum dicere
quare, that is they must keep at a distance, and live in hatred and malice,
though they have no reason for it. But when God shall call us to an account for
our ignorance, and uncharitableness, and make inquisition for the Authors and
grounds of all those divisions, that obstinacy and cruelty that has been
practiced among us, what shall we answer him? can we say as Saul did except it
be falsely, I have kept the Commandments of the Lord? it will be replied then,
what means the lowing of the Oxen, and the bleating of the Sheep that are
gone astray? if it be pretended that they are set apart for a more solemn
Sacrifice, the Prophet demands, has the Lord as great delight in Sacrifice,
and burnt-offerings, as in obeying the Voice of the Lord? Behold to obey (the
Commands of God for Peace and Charity) is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of Rams. Shall we say all our divisions were occasioned by
misinformation, that the Cause of God and the Kingdom of Christ were concerned,
or that it was done in opposition to a Ceremony, because we would not receive
the Sacrament on our Knees, or see our Minister wear a Surplice, or because we
would not submit to the injunctions of our Rulers in matters of Decency, Vbi ad
summum illud Tribunal ventum fuerit ubi reddenda erit olim functionis nostrae
ratio, minima erit de Ceremoniis quaestio. Call. Epist, in Catech. Genev.
or which is as much as any of the rest, because we would not eat with
Publicans and sinners? Consider, if this be not contrary to our Saviors rule,
of preferring Mercy above Sacrifice, when we sacrifice Mercy and Peace, and
Charity, which are so strictly commanded, to our own ignorance or interest, or
to the discontent and maliciousness of wicked men, which are so peremptorily
forbidden.

Remernber the Blessing pronounced to the Peacemakers by our Savior, and the
Curse against them that are Contentious, and obey not the Gospel, and then
think, whether true Comfort and Piety, do lie most in being instruments of
Peace, of Mercy and good Works, Deterior est qui recedit ab Ecclesiae
concordia, and in baeresin aut Schisma demigrat, quam qui impure vivit salvis
dogmatibus. Eras. de Eccl. concordia, p. 113.
or in being Firebrarnds in the Church of God, instruments of Satan, accusers
of the Brethren, enemies of Peace, and authors of Confusion. And think often,
that God has made our following of Peace, a condition of Salvation, as well as
of Holiness. Follow peace with all men, (with all our Christian Brethren more
especially) without which no man shall see the Lord.

The Plea of Templum Domini, will but aggravate the guilt of such as do steal,
Jer. 7.4.
and murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, Is this House which is
called by my Name become a den of Robbers? What greater dishonor can we do the
Church of God than under pretense of Zeal for Reformation of things
inconsiderable and doubtful, to open a gap for the greatest impiety, such as
Rebellion, and Schism, a contempt of things Sacred and Civil, which have been
after mature deliberation and Primitive custom legally established in the
Church of God?

If men do indeed desire the honor and safety of Religion, and the whole
Nation, there is no better method of effecting it, than by a hearty endeavor,
that we may all speak, and mind the same things, and keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace: by this the power of godlinefs will appear, as
well as the form of it, when that Dove-like spirit shall possess our Souls, and
banish all those proud and wrathful dispositions, that do as much hinder the
righteousness of God, James 1.20.
as love and charity to our Brethren. What an honor is it to be a Repairer of
the breaches of Sion, to settle the Ark of God, that has been so long in a
wandering condition, to convert Thousands of Souls from the error of their ways,
and as the good Samaritan, pour in Wine and Oil to their wounds, that have
fallen among Thieves, in their journeying from Jerusalem to Jericho? If Christ
will so graciously reward at the last day, all those temporal and bodily
supplies, that we bestow on his distressed Members, as himself has expressed,
Matthew. 25.34. much more bountifully will he recompense all that labor of love,
which we manifest for the preservation of those Souls, which he redeemed with
his precious blood, to reduce a sinner from the error of his ways, by a mild
reproof, a seasonable instruction, a peaceable and pious example. This is to be
as Moses was to Aaron, ( Exodus 4.16.) instead of a God and a Savior unto them.
Great is the advantage and opportunity that those Men have, who by their parts
and reputation have an influence upon the spirits and consciences of their
misguided Brethren, if they would instruct them in this plain lesson of
preferring works of mercy and charity above all external services whatsoever;
if they would convince them, how hateful to God a Pharisaical temper is, that
disposes Men to quarrel about external circumstances, wherein they are not at
all concerned, and to neglect the most necessary duties of the Gospel,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, which are of Eternal concernment to their Souls. In
so doing, the may save themselves, and perhaps thousands of those that know
them, and are ready to follow them, And if there be a pleasure in doing good,
there is no pleasure like that, which will arise, from being instrumental in so
public a blessing, wherein the very being of Religion, the peace of the
Nation, and the salvation of souls are bound together, especially in this
juncture of affairs, when for want of exercising mercy to one another, we
expose our selves as a Sacrifice to our common enemies. Misericordiam volo, is
God's voice to us, and may it ever be heard in our Land. If he should have
dealt with us, as we do one with another, and lay hold of every provocation to
destroy us, the whole Land might have been a sacrifice to his Justice: but he
has in the midst of judgment remembered mercy, and seeing it is his mercy that
we are not consumed, let us not be so unmerciful to our selves, as to bite and
devour one another till we be utterly consumed. Gal. 5.15.
Misericordiam volo, is the Kings Motto, as well as God's; He has sometime
graciously manifested his readiness, to dispense with the use of those
established forms of worship, which himself retains as most agreeable to the
Word of God, and in which, the Arguments and Sufferings of his Royal Father
have confirmed him (next to a Jus Divinum) against all doubtings or
contradictions: yet to show that he also loves mercy, rather than sacrifice, he
indulged the omission of them, as long as the peace and welfare of the Nation
could bear it; how ill do they requite this great condescension, that will not
recede one step from their pretended holy, but really unpeaceable Discipline,
to follow such a Divine and Royal example, as both God and the King do propose
to them? Misericordiam volo, should be our Petition to the King to pardon all
that obstinacy and peevishness of spirit, that keeps us still in disobedience
and contradiction to those good and wholesome Laws, whereby we might lead quiet
and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Sure I am
Misericordiam volo will one day be our Petition to God, that he would not enter
into judgment with us; and we may know what our sentence will be then, Romans
2.16.
sor by the Gospel we must be judged, and that assures us that with what
judgment we judge we shall be judged; Mat. 7.2.
and, he shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy. James 2.13.
Voluit Deus ut quisque sit sibi mensura misericordiae. And now Misericordiam
volo, shall be my Plea also, that you would pardon my trespassing on your
patience, and that you would suffer a word of Exhortation. God has planted us
in his own Vineyard, Isay 5.
hedged us about with his Almighty providence, and been at the expense of
Miracles of Mercy, to restore and establish us on foundations of peace and
rightcousness: And now that he expects Grapes, let us not bring forth wild
grapes, he looks for judgment, let us not bring forth oppression, and when he
expects righteousness, let us not bring forth a cry of our own sins and
divisions, and the sufferings of our brethren, lest he take away our hedge, and
we be eaten up, and lest he break down our wall, and we be trodden down of
them, that bear evil will to Sion, and watch opportunities to lay us wast.

If there be any fanatic principle among us, (and there are certainly very
many) this is one, to think that purity of Ordinances will commute for the
impurity of our lives, or that we are either better, or safer, for being of
this, or that Party: Lot and Noah are commended for being righteous in a
wicked, and perverse Generation; their condemnation will be the greater, that
are wicked and unrighteous in a holy Nation, and Schismatical in the Communion
of a Church truly Catholic and Apostolical: Let none of us be as the Sons of
Eli, Sons of Belial, that snatched at the flesh while it was raw, and served
themselves before the Lord, whereby they made the offerings of the Lord to be
abhorred of the People: Let none of us be like the Proud and Hypocritical
Pharisees, who thought to cloak their real impieties, in neglecting works of
mercy and peace, by a pretense of zeal for the minute circumstances of external
Worship and Discipline; but let us offer to God the sacrifices of a humble and
contrite heart, and not forget to do good and communicate, Heb. 13.16.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: and then he will accept our
praises, and answer our Prayers with a Misericordiam volo: I will have mercy
upon you, and heal your Land. Which God grant for the sake of Jesus Christ,
Amen.

FINIS.

