VOX CLERI: OR, THE Sense of the Clergy, Concerning the Making of ALTERATIONS
IN THE ESTABLISHED LITVRGY: WITH REMARKS on the Discourse concerning the
Ecclesiastical COMMISSION, and several Letters for ALTERATIONS. To which is
Added, An Historical ACCOUNT OF THE Whole PROCEEDINGS OF THE Present
Convocation.

My Son, fear thou the LORD, and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to Change,

Prove. xxiv. xxi. Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuvat utilitate
novitate perturbat,

August. ad Januarium Epist. 118. Cap. 5. Licensed, and Entered according to
Order.

London: Printed, and are to be sold by R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1690.

THE AUTHOR'S PROTESTATION.
TO cure the Prejudices with which too many are already prepossessed, and to
prevent the growth and mischievous effects, which they may produce; I have
thought it necessary for the security of my self, and Brethren, to declare what
our Persuasions are, as to the Present Government both in Church and State. And
first we have by our Oaths promised to bear Faith and true Allegiance to the
King and Queens Majesty's. And the whole Clergy have renewed their Allegiance
to their Majesty's, and their adherence to the Church as Established, in their
late Address of Thanks, etc. in these words, Whereby we doubt not but the
Interest of the Protestant Religion in all other Protestant Churches (which is
dear to us) will be better secured, etc. So that whoever do represent them as
enemies, either to the Church or State, or any Protestant Churches, do falsely
and maliciously reproach them, or interpret that to be their sin, which is
their bounden duty, and care; and if these be our faults, I hope there is no
sort of people, who join with us in living, in obedience to the Laws of the
Land, and in the Communion of the Church, will entertain those Prejudices and
hard thoughts of us, which some that are enemies to both, have from the Press,
and from their Pulpits, scandalously suggested against us, to draw an Odium on
the Consultations of the whole Clergy in Convocation, and to incense the people
against them, as enemies to peace and reconciliation, I only crave this
kindness from those that are influenced with these reports; 1. To consider,
what our Adversaries report of us: And 2ly, what may be the reason of such
reports. The Author of the second Letter (reflected on in the following
Discourse) relating to the Convocation, has these expressions concerning such
as are not for Alterations, Page 6. I expect no less than that they become
abhorred of the whole Nation, and as the common enemies of its peace be treated
accordingly in every Parish where we live among them. P. 5. That we have
maintained Trifles with unreasonable Rigor. And P. 6. we have already lost our
reputation with the people by insisting too rigorously on those things. P. 9.
That there is an obligation upon us of coming to a change not to be resisted
without guilt. P. 20. That we are a base and false sort of men that can promise
in adversity, and forget all when that is over. P. 22. That we shall lose the
people of the Land, and give our Adversaries advantage over us to our utter
ruin. P. 15. That the People are overthrown by Excommunications for a penny or
two-penny cause. That we shall totally extinguish all Convocations for the
future, and therefore he desires them to consider, whether the Church of
England is now met together only to be Felo's de se, and (not to mention all
his vile insinuations) that in P. 25. contains as much spite and venom as he
could hold without breaking, such (says he) as are most perversely bent
against reason and conscience to do all the wickedness they can to gratify a
peevish humor. With these things he asperseth the whole Clergy in general,
clothing them as the Persecutors of old did the Christians, in Bears and Lions
Skins, and so exposed them to be devoured by such creatures. But this Author
comes to Particulars. And P. 25. says of the suspended Bishops (whom he
acknowledges (as their greatest enemies must) that they are excellent men) yet
says, if they should not consent to Alterations, The resentment of the State
will be heavy on them as enemies to them and us, so as they will be immediately
crushed and fall to nothing. And more particularly he thus reflects on our
worthy Prolocutor, as a man worthy of the death of the greatest Criminal. For
thus he says of him, We have no reason to thank him for his Speech, or his
Motto, the last of which I suppose pleased him best, because it carried a
double stab with it, the one against the Church, the other against his greatest
Benefactor to promote him in it, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?

But 2ly, What is the cause of all this bitter zeal and inveterate malice, it
is only because he fancieth they will not consent to such Alterations as shall
be proposed to them; but first it may well be supposed, that neither he nor
they do yet know what Alterations will be, for none have been as yet proposed
to them, and therefore to hang and draw before any crime be alleged against
them, is a most barbarous practice, especially for one that is of the same
Communion with them, and upon those whom he acknowledges to be such excellent
men his Fathers and his Brethren. But thus did his Predecessors heretofore
destroy the Church by such malicious insinuations from groundless fears and
jealousies, as the Jews did Crucify our Savior. Venient Romani, They will
bring in Popery. But when the Church has defeated that Engine, and made it
wholly useless by rooting up the very foundations of Popery, such men must have
recourse to other inventions. And the noise of Persecution is raised against
them, that they have been and would be again, if they had power, as great
Persecutors as the Heathen Emperors were; but this clamor the present Bishop of
Salisbury with some others have silenced, proving undeniably that the Church of
England had neither the temper nor the power to be of a Persecuting spirit.

And now the Cry is, That she is of a peevish and obstinate humor, that
against Reason and Conscience hinders peace and reconciliation, and in sum
says our Author, That she is afraid of losing her Church power and
Church-promotions; though all the Nation knows with what general unanimity and
Christian resolution, the Clergy hazarded all their Promotions, by refusing to
publish the late Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and suspending
the Penal Laws, which now their enemies plead for, in compliance with the
present juncture of Affairs, and is as evident as any matter of fact can be;
and little less evident is it, who they are that gape for the Preferments,
which other men have signally deserved, and are legally possessed of; if this
be not enough wholly to cure the prejudices which have been insinuated into the
Minds of overcredulous and inconsiderate Men; yet I hope that which follows, if
duly considered, may prevent the prejudicate Opinions of such as have any sober
Principles, or serious Thoughts, least unawares they be tempted to curse those
that bless them in the Name of the Lord, and to bless those that curse their
Father and Mother; in that heretofore most abused Scripture, Judges 5.23. Curse
ye Meroz; curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to
the help of the Lord against the mighty: And blessed above Women shall they be
that put their hands to the nail, and their right-hands to the workman's
hammer, to smite off the head of Sisera, and destroy all the carved works of
our Temples with Axes and Hammers. We are told that we have many Enemies, and
so we ever had, and are like to have, as all may see, that read what comes from
the Press, and what is preached from the Pulpit by Men of our own Communion:
witness what was lately preached, in several Congregations; That we are raising
within our own mind, and in the minds of the people, over whom we have any
influence, all the sowerness and peevishness that is possible; That the things
proposed (when yet there is nothing proposed) are of themselves so desirable,
though there should be no Dissenter gained by them, and such as will tend to
the making all the parts of our Offices both more unexceptionable, and more
edifying; and if we let slip the present advantages that we have, what is to be
said upon it? but that this is of the Lord, who by it is punishing us for our
other Sins; for our remisness in our Duties; for our neglect of our Pastoral
Care; for our slackning that strictness of Life which becomes our Profession;
for our indulging our selves too much in Sensuality and Laziness; and he thanks
God for the Liberty, that the Service of God is secured to all Men; of
following the Dictates of Conscience, in the Service of God; and that we are
freed from all the Remnants of the worst part of Popery; that we had too long
retained, I mean, says he, the Spirit of Persecution. Though the same person
had vindicated the Church from such a Spirit in several other Tracts; I shall
only add, to make this Apology complete, what Festus said of Agrippa, Acts
25.23. It seems to me unreasonable to send a Prisoner, and not withal to
signify the Crimes laid against him. And certainly, as yet, there are no
Crimes laid against us of the Country, or you that are of the Convocation; for
it cannot be a Crime in them that are Men of good Reputation, and honest
Conversations, not to do that which is both against the Law of the Land, and
against the Dictates of their own Consciences: It is not a Crime for a Man not
to do what none as yet has required of him to do; It is not a Crime for a Man
to do that which he is well persuaded will be but lost labor when it is done;
and yet for these things we are defamed, accused, and condemned, and exposed as
so many Offenders to be executed at the will of the Rabble. Were it so, that
the Question had been proposed, whether we would admit of Alterations, or not;
yet all Law and Equity gives Malefactors the privilege of making a defense,
especially when their Reputation, their Livelihoods, and even their Lives are
concerned: An accused person ought to have his Enemy face to face; and hear his
Indictment, and plead guilty or not guilty; but none of these things have yet
been permitted to us: And if it be crime enough to be accused, no mortal Man
has his Innocence secured. These are, I hope, competent Reasons for this
present Undertaking, it being a thing natural for a Man to defend himself,
there being no living Creature so void of Sense, as not to avoid another that
attempts to destroy him; and every Worm will turn upon him that would tread on
it: And if an innocent person chance to injure another that injuriously
assaults him, he is always held guiltless, as having done it Se defendendo.

This, Sir, is what the irregular and groundless Proceedings of some Dissenters
have exacted from us, to mollify, if it be possible, the Temper of the People,
as well as to abate the confident Calumnies of our Enemies. Which God of his
infinite Mercy grant. I am, Sir,

Wholly yours, as you are the Churches Servant.

VOX CLERI: OR THE Sense of the Clergy, CONCERNING ALTERATIONS in the
Established LITURGY, etc.
SIR,
THE Intelligence you were pleased to give me of the Election of Dr. Jane to be
Prolocutor of the Convocation, gives great satisfaction to the Clergy of these
Parts; and that he was Chosen by much the major part of your Members, is looked
on as a good Omen of Success in your Proceedings for the good of the Church, as
by Law established; He being generally known to be a Person extraordinarily
well qualified, as well in respect of his Parts and Piety^, as of Loyalty and
Love to the Church. I have (as you desired) been very solicitous to inform my
self concerning the Sentiments of the Clergy in my Neighborhood, whether they
think it convenient that there should be Alterations made in the Liturgy,
Government and Discipline of the Church, or not: And although I find them very
inclinable to part with several Ceremonies, and to submit to many Alterations
for the peace of the Church, and satisfaction of sober Dissenters; yet
considering what weightier Matters the Dissenters seek to remove, they suppose
it more advisable not to part with any thing to those that will not be
satisfied, unless they may carry all: And for this Opinion of theirs, which
they humbly submit to the more mature determination of the Convocation, they
humbly offer the following Considerations:

1. They think it very reasonable, that such as are aggrieved should make their
Application to the Convocation, to whom His Majesty has given Power to prepare
such Remedies as may by the Parliament receive the force of a Law; for so says
the Commission; So that the things by you so considered and prepared may be in
a readiness to be offered to the Convocation at their next meeting; and when
approved by them, may be presented to us, and our Two Houses of Parliament;
that if it shall be judged fit, they may be established in due form of Law. It
cannot be expected that the several Sects should agree in Common Proposals, but
that such of them as will be satisfied with what in Reason and Conscience may
be granted, and then I should not doubt that they would be gratified, and a
good agreement made; for all agree (according to our Subscriptions) that such
Ceremonis as concern Discipline and Order, may, upon just causes, be altered
and changed; but whether Alterations should be made when they are like to
produce more hurt than good, is what we think worthy of consideration in the
present case. And we think we have a Moral assurance, that whatever Concessions
the Convocation can make with safety to themselves, will not only be despised,
but cast back as filth in our faces; not only with a Quis requisivit, but with
a Pudet haec Opprobria vobis; as if our manner of public Worship were so
corrupt, that we were ashamed of it, and were convinced of a necessity to purge
it. Whereas though it was declared in the Preface to the Liturgy, as also in
the King's Ecclesiastical Commission, as is repeated p. 13. of that Discourse,
That it is reasonable that on weighty and important Considerations, according
to the Exigency of times and occasions, such Changes and Alterations may be
made, as to those that are in place of Authority should seem necessary or
expedient: Yet it is there said, We are fully persuaded in our Judgments, that
the Book, as it stood before established by Law, does not contain in it any
thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a godly Man
may not with a good Conscience use and submit unto, or which is not fairly
defensable against any that shall oppose the same. Though the Book there spoken
of has been altered for the better in some Hundreds of places since that
Declaration.

2. They think it reasonable, that the End should be considered, before the
Means be resolved on. Now the End designed by the Alterations to be made, is
the Satisfaction of the Consciences of the Dissenters, and reducing them to the
Communion of the Church; but what those Alterations are that will give them
satisfaction, has not yet been proposed with any moderation, nor what
Concessions will reduce them to our Communion. The Author of a Discourse
concerning the late Ecclesiastical Commission, p. 18. says, That in the Year
1661, the Alterations and Additions then made by the Convocation, did amount to
the number of about Six hundred: Yet that Established Liturgy was rejected by
some of the chiefest Dissenters (not without very indecent Reflections on King
Charles the Second, who had promised to leave those things to the Parliament
and Convocation) with this reproach, If these be all the Abatements and
Amendments ye will admit, ye sell your own Innocence, and the Churches Peace
for nothing. In the Year 1681, when Dr. Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester,
made large Overtures to gratify the Dissenters, (viz) That the Cross in
Baptism might be either taken off, or consigned to public Baptism, and left to
the choice of the Parents: That such as could not Kneel might be permitted to
stand at the reception of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: That the Surplice
should be taken away: That at Baptism the Fathers should be permitted to join
with the Sponsors in offering the Child to Baptism, or desire them publicly to
present their Child, and the Charge be given to them both: That they should be
required to Subscribe only to thirty six of the Articles: That there should be
a new Translation of the Psalms for Parish-Churches: That the Apocryphal
Lessons should be exchanged for Scriptural: That the Rubric should be
Corrected, with many other Condescentions. They were all thrown, as it were,
with spite in his teeth, by those that Answered his Sermon and Proposals, with
an Habeat sibi and suis. And in a Book of Mr. R. B's, lately Reprinted, being
an Account of Nonconformity in the Reigns of Charles the Second and James the
Second; it is affirmed, That there are Forty sinful Particulars in our
Communion, besides Thirty tremendous Principles and Circumstantials, which
affright the Dissenters from it; and he reproacheth the Conformists as a
company of lying and perjured Persons. And the Author of a late Book, called
the Healing Attempt, says, they (the Non-conformists) are not satisfied with
the Propension of our Governors, to lay aside the Ceremonies, and other more
offensive Impositions, unless their new Model for a Comprehension may be
admitted; which is such, as would make every Parish Church independent, and in
a short time turn our Bethel into a Babel of Confusion; whereas therefore it is
said in the Preface to the Liturgy, It is reasonable, that on weighty and
important Considerations, such Alterations may be made as to those that are in
Authority should seem necessary and convenient: Yet it is added in the same
Preface, We are fully persuaded in our Judgments (and we here profess it to the
World, that the Book, as it stood before established by Law (and we may say the
same of the Book now Established after the Six hundred Alterations) does not
contain in it any thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or
which a godly Man may not with a good Conscience use or submit unto, or which
is not fairly defensible against any that shall oppose the same.

Now I take it as granted, that the Convocation neither can nor will alter all
those Particulars which some leading Men among the Dissenters do account to be
Sinful; nor all those tremendous Circumstantials which will still afright them
from our Communion; and that if but a few, if but one such thing, which they
account to be Sinful, remain unaltered, the Schism will still be continued: and
therefore if I should ask, Cui bono? To what end should any Alterations be
made? I doubt a satisfactory Answer could not be given by such as plead for
them, when they themselves have so plainly declared, that they will not be
satisfied.

Object. But herein we may please the King, the Parliament, and a great part of
the Dissenting Laity.

Ans. First as to the King, His Majesty has devolved that Province on the
Convocation and Parliament.

2dly, He has declared his Satisfaction as to the present Constitution.

3. He does confirm his delared Judgment by his constant practice in
Communicating with the Church as established, and frequent Promises to favor
and protect it.

2. As to the Parliament, they do generally live in the Communion of the
Church; and if any do otherwise, it is contrary to several Acts of preceding
Parliaments, against which, though a Toleration be their Security, yet as that
has been formerly exploded, so it may be again, and if they see it fit,
abrogated.

And 4hly, Nothing can be obligatory but what shall be enacted by them whose
consent we are not assured of.

3. As to the People, though some few may desire Alterations, yet they do not
agree in what Alterations they will acquiesce: And it is more probable, that
the insisting on a Consormity to the present Constitution, will reduce all to
an Uniformity, rather than any intended Alterations; for Experience shows, that
from the Year 1661, when Uniformity was enjoined, the People were generally
reduced to it; so as in some great Cities scarce three or four persons of any
note kept off from our Communion, until the Toleration (procured by the
Papists) put all into Disorder again.

Lastly, What the late Commissioners have prepared in order to an Alteration,
is to us a Non constat, the Reasons are best known to themselves; but though we
have no very good opinion of such of them as are said to be of Latitudinarian
Principles, yet they having hitherto lived in a Conformity to the Church as
established, we hope they will not give up any thing that is substantial, with
the Circumstantials for Decency and Order; or if they do so, it will be as
pardonable in us of the Country, to forsake them, as for some of those eminent
Divines, that were joined in Commission with them: And I am fully persuaded,
that on making such Alterations as are said to be prepared by the
Commissioners, the Church will run the hazard of offending a greater number of
more considerable persons, than they are likely to gratify thereby.

Object. But such Alterations being made, such as shall thenceforward continue
to be Dissenters, will be more inexcusable.

Ans. This is not very probable, because they will still say, you have only
taken off the lesser Offenses, but have continued the weighter Matters on their
Consciences still, (viz.) such as in their Consciences they account to be
Sinful, and their Conformity to them to be Damnable.

And if after such Alterations be established by Law, and any Penalty be
annexed for the Sanction of that Law, the Legislators will be reflected on as
Persecutors, and their Laws as so many tearing Engines: though I must needs
say, there never yet were such severe Penalties enacted against any sort of
Dissenters, though known to be Men of Atheistical and Antimonarchical
Principles, as against some Reverend Fathers and Members of the Church, who are
known to be Men of Religious and Peaceable Principles, yet they quietly submit
with a Deus providebit.

I may well presume, that no Man living in Communion with our Church, is
convinced, that there is any thing Sinful in that Communion; now these being
the greater and the better part, I say with Dr. Beveredge in his Sermon to the
Convocation, p. 25. Neque ratio neque perpetua Ecclesiae consuetudo patitur ut
pars toti praeferatur; Neither reason, nor the perpetual Custom of the Church,
does permit that a part should be preferred before the whole: And then nothing
can justify the Dissenters from Schism in their Separation from us; for as to
things that are by them judged Inexpedient, it is fit that the greater and
better Part should judge of Expediency for the rest, and not they for
themselves or their Betters: And if such Opinionative and Ungovernable People
were for a while, by strict Discipline, taught the Duty of Self-denial, as to
things in their nature indifferent, and how necessary Obedience to Superiors
is in such cases, which even they themselves do practice, and in which sort of
things only our Governors have Authority, we might hope for an Uniformity, and
not otherwise: And to this end it is very observable what Dr. Beveredge says in
his Sermon, p. 26. Antiquas novis mutare Legibus; To change old Laws for new,
is always dangerous, unless such a Necessity constrain as is otherwise
insuperable.

There was never any Church which has not inserted into her Laws many things
(not contrary, but) beside those things which are in the Holy Scripture, and
having made such Laws, do establish them by the Sanctions of Ecclesiastical
Punishments, p. 23: When therefore that Learned Doctor says, p. 27. Vtrum
Ecclesiae noslra, etc. whether our Church be obliged by a Necessity to change
any thing that is by her Laws established, is not his part to determine; but,
Prudentis est, and immediately adds, This only I dare to affirm, That if it be
necessary to reduce wandering Sheep into Christ's Flock; if to take off Scruples
from the minds of weak Brethren; if to allay Hatred, appease Anger, and as much
as may be, to suppress all Dissentions concerning Religion; if to recall
Ecclesiastical Discipline to its Primitive Vigor; if to Defend and Establish
the best Church in the World against the Assaults of Men and Devils; if these
things (says he) seem necessary to any Man, it will also seem necessary to that
Man to admit such Changes as he is persuaded will conduce to such ends; so as
the Change be made in such things only which our Church has constituted by her
sole Authority, not in such as the Universal Church by her common Laws has
Established.

Here then we say, that to alter the Episcopal Government, to take the Power of
Ordination from Bishops, and place it in the hands of Presbyters, to take away
a Well-ordered Liturgy, and bring in Extemporary Prayers for Public Worship,
to give every Minister a Jurisdiction and Power of Excommunication, and many
other things, without which some grave Dissenters will not be comprehended, is
more than the Learned Doctor will grant: for of such things he speaks his mind
impartially, Has sub quovis praetextu vel extremis digitis attingere, etc. To
endeavor the removal of these, under any pretense whatsoever, or to touch them
with one of our Fingers, is contrary to the Religious Care of all the Churches
of God, and of our own.

And to Abrogate or Reject that, which has been everywhere, and at all times
observed, is not to change an Ecclesiastical Rite only, but the Church itself,
and to make it differ from all other Churches of God.

But what then is the Doctor's Judgment concerning such Constitutions as are in
the Power of a particular Church.

Ans. This the Doctor determined, p. 23. ut supra, and again, p. 26. A Change
has neither been wont, nor ought to be made by any Church at any time, unless
some great Necessity do constrain thereto: But of a change of what fort of Laws
does the Doctor speak? That he tells us in the same Page, Neque enim quispiam,
etc. There is not any Man so skilful, as by any Art to foresee how many and
great dangers are like to arise by the change of incommodious Laws; wherefore
to change old Laws for new, is always dangerous, unless such a necessity urge it
as cannot otherwise be overcome; and such as is so manifest to all, that
whoever sees the Change, may also see, Summam ejus rationem and necessitatem,
the greatest Reason and necessity for the Change even of those incommodious
Laws.

To this I shall need to add no more than that apt Allusion of this Learned
Doctor, concerning the Obligation of Ecclesiastical Laws, p. 19. As in this
Kingdom there are many Corporations and inferior Societies which have a Power
granted them, of constituting Laws for themselves and their Members, with this
caution, That nothing be done or constituted by them which is contrary to the
Statutes of the Realm, the Common Law, or any ancient Custom, which beyond the
memory of Man, has been introduced and received by the whole Kingdom, and
thereby has obtained the force of a Law; (Now though this be in p. 20. applied
to the Universal Church, yet in p. 21.) the Doctor applies it to particular
Churches: In quacunque provincia sitae sunt; In whatever Province a Church is
planted, the Bishops and Pastors of that Province, may, as often as occasion
requires, hold their Synods or Sacred Assemblies to deliberate and consult of
things belonging to the Church constituted in that Province: And p. 22. All
such Churches, by their Synods, have power to make Laws, as they shall judge
expedient for the better Administration of the Public Worship of God, and of
his Word and Sacraments, within their Province; otherwise it could not well be,
that any Provincial or National Church should long subsist, or be at peace. And
p. 23. Moreover, it belongs to all the Churches of God, to establish, by
Ecclesiastical Penalties, such Canons by them made, lest any thing contrary to
them should be without Impunity committed.

Object. But our Divisions had almost betrayed us to Popery and Slavery, for
prevention of which danger, for the future, it is advisable, as much as may
be, to enlarge the Terms of our Communion.

Ans. But who betrayed us to those Divisions? were they not such as causelessly
separated from us, and were more ready to join with the common Enemy of the
Protestant Religion, though they called themselves true Protestants, than with
the Church of England? Whereof he that wrote the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Sermon of Separation, gave an Account, and even dared the Opponents to call him
to the proof of it, (viz.) That Dr. Owen, etc. were entertained as Pensioners
to the late King, and by him encouraged to continue our Divisions; by which the
Papists got great advantages against us. And whereto tended the flattering and
fulsom Addresses of the Sectaries to the late King, to stand by him with their
Lives and Fortunes, and to obey him without Reserve, but to continue those
Divisions, and foment those Seeds of Discord which were grown up, and ripened
almost for the Harvest, to cut us all down, and utterly destroy us? And what if
some leading Presbyterians be by our Alterations let into the Church, and
advanced to such Preferments as they hope for; to be Bishops, Deans,
Archdeacons, etc. what security have we, that they will not promote Divisions
in the Church, more dangerous, than the Schism they made by Separation from us;
as some Bishops, and others that had been sour'd with that Leaven, being
preferred in the Reign of Charles the Second, did attempt: A secret Enemy
within the Walls of a well Fortified City, is more dangerous than an open Foe
in the Field.

I have read in the Life of Judge Hales, written by the present Bishop of
Sarum, p. 71. That there was a Bill for Comprehension contrived by Bishop
Wilkins, Sir Orlando Bridgman, and that Judge, which though it contained more
reasonable Terms than what are now proposed, (as I have been informed) for the
Admission of some Dissenters into our Communion, yet it was opposed by the
Clergy, because they thought a Faction within the Church, would prove to be
more hurtful than a Schism without it: And when one Party was let in upon Terms
not perhaps unreasonable, another Party, upon other Terms less reasonable,
would solicit their Admission. And it was objected, That as some might come
in, so others, that were in our Communion, might take Offense by the
Alterations, and desert it; and seeing our frequent Changes in some things,
they might suppose that there is nothing certain among us; and from the many
Disputes about our Liturgy, proceed to question our Articles, and at last fall
off to the Church of Rome, which they saw more constant to their Principles:
For which, and other reasons the Bill was cast out by the Votes of the House of
Commons, with whom the same Considerations may still prevail.

And now let the Men that are given to Change, produce those weighty and
important Reasons, required in the Preface to the Common Prayer, or that great
Necessity which Dr. Beveredge requires for the Alteration, even of incommodious
Laws.

Is it necessary that an honest Man should voluntarily resign his Freehold to a
litigious Person, who neither desires nor deserves it, and perhaps would
improve the possession of it to his ruin?

Is it necessary that a Parent should yield to a disobedient Child, upon his
own unreasonable terms?

Is it necessary that a good Man should accuse, bear false witness against, and
condemn and execute himself, and be a Felo de se?

Is it necessary that the Citizens should suffer a breach to be made in their
Wall, to give advantage to an Enemy, when they are ready to open their Gates to
let in any that offers a reasonable assurance that he is a Friend?

Is there any necessity to Reform that Church which is conseft to be the best
Reformed Church in the World; that Church to whose Pattern all the rest do
desire, and only want power and opportunity to conform their own?

Is it necessary we should do more for those, who wilfully departed from us,
and as our Savior intimates, Not being content to be with us, were against us,
than we have done for those foreign Protestants, Men of great Learning and
tender Consciences, who voluntarily offer themselves to our Communion, without
insisting on any Terms with us?

Is it necessary that a Church in which all things necessary to Salvation, may
be freely enjoyed, should accuse herself of want of Christian Charity, and of
imposing such sinful Terms, for admitting others into her Communion, as were
purposely designed to keep them out, and afterward voluntarily cast off those
things, and thereby confess themselves guilty of so great Uncharitableness?

Is it necessary that a Church, which has Authority to judge for itself, what
is decent and orderly, should subject herself to the Judgment of her Members,
to determine for her or themselves, what is decent and expedient, and what is
not; especially when the Exception from Obedience to the Church in such things,
ought to be as evident and unquestionable, as the Command to obey them in such
Matters is?

Is it necessary that we should give greater Offense to the Papists, from
coming into our Communion (now in this juncture of time) by our Variableness
and Defect of the Solemnity of Public Worship, which hitherto they have
objected against us?

Is it necessary we should part with any thing to them, whom we have reason to
suspect, that they will not leave craving till they have all?

When all these things are proved to be necessary, then shall we be ready to
make Alterations in our Ceremonies, and other Circumstances, if the Dissenters
will be content to let us enjoy what is substantial and necessary to the
well-being of our Church: In the mean time we shall account our selves Happy,
in the number of those Englishmen, that know when they are well.

REFLECTIONS ON A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Ecclesiastical Commission.
SIR,
I Have also conferred with my Brethren concerning a Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission, 1689. Of which we shall not
say so much as the Author does of a former Commission for the like affair, viz.
That he never entertained a good Opinion of it. We only remark, that this
Author has laid the foundation, which he and some others have framed their
superstructure on, viz.

1. That the Alterations intended by it are not prejudicial. 2. That they are
useful, tending to the well-being of the Church. 3. That it is a fit juncture
for putting the design in execution.
The Author gives several Instances of several Alterations made, as in the
Third of Edward the Sixth, when the Common Prayer Book was composed and
altered, the 1st. of Eliz. And a Proclamation for Authorizing an Uniformity of
the Book of Common Prayer; and at the Return of Charles the Second, the Liturgy
was reviewed (and altered) by his Commission ae the Savoy; but our Author takes
no notice of the Penalties to be inflicted on such as should not conform to it,
and on such as should defame it, by several Acts of Parliament; nor how little
effect it had for the healing the Divisions and Schism which some Dissenters
had then made; nor how much King James the First was displeased with those
Dissenters, that pretended to make good their Objections against it, which they
were not able to perform in the Conference at Hampton Court, whereof the Author
speaks, p. 3. Yet this I say of this Author, that he speaks much more modestly
than the Author of A Glance on the Ecclesiastical Commission, who would
precipitate the matter, and have an Act of Parliament for a Comprehension
first, and then an Act to Authorize the Commission: But our Author pretends
only to prepare things, thereby to save Time and Labor, in kindness to the
Convocation; whatever the Pretense be, the Consequence may be very prejudicial
to the Members of the Convocation, if any difference should happen for this
Discourse; and several Letters being dispersed into the Countries, where they
have their Residence, to prepossess the Minds of Dissenters, that they have
occasioned the obstruction of the intended Union; and as those Letters import,
deserve to be treated as Enemies.

That Mobile which are already too full of Rankor against them, and have
already, in a considerable City, burnt a Bishop instead of a Pope, will be
ready to affront them, and throw them into the next fire, as they were, when
there was rejoicing for the Bishops deliverance out of the Tower: And therefore
it had been more prudent, if they had with patience expected the determination
of the Convocation, and forborne those ill-boding Reflections, which tend to
create an Odium against such Members; though it be well known, they have no
power to offer any thing, being limited by the King's Proposals.

Nor has the Author consulted better for his own Party, when speaking of the
Personal Qualifications of the Commissioners, p. 8. he tells the Country, how
they have been traduced as assuming Men, who will think themselves bound in
Honor to defend what they shall have done, as Men that have tenderness enough
to part with any thing but their Church-preferments; As Men who have a Latitude
to conform to a Church, de facto, which has Power on its side. And page 9. Men
who conceal their own inclinations, till it is time to show them; Men likely to
do the Church of England a good turn, when opportunity serves, and which
perhaps they imagine now they have, which Characters agree well with those who
are known to be Latitudinarians indeed, and have Monopolized
Church-preferments. Yet our Author says they have no temptation now to show,
that they are Men of Latitude; it seems then they had heretofore. Page 10. our
Author mentions another Objection, (viz.) That as it may happen, our Church
may be changed, altered, and transformed by nine Men, which are the number of
the Quorum in the Commission.

Now although I dare not say, there was any partiality used in naming the
Commissioners; yet when I consider that many of those that were named did not
appear, and some very considerable persons that did appear, perceiving that
some such things, as might in their judgment prove prejudicial to the Church,
were proposed, did dissent and withdraw; it was not altogether unlikely that
Nine of those who remained might prepare such things, as the Convocation would
not approve of, as the Event will show.

And as for those great and excellent Men, who, as our Author says, are not
named in the Commission; it had been a more commendable Office and Duty to have
pleaded on their behalf, knowing them to be Men of great Prudence and
Fortitude, as well as of Integrity and Affection to the Church; and that they
are never like to disturb the Peace of the State, to intercede that some favor
might be shown to them as well as to Dissenters: Seeing if any, they are the
Men, who suffer for sake of their Consciences; especially, seeing our Author
says, The Commissioners design nothing so unreasonable as to fear, that the
Alterations would not pass in a free Convocation, if those Reverend and
Judicious Prelates were present. But it is our great unhappiness, that though
there have been several Convocations called, yet had not an opportunity of
meeting, till these Right Reverend Fathers and others were excluded and made
incapable; what hinderance this may be to the performance of what they
promised, (as our Author relates) That they wanted no due tenderness to
Dissenters, but were willing to come to such a temper as should be thought fit
when that matter should be considered in Parliament and Convocation, I cannot
divine, but acquiesce in the judgment of our Author, That if nothing
unreasonable were designed, it might then have passed, and a firm Establishment
ensued; for doubtless the calm Tempers of those Reverend Fathers would mightily
have influenced their Sons.

Page 13. mention is made of the Commission; the Preface whereof is the same
with what has been before mentioned out of the Preface to the Liturgy,
concerning the Alteration of Rites and Ceremonies, etc. upon weighty and
important Considerations; and the end of it is, to take away all occasions of
differences for the future, as well as reconciling all Their Majesty's Subjects
at present. A Blessing! this to be seriously endeavored by all persons, but
rather to be hoped for than expected; for though not only all our Rites and
Ceremonies, all things tending to Decency and Order, should be taken away, yet
there will be some that will find occasions of difference still; for we are
told in the late Healing Attempt, That it is impossible for the Dissenters to
unite, if it be still affirmed, That the Bishops and Presbyters are not of the
same Order: That the Power of Ordination is the sole Prerogative of the
Bishops: (i. e.) If the Ordinanation by Presbyters be not as authentic, as
that by Bishops; or that the Ordination by Presbyters is void; and that the
Ordaining them again by Bishops, is not Reordination; and he tells us plainly,
That it is not the taking away of our Ceremonies, and other Impositions, that
will satisfy the Dissenters; but if a Comprehension may not be had on those
other terms, there can be none at all. And a greater Dissenter than he says of
Episcopacy, That it is that thorny hedge which he had made his business to pull
down and would endeavor it (by going on both sides) as long as he lived. And
what dislike some have, not only of the pretended defects in our Liturgy, but
to any Liturgy for public Worship, is too well known by some very late
Writings of the Dissenters. And Mr. Baxter affirms, That of the Forty sinful
Terms for a Communion with us, if Thirty-nine were taken away, and only that
Rubric concerning the Salvation of Infants, dying shortly after their Baptism
were continued, yet they could not conform.

Now to what purpose should we begin, when we cannot see where to end. Is it
not better to endure some inconveniences (as in all Constitutions some will
be) than to expose our selves to certain mischiefs? And what can we expect when
the Six hundred Alterations in 1661, had no competent effect, but were rejected
with scorn? I wonder how this Author can object to you, as if you proceeded on
the same false grounds, as those Papists Heath and Fecknam did in Primo Eliz.
in opposing the Act for Uniformity, (viz.) That those changes were departures
from the Standard of the Catholic Church; That Points once defined, were not
to be brought again into question; That the Church should be constant to it
self: For he cannot but know that they opposed the Act for Uniformity Primo
Eliz. as excluding the false Doctrines and Superstitions of Rome; whereas we
plead for the Preservation of Uniformity in Doctrine, Worship and Government,
which are all opposed by some sort of Dissenters: I shall leave the indifferent
Reader to judge of the Inference which he makes, p. 18. That if the
Commissioners in 1661, saw reason for making Additions and Alterations to the
number of Six hundred; That there is equal, if not greater reason for some
further improvements. I think he might rather conclude, as he does immediately
after; That if they had foreseen what is since come to pass, (viz.) how few of
the Dissenters came in upon those Condescentions) they would not have done all
that they did. And perhaps on these Concessions, in favor of Dissenters, the
Papists had those hopes cherished in them (of which our Author there speaks) of
Liberty of Conscience, the removal of the Sanguinary, and then of other Penal
Laws, and of Forty Chapels to be opened for them in and about London; for they
know the Charity of the Church of England is not confined to one Sect, as that
of the Sectaries is. What he says p. 19. That the Conformists have given their
Assent and Consent to the Book of Common Prayer, whereof the Preface is a part;
which says, That in Churches Circumstantials may from time to time admit of
Alteration, is true, but not the whole truth; for it is added, Upon great and
important Reasons, which the Author omits; and if he speaks it not, as being in
a good Mood, but as his settled Judgment, that our Church, as it is the best
constituted Church in the World; then certainly they that cannot conform to our
Church, must on the same reason dissent from all the other Reformed Churches.
Page 20. he says, He is, in part, of the Opinion that the Prayers cannot be
altered for the better by any mere humane composition: But he will not grant it
of every Collect; and what those Collects are, we may have occasion to consider
hereafter; it is enough, that our constant daily Prayers are beyond exception;
His great business (as he calls it) will be but a great burden to the
Dissenters, as well as himself, (viz.) Adding some Offices to the Liturgy, and
preparing new ones which are wanting. Seeing we have had so many complaints of
the length and tediousness of them formerly, one thing the Author can scarce
pardon himself for, when writing of those who he says so angrily, though
causelessly, spoke against that Work, i. e. of making Alterations; he adds, They
must pardon me, if so near after the mentioning of them, I take notice of the
French Papists, who have reviled both the Commission, and the persons named in
it. Herein he scems to join all such as are not for Alterations, with the
Papists; and whether they must pardon him for this, if the People deal with
them as Papists, let him consider, and pardon himself if he can; yet I think
the Papists would very willingly have us make more Alterations, than most
Protestants think sit to make.

It is a pretty insinuation which he makes, p. 21. That the Conformists will
naturally be glad if the House, in which they resolve to live and dye, have all
the strength and beauty added to it, which can be given it by Commission,
Convocation, and Parliament.

Ans. The strength and beauty which it now has, is by all those means
confirmed to them; and willingly they would live, and hope they may happily dye
in it: But if the Dissenters will make breaches in that House, and take
possession thereof, deface its Beauty, and undermine its Strength, and force
them to leave it, I cannot see how they can naturally be glad of the behavior
of such ill-natured Men; and that there are some such besides those whom I have
mentioned already, the Author speaks of some in Northamptonshire, and I know
such in other Counties, who oblige their Communicants, and have vowed
themselves never to return to the Communion of the Church of England; and if
the present generation be so bad, the next is not like (if these Men have their
desire) to be better.

In p. 22. the Author considers, That now is a fit juncture of time for
Alterations: And his first ground is, the Expediency, for things which may be
done, yet are not to be done at a time when they are not expedient: And thus he
shows the Expediency; The Passions of Men at this time are in a vehement
fermentation; and he that would allay the Fever, may stay too long, if he
forbears to prescribe till the blood is quiet. But must the Mother be bleeded,
if the Children be distempered? Must the Passions of Men disturb the Peace of
the Church, and no Man endeavor to suppress them? If a sick Man be
distempered, and ungovernable, the Physician is his friend, though he cause him
to be confined or bound for a time.

2. He says the Church has at this time powerful Enemies. Therefore I think
she ought to stand on her guard, and keep strict watch, least they that are so,
make too near approaches. And none are more dangerous, than those that are or
have been of the same House; And though the Church had of late as implacable
Enemies as ever, and they in great Power; yet, by the blessing of God, she has
outlived them.

Obj. 3. Their Majesty's have declared their desires of it.

Ans. The Commission says, Upon weighty and important Reasons; and that the
Alterations prepared by the Commissioners, may be approved by the Convocation
and Parliament. Cannot you wait for that time?

2. Their Majesty's desire may be best known by their living in the Communion
of the Church as now established, and his former and late Declarations to
favor and protect it; for which the Convocation have addressed their Thanks,
and doubt not of it.

4. The House of Lords have given us their Sense of it in the Bill of Union.

Ans. We must expect their Sense, nothing being as yet determined by them, as
to new Alterations; and the Act for Uniformity stands unrepealed by them.

5. Toleration is already granted by Statute

Ans. That is a greater favor than was granted to the Church-party, in the
late Wars, for almost Twenty years together, when Dissenters were in Power; and
that should suffice them which they accounted too much for others.

2. It is well known at whose instance, and for whose sake Tolerations were
formerly granted, (viz.) of such as were professed Papists, and that under a
false pretense, That the pressing of Uniformity had not procured the desired
success; but the true Reason was, that it was too successful.

3. The Reasons given by a very Religious and Loyal Parliament against
Toleration are irrefragable, which were passed Nemine contradicente, in the
Parliament 1662, and may be seen in several Printed Tracts: This Parliament in
the Act for Uniformity, did as much as was possible to perpetuate the Liturgy
then Established, to future Generations, ordering all Deans and Chapters to
procure Copies of it under the Great Seal, and perfect Copies of the Act of
Uniformity; and the like were to be kept in the Courts of Westminster, and in
the Tower of London, that by them, any Error committed by the Printer might be
rectified.

4. The Eyes of the World are upon us, and all the Reformed Churches are in
expectation of something to be done, which may make for Union and Peace.

Answ. The Eyes of the Christian World admire, as well the Holiness of our
Doctrine, as the Beauty of our Worship and Administration; as also, the great
things that God has done for our Church to preserve it, as hitherto, (blessed
be his Name) he has graciously done against all the violent Attempts of Popish
Fury, and Fanatic Zeal. And as for the great Numbers of Irish and French
Protestants, which are now among us, if we consult them, they will all
acknowledge the great Goodness of God, in preserving our Church to be a
Sanctuary unto them, from the Rage of their Persecutors; and heartily join with
us in all our Ordinances, without any scruple against either our Doctrine or
Ceremonies. And this gives us much ease under our domestic Troubles, and hopes
that it will be a benefit to us, if well considered by them that are otherwise
minded.

No Man can be wise too late, (says our Author) page 24. But it is too late to
shut the Stable-door, when the Steed is stolen: Principiis obsta, is a wise
Rule. Page 25. After the Year 1661, though there were Writs issued out for a
Convocation, yet no Warrant could be procured for the Support and Encouragement
of the Church, during the Reigns of Charles the Second, and James the Second.

Answ. The reason was, because the Dissenters of all sorts seared what would be
done in the Case of Toleration and Indulgence, as now they do in the Case of
Comprehension, and therefore the Meeting was delayed. And he thinks it no good
Advice of them that say, Do nothing now, or as little as may be: when little or
much is not the business; but as much as is fit, he should have said, Upon
great and important Reasons. He adds, If one Opportunity be neglected, it may
discourage the Powers that offer it, from vouchsafing another.

Answ. We have heard indeed, That if the intended Alterations be not made by
the Convocation, it may be done without them in time. If so, it will be their
comfort, that they did not put their Hands to the pulling down the Church upon
their own Heads. In the mean time, we of the Country are much amused to hear of
your tedious Adjournments, and know not what to guess at, as the occasion of
those delays; unless it be, to give the Dissenters time to spread abroad
scandalous Reports of such of the Convocation that carried the Election of Dr.
Jane to be Prolocutor, against those who Voted for Dean Tillotson; who, as we
have heard, claimed it as his Right, belonging to that Deanary; though we have
been since informed, that there belongs to that Deanary only Jus dirigendi
Electionem; which implies, That the Convocation had the Power and Right of
Election; and that Dr. Tillotson was not then confirmed in that Deanary; but
that the Election was carried only by three or four Voices, and given up by Dr.
Tillotson's Party to prevent any disturbance: But you have assured us, that it
was otherwise, there being Two to One who Voted for Dr. Jane. And now that we
see Letter after Letter sent abroad, to cast an Odium on such as shall not Vote
for Alterations, though they see not any sufficient cause so to do, but great
and important Reasons for the contrary, we think that we see the reason of your
Adjournments, which have given a Month's time to others, to prepare and
disperse such Pamphlets as may tend to your prejudice, and prepossess the
People, that you are the Enemies of Peace and Reconciliation; and to this end
he complains: First, (as the usual Practice is) of those Churchmen, who by
means of any Letters or Pamphlets, containing uncharitable Misrepresentations
of the Commissioners, or the Work under their hands, are prejudiced against
them; for he condemns such as Enemies to Peace, and as having a Zeal not
according to Knowledge: but neither this Author, nor any other, since the first
meeting of the Convocation, have taken any care to prevent the prejudices that
some have endeavored to raise against the far greatest part of them, for
choosing Dr. Jane, rather than Dean Tillotson; and whereas we have not yet seen
one Pamphlet, or Printed Letter to persuade us, that there is no necessity of
Alterations, we have very many, that not without great Zeal, would incline us
to think them necessary. And this Work being done by way of preparation, our
hope is, that the Convocation will meet with no more Adjournments, but closely
apply themselves to what shall be proposed by their Majesty's, and give the
Nation the Result of their Consultations, and the Reasons of them: And so I
join with the Author, earnestly beseeching the People, not to give too open an
Ear to any such Censures of Things, which they do not yet fully understand, and
which for ought they know, may prove a great Blessing to them.

The next Paper whereof I shall give you my thoughts, is, A Letter from a
Minister in the Country, to a Member of the Convocation: The Author needed not
have told us, that he was a Country-Minister; for though there be in the
Country many Ministers, who for their Learning, may be, without disparagement,
compared with most of the City-Ministers; yet the Matter of his Letter, as it
is penned, shows, that he is inferior to many of our Country-Ministers, as
will evidently appear, by his handling the particulars which deserves any
remark: He begins with what, he understands, will be first offered to the
Convocation, (to wit) The Reformation of the Calendar; where he would have the
Apocryphal Lessons exchanged, for as many taken out of the Canon of Scripture,
as by the Bishops and other Divines Assembled to consider of that matter, 1641:
He does not say was agreed; for I find in an Answer to a Petition presented to
the King's Majesty, by above a Thousand Ministers, as it was there said, that
there was no such concession made; for page 14. the Answer to the Objection
says, That they are grossly ignorant if they know it not, or wilfully malicious
and turbulent, if knowing it to be lawful, they yet oppugn the Reading of the
Apocryphal Writings in the Church; Non ad confirmationem fidei sed ad
reformationem morum: As the Ancient Fathers speak and approve; for which they
quote Hier. Preface in Pro. Cyprian in Symb. in whose days, it seems, they were
so read. And they add, That the Articles of Convocation, and the Preface before
the Apocryphal Books in the English Bibles, do directly show; adding, that they
give light to the Divine History. And in the Account given of the Proceedings
of the Commissioners, Printed 1661, where the same Objection was made, p. 55.
and the reason given for it: Because the Scriptures contain all things
necessary, either in Doctrine to be believed, or in Duty to be practiced: They
answer, That such a Reason would exclude all Sermons, as well as Apocrypha; And
why then so many Sermons, if notwithstanding the sufficiency of Scripture,
Sermons be necessary? There is no reason why these Apocryphal Lessons should
not be useful, most of them containing excellent Discourses, and Rules of
Morality: It is heartily to be wished, that Sermons were as good; and to leave
them out, were to cross the Practice of the Church in former Ages. And the
Reply of the Dissenters at that time is observable: We asked not, say they,
that no Apocryphal Chapter may be read in the Church; but, that none may be
read as Lessons. If you cite the Apocrypha as you do other Humane Writings, or
read them as Homilies, we speak not against it; and of this, neither those
Dissenters, nor any ordinary Country-Minister could be ignorant; the Church
having declared, That they are not of equal Authority with the Scriptures;
which is known to their own People, who therefore will not have them Bound with
their Bibles; besides, no part of the Apocrypha is read on Sundays, but on the
Weekdays, when there are too few to hear them, and those few better instructed
than to think them Canonical. But though this may satisfy all sober persons,
yet I do here protest, That were it not that the Dissenters have given us an
assurance, that though these and many other Alterations should be made, it would
give them no satisfaction, nor bring them into our Communion, I would use all
the Interest I have for such Alterations; and for that end also, part with many
of the Ceremonies; but of this there is a deep silence, or rather a loud
dissent.

The Letter adds, If those Apocryphal Chapters were anciently read, so were
Hermes Pastor, and Clemens Romans and the Argument holds for reading these.

Answ. The Church have anciently disused them; but if they were now read, or
the Epistles of Ignatius and Polycarp, or some select Chapters out of King
Charles the Martyr's (...), instead of the Sermons on the Weekdays Lectures;
in which many greater Absurdities tending to Schism and Sedition are injected
into the minds of the People; I believe, it would be much more for the
Edification of them.

Object. If they, (i. e.) the Apocryphal Lectures, were read, then we know what
Mischief ensued from it, etc.

Answ. We know too, what Mischief accidentally arose from Reading the
Scriptures; must they therefore be laid aside? But the Church of Rome has made
them Canonical.

Answ. The People do believe, that many of those false Doctrines, many
Falsehoods, and dangerous Opinions, which are held forth to them in their
Conventicles, are as true as the Gospel; and why are not they laid aside? when
we know what Mischiefs some Sermons Preached in 41, and 42 produced: Bell and
the Dragon, with Tobit and his Dog could not have done such dismal feats. The
next thing insisted on, p. 6. is, The Revising of the Psalter, added to the
Liturgy, which seems not so defensible, there being a more Correct Copy in our
Hands; and an inconsistancy between the two Translations being observed by the
Vulgar.

Answ. Though there be Variations in the two Translations, yet they do not
contradict one the other; but rather explain and give light to each other; as
the diverse Commentaries of Learned Men do.

2. The Translation of the Liturgy-Psalter is taken mostly from the Septuagint,
or Greek Copies, which that Church still observes; and it is observable, that
our Savior and the Apostles, when they quote the Scripture of the Old
Testament, to confirm their Doctrine, do frequently make use of this
Translation, though the Hebrew was as well known to them as the Greek.

3. There are Variae Lectiones even in the Hebrew Copies, which the want of
Points has occasioned; concerning which there are yet great Disputes among the
Learned Critics.

4. The best Translations have many Defects and Inconsistancies, occasioned by
the various Significations of the Hebrew words; as the word Barach signifies
both to Bless and to Curse: So that though the one should be granted to be more
correct than the other, yet because the one serves as a short Paraphrase to
explain the other, and the People have the Use of both, this Exception is a
mere Cavil: And there is some weight in what the Letter observes, That the
People have many of them learnt the Psalms, as they are daily read Memoritur,
which if disused, they would soon forget. And for this cause our Savior made
use of the Septuagint Translation, because it was best known to that
Generation. And if the Septuagint Translation needs a Review, so does the
other, which is not so Correct, but it may be amended in many places, and so
will the best, to the end of the World. That the Author of the Letter may let
nothing pass, he omits not the Use of the Ring in Marriage; though he says, It is
agreed to be but a Civil Right: And therefore I leave him to be civilly treated
by the Women.

Page 8. The Letter comes to treat of our Ceremonies; concerning which he says,
There is a difficulty to proceed in our Dissentions; for without quitting or
altering, the Dissenting Party is not to be brought into the Church; and
without retaining them, many of our own will hardly be kept in it: And he
considers, That the one may occasion a Schism from the Church, the other a
Schism in it. Now a Schism in the Church, will tend more certainly and speedily
to its Confusion, than that out of the Church. And this Schism is already in
being, and will not be remedied, though all the Ceremomonies should be taken
away; it is therefore very imprudent, causlesly to begin another Schism in the
Church, especially when it is not so much Conscience, as Scruple and Prejudice,
on which the Dissenters dislike our Ceremonies; for when for their Interest,
and enjoyment of beneficial Offices, they were required to conform to the
Public Worship, they did it, notwithstanding the Use of Ceremonies; and I know
few of them who are not willing that their Children and Relations should
conform for their advantage; and therefore I shall not trouble the Reader with
his impracticable Idea's for Accommodation, and only say, That more than what
he proposes has been offered for an Accommodation, but refused, and that not
without scorn.

Page 9. He comes to the business of Reordination, and says, They that have
been Ordained by Presbyters (though they are not against Episcopal Orders, yet)
think it unlawful to renounce them, and to be Reordained.

Answ. This he confesses to be against a late Act of Parliament yet in force,
which has provided, That none are to be admitted to Officiate in the Church of
England, without Episcopal Ordination: for which reason, if there were no
other, I cannot see how any Member of the Convocation can consent to it: The
first Reason which the Letter gives for it, is, That it was not so before.

Answ. It was ever so in the Church of England, except in some extraordinary
Cases, where Ordination by Bishops could not be had; as in the Case of the
three Scottish Bishops: but here the Case is altered, there being Bishops ready
to give Orders, ever since 1660; wherefore such as have been Ordained by
Presbyters since that time, may be said to do it in Contempt of their Authority
in that Case; nor were those that were Ordained before that time deprived of an
opportunity to take their Orders from the Hands of a Bishop, there being some
still ready to confer them; and many in the preceding Years did accept of those
Orders from Bishops; which argues, that such as did not refuse it in Contempt,
or for their Preferment, which was denied to some, because they had been
Episcopally Ordained; but the main Argument may be taken from Dr. Beveridge's
Text, 1 Cor. 11.16. If any Man seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom,
neither the Churches of God: for search all the Ecclesiastical Records, and you
will find, that, except in case of great necessity, no Ordination has ever
been accounted valid, but such as has been administered by the Hands of a
Bishop; and if any did contest it, they have been branded as contentious
Persons.

This Country-Minister therefore assumes too much to himself, to prescribe to
the Convocation in so material a Point, and urge Arguments for it, when the
Commissioners were only to prepare Materials for the Convocation to determine
of. But he pleads farther, p. 10. Quod fieri non debuit factum valet: Though it
ought not to be done, yet being done, it is valid.

This is denied, because both those Presbyters that gave it, and these who
received it, were guilty of a Schism, as much then as now (for the Practice is
still continued) Episcopal Ordination, being still to be had without any
considerable difficulty. And the Author grants, that St. Hierome, (though
pleading the Cause of Presbyters against Bishops, yet) grants, that it was the
sole Prerogative and distinguishing Character of that Order (viz.) of Bishops
to Ordain: His words are, Quid enim non faciat Presbyter, quod facit Episcopus
excepta Sola Ordinatione: And therefore the Salvo's which he makes for the sake
of some particular persons, against the constant practice of the Universal
Church, and particularly against the Law of the Land, cannot be excused from
being a Plea for the present Schism; and the perpetuating thereof, such
Ordinations being still practiced.

Page 12. He speaks concerning Declarations and Subscriptions: the result
whereof is, That he persuades himself, (and I think he will not persuade many
others, besides those who already stand out) that what is generally understood
by those Subscriptions and Declarations, ought to be more plainly expressed:
For if it be generally so understood already, as he would have it, what need is
there to have it more plainly expressed? (viz.) That the former, i. e. the
Declaration of Assent and Consent is to the Use of the Common Prayer; the
latter (viz.) Subscription to the Articles, is as to Articles of Peace and
Concord, which, he says, is the Sense of Archbishop Laud, as he understands it
(against Fisher, p. 51. n. 2.) And without doubt that of Archbishop Bramhall
(Schism guarded, S. 1. C. 11, etc. and Mr. Chilingworth's Answer to Charity
Maintained.) But yet, to maintain Schism and Contention, he forms a Case after
this manner: Suppose a young Student (not a Dissenter) thinks of entering into
Holy Orders; and considering what he is to do, meets first with the Declaration
of his unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all and every thing contained
in and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer; among which, he finds that the
Apocrypha is to be read. (Of this Scruple we have spoken already.) Then he
proceeds to the Psalms, and comparing the two Translations, finds some things
inconsistent, and sometimes the one to deny what the other affirms.

Ans. And this Case has been already seanned; but to omit nothing of his
Objections, he adds, That this young Man finds in the two Translations, some
things inconsistent, and the one to deny what the other affirms; and being to
use both, in the Desk, he reads, (as Psalm. 105.28.) They were not obedient to
his word; and in the Pulpit, with the Hebrew, and the new Translations, he
reads, They rebelled not against his word. To this I answer:

First, There are many seeming Inconsistencies and Contradictions in that which
he calls the Correct Translation, (namely, from the Hebrew) which have
occasioned the writing of diverse Books, for the reconciling of them; and none
but such as are disposed to Atheism, are offended at them.

2dly, This is such a Blunder, as none but a Man wholly given to Contention,
and is able to read the Resolutions of Learned Men, could be guilty of; had he
consulted but Mr. P.'s Synopsis on the place, that the words LoMaru admits of
an Interrogation, and that is a vehement affirmation, then the sense of this
Translation, Did they not rebel? is as much as they did rebel against his word,
which is the same with the other Translation, (viz.) They were not obedient, or
they rebelled against his word; thus the Hebrew Translation agrees with the
Septuagint: And of this among other instances, Mr. Poole gives one, Exodus 8.26.
we read, will they not stone us? when without the Interrogation, it would have
been translated, They would not have stoned us; but the Septuagint also agrees
well with the Hebrew Translation, for the Verb plural may have respect to
diverse precedent Nouns, some whereof speak de rebus and signis, others de
personis; Now the Egyptians, for the conviction of whom God executed the
Plagues before spoken of, were not obedient to his word, and so both
Translations agree: These and other Resolutions are so clear, that I wonder how
any Country-Minister, much less one of the City, should at this time of the
day, be ignorant of them; but none so blind as he that will not see; for it
looks like a design in the Author, to foment Prejudices and Mistakes in the
Minds of young Men, to keep up a Schism against the Church. And so does his
next Plea, p. 14. against the use of the Athanasian Creed, whilst he restrains
the Damnatory Sentences to one Article of the Creed, which is to be referred to
the whole, for so says the Preface, This is the Catholic Faith, etc.

Moreover, I think it not necessary to Salvation, that every Man should believe
that Article of the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father to the Son,
seeing there are several Articles in the Creed called the Apostles, as we
receive it now, which in the most Primitive Times, were not extant in that
Creed; for which consult Vossius, Armagh, and Dr. Pearson, the late Bishop of
Chester; and therefore I cannot conceive that those Greek Churches were
Heretics, and in a state of Damnation, that held not the Filioque: And to this
purpose the Letter makes his second Quere, Whether this be a fundamental
Article of the Faith, which except a Man believes he cannot be saved? Seeing as
he grants it is not made necessary by Athanasius himself, nor was originally
either in the Nicene (truly so called,) or Athanasian Creed; Nor is it so
thought by our Church, (says the Letter) which receiving the four first General
Councils, agrees with that of Ephesus, (which is the third) which made a
peremptory Decree against all Additions to be made thereafter to the Creed,
Council. Ephesians. Part 3. Art. 6. (Which shows that some Additions had been
formerly made,) From whence (says he) it follows, that nothing else was then
accounted necessary to be believed, but what was contained in the Nicene: And
so the Damnatory Sentences not appearing to be the Addition of Athanasius, nor
respecting any particular Article, but what is fundamental and necessary to
Salvation; in the whole, the young Man, notwithstanding any thing that the
Letter says, may Subscribe the Athanasian Creed with the Damnatory Sentences,
which are applicable only to such as obstinately deny the Fundamental Articles
of the Christian Faith contained in that Creed. And I desire the Author of this
Objection to consider, what occasion it has given to the Antitrinitarians to
proclaim their Blasphemies against the Blessed Trinity, and consequently
against the Christian Religion; for a late Writer says, That Athanasius was
drunk when he wrote that Creed; That it is settled by a Tyrannical Dominion, and
is a Superstition or Polity, rather than true Religion; That the Follies and
Contradictions charged on the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, are neither for
Number, Consequence or Greatness, comparable to those implied in the Athanasian
Creed; And that the Trinity has the same foundation with Transubstantiation,
and we must admit both or neither. This Opinion of the Socinians has been so
confuted by our late Divines, that I shall not repeat their Arguments; so apt
are our Adversaries, of all sorts, to improve the Objections of Dissenters into
very dangerous and destructive Errors.

Page 15. This Country-Minister has a very modest Request in behalf of himself
and the Dissenters, viz. That Presbytery may be restored to its ancient
Privilege, and permitted to share in all Acts belonging to their Station. What
Acts those are, he sufficiently intimates, but does not enumerate; they must
share in the Jurisdiction and Administration of Discipline; in the issuing
forth of Excommunications, and in the power of Conferring Orders; and this,
forsooth, for the honor of the Bishops to take off whatever they may suffer by
Misgovernment; and I suppose they would quickly draw too much of that Odium
upon themselves: Wherefore as he does, so shall I leave these things to the
mature consideration of the Convocation; and how likely it is that the Church
would not be the worse for these Alterations.

But concerning this, he raises two Objections: the first is, Where are they
that would come in upon these Concessions and Alterations? And, 2dly, if they
do come in, what advantage this will be to the Church? To the first he says,
it is but to try; and I say, whatever the Church can grant, and not be the worse
for it, has been already tried, and scornfully rejected, though the
Concessions were more than the Convocation can now with prudence and safety
grant them; for these will not stifle their clamours against the Church, who
have publicly declared, that they expect greater things: But in justice and
integrity, says the Letter, these things ought to be granted; for it was
promised by their Bishops, (viz.) that they wanted not due tenderness toward
Dissenters, but were willing to come to such a temper as should be thought fit
when that matter should be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation.
But as he says they promised it when it was not in their power, and now (the
more is the pity) it is not in their power to perform it; but they promised no
more than was fit to be granted (i. e.) upon great and important Reasons, nor
more than what should be thought fit by a Parliament and Convocation, to which
it is still referred.

2dly, He inquires what benefit this will be to the Church? To which I answer,
None at all; if, as he says, when kept out they are Enemies, and when let in
they will be no Friends: but when they have more power and opportunity, they
may do more mischief. S. M. E. C. T. Y. M. N. W. S. were in the Church in 1641,
and did it more hurt than those that were kept out; and there are still such
among us, as are not of us, whose Names would make up as terrible a word, as
that of Smectymnuus; but I forbear to call Names.

His third General is, That there are such things in our Church, as may be
altered for the better.

Ans. Thus some Men have attempted to mend the Magnificat; but finding they
could not do that, they resolved to lay it aside: And many an unskilful
Architect has under taken to repair a good old Fabric, and make it better;
but by pulling down Beam after Beam, and after a lesser Stone a greater, till
the whole Fabric has been like to fall; and then (what perhaps was designed
at first) he persuades the Owners, that there is a necessity wholly to destroy
the old, and erect a new one upon better foundations: And thus the
Country-Minister thinks he has cleared the Point, and may come in for a share
in the employment and benefit. And first he ingageth to make easy and short
work of it, and would not have his Country-Brethren to be obliged to their
daily labor in the Service of the Church, but to be left free to attend it how
and when they please, to perform one part of the Service at one time, and
another at another, and to be left to their own discretion, and not tied up to
Forms, and to do what is commanded them. Thus he pleads for himself and
fellow laborers, whom he thinks fit to share with the Master Builders; and to
that end he thus mis-represents them, p. 20. That they are ready to impose such
burdens on others, as they will not touch with themselves; That they only walk
from a warm House to a Cathedral, and for half an hour turn over a
Service Book, hear a Sermon, and return to a warm Room and good Fare, and know
not what it is to do the Service of a Cure perhaps all their life. This would
be very edifying Doctrine in a Conventicle, but not so acceptable, when a
Country-Minister shall preach it to a Convocation, which consists of the select
Clergy of the Land, who are, for the most part, obliged to the Service of God
in Cathedrals, or in their own Churches; and moreover, to all those Services
which the Country-Minister is bound to do: And which is as difficult a work, as
any of the other, to Oversee those Laborers, least they do more hurt than good
by their Idleness, Ignorance, or Immorality; for too many such there be, who,
if they were kept to their daily duty, might be restrained from many
inconveniences, which are more prejudicial to their Lives, than the appointed
Service of God would be. And doubtless the Convocation will not be of the
Country-Minister's mind, p. 21. That he should be left to his discretion to
read one part of the Service one day, and another another; and in the Afternoon
to leave out the first Lesson, or the like; leaving out on Sunday the
Communion-Service, and shortning the Liturgy at the Lord's-Prayer. For which he
gives this reason, That it was composed peculiarly with respect to a State of
Persecution: For which cause it ought rather to be continued; for he asks the
Question, p. 27. Are we without danger? and if not, have we less danger to fear
now, when we are divided, than when united? But why must the Communion-Service
be left out, when the Primitive Church did communicate at their daily
Assemblies? And it is the Peoples fault that the Communion is not Administered
every Sunday in the Parish-Churches, as well as in the Cathedrals; so that the
reading that Service minds the People of their backwardness to partake of so
great a Blessing, and both minds and prepares them for it.

But I see not to what end these Offices should be shortened, except it be to
yield to the Country-Minister's extemporary Prayers, and tedious Sermons; which
if left to his discretion, would doubtless be the consequence. And his desire,
That the first Lesson, or the like, may be left out in the Afternoon, that Men
may fodder their Cattle; when, I suppose, the turning of the Afternoons Sermon
into Catechizing, may better answer that end, and be more profitable to the
People, both young and old; and it is more agreeable to Order; and this course
would neither hamper their Consciences, nor expose them to the rash Censures of
those whom he calls their not over-laborious Brethren: Which Epithet some such
Country-Ministers as himself may deserve; p. 19. he would have some of the
Convocation sent down to some Country-Parishes, to ease the poor Ministers, by
reading Prayers and Preaching, etc. As if the Members of the Convocation never
did perform the entire Service of the Church in Praying and Preaching.

The Country-Minister might consider, that a great part of them have traveled,
some a hundred, some near two hundred Miles, to meet in Convocation, to consult
for the common benefit of the Clergy, and sit sometime near the whole day in a
cold place, in the depth of Winter: And some Country-Ministers, now of the
Convocation, do now see in what great ease and plenty the City-Ministers live,
who have their Readers and Lecturers, and frequent Supplies, and sometimes
tarry in the Vestry till Prayers be ended, and have great Dignities in the
Church, besides their rich Parishes in the City.

Having pleaded for the shortning of the Liturgy, he pleads, p. 22. for the
prolonging of it, by adding an Office to receive Penitents after an Apostasy,
and in case of notorious Scandal: this may concern the Country-Minister. 2. For
receiving persons Absolved after Excommunication: this, as he desires, is left
to the discretion of the Priest that Officiates. 3. An Office for the
Prisoners, which is provided for by the Bishops, who generally appoint able Men
for that charitable Office. So that all this notwithstanding, he concludes in
the words of Dr. Featly, etc. concerning the Liturgy, as it stood before the
600 Amendments in 1661. That the Book of Common Prayer is the most complete,
perfect and exact Liturgy in the Christian World, and such as a Godly Man may
with a good Conscience use, and not only lawfully, but comfortably join in.
Wherefore it having already received so many Amendments, there should be some
important Reasons given why it should admit of more, for his May-be's are no
Arguments: It may-be some things are obscure, and too doubtfully expressed; It
may be in its Phraseology liable to misapplication; It may be too fanciful: And
all these May-be's, may not be, if the most exceptionable Expressions in the
whole Liturgy be allowed (as the Preface to it says) such just and favorable
construction, as in common equity ought to be allowed to all humane Writings.

Page 23. Our Author comes to enquire more nicely into it, but whether more
wisely let the Reader judge: He instanceth first in what he thinks obscure: As
in the Prayer for the Clergy: Who alone workest great Marvels, send down, etc.
of which, Who dares deny, says Dr. Comber, that the assistance granted to the
Ministers for the conversion of sinners are as mavelous, as was the Creation
of Light out of Darkness or the Resurrection from the Dead: see Ephesians. 1.19. So
in the Collect for Trinity Sunday, Who has given us Grace in the Power of the
Divine Majesty, to Worship the Unity. This is not obscure to any that
acknowledges the Trinity, which is to be worshipped in the Unity of Divine
Majesty: As when in the Litany we pray, O holy blessed and glorious Trinity,
three Persons and one God.

In the Preface at the Communion for Trinity Sunday, that which we believe of
the Glory of the Father, the same we believe of the Glory of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, without any difference or inequality, (viz.) as to the Godhead,
Christ having said, I and my Father are one: And the Church in all Ages has
professed the same belief in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and ascribes the
same Glory to each of them in the Tresagion.

In the Prayer before the Communion: That our sinful Bodies may be made clean
by his Body, and our Souls washed through his most precious Blood: (i.e.) that
both our Souls and Bodies may receive all the benefits of his Death and Passion.

In the Office of Baptism: By the Baptism of thy well beloved Son in the River
Jordan, did sanstifie Water: (i. e.) did appoint and consecrate the Element
of Water, to be the outward sign of the Grace conferred in that Sacrament by
the Blood and Merits of Christ. In the Office of Matrimony: With my Body I thee
Worship: Which signifies a civil Respect and Honor, and is more significant
than what they would exchange it for, (viz.) I give thee Power over my Body. In
that of Burial: Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to take to himself,
etc. By which no more is meant, than what, as some understand, the Scripture
says: The Spirit returns to God that gave it: or if it supposes Discipline; so
it expresses Charity, where Discipline has not excluded them from the
Communion of the Church, that we hope they rest with God. So in the Collect for
Easter-Sunday, where the Preface and the Petition want a better Connection: The
Preface and Connection are thus: That as God by Christ has opened to us the
Gate of everlasting Life, so he would (prepare us for that life) putting into
our Hearts good Desires, by his special Grace preventing us, and by his
continual help we may bring the same to good effect. So the first Sunday after
Easter, etc. the Preface is, Almighty God who have given thy only Son to die
for our Sins, and to rise for our Justification: The Connection is: Grant us so
to die unto sin, (which is the sense of) to put away the leaven of Malice, that
we may serve thee in pureness of living and truth, (i. e.) we may live unto
God. 2. He instanceth in some things liable to misapplication; as in the
Visitation of the Sick: By his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee; which
the Priest having prayed God to do, he applies in Nomine domini, in the Name
of the Father, etc. By the Authority committed to me as God's Minister, I
absolve thee, Jo. 20.23. And the Answer in the Catechism: The Body and Blood of
Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the
Lord's Supper: (i. e.) in a spiritual, but real manner by the faithful
Communicants; for there is sufficient caution given against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. So in the Exhortation for warning of the Communion: Because
it is requisite no Man should come to the Holy Communion, but with a full trust
in God's Mercy, and with a quiet Conscience: For if St. Paul says, we may not
partake of common things with a doubting Conscience, Romans 14.5. much less of
spiritual: And when Men consult the Lawyers for their Estates, and Physicians
for their Bodies, why should they not consult the Ministers for their Souls?
Such again are those Collects which too much incline to the Pelagian Phrase,
laying the force of temptation, and Man's liableness to sin, upon the frailty,
and not the corruption of our Nature; as the first and 24th Sunday after
Trinity: what they mean by frailty, that first Collect explains, to be such, as
that without God we can do no good thing, which is the great corruption of our
Nature; and no Doctrine concerning the corruption of Nature is more plain, than
that in our Articles. Lastly, Some Collects, he says, are too fanciful, and
savor of the Breviary, as those of St. Luke, St. John, Simon and Jude.

Answ. Whatever in the Breviaries are taken out of the Scripture, or Authentic
and Ancient Ecclesiastical History, is not therefore to be rejected; and that
St. Luke was that beloved Physician mentioned Col. 4.14. is the constant
assertion of all Interpreters, and the express words of the Scripture;
therefore no Legend. Of these he says, That in a sort they need amendment: And
so does the Judgment of this nice Enquirer, who, I fear, has lost his
Rationale, which he might easily supply from Dr. Comber's, or Bishop Sparrow's
Discourses. A Man would think this Writer to have been hired to betray the
Cause of the Dissenters, by his weak and impertinent Arguments for its defense:
and a great conviction it will be to many, that there need no Alterations to be
made, when their prime Advocate insists on such Instances as render him vain
and ridiculous. Many things he would add to the Office of Confirmation: viz. An
Exhortation on the Sunday before, and a Discourse about the Nature, Use, and
Obligation of it; and a serious Exhortation after it, with some Inlargements of
the Collects; by all which he provides to bring down the Bishops to more labor
than he would have any Country-Minister to perform, considering what other
Offices they usually perform at the same time (viz.) Administration of the Holy
Sacraments, Ordination of Priests and Deacons, etc.

It were easy, says our Author, to be copious on this Argument: But he has
said enough, by choosing out such instances as are beyond all exceptions for
their significancy, and self-evidence; so that the very reading of them, is a
sufficient Confutation of this Author's Cavils, and a Justification of them
from his frivolous Accusations; which not being very grateful to him (as he
confesses) will be very offensive to others.

Yet (so importune are some sort of Men) he will not leave the point so, but
will show, that this is a fit season for such Alterations) when he has not
shown the least cause, much less any necessity for making of them; but first he
lays the blame on some that are in the Convocation, that should tell him, This
is not a season: which he would disprove by this Question: Is there any thing
can make that not to be seasonable, which is always a Duty: As if it were always
a Duty, to make needless Alterations.

2. Is there any Season in which we are not as much as in us lies, to seek
Peace and ensue it?

Answ. The Peace of the Church is more to be valued, than of those who disquiet
themselves and others in vain. Was it a Season for the Representatives of our
Church to declare, when they were not in a condition, They wanted not a
tenderness toward Dissenters? And is it not their Season when they are in a
condition? (which I heartily wish they were, even for the Dissenters sake)
because he has said, He doubts not but they would agree to the Alterations
that are desired.

But suppose, says he, there were never a Dissenter in the Land; I say, we
might have a happier and fitter Season, when there would be none that watch for
our haltings, and seek occasion to accuse us from our own Concessions, and will
reject them with scorn and contempt; and so our Liturgy and Worship, which (the
Letter says) was complete and perfect before, be exposed as not only infirm,
but so corrupt, that it needed Alterations; and that for very shame the
Convocation thought it necessary to make them. But our Author finding all his
arguings to be lost, as in p 28. he betakes himself to a sham-plot against
those that are not for Alterations, as if because they said, or rather he for
them, That they were not seasonable: they had said, the Parliament was illegal,
the Government precarious, and the Laws no Laws, it becomes not a
Country-Minister to be a Minister of Satan, in falsely accusing his Brethren,
who have all owned the present Authority and Laws, and he that blames the want
of Connection in our Collects, should have been more cautious, then first to
raise an Objection of his own, and then infer from it such impertinent
conclusions as may be mischievous to others. But what think you, says he, if
this Government sink? I think our causless dissentions will be one of the
greatest causes: Who sunk the Government under the Royal Martyr? Who had well
nigh sunk it a second time under the late King? to whom such multitude of
Dissenters addressed Thanks for Suspending the Laws, and promised to obey him
without reserve: we have had experience enough who they were that could, after
all their Pleas for Liberty, part with their Consciences to save their Lives,
though with the loss of their Religion, Laws, and Liberty; so as their Brethren
might perish a little before them. When therefore he would persuade us, that we
may have a new Law for the intended Establishment; I think no Man will be
persuaded to run such a risque; for having many good Laws already for our
Established Worship, we may conclude, that as to certainty the old are better.
Having thus treated the Members of the Convocation, he takes his Farewell of
them, leaving them to their Couch and Consideration; intimating, that they are
all become mighty Politicians, or Tools for them that are so. Who have been
made and used as Tools by the late unhappy Politicians is as evident as any
matter of fact can be, and I wish I could leave this Country-Minister well in
his Wits, to consider whether he be not used as a Tool to destroy the
Established Church, by some who think themselves mighty Politicians.

Some REMARKS on a LETTER from a Member of the Convocation.
NO sooner had I finished my Remarks on the Letter of the Country Minister to a
Member of the Convocation, but I were encountered with another from a Member of
the Convocation to his Friend; in which I feared my Opinion would have been
oppugned, not only by a greater Authority, but by sharper Arguments than any I
had yet met with: But having viewed his Weapons, I found that they were
flourished and glittered with a Rhetorical style, yet they wanted that Logical
strength that might enforce them. This encouraged me to take my Pen in hand
again, and to enter the List against this Master of the Assembly; for I
considered, that though his Weapons were keen, yet the Arm that wielded them
was but weak, and it was no great danger to wrest them out of his hands, and
employ them against himself: His great flourish was, A Necessity, an absolute
Necessity of yielding to many Alterations in our Established Worship. This I
thought might prove durum telum; for, Necessity has no Law, especially when it
is Absolute; then, like the Absolute power, it bears down all before it: This
looked somewhat formidably; for I considered that Necessity had destroyed many
great and good Men. It was said of that great Hero, the Earl of Strafford,
Illum non tulit Lex verum necessitas non habens Legem; And of a greater than he
we have a Law (viz.) of the Jews making, and by that Law, Oportet mori, to dye,
and dye he did, because it was expedient also for the People.

But that there was an Absolute necessity that Judas should betray his Master;
I can no more believe, than that there is a Necessity, That he who is a Member
of the Church of Christ, and has familiarly, eaten of her Bread, and born the
Bag too, should lift up his heels and kick at her. I considered therefore what
kind of Necessity this might be, for our Opponent grants, there is no necessity
in respect of the Church her self, that she should make Alterations: Because,
says he, p. 1. nothing is more dangerous to Religion, than frequently to make
Alterations. 2. Because an unsteadiness, though in Circumstantials only, which
are always alterable, may become an Argument against the whole, the Multitude
not being able to judge what is Circumstantial, and what is Essential in our
Worship; what is in the Power of the Church to alter, and what is not; and are
apt to call every Alteration, though in things indifferent, and by variation of
times made totally insignificant, to be a change of Religion it self, and so
concluding that we have no firm bottom, become Apostates from us to Popery or
Atheism. And therefore he thinks the Church of England may be justified, that
it has not been forward on every demand of the Dissenters to unhinge those of
her Communion, but has to the utmost resisted all Alterations, hoping by other
less dangerous Methods to heal the Divisions that are among us. By this I
perceived the Absolute necessity would not much affect the Church; yet I
considered farther, whether there were an Absolute necessity from any Precept
that did oblige the Church to make Alterations in the external Parts or Rites
of Worship; and I found she had a Power by Precept to see that all things be
done decently, and according to her Order and Appointment; and another Precept,
That the People should Obey those that had the Rule over them. And accordingly
the most Primitive Church, of which we read Acts 2.45. Continued daily with one
accord in the Temple, and in the Apostle's Doctrine and Fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread, and in Prayer: Nor would St. Paul endure any Contention
about Circumstantials, contrary to the Custom of the Church, 1 Cor. 11.16. Nor
can I see this Absolute necessity in the things that are to be altered, because
they are confessed to be in their own nature indifferent; and when they fall
under a Precept of those whose proper work it is to enjoin them, we cannot
without Disobedience to our lawful Governors, reject them. Neither can this
Necessity affect the Persons for whose sake the Alterations are desired;
because if there be nothing sinful in our Communion, it is sinful to separate
from it; besides, the Dissenters would take it ill of any Man that should say
they cannot be saved in that way of Worship which they have chosen for
themselves; and then there is no Absolute necessity for the Church to alter her
Constitutions to gain them to her Communion: In a Church where Salvation is to
be had, we ought to abide, notwithstanding some inconvenient circumstances,
whose Amendment is desirable. Though there were great Disputes in the Primitive
Church about the Place of Worship, Circumcision, and Meats and Days, yet was
there no Separation: And the constant Voice of the Church was, (...), Let
ancient Customs prevail. But here Absolute necessity is urged for Alterations,
because all other means have been tried, and prove ineffectual to heal our
Divisions. To which I Answer.

1. The Acts for Uniformity were much more effectual than any Alterations that
the Church can justly make will be, seeing the Dissenters have declared they
will not be satisfied with the Alterations of our Ceremonies, etc. but expect
greater matters than the Church can grant. 2. Experience shows, that they will
not acquiesce in such Alterations as may be granted. 3. Because it was not for
want of success, that Toleration was granted against the Act for Uniformity;
but because it was too successful, and the Common Enemies of our Church
perceiving the good effects of that Act, which had well nigh reduced the whole
Nation to an Uniformity, with their joint Interest procured a Toleration; and
it needs no proof, That if the Act for Uniformity has made one Dissenter,
Toleration and Alterations have made hundreds; so that as there is no
Necessitas praecepti, neither is there Necessitas med^i, to obtain the Ends
which this Author proposes.

And thus we have put off the first blow of this Absolute necessity, and the
second will be as easily warded; for if there be no Absolute necessity to make
any Alterations, then it is not absolutely necessary that we should make them
now: For there is no necessity that we should expose our selves to that
reproach, which is endeavored to be fixed on some of us, of being
Ecclesiastical Tinkers, who undertaking to mend one hole, do usually make two
or three. We have, by standing our ground, put to flight one formidable Enemy;
and is there an Absolute necessity, that by giving ground, we should bring our
selves under the Power of another? And such an Enemy, as our Author says, did
(once and therefore may be suspected of doing it again) take shelter in the
Camp of out Common Enemy, and joined with the Papists against us, endangering
the Church and State to utter turn, p. 3. This methinks should blunt the edge
of his Absolute necessity.

Page 3. The Author makes the excepted Passages in our Liturgy, and the
Ceremonies in our Worship, the whole Origin of our Divisions. As if the whole
blame lay on the Church, whereof be is an Eminent Minister; As if the Ignorance
of some Dissenters, and the interest and Obstinacy or others that know more,
were in no manner culpable; no, not though they rail at our Ceremonies as
Superstitious, and our Bishops as Antichristian and Tyrannical; and condemn not
our Liturgy only, but our Use of our Lord's-Prayer. And our Author, contrary to
his hounden Duty, administers encouragement to some of these, while he
reflection the Penal Laws and Church Censures, which, he says, have (...), and
increased the Mischiefs which they endeavored to remove; and that they were
executed with an unjustifiable Severity: Though if they had been legally
executed against the Papist, and such Dissenters as joined with them, it might
have prevented that greater Severity, which was exercised against some whole
Colleges, and the Seven Famous Bishops, who were sent to the Tower, in order
to their (and in them, to the) destruction of our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, which by their Constancy they preserved to us, however apt we are to
despise them, and deal with them as in Forty Two, they were dealt with by the
Scottish and Dissenters Malice. What though there be some few that are really,
but causlesly offended at our Ceremonies, must we for their sakes give offense
to the Church of God; we have found concerning the greatest part of the
Dissenters, that it is not their Cannot, but their Will not that keeps them
from our Communion; and when their Interest and Advantage requires it, they can
Conform; And what necessity is there, that for the sake of a few ignorant, or
peevish, and unsatisfiable persons, that will not be pleased with all that we
can do, we should confirm them in their obstinacy, by yielding and complying
with their humors? Who were not offended at the excepted passages of our
Liturgy and Ceremonies only, but at Episcopacy, at our Doctrine, at the whole
Liturgy, and even at our Lord's Prayer, which they disused.

The next for which he says there was a pressing necessity, is the late Act for
Toleration, for which he gives these Reasons: 1. Because the Dissenters were
driven to take shelter in the Camp of our common Enemy, and join with the
Papists: Or rather, the Papists by the Toleration sheltred themselves under the
Dissenters: However, it is a good confession of this Author, and shows, that
they who strained at a Gnat could swallow Camels: And though one Parliament
passed an Act for Toleration, yet another gave such Arguments against it, as
are not yet, nor, I believe, can be answered; which are lately Printed in a
Tract entitled, An Answer to the Letter for Toleration, p. 28. Nor is it
evident, that by the Act for Toleration, the Dissenters are put on as good a
bottom of Legal Right, as the Church is; for it is well known, by what means,
and for what end a Toleration has been more than once obtained, which
Coleman's Letters do testify; and Toleration implies somewhat more culpable
than the Established Government, and never deserved the like protection, having
been often rejected. And whereas he desires a reason from him that can give it,
Why we should not abate a few excepted passages in our Liturgy, and two or
three Ceremonies?

I Answ. Because, as has been often said, the giving up of these will give the
Dissenters no satisfaction; and, because the Remedy has been worse than the
Disease, (i. e.) the retaining of our Ceremonies, and excepted passages, never
caused so much Impiety, so many Sects and Errors, as the laying them aside has
done; the Twenty Years War from 40 to 60, and the Thirty Years Animosities last
past, had other Causes than what he (very unbecoming a Member of the Church,
and, as he calls himself, one of the Convocation) terms Trifles, and p. 6. A
Bone of Contention: The Covenant shows what caused that War, the destruction of
Episcopacy Root and Branch, the setting up of Presbytery, the dividing of the
Revenues of the Church among themselves, etc. When therefore he calls that
unreasonable Rigor, which enjoined Uniformity in our Worship; he reflects on
the Act for Uniformity, and the Canons of the Church, to which he has
subscribed; so that he and his Brethren are more like to lose their Reputation
with the People, though he would cast all the Odium upon us, whom he expects and
endeavors to make to be abhorred of the Nation as the Common Enemies of its
Peace, and be treated accordingly in every Parish where we live. Did we contend
against the Arrians, says he, p. 7. we would not yield them a Letter to end the
whole Controversy? And are not the Arrians coming in, when the Athanasian
Creed is so ridiculed, as has been shown? And did not the Church in St.
Augustin's time, contend as much against the Donatists, who could plead for
themselves, as this Author does for the Dissenters? What Article of Faith? What
necessary requisite of our Worship is it in which any Alterations are intended?
This St. Augustine granted, Nobiscum estis in Evangelio in Sacramentis idem
cantatis Hallelujah, sed hoc solo nomine; For this only cause that they made
Divisions and Separations in and from the Church, he excluded them, not only
from the Church, but from Salvation; and it is observable, that the Arrians did
not only come in among the Donatists, but these joined with the Arrians against
the Church; how confidently soever therefore he would assure us, that the
intended Alterations are only in things indifferent; we cannot take his word
for it, for many things have been well intended, the consequences whereof have
proved fatal and destructive.

Page 8. Our Savior (he says) prescribed not the particular Rites and
Constitutions which the Church made use of: Very true; but when the Church
prescribed the Use of them, that all things, in the Public Worship might be
done decently, and in order, they were judged contentious Persons that did not
conform to them: and therefore I agree with him, that as long as those Forms of
Prayer used in our Church, and those Rites and Constitutions which are
received, do answer the Ends of their first Establishment, (viz.) the Honor of
God, and Edification of the People, they ought with constancy always to be
retained: And in what Assembly, not only of the Sectaries, but of any Reformed
Church in the World, either for purity of Doctrine, fervency in Devotion, and
decency in Worship, is the Honor of God, and the Edification of the People
better provided for, than in the approved Assemblies of the Church. But in this
which follows, I think, no sober Person can agree with him: (viz.) That when
either the infirmity or wickedness of Men makes any Alterations, and administer
to Schism and Division, then he says, there arises a reason altogether as
strong for their Alteration, as there was for their Institution: That is, we
must alter a godly and well established Worship, as often as the wickedness of
Men requires it: And how such an Established Worship should become mischievous,
and so bring on the Church an Obligation (which without guilt cannot be
resisted,) to make a change, is a very bold saying: For, Suppose the Papists
arguing thus against the Scripture, or against our Liturgy, that it had
occasioned many mischievous Schisms and Errors, were it a strong Argument for
us to lay them aside? And should we be guilty if we did not?

Page 9. He descends to particulars: And concerning the Cross, p. 10. he says:
I think we have an Obligation upon us, not to be resisted from absolute
necessity of the thing, either totally to lay this Ceremony aside, or make such
Abatements as may allay our Heats of Contention, and Mischiefs of Separation as
have been caused thereby.

Answ. If I were of the Judgment of this Convocation Man, I would not tarry any
longer in the Communion of that Church, which enjoins the Use of the Cross,
though I were a Dean or Archdeacon. But how comes this Man to be more scrupulous
than Mr. Baxter? who says, He will not condemn Ancients or Moderns that use it,
nor make any disturbance about it in the Church: His Opinion is grounded on an
unwary Expression, as he calls it, in the Canons: That by it the Person
Baptized is dedicated to the Service of Jesus Christ; and so attributes a
Sacramental effect to it, which belongs only to Baptism. Sure this Person did
never consider, that the Church has declared that Sacrament sufficiently
administered where the Cross is omitted; and had he considered the definition of
a Sacrament in the Catechism, he might perceive, that no part of that
definition agrees with the Cross to make it Sacramental; and when we see that
the Disputes for laying aside the Cross, have been improved to the layin aside
of Baptism, let the Author consider where the guilt does lie.

As to the Surplice, p. 11. he says, Nothing is more unreasonable than the
Cavils against it; yet he would have it totally laid aside, and another Habit
appointed: And if that other should be laid aside, for the reasons he there
gives, we might as easily fit a Garment for the Moon, as one that should please
all Men.

Page 11. Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is the last
Constitution of the Church, that he says, he should willingly part with: The
rest, it seems, may go with his good will; and so may this also, by what
follows: (viz.) I can see no reason that savours either of a Christian Temper
or Charity, why to communicate standing, may not be allowed to weak and
scrupulous Persons: He can, it seems, see a reason, why the scrupulous Person
should forbear that blessed Sacrament, for fear of a fit and prescribed
Ceremony; but can see none, why the Sacrament should not be administered to them
in their own way. I would ask him, Is it not fit when we pray with the Minister
as we ought to do, that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for
thee, preserve thy Body and Soul to everlasting life, to kneel? Or is it decent
one should stand, and another kneel? And is not Obedience in such things,
better than sacrificing to our own humors, and making confusion in so solemn
an Ordinance? Whether the ancient Communicants did stand or kneel, they did in
obedience to the Constitutions of the Church; and so ought we. Hear Mr. Baxter
in this case: If it be lawful to take a Pardon from the King upon our knees, I
know not what can make it unlawful, to take a sealed Pardon from Christ upon
our knees, See Christian Direct. p. 616. And as for kneeling at the Sacrament,
since the Rubric, my Judgment was ever for it: God having made some Gesture
necessary, and confined us to none, but left it to humane determination: I
shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work. I am not sure, Christ
intended his Example as obligatory; but I am sure he has commanded me
Obedience and Peace. p. 411. of the Five Disputations.

Page 12. The Liturgy, he says, is the best that ever was used in any
Christian Church: If then we cannot join with our Church therein, we cannot
join with any Christian Church: Yet p. 13. he thinks it absolutely necessary,
not only that it be altered now, but every thirty Years. And what example does
he set before us, but the Church of Rome, and the Greek Church, which have
several Liturgies; because they consist of several National Governments: but
from the beginning of the Reformation, under Edw. 6. was the first Law for an
uniform Liturgy; And shall we take example from the Church of Rome, or from our
Reformers? It was indeed necessary, that it should be reformed in those days,
because all Popish Superstitions could not be cast off at once. He tell us, p.
14. Of many Alterations formerly made, and would fain know a reason why we
should not make more.

I Answ. Because there is not such reason, as was to reform the Liturgies in
the Reign of Edw. 6. when there was Crisme, and Prayers for the Dead, and such
other things, which Calvin called, Tolerabiles ineptias: and Q. Elizabeth kept
in some things to bring in the Papists; and it had good effect: But ours being
so well accommodated to Truth, Piety, and Devotion, there needs no other
Alterations, unless better reasons can be showed, it being confessedly the best
in the Christian World. But, moreover, what good effect has followed the six
hundred Alterations in 1661? Who desires them at our hands? And their not
desiring them, argues they will not be satisfied by them; but they expect such
things as they are not willing to ask, knowing they cannot be granted. His
Objections from Tobit, and the old Translation of the Psalms, have been already
considered, and so has that of the Athanasian Creed: As to the Liturgy,
therefore I commend Mr. Baxter to him, and the Dissenters again, p. 76. of
Concord: I constantly join with my Parish Church in Liturgy and Sacraments, and
hope so to do while I live: I take the Common Prayer to be bester incomparably,
than many of the Sermons and Prayers that I hear.

His next charge, p. 15. is against Excommunication; which he says, Is sometime
denounced against the best of our People, right or wrong, for some Penny or
Two-penny Cause. This is a gross Scandal, for if any be sued for small matters,
if it be due to their Minister, he is very unjust that will withold it; and
the Excommunication is issued against such, for the contempt of the Authority;
which is practiced in all other Churches, even in Scotland, as by an Order
printed June 1571. chapter 4. Any small Offense (say they) may justly deserve
Excommunication, by reason of the contempt and disobedience of the Offender.

He comes p. 16. to answer Objections: The first is, That altering any thing in
this now Constituted Church, will be like the plucking a Beam but of a well
built House, which may endanger the whole Fabric: To which he answers, If all
had been of this mind, we could never have Reformed from Popery. This is very
impertinent, for is there no greater reason to reform False Doctrine, and
Idolatrous Worship, than to change innocent and lawful Ceremonies in our well
constituted Church; there we are sure we altered for the better, here we are
not sure but we may alter for the worse.

Object. 2. If we once begin to alter, where shall we stop? his Answer is, When
any thing is proposed to us, which is not fit to be done. This Answer is
insufficient upon his grounds, for he will not have the Church to judge what is
fit, but to do what is unfitly demanded by the Dissenters, whom he makes Judges
what ought to be altered.

Object. 3. And he says, If we yield now, they will still be craving, till they
have taken all away: And there is a crossing of his old Proverb by another:
Give an Inch, and they will take an Ell.

Obj. 4. That Alterations are required in some things, as was in the Primitive
Church. Answ. We are not hound to observe all that the Primitive Church did, as
their Love Feasts, and Deaconesses; which is the same, as if we were bound to
revive the old Saxon and British Laws: To which the Reply in brief is this:
When old Laws or Usages are antiquated and laid aside, by the common consent of
those that instituted them, there remains nothing but our due Obedience to
those new Ones that are in force. I perceive now, this Champion's Arms grow
feeble, and therefore he makes use of his Tongue, and thinks to supply the
defect of Reason by railing; and his Bolt is quickly shot; but shot at random,
and hits Nobody, for he mistakes his Mark: he aimed at the Prolocutor, by an
Inuendo, that he was he who had been promoted in the Church, by him whom he
stabs with a Motto: Nolumus leges Angliae mutare: Which was not spoken by the
Prolocutor, but another person, who owed his Preferment to his own merit, and
not another's favor; but whoever spoke the words, they could not deserve the
name of a stab, unless the telling of a Truth be so; and that ancient saying
may excuse him: Amicus Socrates Amicus Plato magis amica veritas. But the other
stab, that of the Church, is given her by the Author, who complements the
Church, as, ( Joab did Abner.) Art thou in health, my Mother? And the words are
no sooner out of his mouth, but the Sword is in her Bowels; which, as another
Nero, he unnaturally rips up, though he had been long nourished in them; nor
does he spare him whom he intended to vindicate, by changing the Motto into a
Volumus leges Angliae mutare. And thus he insults over his dying Mother, as if
in his judgment her Case were desperate, being reduced to the Ultimus Conatus
Naturae, p. 18. That she sits down quietly, and languisheth to death, rather
then she will make the least effort to save herself: But (God be thanked) she
has more dutiful Sons than this unnatural Brutus.

In the sixth Object. p. 18. Our Author having so much mist his mark, is so
much in passion, that he is angry with, and as far as a plain contradiction
will reach, stabs himself: The Objection is: We have no reason to make
Alterations for the sake of the Dissenters, because the fault of our Divisions,
is not from any Constitutions of ours, but from their obstinacy and
perverseness, in unreasonably dissenting from them. To which his Answer is: I
acknowledge all this to be true, that it is not the fault of the Church by any
of its Constitutions, or Impositions, which are all rational and good, but they
Only who refuse to conform to them. Whereas in p. 3. he had affirmed, That
those excepted passages in the Liturgy, and those Ceremonies in our Worship had
given the whole Origin to those prevailing Evils among us, and therefore
thinks it necessary to lay aside those Penal Laws, and Church Censures, which
have been inflicted with a Severity beyond what we can justify; and this, he
says, has heightened our Divisions, and increased the Mischiefs which we
endeavored to remove. If ever I read a contradiction, this is one: What then
is our Author's Opinion, but that our Penal Laws, and Church Censures must of
absolute necessity be laid aside, and the Fathers of the Church be reconciled
to their disobedient Children on their own terms; as if he had never read of
those terrible Judgments which were denounced against old Eli, for his fondness
toward his profane Sons, who were Sons of Belial, That would endure no Yoke
themselves, and made the People to abhor the Offerings of the Lord, 1 Samuel
2.17. And he restrained them not; but though they kicked at the Sacrifices and
Offerings of the Lord, yet honored his Sons more than God: Yet notwithstanding
this, he charge the Church, as being too obstinate, and obstructing the Peace
of the Church, and the Salvation of so many Souls; as if the Peace of the
Church, and the Salvation of Souls, were not more probably to be promoted in
the Church, than out of it; and the Peace of the Church more likely to be
procured by a restraining of those that separate from it, rather than by
complying with them, as he advises. He tells us, indeed, That we are
Physicians sent to heal those that are sick and infirm; and when they refuse a
wholesome Medicine, ought to think of something agreeable to his humor and
palate; but if the sick Man become pievish, as he says, and nothing will please
him, but what the Physician knows will endanger his life, the Physician ought
not in compliance with his humor to hazard his life: A gentle restraint is more
absolutely necessary in such cases, than a foolish pity; nor can it be called
unreasonable severity; for in such cases, Non persequitur medicus aegrum sed
aeger Medicum: says St. Augustine.

Object. 7. If we make those Alterations, how shall we answer the Papists, who
will upbraid us with it? To this he answers: As well as we did in the first of
Q. Elizabeth. Reply. Not so well; for she altered some things that were
superstitious, and yet kept up such a decency as drew in many Papists to the
Communion of the Church; as my Lord Cook observed. 2. He says, We may alter
now, as well as in 1662. And likely no better; for then, notwithstanding the
six hundred Alterations, the Dissenters were Dissenters still. 3. We may answer
the Papists, he says, by pleading their Alterations at the Council of Trent.
Whereas that Council, were so far from complying with the then Dissenters, that
they made more severe Canons, and enjoined them under their Anathemas; when we
only desire to preserve our own Constitutions, which our Author says, Are both
Reasonable and Religious.

Object. 8. We shall by these Alterations dissatisfie our own People. Answ. I
believe there is more Noise than Truth or Reason in this Objection: There may
be, says he, some few ignorant or weak People that are zealously affected to
these matters. But the Apostle accounted them to be the stronger and better
instructed Christians, who understood their Christian Liberty as to things
indifferent, and were ready to submit to their Governors in such things, for
the Peace of the Church, and condemned those that were contentious against the
use of them; the People ought not to prescribe to the Church in such things,
but the Church to them: Nor is it a sinful supposition in them that do obey,
for they do not obey as to Divine Institutions, but as to the Constitutions of
the Church; and therefore we do not fear that they will desert us, if we keep
our ground. Thus far, says our Author, I have shown what necessity is upon us
to consent to the Alterations that will be proposed in this present
Convocation: A strange kind of necessity, to consent to what we never knew, be
it right or wrong. A great Noise was made of consenting to certain Homilies,
that should be set forth by Authority of Church and State; but here we must
necessarily consent to what will be proposed by some few Men, who by this Man's
Authority may impose what they will upon us; but of this he seems to be
ashamed, and therefore proceeds to another reason for this necessity, From the
Promise made by the Bishop to K. James; which if not performed, we must expect
the general clamor of the People against us, as a base and false sort of Men,
who can promise in times of Adversity, and forget all when that is over; and so
become the Reproach of every Man. Answ. We are little obliged to this Author
for his Misrepresentation of us, and of our Promises, which were conditional;
if the Parliament and Convocation should agree. And are the Bishops in more
prosperity now, than when they made those Promises? Are they in a condition to
perform them now, if they were never so willing?

This is the same, as if one man should extort a promise from another in duris,
and then so bind him up, that it shall be impossible for him to perform what he
promised. The reproach of nonperformance will lay on some other and not on
him. Let the Bishops be put in statu quo, and then see what they will do; but
this Objection our Author sufficiently Answers, when he says, There is no
assurance that any one of the Dissenters will come over to us (on our
Concessions) and therefore it is in vain to proceed on this project; for as for
his confidence that many would come in, he must know the minds of those many
better than they themselves do, if he be assured of it; for the leaders of that
multitude who are guided by them, have declared the contrary. And it being the
interest of their Ministers, who have a more plentiful income by their
conventicles, as well as greater respects, and a larger power than they (...)
hope for in a Church Benefice, will never be such self-denying persons, as to
renounce all these Interests, and be brought into the Church to the loss of
them. But the people, says our Author, will forsake them, and come into us if
these Alterations be made.

Ans. On the contrary, its more probable that when we make Alterations without
their desire, the Ministers will tell them, we were ashamed of our corrupt
Worship, and have altered it in some lesser, but have retained the greater
matters to which they cannot yield; there being yet many sinful conditions in
our conformity; and as the people are already in this belief, so they will from
our voluntary Alterations confirm them in it, and gain more on their credulity:
And from hence the Ministers will not be left without excuse, as long as they
pretend any one sinful term for a Communion with us is retained; and that
pretense is like to hold as long as it is their interest to suggest it, and so
long after all that we can grant, we shall still be vexed with their Clamors.

But, 2ly, it is said, We shall by our Alterations give satisfaction to the
Nation, who expects it, the main Body whereof, he says, stand indifferently
affected to them and us, and think the things stood upon to be but trifling
matters. How the Nation will brook such an accusation, as if like Gallio, they
cared not for the solemnity of Divine Worship, and were Laodiceans, neither hot
nor cold, for that which is Established by Law, and has been so long approved
by their practice, let them show and it were a shame if they should not be as
zealous for the Established Worship, as the Dissenters are for that which has
been so often condemned, though now it be Tolerated.

But there is yet another necessity for Alterations, because if we do it not,
most certainly the Parliament will. This man talks as once Cromwell did, who
having seized the Keys of the Parliament house, clapped them up, and said, He had
now the Parliament in his Pocket. Most certainly the present Parliament will
not truckle under such a degenerate Usurper, and instead of thanks incur the
Odium of the Nation, seeing this very Author says, If it come to their hands
they may instead of Circumstantials alter Essentials, and make a breach on
Religion it self to the undoing of all; and this I think is a Scandalum
Magnatum, and this he fears will be done, not only in the case of Orders, but
other Particulars, which he could instance in, of which the least mischief
would be totally to extinguish all Convocations for the future, and resolve the
whole power of the Church into the Two Houses of Parliament, and fix the
reproach of the Papists on us, That our Religion is a Parliamentary Religion.
For my part I should fear the loss of my Ears if I should have thus slurd that
Great Council, this would make what he would have the Church to be, Felo's de
se.

This Man (as other venomous Animals) keeps the sting in his Tail, or the
conclusion of his Libel, in Answer to a Third Objection, That ha^ necessary
soever his Reasons before Alterations, yet it is time for it when so many of the
Fathers of the Church, whom he acknowledges to be excellent and most Religious
persons, and other eminent Men of the Clergy, by their Suspension, stand
incapacitated to act in this matter; and if this be now done, when their
consent cannot be had, they will renounce it all, and by sticking to the
present Form, create a new Schism in the Church; and this he hears is the
reason much insisted on to defeat the design and intent of this Convocation.
But first I believe, (whatever may be the design of some Men) is not the intent
of the Convocation; they may intend the better Establishment of the present
Convocation; they may intend the better Establishment of the present
Constitution, the Reformation of the Lives and Manners of some of the Clergy,
by new Canons and Censures, to be provided against the Ignorance and Idleness
of some, and the Irregularity and scandalous Behavior of others, who either
already are, or hereafter shall be admitted into the Ministry of the Church.
But let us attend to his Answer to this Objection, which we have p. 24. Is it
possible to imagine, says he, that those who have so eminently signalized
themselves in defense of the Church, and been Confessors for it, should turn
their hands against it? No, It is affirmed before, that if they were admitted
into the Convocation, they would agree to the intended Alterations; and if any
should then separate, they are such as are most perversely bent against Reason
and Conscience to do all the wickedness they can to gratify a peevish humor;
and therefore, he says, they that make this Objection, have a great deal to
Answer for the injury which they do them by this slanderous and vile
Imputation. For my part, I cannot be so confident, that those excellent Men
would be so forward to make such Alterations, as this Author says they would;
and I see the Objectors are not without Reason on their side; for if they are
ready to suffer the loss of all that they have, rather than to offend their
Consciences by assenting to some Civil Alterations in the State, (which what
the Particulars be I cannot imngine, and therefore cannot judge of them) it may
well be supposed, that they would be so tenderly conscientious in respect to
the Constitutions of the Church, as not to assent to any Alterations that
concern the safety, honor, and beauty thereof, without important Reasons. But
what if they should adhere to the old Form, and not yield to the intended
Alterations; why then our Author has advised for their ruin; For their
number, says he, is so small, their Proselytes will be so few, and the
Resentments of the State will be so heavy on them, that they will be
immediately crushed, and fall to nothing. Which will be very hard measure, that
such excellent Men should not be allowed so much Liberty of Conscience as
Anabaptists and Quakers are, though they be known to be Men of sound Doctrine,
and of peaceable and harmless Lives: But it is yet their happiness, that such
as our Author is, are not made their Judges; for how we would deal with those
Scare-crows (as he terms them) which Knaves (...) lift up, but none but Fools
can be frighted with; would probably be (...) like the Knave than the Fool.

And to conclude, he thinks his Argument of Absolute Necessity so plain, that
there can be no opposition, but from them that are afraid of their Church Power
and Church-promotions, when they hear of Reformation: And in truth, that word
was made an Engine of great mischief in the former Age 1642, when the
Churchmen suffered more than they fear, now under the present Government,
whatever this Author and his Abetters may design; for he seems to threaten us,
That if we will not be contented with a moderate and just Reformation, he knows
not but the Nation may take the matter into their own hands, and bring us to
that of Scotland, which, he says, we are so much afraid of, and deprive us of
all: And then farewell our Church-promotions, and all their Revenues, which
there will not want other Men to share among themselves, when such a through
Reformation shall be made as the Scots once procured, and have again designed:
And therefore I dare not trust the promise of this single person, whoever he
be, (for I fear he has not been as faithful to his former solemn engagements
as he ought) That upon our Alterations we shall find all the good success that
can be desired; because, as he says, there are appearances, at present, to the
contrary; and they of such an Aspect, as will much abate the Credit which he
expects should be given to his promises; we had once very great promises from
such a sort of Men, what a glorious King they would make of King Charles the
First, and they did it; but it was by Martyrdom; and a godly Reformation was
promised in the Church, but it proved a through Desolation of Episcopacy,
Liturgy, and all that was Sacred; and as it was their fault then, so it will be
ours now, if we by our too great credulity shall expose our selves to ruin a
second time, on a bare promse of a faithless Man.

Thus, Sir, I have reflected on these two Killing Letters, and shall not
concern my self to enquire the Authors: They may be Papists, who by such Arts
seek to divide, that they may destroy us; nor can I perceive any other end in
either Letter, but the carrying on a design of Self-interest, and Secular
advantages, on the ruin of the Church. The first Author discovers his palpable
Ignorance, the second his visible Malice: The one fights as Don Quixot, with
Windmills disturbing his Brain; The other acts as the Fur praedestinatus under
a fatal necessity, by which he would excuse all his Cheats and Robberies, as if
he could not do otherwise, being under the power of an Absolute necessity; I
shall leave it to the Convocation to conjecture who may be the Authors of these
Letters, but that the One is a Minister of the Established Church, and the
Other, as he pretends, of the Present Convocation, I cannot be persuaded,
though he should swear to it; because by what is matter of fact, such Men have
acted contrary to their Oaths, and solemn Subscriptions; and so I take my leave
of them.

An Historical ACCOUNT OF THE PRESENT CONVOCATION.
THE CONVOCATION being Summoned by the King's Writ, His Majesty issued out
another Commission to thirty Divines, to prepare Matters to be Considered by
the Convocation. The Commission is as follows:

WHereas the particular Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies
appointed to be used therein, being Things in their own Nature Indifferent and
Alterable, and so acknowledged; It is but reasonable, that, upon weighty and
important Considerations, according to the various Exigencies of Times and
Occasions, such Changes and Alterations should be made therein, as to those
that are in Place and Authority should from time to time seem either Necessary
or Expedient.

And whereas the Book of Canons is fit to be Reviewed, and made more suitable to
the State of the Church; and whereas there are Defects and Abuses in the
Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions, and particularly there is not
sufficient Provision made for the Removing of Scandalous Ministers, and for the
Reforming of Manners either in Ministers or People: And whereas it is most fit
that there should be a strict Method prescribed for the Examination of such
Persons as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders, both as to their Learning
and Manners.

We therefore, out of Our Pious and Princely Care for the Good Order, and
Edisication, and Unity of the Church of England, committed to our Charge and
Care; And for the Reconciling, as much as is possible, of all Differences among
Our Good Subjects, and to take away all Occasions of the like for the future,
have thought fit to Authorize and Empower You, etc. and any Nine of You,
whereof Three to be Bishops, to Meet from time to time, as often as shall be
needful, and to Prepare such Alterations of the Liturgy and Canons, and such
Proposals for the Reformation of Ecclesiastical Courts, and to Consider of such
other Matters as in Your Judgments may most conduce to the Ends abovementioned.

The Names of the Commissioners, A. D. 1689.
Tho. Lamplugh, Lord A. Bish. of York. Henry Compton, Lord Bishop of London.
Peter Mew, Lord Bishop of Winchester. William Lloyd, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph.
Thomas Sprat, Lord Bishop of Rochester. Thomas Smith, Lord Bishop of Carstile.
Jonathan Trelauny, Ld. Bishop of Exeter. Gilbert Burnet, Lord Bishop of
Salisbury. Humfrey Humfreys, Ld. Bishop of Bangor. Nicholas Stratford, Ld.
Bishop of Chester. Edward Stillingfleet, late Dean of St. Paul's, Land. now
Bishop of Worcester. Simon Patyick, late Dean of Peterborough, now Bishop of
Chichester. John Tillotson, D. D. late Dean of Canterbury, now Dean of St.
Paul's, Land. Rich. Meggot, D. D. Dean of Winchester. John Sharp, D. D. late
Dean of Norwich, now Dean of Canterbury. Rich. Kidder, D. D. Dean of
Peterborough Henry Aldridge, D. D. Dean of Christ-Church, Oxford. Will. Jane,
D. D. Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford. John Hall, D.
D. Margaret Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford. Joseph Beaumont,
D. D. Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Cambridge. John
Mountague, D. D. and Mr. of Trinity College in the University of Cambridge.
John Goodman, D. D. Archdeacon of Middlesex. Will Beveradge, D. D. Archd. of
Colobest. John Battely, D. D. Archd. of Canterbury. Charles Alston, D. D.
Archd. of Essex. Thomas Tenison, D. D. Archdeacon of London. John Scot, D. D.
Prebendary of St. Paul's, London. Edward Fowler, D. D. Prebendary of Gloucester.
Robert Grove, D. D. Prebendary of St. Paul's, London. John Williams, D. D.
Prebendary of St. Paul's, London.
What things were debated by them, are not yet communicated to the Convocation;
only it is known, that the present Prolocutor, and some other Learned and
Reverend Divines, deserted them, as disliking several Proposals, which the rest
insisted on.

The Particular Acts and Adjournments OF THE CONVOCATION, From December the
4th, 1689.
THE Litany was read by a Bishop, for some days in Latin, there being only
this Supplication added, after the Prayers for the Bishops:

That it may please Thee to inspire with Thy Holy Spirit this Convocation, and
to preside over it, to lead us into all Truth, which is according to Godliness.

At other times when there was no Sermon, this Prayer for the Parliament was
constantly used:

MOst Gracious God who do Rule all Men, and Govern all Things, be graciously
present, we beseech Thee, with the three Estates of the Kingdom in Parliament
assembled, under the Government of our most Gracious Princes William and Mary;
Assist them with the Spirit of Counsel and Peace, whereby they may be preserved
in one Mind and Accord, and also may be inspired with the Love of Thee, and
Study the Public Welfare; that whatsoever Laws, by their joint Suffrages shall
be obtained, being established by our Lord and Lady, the King and Queen, may
establish Righteousness and Peace to us, and confirm them to our Rosterities
for ever, to the increase of all Virtue, and the Eternal Glory of Thy Name, by
and for Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.

Then followed these Five Collects: I. The Collect on St. Simon and Jude's Day,
O Almighty God, who have built thy Church upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, etc.

II. The Collect for Good Friday, Almighty and Everlasting God, by whose
Spirit, etc.

III. Collect, Almighty God who by thy Son Jesus Christ did give to the Holy
Apostles many excellent Gifts, and commandst them Earnestly to feed thy Flock,
Make, we beseech thee, all Bishops and Pastors diligently to preach thy Holy
Word; and the People obediently to follow the same, that they may receive the
Crown of Everlasting Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. The Collect on the Fifth Sunday after Trinity, Grant we beseech Thee, etc.

V. Collect, O Lord God the Father of Lights, and Fountain of all Wisdom, we
thy humble and unworthy Servants, prostrating ourselves at thy Footstool,
beseech thee, that we who are here met together in thy Name, under the
Government of our most Gracious King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, being assisted by
thy heavenly Grace, may so search out, meditate, handle, and discern all things
which may promote thy Honor and Glory, and the Good of thy Church, that thy
Spirit, which heretofore did preside over the Council of the Apostles, may also
preside over this our Council, and lead us into all that Truth which is
according to Godliness; that we who have worthily and seriously, utterly
renounced the Errors of our holy Reformation, the Corruptions and
Superstitions, together with the Papal Tyranny which heretofore did here
abound, may all of us firmly: and constantly hold the Apostolic and truly
Catholic Faith, and without fear, may duly serve thee with a pure Worship,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then follows the Prayer of St. Chrysostom: Almighty God who have given us
Grace at this time, etc.

Then the Members of the Convocation were called over:

An Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Names of the Members of the Upper and
Lower House of this present CONVOCATION.

William, Ld. Bp. of St. Asaph. Geor. Bright, D. D. Dean of St. Asaph. Samuel
Davies, L. D. Proctor for the Chapter. William, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph,
Archdeacon of St. Asaph. Griffin Lloyd, B. D. John Edwards, A. M. Proctors for
the Clergy.
Bath and Wells. Ralph Bathurst, D. D. Dean of Bath and Wells. Rich. Busby, D.
D. Proct. for the Chapter. Edwin Sandys, A. M. Archd of Wells. Bath. Taunton.
Edw. Waple, B. D. Archd of Wells. Bath. Taunton. William Clement, A. M. Giles
Pooley, A. M. Proctors for the Clergy. Humphrey, Ld. Bp. of Bangor. John Jones,
D. D. Dean of Bangor. Rob. Foulks, A M. Pro^t. for the Chapt. Humphrey, Ld. Bp.
of Bangor, Archdeacon of Bangor and Anglesey. Fran. Lloyd, A. M. Archd. of
Merioneth. Robert Win, A. M. John Williams, A. M. Proctors for the Clergy.
Gilbert, Ld. Bp. of Bristol. William Levett, D. D. Dean of Bristol. Steph.
Crespion, A. M. Proct. for the Chap. John Feilding, D. D. Archd. of Dorset.
Roger Mander, D. D. Rich. Roderick, B. D. Proctors for the Clergy.

Canterbury. John Tillotson, D. D. then Dean of Canterbury, now Dean of St.
Paul's Land. -- Proctor for the Chapter. Joh. Batteley, Archdeacon of
Canterbury. George Thorpe, D. D. John Cook, A. M. Proctors for the Clergy.
Simon, Ld. Bp. of Chichester. Francis Hawkins, D. D. Dean of Chichester. Zach.
Cradock, D. D. Proct. for the Chapt. Josias Pleydell, A. M. Archdeacon of
Chichester. Joseph Sayer, B. D. Archd. of Jews. Conyers Richardson, A. M.
David Morton, D. D. Proctors for the Clergy. Thomas, Ld. Bp. of St. David's.
John Ellis, D. D. Praecentor. Spencer Lucy A M. Proct. for the Chapt. Tim.
Halton, D. D. Archd. of St. David's. Geo. Owen, D. D. Archd. of Carmarthen. Tho.
Stainoe, B. D. Archd. of Brecknock. Joh. Williams, A. M. Archd. of Cardigan,
Tho. Sandys, A. M. William Powell A. M. Proctors for the Clergy.

Ely. John Spencer, D. D. Dean of Ely. John Moore, D. D. proct. for the Chapt.
Will. Saywell, D. D. Archdeacon of Ely. Samuel Blithe, D. D. Nicholas Gouge, A.
M. proctors for the Clergy. Jonathan, Ld. Bp. of Exeter. Rich. Annesley, D. D.
Dean of Exon. Geo. Hooper, D. D. proct. for the Chapter. Edward Lake, D. D.
Archd. of Exeter. Edw. Drew, A M. Archd. of Cornwall. Fra. Fulwood, D. D.
Archd. of Totnes. William Read, A. M. Archd. of Barum. John James, D. D. Tho.
Long, Senior, B. D. proctors for the Clergy.

Gloucester. William Jane, D. D. Dean of Gloucester, Prolocutor. Rich Duke, A. M.
proctor for the Chapt. Tho. Hide, D. D. Archd. of Gloucester. Abraham Gregory,
D. D. Rich. Parsons, L. D. Proctors for the Clergy. Herbert, Ld. Bp. of
Hereford. George Benson, D. D. Dean of Hereford. Tho. Rogers, D. D. proctor for
the Chapt. Sam. Benson, A. M. Archd. of Hereford. Adam Ottley, A. M. Archd. of
Salop. William Johnson, D. D. Rich. Bulkley, A. M. proctors for the Clergy.
William, Ld. Bp. of Landaffe. Henry Bull, D. D. Archd. of Landaffe. Jonathan
Edwards, proctor for the Chapter. William Frampton, A. M. -- Jenkins, A. M.
proctors for the Clergy. Thomas, Ld. Bp. of Lichfield and Coventry. Lancelot
Addison, D. D. Dean of Lichfield. John Wills, D. D. proctor for the Chapt.
Lancelot Addison, D. D. Archdeacon of Coventry. Fran. Ashenhurst, A. M. Archd.
of Darby. Fran. Ashenhurst, A. M. Archd. of Stafford. Fran. Ashenhurst, A. M.
Archd. of Salop. Barnabas Poole, A. M. Jo. Kimberley, A. M. proctors for the
Clergy. Thomas, Lord Bp. of Lincoin. Daniel Brevint, D. D. Dean of Lincoln.
John Inet, A. M. Samuel Fuller, D. D. proctors for the Chapter. Tho. Oldys, L.
B. Archd. of Lincoln. John Hutton, A. M. Archd. of Stow. Byrom Eaton, D. D.
Archd. of Leicester. John Hamond, D. D. Archd. of Bucks. John Gery, L. D.
Archd. of Huntington. John Skeleton, A. M. Archd. of Bedford. James Gardener, D.
D. Robert Edwards, B. D. Proctors for the Clergy. Henry, Ld. Bp. of London,
Pres. J. Tillotson, D. D. now D. of St. Paul's. Will. Stanley, D. D. Proct. for
the Chapt. Tho. Tenison, D. D. Archd. of London. John Goodman, D. D. Archd. of
Essex. Charles Alston, D. D. Archd. of Middlesex. Will. Beveridge, D. D. Archd.
of Colchester. John Cole, A. M. Archd. of St. Albans. Gregory Hascard, D. D.
Robert Grove, D. D. Proctors for the Clergy.

Norwich. John Sharp, D. D. then Dean of Norwich, now Dean of Canterbury.
Nath. Hodges, A. M. Proct. for the Chapt. John Conant, D. D. Archd. of Norwich.
Edw. Reynolds, D. D. Archd. of Norfolk. John Spencer, D. D. Archd. of Sudbury.
Hum. Prideaux, D. D. Archd. of Suffolk. John Connald, A. M. John Eachard, D. D.
Proctors for the Clergy.

Oxford. Hen. Aldrich, D. D. D. of Christ-Church. Hen. Smith, D. D. Proct. for
the Chapter. Timothy Halton, D. D. Archd. of Oxon. John Mill, D. D. Henry
Maurice, D. D. Proctors for the Clergy.

Peterborough Rich. Kidder, D. D. Dean of Peterbour. John Patrick, A. M. Proct.
for the Chapt. Tho. Woolsey, D. D. Archd. of Northampt. Matthew Hutton, B. D.
Nath: Whalley, A. M. proctors for the Clergy. Thomas, Ld. Bp. of Rochester.
Henry Vllock, D. D. Dean of Rochester. Fran. Brevall, D. D. proct. for the
Chapt. Tho. Plume, D. D. Archd. of Rochester. Richard Holden, A. M. Joseph
Yates, A. M. proctors for the Clergy. Gilbert, Ld. Bp. of Salisbury. Thomas
Price, D. D. Dean of Sarum. Robert Woodward, L. D. proctor for the Chapter.
Will. Richards, B. D. Archd. of Sarum. Tho. Lambert, D. D. Archd. of Berks.
Thomas Ward, L. D. Archd. of Wilts. John Younger, D. D. Thomas Wyat, D. D.
proctors for the Clergy.

Westminster. Thomas, Lord Bishop of Rochester, Dean of Westminster. Edw.
Pelling, D. D. proct. for the Chapt. Rich. Busby, D. D. Archd. of Westminst.
Peter, Ld. Bp. of Winchester. Rich. Meggott, D. D. Dean of Winton. Will:
Hawkins, D. D. proct. for the Chapt. Tho. Clutterbuck, D. D. Archdeacon of
Winchester. Tho. Sayer, D. D. Archdeacon of Surrey. William Harrison, D. D.
George Hooper, D. D. proctors for the Clergy.

Windsor. No Return. Wolverhampton. No Return.
Edward, Ld. Bp. of Worcester. George Hicks, D. D. Dean of Worcester. R.
Battle, A. M. proct. for the Chapter. John Fleetwood, A. M. Archdeacon of
Worcester. John Jephcott, D. D. Tho. Hodge, A. M. proctors for the Clergy.
And after this, the Prolocutor was chosen: The Persons named, were Dr.
Tillotson, Dean of St. Paul's, and Dr. Jane, the King's Professor in Oxford;
Dr. Jane had the Majority of Voices; yet great endeavors were used to prefer
the Dean, whose Party having argued much for it, but saw themselves overcome,
did at last yield to the Election of Dr. Jane, the Votes for him being double
to the others.

The first thing that was done in the Convocation, after the choosing the
Prolocutor, was, December. 4th, when the Commission from the King was read, there
being present twelve Bishops; the Commission was as follows:

WIlliam and Mary, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents
shall come, Greeting; Whereas, in and by one Act of Parliament made at
Westminster, in the 25th Year of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, Reciting,
That whereas the King's Humble and Obedient Subjects, the Clergy of this Realm
of England, had not only acknowledged according to the Truth, that the
Convocation of the same Clergy, were always, had been, and ought to be
Assembled only by the King's Writ, but also submitting themselves to the King's
Majesty, had promised in Verbo Sacerdotis, that they would never from
thenceforth presume to Attempt, Allege, Claim, or put in Ure, or Enact,
Promulge, or Execute any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial or
others, or by whatsoever other Name they should be called in the Convocation,
unless the said King's most Royal Assent and License might to them be had, to
Make, Promulge and Execute the same; and that the said King did give his Royal
Assent and Authority in that behalf.

It was therefore Enacted by the Authority of the said Parliament, according to
the said Submission and Petition of the said Clergy, among other things, That
they, nor any of them from thenceforth should Enact, Promulge or Execute any
such Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever Name they
might be called in their Convocations in time coming, which always should be
Assembled by Authority of the King's Writ, unless the same Clergy might have
the King's most Royal Assent and License, to Make, Promulge and Execute such
Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial or Synodal, upon Pain of every
one of the said Clergy doing contrary to the said Act, and being thereof
Convict, to suffer Imprisonment, and make Fines at the King's Will.

And further, by the said Act it is Provided, That no Canons, Constitutions or
Ordinances should be Made, or put in Execution within this Realm, by Authority
of the Convocations of the Clergy, which should be contrariant or repugnant to
the King's Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws or Statutes of this Realm,
any thing contained in the said Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And lastly, It is also Provided by the said Act, That such Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals Provincial, which then were already
made, and which then were not contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes
and Customs of this Realm, nor to the Damage or Hurt of the King's Prerogative
Royal; should then still be Used and Executed as they were before the making of
the said Act, until such time as they should be Viewed, Searched, or otherwise
Ordered and Determined by the Persons mentioned in the said Act, or the most
part of them, according to the Tenor, Form and Effect of the said Act, as by
the said Act, among diverse other things more fully and at large, it does and
may appear.

And whereas the particular Forms of Divine Worship, and Rites and Ceremonies
appointed to be used therein, being Things of their own Nature Indifferent and
Alterable, and so acknowledged, it is but reasonable, that upon weighty and
important Considerations, according to the various Exigency of Times and
Occasions; such Changes and Alterations should be made therein, as to those
that are in Place and Authority, should from time to time, seem either
necessary or expedient.

And whereas the Book of Canons is fit to be Reviewed, and made more suitable
to the State of the Church: And whereas there are diverse Defects and Abuses in
the Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdictions; and particularly there is not
sufficient Provision made for the removing of Scandalous Ministers, and for the
Reformation of Manners either in Ministers or People; And whereas it is most
fit, that there should be a strict Method prescribed for the Examination of
such Persons as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders, both as to their
Learning and Manners: Know ye, That We, for diverse urgent and weighty Causes
and Considerations, Us thereunto moving, of Our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, have by Virtue of Our Prerogative Royal, and
Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, Given and Granted, and by these
Presents do give and grant, full, free and lawful Liberty, License, Power and
Authority, into the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Henry Lord Bishop of London,
President of this Present Convocation, for the Province of Canterbury, (upon
the Suspension of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury) during this present
Parliament now Assembled; and in his Absence, to such other Bishops as shall be
appointed President thereof, and to the rest of the Bishops of the same
Province, and to all Deans of Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters and
Colleges, and the whole Clergy of every several Diocese, within the said
Province; That they the said Lord Bishop of London, or other President of the
said Convocation, and the rest of the Bishops, and other the said Clergy of
this present Convocation within the said Province of Canterbury, or the
greatest number of them, whereof the President of the said Convocation to be
always one, shall and may from time to time, during this present Parliament,
Confer, Treat, Debate, Consider, Consult, and Agree of and upon such Points,
Matters, Causes and Things, as We from time to time shall Propose, or cause to
be proposed by the said Lord Bishop of London, or other President of the said
Convocation, comercing Alterations and Amendments of the Liturgy and Canons,
and Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions for the Reformation of Ecclesiastical
Courts, for the Removing of Scandalous Ministers, for the Reformation of
Manners either in Ministers or People, and for the Examination of such Persons
as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders, and all such other Points, Causes
and Matters as We shall think Necessary and Expedient, for advancing the Honor
and Service of Almighty GOD, the Good and Quiet of the Church, and the better
Government thereof.

And we do also by these Presents, Give and Grant unto the said Lord Bishop of
London, or other President of the said Covocation, and to the rest of the
Bishops of the said Province of Canterbury, and unto all Deans of Cathedral
Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges, and the whole Clergy of every
several Diocese within the said Province, full, free and lawful Liberty,
License, Power and Authority, That they the said Lord Bishop of London, or
other President of the said Convocation, and the rest of the said Bishops, and
other the Clergy of the same Province, or the greatest Number of them that
shall be present in Person, or by their Proxies, shall and may from time to
time, draw into Forms, Rules, Orders, Ordinances, Constitutions and Canons,
such Matters as to them shall seem Necessary and Expedient for the Purposes
abovementioned; and the same set down in Writing, from time to time, to Exhibit
and Deliver, or cause to be Exhibited and Delivered unto us, to the end that
We, as Occasion shall require, may thereupon have the Advice of Our Parliament:
And that such, and so many of the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances,
Constitutions, Matters, Causes and Things as shall be thought Requisite and
Convenient by Our said Parliament, may be presented to Us in due Form, for Our
Royal Assent, if upon Mature Consideration thereof, We shall think fit to Enact
the same. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patent; Witness Ourselves at Westminster, the 30th Day of November, in the
First Year of Our Reign,

Per Breve de privato Sigello, BURKER. Vera Copia, J. C. N. P.

His Majesty's Gracious Message to the Convocation, sent by the Earl of
Nottingham, as follows:

WILLIAM R.

HIs Majesty has Summoned this Convocation, not only because it is usual upon
holding of a Parliament, but out of a Pious Zeal to do every thing that may
tend to the best Establishment of the Church of England, which is so eminent a
Part of the Reformation, and is certainly the best suited to the Constitution
of this Government; and therefore does most signally deserve, and shall always
have both His Favor and Protection; and he doubts not, but that you will
assist Him in promoting the Welfare of it, so that no Prejudices, with which
some Men may have labored to possess you, shall disappoint His good
Intentions, or deprive the Church of any Benefit from your Consultations. His
Majesty therefore expects, that the Things that shall be proposed, shall be
calmly and impartially Considered by you, and assures you, that he will offer
nothing to you but what shall be for the Honor, Peace, and Advantage both of
the Protestant Religion in general, and particularly of the Church of England.


The Bishops ADDRESS:

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects, the Bishops and Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury, in Convocation assembled, having received Your
Majesty's Gracious Message, together with a Commission from Your Majesty, by
the Earl of Nottingham, hold ourselves bound in Gratitude and Duty, to return
our most Humble Thanks and Acknowledgements of the Grace and Goodness expressed
in Your Majesty's Message, and the Zeal You show in it for the Protestant
Religion in general, and the Church of England in particular, and of the Trust
and Confidence reposed in us by this Commission: We look on these Marks of Your
Majesty's Care and Favor, as the Continuance of the great Deliverance Almighty
God wrought for us by Your Means, in making You the Blessed Instrument of
Preserving us from falling under the Cruelty of Popish Tyranny; for which as we
have often Thanked Almighty God, so we cannot forget that high Obligation and
Duty which we owe to Your Majesty; and on these new Assurances of Your
Protection and Favor to our Church, we beg leave to renew the Assurance of our
constant Fidelity and Obedience to Your Majesty, Whom we Pray GOD to continue
Long, and Happily to Reign over us.


This Address was not approved of by the Lower House, who thought they had the
Privilege (wanting the Books of Presidents) to present one of their own
drawing; but that not being admitted, it was voted by the Lower House, to make
some Amendments; which were not agreed on, till after a Conference with the
Bishops, the Lower House insisting, that they would confine themselves to the
King's Declaration, and to what concerned especially the Church of England;
whereupon a Conference was desired, and a Committee appointed to attend the
Lords: The Conference was managed chiefly between the Bishop of Salisbury, and
the Prolocutor; the Bishop urged, That the Church of England was not
distinguished from other Protestant Churches, but by its Hierarchy and
Revenues, and that it was an equivocal Expression; for if Popery should
prevail, it would be called the Church of England still. To which the
Prolocutor answered, That the Church of England was distinguished by its
Doctrine, as it stands in the Articles, Liturgy, and Homelies, as well as by
its Hierarchy, and that the Term of Protestant Churches was much more
Equivocal, because Socinians, Anabaptists, and Quakers assumed that Title.
After this, we heard no more Reply, but a Committee of the Convocation, in the
Lower House, having drawn up another Form, it was consented to. And Thanks were
given to the Prolocutor, for managing the Conference.

And the Address, as agreed on, to be Presented, was as follows:

WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and most Dutiful Subjects, the Bishops and Clergy
of the Province of Canterbury, in Convocation Assembled, having received a most
Gracious Message from Your Majesty, by the Earl of Nottingham, hold ourselves
bound in Duty and Gratitude, to return our most Humble Acknowledgments for the
same; and for the Pious Zeal and Care Your Majesty is pleased to express
therein for the Honor, Peace, Advantage, and Establishment of the Church of
England: Whereby, we doubt not, the Interest of the Protestant Religion in all
other Protestant Churches, which is dear to us, will be the better secured
under the Influence of Your Majest's Government and Protection. And we crave
leave to assure Your Majesty, That in pursuance of that Trust and Confidence
You repose in us, we will consider whatsoever shall be offered to us from Your
Majesty, without Prejudice, and with all Calmness and Impartiality: And that we
will constantly Pay the Fidelity and Allegiance, which we have all Sworn to
Your Majesty and the Queen; Whom we pray GOD to continue Long, and Happily to
Reign over us.


This Address was presented on Thursday the 12th of December, in the
Banquetting-Chamber.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Bishops Address, etc.

My LORDS,
I Take this Address very kindly from the Convocation: You may depend upon it,
that all I have promised, and all that I can do for the Service of the Church
of England, I will do: And I give you this new Assurance, that I will improve
all Occasions and Opportunities for its Service.


I. In the Adjournments it was first debated, What Proxies each Man might have,
from those that were absent; and it was agreed, that one Man might have four.
II. Whether those Bishops that had Arch-Deaconries annexed to their
Bishoprics, might grant Proxies to any Member of the Lower House of
Convocation, to Vote for them. III. Whether such Proctors for the Clergy, as
had not appeared, might grant their Proxies; Which was resolved in the
Affirmative, Presidents being found for the same.
Then it was complained, that the Convocation wanted the Books of Presidents
belonging to the Convocation; and it being said, that the Bishop of Asaph, and
Dean Tillotson had such Books, they were desired to bring them in; which was
done, and a Committee appointed to inspect them, and report what Presidents
could be found, that might concern the Convocation, which is yet under
Examination. It was proposed, that a Committee might be continued during the
Adjournment, to prepare things against their Meeting; but this was denied.
Complaint was made of some dangerous Books printed contrary to the Canons, as
that against the Creed of Athanasius; which was sent to the Bishops to be
Censured by them. A Reverend Person made a Speech on the behalf of the Bishops
under Suspension, that something might be done to qualify them to sit in
Convocation, but so as the Convocation might not incur any danger; which being
not in their Cognizance, it was waved, and left to farther Consideration.

The MINUTE PARTICULARS Observed in the Proceedings of the CONVOCATION.
4 December, 1689.

PRayers being ended, the King's Commission brought in with a Message by the
Earl of Nottingham, both which being read, the Bishops went to
Jerusalem-Chamber, from whence they sent a Copy of the King's Message, with the
Form of an Address, to which they desired the Concurrence of this House.

Dean of Windsor, St. Paul's, Exon, desired by this House, to attend the Lords,
to know whether they were all consenting to the said Address, and likewise to
pray a Copy of the said Commission.

They Reported from the Lords, That they were consenting to the said Address,
and ordered to be sent down to this House, and desired their Concurrence; and
that they would order a Copy of the Commission. Then a Question arose, Whether
this House should concur with the Form recommended by the Bishops, or Address
the King in their own Form?

Resolved by this House, To return Thanks to the King in a Form of their own.

Dean of Peterborough, Dean of Christ-Church, desired to attend the Lords with
their Resolution.

Ordered, That nothing of any moment be agreed upon, or pass into an Act, till
the old Books of former Convocations are brought in.

Ordered, That Mr. Pleydell's Proxy be withdrawn.

The Bishops desiring a Conference,

Ordered, That the Dean of Christ-Church, Chichester, Litchfield, Bristol, St.
Paul's, Peterborough, Drs, Hooper, Maurice, Willis, be desired to attend the
Lords, to acquaint them, that the House consents to a Conference, and have
appointed Managers, but desire a longer time to prepare Instructions for them.

The Lords appointed Friday Morning, nine of the Clock, to be attended about
the Conference.

Ordered, That the same Persons, together with the Prolocutor, Deans of
Windsor, Exon, Dr. Battely, and Archd. Feilding, be appointed a Committee, to
draw up Instructions, to Morrow at nine of the Clock.

Adjourned to the 6th.

6 December. Prayers ended, the old Books, and the Copy of the Commission brought
in. The Committee brought in an Address, with Alterations, with the Reasons why
they cannot concur with the Bishops in their Form, in these words, We are
desirous to confine our Address to his Majesty's most Gracious Message, and to
those things only therein, which concern the Church of England; which Reasons
being approved of, and agreed to by this House, it was carried up to the Lords
by the said Committee; who Reported from their Lordships, That what Alterations
this House makes in their Lordships Address, ought to be specified in the
respective Lines thereof in particular Exceptions.

Ordered, That the Form of Amendments sent down by the Lords, be referred to
the same Committee, to meet to Morrow at eight of the Clock, at Dr. Busby's
Chamber, saving this House's right of Proceedings, in their own way, in this
and the like cases, where there is no Precedent to the contrary.

Ordered, That the House adhere to the Reason of their Amendments, which was
offered to the Lords.

Ordered, That Drs, Tenison, Fuller, Beveredge, Hamond, Halton, Thorpe,
Parsons, Gregory, Grove, Saywell, Alston, Mander, Woodward, Goodman, Busby,
Younger, Moore, Stanley, Mr. Kimberley, Richardson, Ottley, Buckley, and
Skeleton, be appointed a Committee, to inspect the old Books belonging to the
Convocation, and where they find them defective, to offer new Orders, for the
Approbation of this House: Eleven whereof to be a Quorum, and to meet at three
this Afternoon at Dr. Tenison's Library.

Adjourned till to Morrow.

7 December. Prayers ended, the Committee returned the Bishops Form of Address
Altered and Amended according to the order of the House Yesterday, which being
approved of by this House, they were desired to carry it up to the Lords.

Adj till 9.

9 December. Prayers ended, the Committee returned the Bishops Form of Address,
Altered according to the order of the House on Friday, which being approved of,
they were again to carry it up to the Lords, (being prevented by the
Adjournment on Wednesday, from attending their Lordships with it) who brought
down three Reasons from their Lordships, why the express mention of the
Protestant Religion, should be inserted in the Address, which are as follow: 1.
Because it is the known denomination of the common Doctrine of the Western part
of Christendom, in opposition to the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome. 2. Because the leaving out this, may have ill consequences, and be liable
to strange constructions, both at home and abroad, among Protestants as well as
Papists. 3. Because it agrees with the general Reason offered by the Clergy for
their Amendments, since this is expressly mentioned in the King's Message; and
in this the Church of England being so much concerned, the Bishops think it
ought still to stand in the Address.

Then a Question arose, Whether the consideration of these Reasons should be
referred to a Committee, or debated in a full House.

Resolved, That it be debated.

After the debate, the House agreed, that after these words in the Address,
(viz.) The Establishment of the Church of England) it be immediately added,
Whereby we doubt not the Interest of all the Protestant Churches, which is dear
to us, will under the influence of Your Majesty's Government, be the better
secured.

Ordered, The Lords desiring a Committee from this House, to inspect the old
Books, That Drs, Tenison, Mauder, Woodward, Halton, Moore, Gregory, Mr. Skeleton
and Ottley, be appointed a Committee, to attend the Lords this Afternoon, at
five a Clock, to inspect the old Books.

Adjourned till to Morrow.

10 December. Prayers ended, a Message came down from the Lords, for the Managers
to attend their Lordships; who Reported from their Lordships, That they desire
the reason of this House, why instead of the Protestant Religion, they insert
Protestant Churches.

Ordered, That the same Managers be appointed to draw up their Reasons
immediately; who returned their Reason in these words: We being the
Representative ^f a formed established Church, do not think fit to mention the
word Religion, any further, then it is the Religion of some formed established
Church. Which Reason being approved, it was carried up to the Lords.

The Lords returned the Amendments with some Alterations, in these words: After
the words (Establishment of the Church of England) add, Whereby we doubt not,
the Interest of the Protestant Religion, in this and all other Protestant
Churches, which is dear to us, will be the better secured under your Majesty's
Government and Protection.

Ordered by the House, That the words, this and, be omitted.

The Prolocutor, at the Request of the House, gave an Account of the Conference
with the Lords.

Ordered, That the Thanks of the House be given to the Prolocutor, for Managing
the Conference with the Lords.

Adjourned till to Morrow.

11 December. Prayers ended, the Prolocutor Reported from the Lords, That they
had agreed to all the Amendments with this House; and that they would give this
House an account this Morning, when it would be a fit time to wait upon his
Majesty with the said Address.

Then the House desired the Prolocutor to attend the Lords, and humbly to
represent to their Lordships, That there are several Books of very dangerous
consequence to the Christian Religion, and the Church of England particularly;
Notes upon Athanasius Creed, and two Letters relating to the present
Convocation, newly come abroad; and to desire their Lordships Advice, in what
way, and how far, safely, without incurring the Penalty of the Statute 25 H. 8.
the Convocation may proceed, in the preventing the Publishing the like
Scandalous Books for the future, and inflicting the Censure of the Church,
according to the Canons provided in that behalf, upon the Authors of them.

Then the Prolocutor acquainted the House, That their Lordships received the
Message very kindly, and promised to take it into consideration; And also, that
this House is desired to attend their Lordships at the Banqueting House to
Morrow at three of the Clock, to present the said Address to his Majesty.

Adj. to Friday.

13 December. Prayer ended.

Adjourned till to Morrow.

Prayers ended, a Copy of the King's Answer to the Address, sent down from the
Lords.

The Prolocutor acquainted the House, That the President had declared his sense
of the ill consequence of those Books that were sent up from this House, to
their Lordships; and that upon inquiry, he could not receive any satisfaction,
how far the Convocation might proceed in that affair, but he would as far as
lay in him, take further order about it.

Agreed by this House, That the Prolocutor return Thanks to the President for
the care he has taken about our Proposal concerning the Books, and to desire
his Lordship to proceed further in it.

Then it was proposed by the Lords, to appoint a Committee of both Houses to
sit during the Recess.

After some debate,

Resolved, That this House does not consent to appoint any Committee during the
said Recess.

Adjourned to the 24th of January.

FINIS.

