A TREATISE OF THE Souls Union WITH CHRIST.

Wherein is Declared, What this Union with Jesus Christ is.

And many False Grounds of Union Discovered.

In which these Two weighty Quest. are largely handled, viz.

I. How Souls do attain the first, certain, infallible Evidence of their Union
with Christ.

II. How Souls that conceive themselves to have received certain and satisfying
Evidence of their Union with the Lord Jesus, may know certainly and infallibly
that their Evidence of Union with Christ received, is really from God, and not
a Diabolical Enthusiasm or Inspiration, or a Delusion from the Devils
Translation of himself into Angelical Glory.

By J. L.

Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves: know ye
not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? 2
Cor. 13.5. London, Printed for J. Hancock at the Three Bibles in
Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil. 1680.

The Contents.
The occasion of the words and opening of them.

Doct, That the purpose and intetns of God in discovering the truths of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ unto the Sons of men, is that he might gather together
their Souls into union with Jesus Christ, that by virtue of their union they
might be one with the Father, as he and Christ are one, p. 5.

Three Questions answered.

Quest. What is this union with Jesus Christ? What is it to be one with Jesus
Christ? Answered, 1 Negative, 2 Affirmatively. p. 6.

Quest. 2. How can the revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ bring the Soul
into union with him? Answered, 1 Negatively, 2 Affirmatively. p. 9.

Quest. 3. Why the Lord intends by the revelation of the Gospel to bring Souls
into union with Jesus Christ? Two premises, and 4 answers. p. 14.

Use 1. Of information in 9 particulars, p. 19.

Use. 2. By way of admonition, p. 23. Wherein three great miscarriages of Souls
in attending upon Gospel Ordinances are opened.

Quest. Is union with Christ the first intent of God in revealing Gospel
truths? Does not the Lord require there should first be a mortifying of
corruption, a drawing the heart from sin, that there should first be a
mortifying of corruption, a drawing the Heart from sin, that there should be a
cutting off from the old stock, that it might be magnified into the New Vine
Jesus Christ?

Two Premises, the Answer, p. 24.

Use 3. Of Examination, Whether we be united to Jesus Christ?

Four things to urge the necessity of knowing it, p. 29

This great Question propounded.

Quest. How shall I know whether I be united to Christ or no? Or what is it
that may evidence the Souls Union?

Answ. 1. Negatively, The Souls Union with Christ cannot be evidenced these
ways.

1. Not from any work of the Spirit of God, that is effected in, or upon the
Soul, p. 32.

2. Not by any thing inherent in the Soul, p. 34.

3. Not by any thing done or effected by the Soul, or that can be effected and
done, p. 38.

4. Not from the outward Revelation of the nature and manner of the union of
the Soul with Christ, cleared in Three particulars, p. 45.

Some Questions Answered before the Affirmative Answer.

Quest. 1. Whether all those Evidences from something thus inherent in
themselves, and done them by the Spirit of God, be rotten and unsound, and no
Evidences? p. 47. Answered. 1. Negatively.

1. They are no Evidences of Faith, p. 49.

2. They are no Evidences of Knowledge, p. 49.

Answ. 2. Affirmatively, those may be improperly called Evidences, are
Evidences of Opinion, p. 50.

Five things to be noted about Evidences of Opinion.

Quest. 2. Why does the Scripture propound the Souls obedience unto God, and
its love unto God, as Signs and Evidences of the Souls union with Christ? p. 56.

Quest. 3. To what purpose are all the Promises made to Qualities inherent in
Souls, and to the workings of the Spirit of grace in hearts, seeing union with
Christ cannot be evidenced from it? Answered, p. 60.

Quest. 4, Are not the Promises made to Faith, and believing as believing, that
through Faith only a Man can claim right to the Promises? Answered, p. 66.

The use of conditional Promises opened in Four particulars, p. 69.

Answ. 2. The affirmative Answer, How a Soul may know his Union with the Lord
Jesus? Four Premises, p. 71.

The Question must be concerning assurance of Faith, and not of knowledge. It
divides it self into two Questions.

1. How Souls do obtain the first, certain, infallible Evidence of their union
with Christ?

2. By what means? 3. In what manner?

Quest. From whence do Souls obtain infallible Evidences of their Union with
Christ?

Answ. There is but one only proper ground substantially and that is, the Lords
own free promise cleared in Three particulars, p. 80.

Quest. But it is not from the sight of a Condition, to which the Lord has
made some Promise of Christ, that a Soul receives the infallible evidence of
his Union? p. 82.

Under what notion the Promises that seem to be made to Conditions are to be
understood in 5. particulars, p. 87.

Two things to clear those Texts that seem to make the Promise run upon
Conidition, opened in many particulars, p. 91.

Quest. But does not the Lord reveal first these Graces that he describes his
own People by, to be in such Souls, and then through the sight of them clear to
Souls that he has given them the Lord Christ out of his own good will alone
through the Promise? from p. 96. to 105.

Quest. How can the Lords absolute Promise be the ground from whence the Soul
can have the first infallible evidence of his Union, seeing there is no
absolute Promise of God wherein he discovers his own will to accept any one
particular Soul into Union with the Lord Christ? Answer, p. 105.

Quest. 2. By what means does a Soul receive the infallible evidence of his
Union?

Four Premises, the positive Answer, p. 113. 118.

Three joint concurring Causes, and what they are, p. 119.

That the Spirit of God is the principal, most immediate cause of the Promises
evidencing to the Soul his Union with Christ, p. 123. Cleared in 4. particulars.

Quest. 3. In what manner does a Soul receive the first infallible evidence of
his Union with Christ? 5. Premises, p. 130.

The Positive Answer in opening [Five Effects.] that the Spirit of God does
produce in every Soul to whom it does manifest his Union with Christ from the
Promise.

1. The Spirits Illumination. 2. The Spirits Irradiation of the Gospel to the
Soul. 3. The Spirits conviction of the Conscience. 4. The Spirits excitation.
5. The Spirits Attestation or Witness unto the Soul, p. 132.

1. The Spirits Illumination, p. 133. This consists, 1. In the infusion of
greater degrees of Divine light into the Soul.

2. In the removal of all Impediments, these are of Two sorts.

I. Principles of Darkness, of which there are 8. opened in many particulars,
p. 136. to 178.

II. Dark Distempers, Six of them opened, p. 178. to 233.

2. The spirit acting by his own power the divine Light communicated to the
soul, p. 233.

2. The spirits Irradiation of the Promise, or of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Diverse things in the Promise or in the Gospel that the Spirit does evidence
to the Soul when it is revealing its Union with Christ. This is clear in many
particulars from, p. 234. to 340.

The first beam of Divine Light, p. 236.

A Second Beam of Divine Light, p. 254.

A Third, p. 262. A Fourth, p. 267. A Fifth, p. 269. A Sixth, p. 274.

The security given to Souls from the Covenant, Oath, Seal -- p. 274.

From the many engagement upon God himself, p. 305.

3. The Spirits conviction of the Conscience, p. 340.

What Conscience is?

The two most eminent works of Conscience.

The spirits excitation of the habits of grace formerly infused into their
proper exercise, p. 345.

What the spirits excitatioin is? p. 350.

5. The Spirits Attestation or Witness unto the Soul. Both its Attestation to
sense and to faith, p. 355. to 392.

Quest. How Souls that conceive themselves to have received certain and
satisfying evidence of their Union with the Lord Jesus, may know certainly and
infallibly that the evidence of their Union with Christ received, is really
from God, and not a Diabolical Enthusiasm, or Inspiration, or a Delusion by the
Devils translation of himself into Angelical glory? p. 392.

Several things concerning Diabolical Inspirations, p. 393.

The grounds of the different actings of the Devils policy toward Believers
and Unbelievers, p. 406.

Quest. Can the Devil look into the understandings of Men to know what the
inward actings of their Minds are? p. 425.

2. Satan's power upon the Conscience, p. 431.

3. Satan's power upon the Affections and Passions. p. 436.

Premises about a Souls trial of the evidence of his Union received; whether it
it be from God, or be a diabolical inspiration, p. 437.

Four sinful Distempers incident to believing Souls when doubtful of the truth
of their Evidencs of their Union with Christ, which do incapacitate for a just
Trial and true examination of the evidences of their Union, p, 445.

Quest. If souls under the Dominion of impatiency, rashness, irrational
affections, prejudicial conceits against the truth of their evidence of their
Union with Christ, and under decays of holiness be unsuitable for a right Trial
of their Evidences, then what suitable means remains for such souls in these sad
conditions, under fears that their Eaidences are delusions? Answer. p. 455.

If the examination can only be taken from those Evidences, which remain in
their perspicity clearness and sanctifying power, then.

Quest. What use could souls make of the evidences they conceive they had
received of their Union with Jesus Christ, when the Luster and orient
brightness of their evidences be Eclipsed. p. 472.

Answered in 4 Propositions.

Six Holy Uses the soul is to make for former Evidences. p. 479.

Nine Arguments from former Evidences to plead with the Majesty of Heaven. p.
483.

From all those Considerations the Question is thus Stated.

Quest. How shall any Soul that conceives he has received, and does actually
enjoy certain and sufficient evidence of his Union with the Lord Jesus,
Demonstrate from certain necessary and evident reasons, that those his
Evidences are really from God. p. 491.

Answ. There are but two kinds of Demonstrations.

1. The first and most certain ground is taken from the Causes. Now there are
but two principal Causes of the Souls Union with the Lord Jesus, both which
concur together, and are never Separated one from another, that is. the Lords
Blessed Written Word, and that precious Spirit of Jesus Christ.

That the first primary and principal reason from whence a Soul may conclude
that the Evidences of his Union with Christ received are really from God, is,
that those Evidencing Beams of Light do proceed from the Blessed Spirit of
Jesus Christ.

Two things opened to clear this.

1. That the Light that proceeds from the Spirit to Evidence to any Soul its
Union with Christ, does Evidence it self to proceed from the spirit p. 493.

2. That the light that proceeds from that spirit to discover to the soul its
Union with Christ, is the most potent invincible Demonstration of its own
proceeding from God. p. 499.

The second Instrumental cause that shines into any heart really from God to
discover its Union with Christ is the Lords precious Word. p. 502.

Where is cleared that the Scriptures are the Word of God. p. 512.

2. The second sort of Demonstrations a posterioti taken from the effects.

Five acts in Believing Souls whereby they exalt the name of God.

Souls Confident they shall be everlastingly saved by Christ, put upon it to
search into their Hearts, and seriously lay six things before them to consider
of.

A TREATISE OF THE Souls Union WITH CHRIST, etc.
Ephesians. 1.10. That in the Dispensation of the fullness of Times, he might gather
togather in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are
in Earth, even in him.
THE Apostle taking care of the Church of Ephesus after his departure from it;
writes this Epistle for the Establishing their Hearts in the Riches of the
Lords Free Grace in Christ, that the Lord had made their Souls Partakers of,
that thereby he might excite and quicken them to all suitable walking to such
Privileges.

This being his Scope, in this first Chapter, the Apostle begins to reckon up
all those Glorious Privileges by their several names, in their several Causes
and orders; and therefore you shall see in ver. 3. He breaks out in the very
beginning into a Holy Rapture of Praise and Admiration of God, to Bless his
name for those high Privileges, as Election, Justification, Vocation, and
Glorification. Now in ver, 8. is comprehended the great Privilege of their
Vocation, in those words wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and
Prudence, or Understanding; That is, in which Grace and Love before named, the
Lord has abounded toward us, through the Communicating that Grace of Wisdom
and Understanding to us; That is, that Grace that made us receive and rest upon
the Doctrine of the Wisdom of God to Salvation. And having thus named the
Privilege it self, ver. 9. He opens the manner of the Lords thus effecting
this grace upon their Souls, in these words, having made known unto us the
Mystery of his Will, according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in
himself. The manner of the effecting of it is by the Lords manifesting the
Mysteries of his will to their Souls: And what he means by the Mystery of his
will he tells us ver. 13, it is the Word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation; He
means indeed the Salvation Preached in and through the Lord Christ alone, which
was the great Mystery that the Angels desired to pry into. Now by the
Revelation of this Mystery the Lord did Communicate that Grace and
Understanding to them, whereby they did embrace that precious doctrine that
made them wise to salvation. Now in opening of it, he amplifies it first, by
the original cause in the latter end of verse 9. which is the Lords good
pleasure purely in himself: Then he opens the ends of the Lords effecting this
in this manner; that is, of the Lords revealing the mystery of his will to
their souls, in these words, That in the dispensation of the fullness of time,
he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth, even in him: Thus you see the occasion of the words:
They contain the intended effect, or end the Lord aimed at, in the revelation
of the Gospel of Christ to their souls. In this intended effect, there are
several things observable.

1. The act it self in the producing the effect, that is union of Souls with
Christ, [That he might gather together in one:] Indeed the union is twofold:
First of all with Christ. Secondly, one with another; they are made both one
with Christ, and one body within themselves.

2. Observe here the object upon which this effect is to be wrought, in these
words [All things:] The object is laid down in general.

All things, that is, all persons predestined according to the counsel of the
Lords own will, to be his own in Jesus Christ, that he might gather them
together in one. Secondly it is laid down more particularly, and that by a
double distribution of the persons into the several places where they remain,
in those words, [both which are in heaven, and which are on earth;] that is to
say, that the Lord might unite to Jesus Christ, all those that are already
fully joined and completely united to him in heavenly glory, and all those that
are upon the earth, whom the Lord does intend to bring into that glorious union.

3. Observe here the subject with whom this union is to be perfected, and that
is Christ himself. He is the very punctum as it were, he is that one point in
which all these are to be gathered together in one.

4. Here is the time of the accomplishment of this effect. And that is in the
first words [In the dispensation of the fullness of times.] Those words, In the
dispensation of the fullness of times, seem to have some difficulty in them.
They are a Metonymy of the Adjunct as we use to speak, where the dispensation
of the fullness of times is put for the various successive times, in their own
orders variously dispensed by the wisdom of God. The meaning is this, In the
various seasons purposed by God himself successively, according to the Lords
wise dispensation of those times in their orders, the Lord might thus gather
together all to be one in Christ. Thus you see the words a little opened, and
the meaning of them to be briefly this, That the Lord did reveal the mystery of
his own will, that is, the Gospel of Jesus Christ to their souls for this end;
that in the successive times that he has purposed according to the counsel of
his own will, as he is dispensing them in his own wisdom, he might gather
together all the souls of his own to be one in Jesus Christ. There are diverse
things worthy our observation out of these words. First, we may consider them
as they have dependence upon the former Verse, and therein we must consider the
act it self named in the effect, and consider it as the end of the Lords
revealing the mysteries of his will, it is to gather our souls to be one in
Christ. From thence take notice of this conclusion.

Doct. That the purpose and intent of God, in discovering the truths of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ unto the Souls of men, is, that he might gather together
their Souls into union with Jesus Christ, that by virtue of that union they
might be one with the Father, as he and Christ are one.

By transgression in the loins of Adam, we are all estranged from God, and
there was an high wall of separation built up between him and our souls; Hence
in Col. 1.21. We are said to be alienated from God, and from the life of God,
Ephesians. 4.18. But though we have dealt thus unworthily with God, in our breach of
union, and despising communion; the Lords love does condescend so low, and the
bowels of his compassion have been so unconceiveably tender, toward poor
worthless sinners, that he has again provided a new and living way, for such
souls as are so departed from him, to have access to himself; He has provided
his Son a Mediator between himself and such wretched souls, and in and through
that one Mediator, through that one Days-man, he offers to make himself one
again with the soul. And least Souls should be ignorant of this
incomprehensible kindness of his, he has written a glorious Gospel by the
great Secretary of heaven, discovering the precious workings of his own love,
and sends messengers on purpose, to proclaim it to every soul: And the intent
of God in all, is only this, that he might gather souls into union with the
Lord Christ, that so by that union, himself and those souls may again be one.

For the opening of this proposition, there are diverse questions that souls
would willingly have answered.

Quest. 1. What is this union with Jesus Christ? What is it to be one with
Jesus Christ!

First, I must answer you negatively, what it is not. Secondly, affirmatively
show you what the union is.

Answ. First negatively, what it is not.

1. It is not a personal union with Jesus Christ, that men are called to by the
Gospel. That we call the hypostatical union, which is the union of the humane
nature with the divine: Now it is the nature of man in general that Christ took
upon him, and not the person of man, for then there should have been a fourth
person taken into the Trinity.

2. It is not an union of dependence. The Lord being the primary being, the
first being of beings in the world; every thing that has a being proceeds from
God the first being, and is preserved in that being by influences from God: Now
should the union of dependence upon God be broken, then the creatures should be
broken and fall into nothing: Now in that respect all the creatures may be said
to have union with God: so the poorest herb and weed has an union of
dependence.

3. It is not the union of presence, that is, of the Essential presence of God.
The Lord being an infinite being, fills heaven and earth, and is not
circumscribed in both; that is, he is not contained in both, but is infinitely
in heaven and earth; And the Lord, according to his own being, is as present in
Hell as in Heaven, in this place as in that place. Now the Lord is in the
creatures, and so it is called an union of presence: Every creature sensible
and unsensible has such an union, there is the presence of God in them: God
has his way in the poorest weed that has a being, and it is impossible this
should be broken, unless the nature of God can be taken away, and the infinite
nature of God become finite.

Answ. 2. I shall answer affirmatively: The union that the Lord intends by the
revelation of the Gospel, to bring your souls to in Christ, is according as the
scriptures name it, five-fold.

1. There is an union of agreement, or an union of peace made up between Christ
and the Soul. This is called in Scripture the reconciliation of the soul unto
God, and unto Jesus Christ. Then persons are said to be divided, when there are
jars and quarrels taken up by one person against another: but the removing of
these quarrels and controversies between those persons, is the making those
persons one again. Now this is the case between God and the soul; there was
such a blessed harmony and agreement between the Soul and God in Adam, as there
was not the least jar imaginable in Gods bosom against us, nor in our bosom
against God; but through our cursed transgression in the loins of Adam, we gave
God such offense, as he has a quarrel against all the Sons of Adam, and our
hearts have a cursed quarrel against God; whence we are said to be enemies in
our minds. Now the union God intends to bring the soul to in Christ, is an
union of agreement, that is, the removing all those jars and differences
between God and the Soul.

2. There is an union of Marriage, or a Matrimonial union. The Lord has such
infinite bowels of mercy in his bosom toward souls, that when they had despised
that blessed union with himself, that he had given them by creation, he will
make them better again then they were first made, by another union: he brings
them into a marriage union, to make the Soul a Spouse to Christ, and Christ an
Husband to the Soul; and that advances them in some measure above the Angels:
They are but ministering spirits to Christ, and to the Spouse of Christ: they
never had such an honor as to be the Spouse of Christ. This union you find
frequently in Scripture; In Ephesians. 5. speaking of marriage between man and wife,
says he, I speak concerning Christ and the Church. So Rev. 19.7. and Chap.
21.9.

3. There is an union of spirit. He will communicate of his own spirit to the
soul, and make his wife partake of the same spirit with himself, that the
Saints and he shall be one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

4. There is the union of likeness or similitude, between Christ and the Soul.
That is, the Lord by the communication of himself unto the Soul, makes it to be
a lively pattern of himself. Thence it is that in Romans 8.29, he tells us, he had
predestined us to be conformable to the Image of his Son. Hence he says, 2
Pet. 1.3. We are partakers of the divine nature; That is, of the same nature
that Jesus Christ is partaker of, that there should be an union of nature
between Christ and the Soul; that is, an union of holiness; That as he did
partake of the humane nature, he will make his Spouse partake of the divine
nature. Nay we are said to partake of the life of God, Ephesians. 4 18, that is, to
live the same life of God.

5. There is the union of headship. That is to say, to have Jesus Christ as his
head, and to be of the same body with Jesus Christ: This is commonly called by
men, the mystical union, because it is an hidden union, that Christ and the
Soul should be but one Body. This union is thus, that the soul should be of the
number of those Elect, that the Lord according to the counsel of his will,
chose to be vessels, to which he would communicate of himself to all eternity.

Quest. 2. How can the revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, bring the Soul
thus into union with Jesus Christ? How can the manifestation of the mysteries
of Gods will effect such a gracious work as this, to unite the Soul to Christ
in all those ways?

I answer, First, negatively. Secondly, affirmatively.

Ans. 1. We must not conceive that the revelation of Gospel truths, are the
original, principal, efficient cause, of this union of Souls with Christ, as
though this union of Souls with Christ did depend only upon the working of
those truths of the Gospel of Christ revealed. It is the will of God that is
the principal efficient cause of union: The Lord has not left the state of
souls to be determined by themselves, either by resisting or embracing the
Gospel of Jesus Christ: and therefore you shall see in the Verse before the
Text, that the revealing of those truths of the Gospel, are said to be
according to the purpose of the Lords own will.

2. Neither must you conceive, that those discoveries of the Gospel do by their
own effectual virtue produce this union between the Soul and Christ. Faith it
self, which is the uniting grace, by which the union is made up, does not
produce this union by any virtue, or efficacy, and proper quality in it self,
but as God has determined the revelation of the Gospel, and says wrought by
those revelations, to bring the soul into union.

3. Neither do those revelations of the Gospel to the outward ear work this
effect of the Souls union with Christ. Thence it is said, John 6.45. Every one
that has learned of the Father comes unto me: It is not hearing and learning
those truths from the mouth of man, that immediately produce those effects, but
hearing from the Father, that is, by Gods giving inward beams of light to the
understanding, whereby he does discover the mysteries of his will to the soul.

Ans. 2. I answer affirmatively, The revelation of the truth of the Gospel does
produce this union three ways.

1. By discovering the union with Christ to be attained in the Soul-alluring
properties of it. It is instrumentally that the Lord uses the revelation of
the truths of the Gospel to manifest to the soul that an union is to be
obtained, and to manifest the excellency, beauty, necessity, and sutableness of
that union to the souls present condition, whereby the soul is drawn to accept
of that union. Now in regard union cannot be effected between Christ and the
Soul, without a discovery that there is such an union to be obtained, therefore
it is said, the Lord by revealing the truths of the Gospel to the Soul, does
gather the soul into union, because this is the only glass as it were, whereby
the soul may discover the way of attaining an union between Christ and the Soul.

2. By conveying sight to the blinded soul, to apprehend that union. Though the
most Orient bright glistering colors, be presented to the eyes of a man
covered with darkness, they could not take up a man's meditations about them,
neither could he be affected with them. Now the eyes of all men naturally are
covered with darkness, that though the Gospel hold forth the union, yet we
cannot be taken up with it, nor pass judgment upon it till the eye be opened;
Therefore the Gospel presents an union to be obtained, and gives eyes to see
that union. Hence it is said to be part of Christ's office, Isa. 42.6, 7. to
open the eyes of the blind. And thence we are said in 1 John 5.2. to receive an
understanding to know the Lord, and this is done by the revelation of the
truths of the Gospel.

3. By infusing a disposition into the will to embrace that union propounded
unto the soul in Christ. The Lord by those inward revelations does convey an
holy inclination into the perverse obstinate will, whereby the will is drawn to
consent to the union propounded to the eye of the understanding. When once the
soul has received a spiritual eye, by those revelations of Gospel truths, to
apprehend an union tendered to the soul in Christ, in the beauty, excellency,
necessity, and sutableness of it; that very vision of that union with the
properties of it, does change the disposition of the soul that wrought in
opposition against God formerly, and causes the will to desire that union
propounded in Christ: The reason is, because then by the light communicated to
the soul, by these truths revealed, the soul apprehends that union as the only
chief good, and then the will cannot but close with it and embrace it: Then by
the consent of the will to embrace that union, the union is made up between
Christ and the soul, in the four respects mentioned, from whence do necessarily
follow the union of likeness and similitude; And that is made up from those
former unions two ways.

1. In regard of the necessary communion that is between Christ and the soul
upon those first unions made up. No sooner does Christ become a head to the
soul, and the soul a member of Christ by consent of will, but some influences
flow from the head to the members: now those influences are part of his divine
nature, part of his holiness.

2. The union of likeness follows, by the constraining arguments of the
understanding unto the souls likeness unto Christ. When once the will, through
the disposition infused into it, by beholding the truths of the Gospel of
Christ, consents; the understanding presently draws such arguments from various
particulars, or adjuncts, that always attend the union of the Soul with Christ,
that thence the Soul is constrained to a likeness to Christ. (1.) Then the
understanding begins to constrain the soul to a remembrance of the intent of
Jesus Christ in uniting the soul unto himself; Thence the understanding compels
the soul to a full conformity to Christ, as you may see Romans 6.5, 6. If we have
been planted together in the likeness of his death, [that is, if we have
partaken of the virtue of the death of Christ] we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection: If we be like Christ in his death, we shall be like him in
his life: How? Knowing that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
death might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: That is
thus, Our understandings arguing and discussing thus; If Christ died for us,
then we have a part in his death, then were our sins crucified in his death:
knowing this, [by this discussive power of the understanding] that our old man
is crucified with him; That is thus, through the apprehension of the Lord Jesus
tendered to make satisfaction to divine justice, for all the injuries and
indignities the soul has offered to him, and the soul apprehending a
willingness in the Lord to receive it into union with himself in Christ,
whereby the will consents to what the Lord propounds to it, then the
understanding begins to argue thus; what art thou united to Jesus Christ? then
the intent of Christ is that thou should be conformable to his Image: and
can thou walk contrary to Christ? (2.) The understanding constrains from the
remembrance of its engagement to be like to Christ. First the understanding
will urge the engagement of Gods honor; If thou be one of Christ's, then
thou art engaged to hold up the name of Christ, to bear the Image of Christ, to
hold forth the likeness of Christ in thy conversation: thou art to be a golden
pillar whereupon the excellency of the Image of Christ should be written in
great characters. Secondly the union of likeness follows, by reason of the
agreement and sutableness of the likeness of Christ to the souls disposition.
Through the consent of the will to embrace union propounded with Christ, there
is such a disposition prevailing in the soul, as sweetly closes with the
likeness of Christ; and it becomes an intolerable burden to the soul, that the
heart is so unlike to him.

Quest. 3. Why does the Lord intend by the revelation of the Gospel to bring
souls into union with Christ?

For the answering this question, two things must first be premised in general.

1. That there is no one act of the Lords will that is the proper efficient
cause of another act of his will. It is not because Gods will has determined
to bring to pass one thing, that therefore the Lord does also determine to
bring to pass another thing, as though the first act were the cause of the
second act of Gods will; for Gods will is God himself, and so according to the
simple act of Gods will, he wills all things together and at once.

2. That there is nothihg that the Lord determines, that moves inwardly the
will of God to determine another thing as the consequent of that. It is one of
the absolute perfections of the divine Essence, that all his operations are
dependent in himself: yet as some things in the order of the creation are
effected by others, so properly it may be said, the Lord wills one thing for
another, that is, the Lord wills one thing to produce such an end: As the Lord
wills the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to have an influence into all things below, to
preserve them in their being, and keep the natural virtues communicated to
them: Though the influences of the Sun, Moon, and Stars be not the cause of
Gods will, yet they are willed to that end. These things being premised, there
are diverse ends, which may improperly be called causes, of the Lords intent, by
the revelation of precious Gospel truths, to bring Souls into union with Christ.

Reas. 1. Because the union of God the Father with Souls, is effected by and
through the union of the Soul with the Lord Christ. Col. 1.19, 20. It pleased
the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, and having made peace by the
blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself. It was by the
pleasure of the Father that all things should be reconciled to himself, that
should ever be brought to an union of agreement with God: so that the mediation
of the Son, is that bond of connection between God and any Soul; As in Job 9.33.
where Job complains he could not come near God, he calls for a days-man: There
is no days-man between us, that he might lay his hand upon us both, that is,
there is no mediator, to mediate between God and me, to bring me near to him:
till Jesus Christ become a days-man between God and the Soul, that by virtue of
his mediation there is an union made up, God and the Soul stand at enmity,
there is an high wall of partition built up between God and the Soul. Now
because the Lord from eternity determined to bring some souls into union with
himself, therefore for the accomplishing his own will, he intends the Gospel,
instrumentally to draw souls into union with the Lord Jesus, for the perfecting
union with him: self.

Reas. 2. The Lord does it, That he might communicate of his own glorious
excellencies into souls. Now without this union with the Lord Christ, there can
be no communications of those excellencies into souls; though there may be some
influences into souls without this, yet not in that glorious way of
communicating himself, whereby the Lord intends to make himself admired.

1. Without this union there can be no communication of the Lords life and
image unto souls. That is, no communicating of the divine dispositions of his
own understanding and will, into the understanding and wills of his people,
that they should live a suitable life to his life.

2. Without this union, there can be no communication of the love of God unto
their souls. There may be influences of God into souls without union, but no
influences of love without union, and that in two respects. (1.) In regard the
displeasure of Justice is only removed, through the union of Souls with Christ.
And before offended Justice is appeased, there can be nothing but wrath in the
bosom of God against souls. (2.) In regard the Adoption is only purchased by
the Lord Christ. All the love that the Lord communicates unto any soul is
fatherly love, the love of Adoption: Now adoption comes only by Christ, who
purchased Adoption for us, I mean materially, though originally it comes from
God.

3. Without this union there can be no communication of any mercy. Mercy is
love, respecting an object as miserable: Now man, as made miserable by Sin,
cannot expect the least dram of mercy from God, but by a Mediator, such a
Mediator as shall satisfy Justice, Now without union with Christ there is no
virtue of Mediation conveyed into the soul, and thence none of the mercy of God
is conveyed into the soul.

4. Without this union, there could be no full communication of the Lord unto
Souls. Though indeed the Lord might glorify himself, in communicating some
degrees of his excellency in some way, as making himself glorious in Justice,
and though outward mercies be communicated by the influences of his power in
protection, and of his wisdom and providence in ordering things.

5. There could be no everlasting communication of God without union. Were it
not for the union of Souls with Christ, the sentence past upon souls in the
loins of Adam, would be a sentence of death upon them. Now the Lord intends to
have eternal glory, by the eternal communication of himself unto the souls of
his Saints, and therefore he intends to draw them into union with Christ. This
the Lord intends in two respects. (1.) In regard the communication of Gods
excellencies are essential unto him. It is as natural unto God to be pouring
out of his excellencies into souls, as it is natural for the Sun to infuse
beams of light upon the creatures. (2.) In regard it is the highest delight and
contentment of God to be communicating of himself unto his creatures. The Lord
takes greatest pleasure in pouring forth his own fullness into the bosoms of
empty souls, in two respects. First, in regard the communication of his
excellencies unto souls, is the manifestation of his own glory. The excellency
of God is made known by communicating of it to others: Then the excellency of
his holiness appears, when it is poured into souls; Then love and grace appear,
when it is fixed upon the soul of a worthless worm. Secondly, this
communicating of himself is the highest delight and contentment of God, in
regard it is the pouring forth of himself into his own beloved objects. It is
so Essential to God to communicate of himself, that he takes contentment in it,
be it to what creature soever, be it to an enemy, the Lord delights in the act
of it, in regard he attains his own highest end, that ever his eye of intention
was fixed upon, which is the manifestation of his own glory: Much more the Lord
takes delight in communicating himself to the souls of his Saints, in regard
those are chosen to that end. Now where there is an object beloved, there is
always delight in doing good to such an object: Therefore the Lord draws souls
into union with Jesus Christ, that they may be suitable subjects to communicate
himself to.

Reas. 3. The Lord intends to draw souls into union with the Lord Christ, by
revealing the truths of the Gospel, because he has purposed and determined, to
make the mystical body of Christ, the object of his own delight and contentment
to all eternity. (1.) The Lord takes pleasure in dwelling among them, and
manifesting himself to them. 2 Cor. 6.16. It is the privilege of the Saints to
have God dwell among them here, much more does the Lord intend to dwell among
them to eternity. (2.) The Lord intends they should be his delight, in having
sweet familiarity and precious converse with them. That converse properly
consists in two things. First, in the Lords opening and revealing to their
souls, all the secrets of his ways and works, that ever were manifested in the
world, and that in their intended issue and effects. That manifestation of the
beams of his own glory, that shined in all his ways, is a kind of familiar talk
with the souls of his Saints. Secondly, it consists in the Lords being among
them familiarly, without terrifying or affrighting them. Then Job shall have
his desire, Chap. 9.34. Let not his face terrify me, etc. (3.) That their
souls might have perfect communion with him, constant communion, without
interruption and intermission. Now when there is a sutableness of the object
for the perfection of love, then there is a sutableness for the perfection of
delight, it being nothing but love in rest, or love enjoying the beloved object.

Reas. 4. The Lord intends this by the Gospel, to bring souls into union, in
regard he intends to manifest the glory of the incomprehensible riches of his
own love, in and through their souls. Isa. 43.7. Bring forth my Sons and
Daughters, that I have created for my glory. Now the Lord accounts the
manifestation of the riches of his love and compassion to poor worthless man,
to be one of the most precious, bright shining beams of his own glory:
Therefore when Moses desired his glory to pass before him, he proclaimed his
name the Lord gracious, etc.

Use I. By way of information, Is it thus, that the Lords intent and purpose in
revealing the precious truths of the Gospel, is to draw souls into union with
Christ?

1. Then hence we may see a discovery of the doleful, dreadful, and too too
common abuse of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: how is the Gospel trodden under foot
by a multitude of souls? How far do they come short when they come to attend
upon Gospel Ordinances? How few consider that Christ has appointed his
Ordinances to draw their wretched, corrupt, obstinate hearts into union with
Christ.

1. Consider, The neglect of desiring a conformity to this intent of God in the
Gospel is a profanation of the precious Ordinance of God, it is a pollution of
the great name of God in his Ordinances.

2. Consider what a mockery and dissimulation thy attendance upon the Gospel
has been unto God. Every Ordinance of God is appointed for God to be
worshipped in, and thou by thy attending upon an Ordinance, professest thou
do worship God; Now it is impossible for a soul to worship God, whilst he is
ignorant, or regardless of the intent of God in an Ordinance.

3. Thy neglect of this great intent of God in his Ordinance, is a direct
contrary walking unto God. In coming to an Ordinance, thou do come with some
intent or other; It is inseparable from a rational creature upon a deliberate
act, to work for some end. Now if thou do always come with an intent, and
have neglected the intent of God; it follows directly, it is a contrary walking
to God.

II. Hence we may learn what a small number of hearts have had the right effect
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ upon them. How few hearts can be found who are
drawn into union with the Lord Christ by the power of the Gospel this day? How
many are careless and regardless, whether they be one with Christ or no?

III. We may learn hence to behold the working of the heart of God toward us,
in propounding of Gospel truths; it is to bring your souls to be one with
Christ.

IV. Hence learn, that every soul that refuses the Lord Christ tendered, upon
what ground soever can be imagined, is a rejecter of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Many poor souls, through the cursed delusion of the old Serpent the
Devil, conceive they do well to stand off from receiving the Lord Christ
tendered in the Gospel: Take notice of the sad doleful miscarriage of thy
heart, thou neglectest the very principal command of God, remainest
disobedient, while thou think thou go on in a way of obedience.

V. Learn what is the general rule, by which we may judge persons to be
embracers, or refusers of the Gospel of Christ. The general rule is, whether
they appear to be made one with Jesus Christ or no. If fruits can manifest
there is an union with Jesus Christ, then we may judge such to be embracers of
Christ; But if fruits manifest there is no union with Christ, then can we not
charitably judge that they are embracers of the Gospel of Christ for the present.

VI. Hence learn, what the sum, perfection, and highest end of all Scripture
is. It is nothing but this, the Lord Christ and the soul made one. It Is Christ
alone that is the Alpha and Omega of the Scriptures. Therefore hence we may
learn how to read, and hear the Scriptures: The way is to make Christ the
punctum, the center of every line, that when we find nothing of Christ, we are
far from reading the Scripture. Look upon the Types, Ceremonies, Genealogies,
all lead to Christ.

VII. Hence learn, what was the end of all those infinite wise counsels of God,
from before the foundation of the world was laid. What was the end of all the
mysteries of the Gospel, that the Angels desire to pry into? The end of all is
to bring souls into union with Jesus Christ.

VIII. Hence learn the reason of the near Sympathy of affection between the
Lord Christ, and those souls upon whom the Gospel has had its right effect.
Why is Christ's honor, the souls honor, and Christ's advancement, the souls
advancement? And on the contrary, the affliction of the soul is Christ's
affliction, the dishonor of the soul is Christ's dishonor? The reason is,
because the soul is brought into union with the Lord Christ, and where there is
such a nearness of relation, there will be a nearness of affection.

IX. Hence learn the intrinsical, specifical difference between the preaching
of the Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments of the Gospel. The
preaching of the Gospel is to draw souls into union with Christ, but the
administration of the Sacraments of the Gospel is to manifest communion between
souls and Christ already united, 1 Cor. 10 16. Thence it is that there is a
difference to be made between persons that partake of the Sacraments of the
Gospel, though not of those that partake of the preaching of the Gospel: Every
soul is a suitable subject to have the Gospel preached, because every soul by
nature is a separated soul, and therefore has need to be brought into union
with Christ: but only some few souls that are suitable subjects, may partake of
the Sacraments of the Gospel, because they are those that do manifest a soul to
have communion, therefore they presuppose union.

Use II. The second Use is a word of admonition. Seeing the purpose of God in
revealing Gospel truths, is to gather souls into union with the Lord Christ,
let this warn every soul from heaven, to take heed how he hears the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. It is a good caution the holy Ghost gives, Eccl. 5.1. Keep thy
foot, when thou go to the house of God: He means, take heed and watch over
the affections, intents, and purposes of your souls, when you approach near to
God in any duty of his worship; Then beware your affections swerve not from
God. There are three great miscarriages in coming to Gospel Ordinances.

1. A carelessness, and mindlesness, of the nature, end, and effect of the
ordinances of God in approaching to them. It may be said of most souls in a
Congregation, as of those Acts 19.32. In that great assembly, the most part
knew not wherefore they were come together. Consider of two things in this
wretched miscarriage of heart in attending upon the Gospel. First, this
heedless frame of spirit is a contempt of God himself. When the great God of
heaven and earth, sends a precious Embassage to thy poor loveless soul, and
cries to thee, come and be one with me in a Mediator, and thou sit carelessly,
neither minding nor regarding the nature of the Embassage, how is it possible
for thee to cast higher contempt upon God? Secondly, it is the highest
indignity and affront, that can be offered in that kind to the glorious Majesty
of heaven and earth.

2. The second great miscarriage of heart, is the taking satisfaction to the
soul in attaining other ends by Gospel Ordinances, beneath or without union
with the Lord Christ. As when the soul aims at no higher ends then sorrow for
sin, or some reformation of life, or drawing the heart to the performance of
some duties of worship, as private prayer, reading, or the like; then the heart
walks contrary to God in Gospel Ordinances. Here are two things to be
considered. First, while thy soul satisfies it self in any of these, thou do
remain a disobedient one to the Gospel of Christ. Let thy sorrow for sin be
what it will, let thy reformation be outward, and inward as thou conceivest,
the prayers thou performest be what they will, so long as thou take
contentment, without beholding the union completed between Christ and thy
soul, thou art still a disobedient one to the Gospel of Christ: There is not
the least dram of spiritual obedience in all those duties, but the great
command being neglected, thou art a rebel still to the Crown of heaven.
Secondly, Thou art a stranger to all true Gospel worship, Without me ye can do
nothing, John 15.5. Without me, That is, while your souls are disjoined from
me; It is not only meant, without my aid, but without an union with me. Thou
art as far from right praying, and hearing in a manner as ever, while thou art
void of this union.

3. The third miscarriage is in the order of the workings of the affections
toward God in Gospel Ordinances. That is, the fixing the intentions of the
soul upon obtaining any other ends through Gospel Ordinances, before obtaining
union with the Lord Christ. The soul once sensible of the want of union with
Christ, beholding his State a divided estate between Christ and his Soul, many
times longs after an union, but propounds to himself a disorderly way of
obtaining it; he propounds the gaining of holiness, and holy qualifications, as
the means to attain this union with Jesus Christ. Says the Soul, while I
remain thus, it is impossible to gain union; Is it possible such a filthy
heart, while it remains thus, should be united to the Lord Christ? Now here I
meet with a question that will be propounded by the soul.

Quest. Is union with Christ, the first intent of God in revealing Gospel
truths? Does not the Lord require, there should first be a mortifying of
corruption, a drawing the heart from Sin, that there should be a cutting off
from the old stock, that it might be ingrafted into the new vine, Jesus Christ?

Answ. In answering this, there are two things first to be premised.

Premise 1. First I must premise this, That the revealed will of God, is the
only proper object of the souls faith. So that we are not to enquire whether
the Lord may have any secret intent in his own bosom sometimes to lay a soul
exceeding low, and rent and tear the heart with sorrow first, as intending to
use these terrors in the soul, instrumentally to draw it into union.

Premise 2. Secondly, I must premise, That I speak only of the proper union of
the Soul with Christ, when we ask whether it be the first effect the Lord
intends the Gospel should have upon the heart. Now these two things premised, I
shall answer the question affirmatively, That the first effect that God intends
the Gospel should have upon the heart, is the union of the Soul with Jesus
Christ. The Lord intends that, before he intends the drawing of the soul from
any sin, before he intends the drawing it to any holiness, before he intends so
much as to draw it to prayer. There is nothing to be imagined, that the Lord
intends to be wrought in the heart by the Gospel of Christ, before the union of
the Soul with Christ; and that will appear in four particulars.

1. The Lord propounds the Lord Christ to the soul lying dead in sin,
immediately to be received. The voice of the Lord is, Thou poor lost soul, that
art now dead in sin, that art utterly lost, do thou hear, and receive the Son
of my bosom the Lord Christ, to mediate between thee and me, and to be a days
man to lay his hand upon us both: and whereas there is now, a division between
thee and me, I will be reconciled to thee, and will be thine, and thou shall be
mine, We have a notable place in Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. Says God, Thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother was an Hittite, and when I passed by thee, and saw thee
polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
live; And when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was the
time of love, [not only wherein he propounded his love, but set his love] then
I entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.
If the Lord enter into Covenant with the soul, while it lies in its blood, and
as it is in its blood, the Lord receives it into Covenant, then the Covenant of
marriage must needs be propounded to the soul, while it lies thus dead in sin.
I might add Romans 4.4, 5, 6. and Romans 5.10. Even when we were enemies he did
reconcile us to himself; There is the union of agreement held forth: There is
no middle state, that God calls the soul unto, between enmity and amity, but
there is an immediate passage from enmity into union, into a state of
agreement. Therefore says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were
dead in trespasses and sins. If Jesus Christ conveyed life into them, when they
were dead; then he was propounded to them as life also, even while they were
dead.

2. There lies an injunction upon the soul at the present, to receive the Lord
Christ into union, while he lies dead in his sins. This is the command of God,
that ye believe, that is, that you receive the Lord Jesus whom he has sent,
and take him into union with your souls; and says he, this is the work of God.
Now none deny but the command of receiving Christ into union, lies upon souls
dead in sins for the present: And none dare affirm, that God commands the soul
to walk in disobedience to his great and highest command, while he should walk
in obedience to an inferior command. Now every moment the soul receives not
Christ into union, it continues in disobedience: Now who can be so blockish as
to conceive, the Lord allow the soul to stay one moment in disobedience to any
command? And if so, then the Lord requires that the soul should receive Jesus
Christ into union, that moment that he is propounded.

3. It appears, because there can no spiritual act proceed from the soul,
without union completed. Says Christ John 15.5. Without me, [the word is
(...)] that is, separate from me ye can do nothing. The least holy spiritual
motion that can be imagined, cannot be put forth by the soul while it remains
without union. The dead branches cannot bring forth fruit: says Christ, Every
branch that is not in me, withers. A dead man cannot walk nor move; neither
can a dead soul, without union with Jesus Christ, either walk or move in the
least measure. So that there cannot be the least step set from one corruption,
while the soul remains without union. I deny not but the Lord may cause the
branches of sin to be cut off, and the acts of sin to be suspended, through the
terrors and horrors of the law, and fear of the wrath of God; but the habit
of sin remains the same still, and the enmity works as strongly in the bosom
against Jesus Christ as before, though it does not appear so much: Therefore it
is impossible there should be a departing from sin, till the soul be brought
into union with Jesus Christ, much less that it should be acting any holiness,
or performing any spiritual duty whatsoever. Now in regard the Lord requires
the soul, at the same moment that he receives the Gospel, to depart from all
iniquity, and requires all spiritual duties in their perfection, therefore the
Lord requires the means to be performed by the soul, to yield obedience to the
great command, that is, the receiving Jesus Christ into union.

4. There are no degrees tending to the perfection of the union of the soul
with Christ, nor nothing that can in its own nature tend in an orderly way to
the procuring of that union of the soul with Christ. I deny not, but the Lord
may according to his own pleasure, use and employ many things, as antecedents
going before this union; but after the effecting of all these things in the
heart, that thou conceivest tend in order to union with Jesus Christ, the soul
is no nearer union than it was before any of these things were effected in the
heart. The reason is plain, there is no medium between union and separation and
disjunction; The nearest point the soul can stand at is enmity; Now all that
can be effected in the heart, before completing union, takes not away the
enmity; The soul moralized, or civilized, humbled and brought to prayer, is
still an enemy: There is but terminus a quo, and ad quem, the term from which
and the term to which, without any medium, or middle State: Nay there is no
degree of the union, but a soul passes from a State of enmity to perfect union
in one instant, in one moment: That soul that this moment, was an enemy, at an
infinite distance from God; the next moment, the Lord coming in by an
inevitable light into the understanding, and irresistible power into the will,
is as completely united to Christ as any soul in heaven.

Use III. The third use is by way of examination, to see if the precious Gospel
truths have had their effects upon our hearts: And to this end search into your
hearts to see whether you be united to Jesus Christ. Either you are united to
Christ, or you are not united; Either you are sinking in the depths of sin, or
you are upon the rock Christ, and all depends upon the knowing of this.
Consider these three of four things.

I. What a cursed stupidity and blockishness it is, not to know whether Jesus
Christ be united to thee, or at a distance from thee. Would we not think that
man a block, that knows not whether he be alive or dead?

II. Consider how cursedly thou do despise the Lord Christ. Will thou ride an
hundred miles to make sure of an earthly estate, and shall the great treasure
of heaven stand open to thee, and either it is thine, or it is not thine, and
thou know not?

III. Consider how wretchedly thy soul destroys the virtue of all Gospel
Ordinances, by disregarding this search. While thy soul perseveres carelessly,
not regarding nor examining whether Jesus Christ be one with thee; impossible
it is that any of the most powerful Gospel Ordinances, should ever convey the
least benefit into thy Soul; And that in two respects.

1. In that thou make thy self an unsuitable subject for every Gospel
Ordinance. Ordinances have but two ends, either to allure thy soul into union,
or else to seal that union, and let thy soul enjoy that blessed fruit thereof.
Now whilst thou never mindest whether Christ be one with thee or no, thou art
unsuitable for every Ordinance of that kind.

2. Thou preventest the efficacy of every Gospel Ordinance upon thy soul. What
concernment is it of to thy soul, when the most precious arguments of love are
set forth, by the mouth of a messenger of God, when thou mindest it not? First,
it prevents the efficacy of all Gospel Ordinances, in regard there can be no
sense of the want of union, while thy soul neglects the search. Till the
prodigal came to consider he was from his fathers house, where there was bread
enough; he had no desire to return, but was content to feed upon husks.
Secondly, there can be no sense of the Lords choosing thy soul into union.
Though the sense of the want of union, be of absolute necessity to every soul,
before Gospel Ordinances take effect, yet this is not sufficient; some think
there must be a sense of the Lords choosing of the soul, before the soul can
close in union with Christ, and till then there can never be a consent of the
will. Now how can there be a sense of the Lords choosing thee into union, when
thou mindest not whether thou be already united to Christ or no?

IV. Consider how wrongfully thou usurpest the name of a Christian to thy self,
when thou regardest not whether union between Christ and thy Soul be made up.
The name of a Christian at least presupposes an union of peace, then it
presupposes a time when it was made up; and if such an union be not made up,
thou do wrongfully usurp that holy name to thy self.

But here may be a Question propounded by the Soul.

Quest. How shall I know, whether I be united to Christ or no? Or what is it
that may evidence the souls union?

I shall first premise two or three things, and then give an answer to the
question.

Premise 1. First I shall premise, That the union between the Lord Christ and
the Soul, may be invisible to the Soul it self. Though the marriage knot may be
knit, yet the soul may not be able to discern it. The rational soul is united
to the body of a poor infant in the womb, while it is a poor Embrio, yet the
rational soul knows it not, through the weakness of the organs by which it
should work: Thus it may be with the soul: It may be begotten to the Lord
Christ by his spirit, and yet the soul being but a babe in Christ, through the
imperfection of knowledge, may not be able to discern himself united to Christ.

Premise 2. Secondly I must premise, That there may be a true and real union,
between Christ and the soul, and yet the soul may discern many disorders, and
sad miscarriages in it self, when the union was effected or produced in that
soul. The Apostles themselves, at their first embracing of Christ, had strange
conceits of a temporal kingdom of Christ, and yet no question the union between
Christ and their souls was real, only through want of clearness of light, many
disorderly affections were in them, which were set in order afterward.

Premise 3. Thirdly I must premise also, That there is a vast difference to be
observed between arguments, or confirming signs of union with Christ, and
evidences of union with Christ. Those properly are called evidences, that do in
their proper nature discover union whenever they are present; So that when such
things are present, the soul cannot question his union with Christ. And those
cannot properly be called evidences, that are not able to clear up union with
Christ, whenever they are present in the soul: Now of that nature are many holy
dispositions, and holy qualities in the soul, that may be present in the soul,
and not able to clear up the souls union; yet these are evidences, that may and
do clear unquestionably, whenever the Lord discovers them. The Question you ask
is a great question; The question is, how we shall know our union with Christ?
That is, how we may attain evidences of union, our union either being dark or
doubtful, or else never had clear evidences? You that have it, do not ask how
you shall have it confirmed more and more, but how you shall have evidences of
your union. Now I shall answer, First, Negatively, how you may not. Secondly,
Affirmatively, how you may.

Neg. First, negatively, how you may not, in three or four things.

Ans. 1. First, the souls union with Christ cannot be evidenced from any work
of the spirit of God, that is effected in, or upon the soul. That is neither by
his Illumination, Humiliation, or Reformation. Neither by a restraining work
from sin, or preventing work of sin, or alluring work from sin, that the spirit
of God has effected upon the soul. All these works are too weak to clear up
union to the soul, and that upon three grounds.

1. In regard all the works of the Spirit upon the Soul that do go before
Union, may be, and are wrought upon Souls that never obtain Union with the Lord
Christ. As Humiliation, sorrow for Sin, restraint from Sin, some kind of
turning the Heart away from Sin, some kind of love to the Ordinances of God;
All those that go before the very instant wherein the Soul is United to Christ,
may be effected in many Souls that never obtain Union. Nay they may be, and
appear greater, in many Souls that never obtained Union, than in Souls that
attain unto Union with Christ. And in regard those works of the Spirit upon
Souls, are common to Souls that are not United, as well as to Souls United,
thence they are no Evidences of a Souls Union. Whatever must evidence Union to
a Soul, must be proper and peculiar to Souls United, that it may be properly
said, that no Souls that are not completely United to Christ, can have such a
work upon their Hearts. Now no such work goes before immediate union, but may
be common to a Soul never United to Christ. For Conviction of Sin, and Sorrow
for Sin, I might instance in Judas. In reformation and desire to Ordinances, we
need go no further than a Wretched Herod, Mark 6.20. He heard John Baptist
gladly, and reformed many things. For a Souls Mourning after God apparently, we
may see it in Esau: A Soul out of the sense of want of Union may Mourn most
bitterly: Now in regard of the Commonality of the works to Souls not United, as
well as unto Souls United, they can be no Evidences of Union.

2. In regard these works of the Spirit upon the Soul, can yield no Divine
Witness, or Testimony unto the poor doubting Soul. Indeed all the works of God
Originally are Divine Works, and Works of Divine Power, yet they have no Power
to yield a Divine Testimony: Now nothing can be a sufficient ground for the
Soul to believe its Union with Christ, unless it be a Divine ground. The proper
object of all Divine Faith must be a Divine ground: If it be a Fallible Ground,
it is a Fallible Faith; if an uncertain Ground, it is an uncertain Faith; if a
Humane Ground, it is a Humane Faith. Now in case upon those grounds (as the
sight of such works of the Spirit of God) the Soul should believe its Union
with Christ, it should not believe it with a Divine Faith, because there is no
Divine ground to believe it upon.

3. In regard there is no promise of Union with Jesus Christ, made by God unto
Souls that have these works of the Spirit of God upon them: That is, no promise
to the Soul that is Burdened with Sin or the like; I mean thus, the Lord does
not engage in any of these promises, to Souls that had such and such Works of
the Spirit of God upon them, that those he would bring into Union, and none but
those; That is, because my Soul is burdened with Sin, or because the Spirit of
God has now convinced my Soul, in this or that manner, that therefore I have
right to such and such a promise. No, these Promises are made to Souls in
reference to Union with Christ, that by Union with Jesus Christ, I might have
right to these Promises, and to the effecting those Qualifications in the Soul
too.

Ans. 2. Secondly we cannot evidence our Union, by any thing inherent in the
Soul: That is, not by any gracious Quality, Habit, Inclination, or Disposition,
that is infused from God into the Soul. The Graces of the Spirit Communicated
to the Soul, and dwelling in it, are as insufficient to manifest and evidence
this interest in Christ, as the workings of the Spirit upon the Soul, I mean
all holy Dispositions, and Inclinations that are Communicated to any Soul. And
that upon these grounds.

I. In regard of the near similitude and likeness of Counterfeit Qualities, and
Graces, to all those Holy Qualities, and Graces, and Habits that can be
discovered in a Soul. The Devil has his Artists at work, as well as the Spirit
of God is at work; and there is no precious Jewel of Grace the Spirit frames in
the Soul, but the Devils Artists can Counterseit a Jewel of as near Similitude
as possible, only to delude poor Souls: Yea there is such a neerness of
likeness in those false Dispositions, to those True Precious Holy Qualities, as
the imperfect sight of the Soul cannot possibly discern the difference, when
the Union of the Soul is dark. As to instance in Poverty of Spirit, which is an
emptiness of the Soul of all Confidence in it self, being nothing in its own
eyes: Mark what a near Counterfeit the Devils Artists can make cursed Pride of
Spirit, so as it can scarce be discerned, nay so near, as the Soul commonly
mistakes. A Soul is convinced of Sin, and moved to accept of the Lord Christ
tendered: Now comes the Devil; What such a Cursed Wretch as thou art receive the
Lord Christ tendered? The Lord Christ is of Holy, Pure, Undefiled eyes, purer
than to behold Iniquity; Can think the Lord will accept of such a forlorn
Soul as thine, that has so cursedly Rebelled against him? O no, says the
Soul, I dare not conceive God will look upon me, who am such a Cursed Wretch:
Alas poor Soul, thou think this to be Poverty of Spirit, when indeed it is
Cursed Pride: Thou would have some ground of Confidence in thy self, that
the Lord should accept of thee, and thou think it great Humility in thy
self, like another Peter, what Jesus Christ Wash my Feet? Now what near
likeness is here between this Pride of Spirit, and Poverty of Spirit? All the
difference is here, that the Soul that is truly poor, desires never to have any
thing in himself to rest upon; The Soul has no hope of ever having any thing
as it is in itself, and alas this difference is hardly discerned. Thus also if
you go to Sincerity of Obedience: Says the Soul, though I do fail in my
purposes, yet I hope my Heart is sincere toward God in all that I do, and that
is given as another evidence of the Souls Union. I say it is true, but the
question is, how we shall discern it from the mere working of Ignorance?
Sincerity is a single eye to the Will of God, and to his Honor and Glory in
what thou do; but according to the Souls Judgment, a Soul acted merely by the
principle of Ignorance, may have a single eye at Gods Glory, Romans 10.2, 3. The
Jews had a Zeal for God, but not according to knowledge; and so they went about
to establish their own Righteousness: Hence the Soul will say I think I have
Sincerity of heart, but I do not certainly know, I may be deceived. Thus in
these chief things there is such a neerness, that we can scarce discern the
Jewel from the Counterfeit.

II. In regard those holy Dispositions, Inclinations, and Habits of Grace, do
properly proceed from some kind of evidence of a Souls Union, and according to
the clearness of the Souls evidence of Union, so do these Graces increase, and
according as the Souls. Union is eclipsed, so do they decrease. To begin with
that, which most promises seem to be made to, that is to Mourners. Whence does
true Mourning for Sin in the Soul proceed? Is it not from a sight of the Lord
Christ? Yea, from some sight of the Souls propriety in Christ, at least thus
far, from some sight of probable interest in Christ. Is it not from thence the
Soul beholds first the cursed nature of Sin? Indeed the horridness of the
nature of Sin never appears, but in the precious glass of the Lords Bowels of
Mercy to poor Loveless Souls.

III. In regard the right nature and truth of those Holy Qualities, or Habits
of Grace in the Soul, cannot be discerned but from the sight of the Union of
the Soul with Christ. And that in these respects.

1. In regard there is not a full conformity in those Holy Qualities inherent
in thy Heart, to the rule of the Word that does command those Holy Qualities.
Should I begin at the lowest, which is Sincerity of heart in the Souls
Obedience unto God: The Soul can seldom (I might say never) see a Conformity in
his Obedience to the rule of the word; The rule is in Ephesians. 6.5, 6. (it is
spoken concerning Servants, but it holds in every duty.) Servants be Obedient
to them that are your Masters according to the Flesh, with fear and Trembling,
in singleness of your Heart as unto Christ, not with eye-Service as
men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the
Heart. True Sincerity in Obedience to any command, it is a singleness of Heart
unto Jesus Christ; a single eye, that is, having respect to nothing but Christ
alone; The species of all the vision of that eye with which he respects the
duty, being taken from Jesus Christ alone. Now how far short shall a Soul see
it self of a conformity to the rule? When can the soul say his heart was single
to Christ in prayer, or in any Ordinance? Now in regard the soul may behold at
all times, so great a difference in the holy qualities inherent in his heart,
to the rule that it ought to be brought to a full conformity to; those holy
qualities in the heart cannot evidence unto the soul the truth of its union
with Christ. The truth of them cannot appear in themselves without a sight of
the souls union, in regard of the imperfection of the souls sight, to discern
the depths of his own heart. Any knowing soul judges it self to be far unable
to search the depths of his own heart, Jer. 17, 9. The heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Thence it is, the soul
has never sufficient evidence of the truth of any holy quality in himself,
from the quality it self, to answer all the objections of a carnal heart,
because that remains unanswered, the heart is deceitful.

2. In regard the truth of those holy qualities appear only as they do proceed
from faith. Therefore unless the soul discerns, and knows them to be fruits of
faith, it cannot conclude them to be holy qualities, Hebr. 11.6. Without faith
it is impossible to please God; Now he that discerns faith, discerns union with
Christ, therefore it must needs be, that there is a sight of union, before a
sight of the truth of those holy qualities.

Answ. 3. The third negative answer is this, That the union of the soul with
Christ, cannot be evidenced by any thing done, or effected by the soul, or that
can be effected and done. Whether we look upon works internal, or works
external; whether we look upon the inward moving of the affections to to God,
or whether we look upon the expressions of those affections, that is, the
breaking out of those affections into prayer, and constant intercessions with
God, into reading, and hearing, and attending upon ordinances, into holiness
expressed in the conversation, by none of these can the union with Jesus Christ
be cleared and evidenced. Yet for the right understanding of this, these three
things are to be considered.

1. I do not mean, that no work of the soul, either inward or outward, done by
the soul, is an evidence of the souls union with Christ. Though no work of the
soul be able to clear the union, and evidence it, yet the work may be an
evidence in it self. The inward act of Faith is an infallible evidence of the
souls union, where the soul is able to understand that act of Faith, to be of
the right nature the word of God requires Faith to be in the Soul.

2. I do not mean neither in this conclusion, that the union of the soul with
Christ may be evidenced, without the souls beholding any work, either inward or
outward in it self. For infallibly, and necessarily, in the souls beholding its
union with the Lord Christ, it does behold some workings in its spirit also,
some holy act in, and upon Jesus Christ; At the same time the soul beholds its
union with Jesus Christ, it beholds its receiving Jesus Christ, which is an act
of Faith.

3. The meaning of the conclusion is this, That no works, either inward, or
outward, performed by the soul, have sufficient light in themselves, to
manifest themselves unto the soul; nor from themselves and their own nature, to
manifest the union of the soul with Christ. Though there is an inward act of
soul, that is an inseparable evidence of the souls union, which is the act of
Faith; yet that act of Faith in it self considered, as is is the mere act and
work of the soul, has not sufficient light in it self, to discover it self to
the soul, that it is the inseparable act of the souls union: Likewise is every
work of the soul, inward, or outward, of the same nature. The works of the soul
may be works of light, and yet the beams of light shine so dimly forth, as they
cannot discover their own nature to the soul; they cannot discover themselves
to be those works that the Scripture holds forth to be the infallible
consequence of the souls union with Christ. And that the works of the soul have
not sufficient light in themselves to discover union, will appear in diverse
respects.

1. Because all the works of the soul united to Christ, may be present in the
soul, when the union of the soul with Christ is obscure and dark. The act of
Faith, that is the most eminent effect of the souls union with Christ, may be
very strong in the soul, when the soul may be yet dark. A clear instance will
be given in Mat. 27.46. by the Captain of our Salvation, who believed when he
hung upon the Cross, and exercised Faith in God, as appears in those words, My
God; yet the union between Jesus Christ and God the Father, as Mediator, was
dark, that made him cry out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? The
hypostatical union was firm, and as firm as now it is in heaven, but the
manifestation of that union was obscure, when the Lord Christ did bear the
greatest burden of the consequence of sin, that was possible, in bearing the
sense of the absence of God from him for a season.

2. It appears in regard the union between Christ and the soul is only passive.
The union is complete between Jesus Christ and the soul, before any one act
goes forth from the soul unto Christ. It is impossible there should be the
least motion of the soul toward the perfecting, or completing of the union
between Christ and the soul, unless we could conceive there may be motions in
dead persons, that there may be action where there is no life. Now the union
being passive, there may be a manifestation of the union, between Jesus Christ
and the soul at the same time, at the same moment that the union between Christ
and the soul is completed: I do not say it is ordinary, but I say there may be
a sight of the Lord Christ, coming down into the heart, in that instant, and
moment, wherein Jesus Christ does take actual possession of the heart, and
unite it unto himself: Now in case the union of the soul should be so evidenced
with Christ, then should all works, either inward or outward in the soul, be
excluded from having any interest in the manifestation of that union.

3. In regard the same kind of works that do arise properly from the union of
the soul with Christ, (though not peculiarly) may arise from other principles
where there is no union. There are three false originals of such outward works.

(1.) God himself may be the Original of such works in some souls, though not
by virtue of union, nor in relation unto union. That is, though the Lord convey
not any influences, that are the proper influences peculiar unto union, nor
though the Lord does not convey those influences into the soul, from whence
those outward works proceed to bring the soul into union with Jesus Christ.
Prayer and revealing the truths of God, and reading of them, and all outward
works of a soul, may be produced by God in the soul, only in relation to other
souls that are already united to himself.

The Lord may convey large streams of gifts, and inward affections unto some
souls, and excite them to the employing of all those gifts, in all outward
works of his own worship, only in respect to the good of his own peoples souls,
when the Lord intends not any benefit to the soul that partakes of those gifts.
Thus the Lord dealt with Cyrus, Isa. 45.1. and Chap. 44.28. Thus says the Lord
to Cyrus, he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall he
laid. The Lord did convey strength to Cyrus, to carry him on in a glorious work
of reforming his worship, and to build the Temple, when the Lord intended no
good to Cyrus, I mean so as to bring his soul into union with Christ. Thus God
furnished John with Zeal against Idolatry, for the good of his peoples souls,
and it redounded little to the good of his soul. For ought we know, Judas was
furnished with as good gifts as the rest of the Apostles, and seemed to pray
with as much earnestness, and publish the truths of Christ with as much Zeal as
any of the Apostles; whereas none of those gifts that Judas had, were conveyed
by virtue of the union of his soul with Christ, nor were given with an intent
to bring his soul into union.

(2.) A second false original of such works is the souls own principle of self.
Self ends, self lusts, self intendments, may be like the spring that may set
all the wheels of the affections on work, and produce all those outward
expressions in the work of God. Certainly it was one of the chief intendments
in the Pharisees, in all their works of holiness, and strictness in their
conversation, that they might advance themselves outwardly, and to eternity,
and thought to tie God to give them heaven for it.

(3.) The third false original of works that properly flow from union, is from
the Devil himself. The workings of prayer, of hearing, of meditating, or
forsaking sin in the conversation, may come from the Devil himself, he taking
his opportunity to sail with the wind, and row with the tide; He seeing the
Affections work toward duties of holiness, he presses with all his might to
the performance of them, that he might weary out the soul with them, or else
cause the confidence of the soul to be placed in them, and the soul to promise
it self happiness by them. Certainly the Zeal of Paul that he had for God, and
the law of God, was acted by the Devil himself. And Saul that was so Zealous to
offer sacrifice before he went to battle, it was from the Devil. Those souls
that are pressed so violently unto prayer, as they will neglect their callings
to multiply duties of prayer; I question not, though such excitations come from
conscience to urge them, yet they are originally from the Devil himself; And
certainly many a soul has found the sad effect of the Devil in it, in causing
the soul to be weary of all duties, and to cast them off. Now in regard the
original of the souls works that it performs, is thus questionable, whether
they have their original from the souls union with Christ, or from one of these
false principles; Thence these works are not sufficient in themselves, to
manifest the souls union with Christ. The question must first be answered,
whether these duties flow from union with Christ or no? before the other
question can be answered, whether those works be the proper effects of union?
And till that question be answered, the soul can never conclude from his works,
that he is united to Jesus Christ.

4. Nothing that is done by the soul can manifest the souls union, in regard
the union of the soul with Christ cannot be concluded from works, as a
necessary truth, grounded upon an unchangeable, and infallible reason. That is
the great distinction between opinion and knowledge; That knowledge is the
apprehension of a truth, flowing necessarily from an unchangable ground,
whereas opinion flows only from a probable ground. Now the works of the soul
can never be an unchangeable ground, from whence the soul can conclude himself
to be united to Christ in three regards.

(1.) In regard no work simply considered in it self, without respect to its
original, can be concluded to be a fruit or consequence of the souls union. The
same kind of work may be performed from a false original, as well by virtue of
influences from the Devil into our hearts, as from God; Therefore till it
discern that the original is from Christ, that it was by the very motion, and
stirring of Christ in the heart, that the work was done, the soul cannot
conclude it to be a consequence of his union; Now so long as the work cannot
appear to be a consequence of the souls union, there can be no infallible
ground to conclude that he is united to Jesus Christ.

(2.) In regard no works can manifest union, but such as are the peculiar and
inseparable effects of the souls union with Christ. Now no soul can discern his
works to be the peculiar inseparable effect of union, unless he can discern and
conclude his soul shall continue and persevere to the end in those works: But
now no Soul can discern, or conclude from any thing, but from a promise of the
God of truth which is only unchangable, that he shall persevere in any Holy
work whatever; and no Soul can lay claim to any promise, till he can claim
right to Union with Jesus Christ, therefore no Soul can see his perseverance in
any such work, till he see his Union with Christ.

3. In regard the Judgment that the Soul passes upon those works, is a
deceivable Judgment. The heart being a bottomless depth that is unsearchable,
the nature of all his works cannot be discerned by the weak capacity of the
Soul; thence the Soul cannot draw that conclusion from them, as a certain
consequence of his Union with Christ.

Ans. 4. Neither can the Union of the Soul with Christ be thus evidenced, from
the outward Revelation of the nature and manner, of the Union of the Soul with
Christ. I do not mean, that the Union of the Soul with Christ, may not be
evidenced by the revelation of the nature and manner of the Union of the Soul
with Christ: The Lord Christ does ordinarily through those Revelations of his
truth, cause the impression of truth to remain upon Spirits; The Lord by
revealing to Souls, a Union to be attained by Christ, ordinarily draws Souls
into Union, and by declaring the nature and manner of the Union, does
ordinarily discover to Souls thus their Union with Christ: Yet the nature and
manner of the revelation of the Union, considered in themselves, is not enough
barely considered in themselves to manifest the Union. And that will appear in
three things.

I. Because those outward Revelations reach no higher than Reasons eye. Now
while the light of Truth pierce no farther than the eye of Reason, the right
Consequences of it, are never effected in the Soul. That Is the reason that the
revelation of the sweetest persuasions of God to allure Souls into Union, take
no effect upon the Heart of knowing persons, because those outward Revelations
reach but to Reasons eye; and therefore they must hear and learn of the Father
before they come to Christ. John 6.45. In the same manner is the Revelation of
the Union to Souls United, as insufficient to satisfy the Soul concerning his
Union, as those other Revelations of the Lords will to draw Souls into Union.

1. In regard the truth to be apprehended, which is the Souls particular Union
with Christ, is far beyond Reasons Comprehension. Now while the light reaches
no higher than to Reasons eye, Reason not being able to comprehend the truth,
needs must the truth be inefficacious.

2. All the Wranglings and Objections of the Soul against his Union, remain in
full Power, notwithstanding those Revelations to the eye of Reason. Till a
higher light be set up in the Soul, to be Lord Controler as it were of Reason,
the Soul is never able to believe, that is, to receive Christ into Union.

II. In regard those communicate no light to the eye, to which those truths are
propounded. As it is at first in the Lords Conviction of a Soul by the truth,
the outward revealing of it is insufficient, in regard there is no light by
those revealings to convey it to the Souls eye; for though the truth be made
clear and apparent, the eye is still blind, therefore the Soul is not
Convinced: So it is in revealing to the Soul its Union, the Revelation is
insufficient, in regard there is no beam of light comes to the Souls eye: And
though the eye of the Soul have received light from Heaven, yet the light to
discern the Souls Union, must be a new light.

III. In regard United Souls that fully understand both the nature and manner
of Union, may be, and are frequently yet unsatisfied about their Union.
Questionless poor Heman (in Psalm. 88.) knew well what it was to be accepted of
God in Christ, and to be one with him, and yet was far from apprehending
himself to be United, but gave up himself for a dead man. David when he made
that 22 Psalm, typically speaking of Christ (though applying it to his own
condition) knew well enough what it was to have the Lord to be his, and did
hang upon him; yet he cried out, fearing God had forsaken him. Now if the
outward Revelation of the nature, and manner of the Souls Union with Christ,
were enough to make the Soul understand its Union; then there were no united
Soul, that did hear the relation of it, and did carefully reflect upon his own
heart, but must be satisfied about his union; but our experience tells us this,
that the most understanding Souls about union, are hardest to be satisfied
about their union. Thus you have the negative part of the answer opened. Now
before I proceed to the affirmative, there is another question will be cast in
upon the neck of this.

Que. 1. But may the Soul say, If none of these can evidence to the Soul his
Union with Christ, are all those Souls evidences of Union that they have
received, from something thus inherent in themselves, and done upon them by the
Spirit of God, rotten and unsound, and no evidences? Must we now cast away all
our thoughts of union with Jesus Christ, that were formerly gathered from the
sight of such qualifications inherent in our souls?

Before I come to answer this question, I must first premise two or three
things.

1. That the soul has not conceived either qualities inherent in his soul, or
works done by his soul, as the cause of his union with God in Christ. That
these should be the uniting means between Christ and thy soul, that have drawn
the Lord Christ to come into thy heart, and to dwell in thee, and so to cause
thee to dwell in him. This were no less than gross Popery, to make any thing in
our selves the cause of union.

2. I also premise, That thou have not taken qualities inherent in thy self, or
works done by thy self, as the ground upon which thou did believe thy union
with Christ. This were a very dangerous sandy foundation for a soul to build
upon: This were to ground a divine faith upon an humane ground, to ground a
certain conclusion upon a poor changeable ground; And this were to make thy
faith of no longer lasting, than the constancy of thine heart in such works, or
the constancy of thy sight in beholding such dispositions in thy heart; This is
both unsafe, and exceeding dangerous.

3. I must premise, That thou mistakest not the ground of thy evidence,
conceiving thy self to receive thy evidence from qualities inherent in thy
self, or works done by thy self, when thou receivest it from a promise of free
grace alone. It may be at the same time, when the Lord declared to thee his
willingness to accept of thy soul into union with Christ, and let thee see
thine heart closing with that gracious tender; he at the same time lets thee
see such holy dispositions in thy soul as the consequence of thy union, thence
it may be thou did conclude thy evidence was from these, when it was from
something in the first place before works.

But if the question be demanded, whether thy qualifications thus considered be
evidences?

I answer negatively, and affirmatively.

First, they are no right kind of evidences.

1. They are no evidences of Faith. That which is an evidence unto the eye of
Faith, must be some truth of God revealed unto faith, with such an authority,
that for the authority of the speaker, and revealer of that truth, the soul
does believe it, and close with it. Now in that manner, the word alone is
proper evidence unto faith. Assurance of faith must always have a divine
ground, to build upon: Now there is no divine ground, but a divine word; and
thine own dispositions and graces are no divine, but a humane ground.

2. They are no evidence of knowledge. Knowledge is the assent of the
understanding to a necessary truth, built upon an unchangeable ground or
reason. Now the union of thy soul with Christ could never be rightly taken as a
necessary truth, built upon thine own works, as the unchangable reason of it;
For (as you have heard) no works done by the soul can be an unchangeable reason
upon which a soul may build such a truth as this, that he is united unto
Christ, in regard thou were never yet fully certain of the right nature of
those thy works, or of those dispositions in thy soul, from whence thou did
gather those thoughts of thy union with Christ.

Secondly, I answer affirmatively, they may be improperly called evidences, and
they may have begotten an evidence of opinion in thy soul, though not an
evidence of knowledge. Opinion is the assent of the understanding to some truth
propounded, upon the sight of probable grounds and reasons of the truth of the
thing propounded. Now the sight of thy gracious dispositions and qualifications
may be an evidence of opinion to thy soul, that is, they may have afforded some
probable arguments of thy union with Christ; And from thence may have flown
these three effects of it.

1. Thence may have risen a quiet and calm in the soul, a cessation from those
perturbations and tumults, the soul was disquieted with formerly.

2. Hence might flow some refreshments. A hope of possibility to the poor
sinking soul brings admirable refreshment: Much like a man being ready to
suffer Shipwreck at Sea, seeing but a ship coming toward him, gives him hope
of being taken in.

3. From hence may arise some flitting joy. Though Christ do but pass by as it
were, and the soul does but see his face through a crevis, it refreshes his
heart.

Thus far they may be evidences of opinion unto souls: But there are diverse
things that must be noted about this evidence of opinion least we mistake. For
though I dare not say but these evidences of opinion in many souls, may prove
such, that in the utmost issue of them may hold to eternity, yet it is not
without great danger, to the safety and comfort of such souls. Therefore
observe,

I. That these evidences of opinion in souls, do yet fall short of raising
those souls, into a full conformity to the rules of Scripture, about and
concerning evidences of union. And that will appear in three things.

1. In regard these evidences of opinion cannot rise to that fullness of
certainty, and that strength of confidence, that the rules concerning evidences
of a souls union, do require souls to be raised to. When this opinion is raised
to the highest degree, there cannot be a full certainty: Now the Scripture
requires souls to attain a full confidence about their union with Christ, Heb.
10.22.

2. In regard the foundation of the souls consolation in these evidences, is
laid upon a ground disagreeing to the rule. The rule is only the will of God
revealed; Now the will of God revealed is, that there should be immutable
grounds upon which the soul should be built, Heb. 6.17, 18.

3. In regard the consolation of the soul, is unsuitable in measure and degree,
to that which God intends for his peoples souls. He intends full consolations
to them, a plerophery of consolation. But how weak are those comforts, that
flow from those weak fluctuating inherent grounds of the souls qualities, or
the working of those qualities?

II. You must note about these evidences of opinion, That no soul may justly
satisfy or content it self, with only those evidences of opinion. Perfection
of conformity to Scripture rule, is the command and injunction that lies upon
every soul: Now these evidences of opinion being attained, and yet the soul
falls short of Scripture rules; thence it necessarily follows, that no soul
may, or ought, to content it self with those evidences.

III. You must note, That the seeking after, and walking by these evidences of
opinion only, do expose the soul to the want of all props, supports, and
comforts, in the greatest necessities of the soul. These evidences are like the
little Brook the Prophet Elisha sat down by, when he went from Jezebel, that
ran only in the beginning of the famine, and after was dry. Or rather they are
like Jonah's Gourd, ( Jonah 4.6.) of which the poor man was exceeding glad for
a night and felt the shadow of it, but when the Sun arose, a worm struck the
Gourd, and Jonah was exposed to the heat of the Sun. Thus may the evidences of
the soul from inherent qualities, and the working of those qualities, be like a
precious Gourd for a season, where the soul may have refreshments, but if the
Sun gets to the mid heavens, and there come any scorching heat, then do they
vanish like Jonah's Gourd, and the soul is exposed to a comfortless, hopeless
condition for eternity.

There are four great necessities of the soul, when it has the greatest need
of evidences, and in all these the evidence of opinion fails the soul.

1 When any Sin in the heinousness of its guilt, and the dreadfulness of its
merit and desert, is charged upon the conscience. When Sin comes once to be
thus charged, it causes all the evidences of opinion to vanish and perish, and
leaves the soul comfortless. As it was with David, Psalm. 51.3. he cries out, My
sin is ever before me: Or as it was with poor Job, Chap. 13.26, 27, Thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of my
youth. Now when the soul is either in Jobs case, or David's case, that any
iniquity comes thus before the soul, then is a soul in great necessity of union
with Christ: When a debt comes to be charged upon a person, and the Bailiff
comes to arrest him, then there is necessity of some bayl; now conscience comes
to arrest the soul, and offers to carry it into hell, and now do those
evidences of opinion from the souls graces, leave the soul hopeless, and
helpless: The thing is evident, when conscience is thus charging an iniquity
upon the soul, it becomes Witness, and Advocate, and Judge: It witnesses the
fact to be done, it pleads the fact condemnation, and pronounces the sentence.

2. The second great necessity is, when some strong master corruption leads the
soul captive; and even keeps the poor distressed soul in chains. You must know,
though the reigning power of sin be destroyed in souls united to Christ, ( Romans
6.14.) yet the tyranizing power of sin is not destroyed: Though sin cannot have
the Throne of the will, to sit there as Lord Commander, yet it will be always
striving for the Throne; then is the soul in great straights, and knows not
what to do without evidence of union with Christ, that he knows he shall be
conqueror over such a corruption: Now in this condition, the inherent qualities
of the soul, and the works of sanctification, leave the soul helpless and
comfortless; now the eye of the soul is upon corruption, and it is hard for him
at that time to discern grace.

3. Another great exigency of the soul for the evidence of his union, is when
the influences of the quickening spirit are suspended from the soul. When not
only a state of deadness is grown upon the heart, but as with those Psalm. 80.4.
God seems to be angry with their prayers, and comes not in; That the soul
begins to complain, as in Lament. 3.44, that the Lord shuts out his prayers; or
complain as Job, Chap. 23.8, 9. Behold I go forward, but he is not there, and
backward, but I cannot perceive him, etc. Then is the soul in great extremity,
that now unless there be some grounds of evidence of union, the soul begins to
be hopeless, and altogether comfortless; And alas when the soul is brought to
this exigency, then does its evidence of opinion from its own grace fail, and
the soul questions whether it ever drew a right conclusion.

4. The fourth extremity is, When the Lord delivers the soul to the buffetings
of Satan for a season. When Satan begins to use all his policy to shake the
foundations of the soul, to make his hope and faith to shake; when the Devil
charge his Cannons against the soul, and lets loose all temptations at
once; blasphemous thoughts come into the heart, questioning whether there be a
God or no, and the soul can meddle with nothing, but one blasphemous thought or
other comes upon the soul, and it knows not from whence they come: And when
Satan is thus buffeting the soul, then a man's inherent graces, and the workings
of them that he saw before, do now fail the soul, in regard Satan in this case
first strikes at the strongest hold, he strikes at the foundation, he strikes
at union with Christ.

4. There is a fourth note about evidences of opinion; That the souls cleaving
unto them, does make the certainty of the truth of God increase and diminish,
according to the increasing and diminishing of the workings of his soul, and of
the influence of the spirit of God upon his heart. Experience it self teaches
us, that while our souls take our evidences from those qualifications, so long
as we find the spirit of God working lively in our hearts, our hopes are
lively, and our confidence firm; and no sooner these cease again, but our
confidence and our hope fail; then the Soul questions again whether Jesus
Christ be tendered to his Soul in particular? whereas before he had some
confidence of it.

5. There is a fifth note about these evidences of opinion, and that is this,
That the cleaving unto those evidences of opinion, does make the whole life and
comfort of the soul depend only upon sense. When the soul trusts to those
alone, he trusts only the eye of sense, both in seeing his happiness for the
present, and for eternity. Now from thence,

First, The fullness of the souls consolation is prevented. The soul, as it
were, shuts the great window, which is the evidence of grace in the promise
unto the soul, and only opens the small crevis of sense and experience: Now
needs must the fullness of light in the house be prevented, when the greatest
window is shut voluntarily; And much more is the comfort of the soul prevented,
when the great window of comfort is shut.

Secondly, The constancy of consolation is prevented. The soul may both see the
Lords will to be unchangeable toward him, in taking him into union, and may
see the command of God to his soul to believe that his union, and receive the
promise of God to take his soul into union, when the soul can see nothing of
those precious workings of grace in his own heart: So that the constancy of the
souls consolation, depends not upon the evidence that he can receive, either
from the inherent graces in him, or the working of those graces, but upon that
which is constant in it self, when the heart is unconstant.

Thirdly, Thence the soul walks contrary to the Scripture rule. The rule is, to
walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. and to live by faith rather than by sight: But when
the soul adheres only to, and seeks after the evidence of his union from the
working of his own graces, the soul seeks to live and walk only by sight, and
not by faith.

Now there is a second Question that will arise, before I can pass to the
affirmative answer.

Quest. 2. If those inherent qualities and habits of grace in souls, and the
workings of them, cannot thus evidence the souls union primarily, nor be no
better grounds of evidence than this: Then why do the Scriptures propound the
souls obedience unto God, and love unto God, as signs and evidences of the
souls union with Christ?

Answ. For the answer of this question, there are diverse things to be
considered.

1. Many of the Scriptures, that the soul conceives to lay down such graces,
and workings of graces, as signs of the souls union, are only laid down as
manifest signs of their union with Christ unto others, not themselves. As Mat.
7.16, 20. By their fruit ye shall know them: The place, if you observe it, does
not say by your own fruits you shall evidence your own condition, but it
propounds the conversations of men, to be the rule by which we shall judge of
men, by which we may conceive their union with Christ, or separation from
Christ, yet this cannot yield an infallible evidence to us of their union.

2. All other places that speak of the graces of the spirit, or of obedience to
God to be as signs of the souls union with Christ, do only lay them down as
Co-witnessing signs, not as those from whence the soul can first clear his
union. Thus far indeed the word manifests, that there are such graces in the
hearts of believers, and that believers do see such graces in their hearts; But
it is then that believers do see them, when they see their union with Christ.
No believer ever had a true evidence of his union with Christ, but he also saw
some such precious holy dispositions begotten in his soul, and some workings of
them also toward Christ. So that the Scripture lays them down as Co-witnesses.
So Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are
the Sons of God: That is, the light of our renewed understanding, beholding the
graces of the spirit of God in our selves, does draw conclusions that we are
united unto Christ, as well as the spirit of God does evidence and witness it,
from the promise of Gods free grace and favor in Christ unto souls. Now thus
are those places to be taken in the first Epistle of John, where the spirit of
God seems to speak most of such signs: He speaks of them there as following
signs of a souls union, and so are demonstrations a posteriori (as we speak)
from the effects, and witness the union as the effect witnesses the cause. But
the Scripture no where commands the soul, to seek out the manifestation of his
union with Christ by those, and from those, though they are also able to afford
some witness unto his union, in way of confirmation of the evidence of it; when
once the soul does behold his union, then beholding his graces, they come in as
another window into the soul to let in light; Faith and Sense come in together,
and so make the souls consolation full and strong.

III. The Scripture lays down obedience to God, and love to God, as signs of a
souls union with God in Christ, purposely to convince deluders of themselves
about their union. It is to convince them of their contrary walking unto souls
that are united unto God in Christ: For though no degree of a souls Obebedience
unto God, nor no degree of love in the heart unto God, be able of it self, and
from it self, to clear the union of the soul with God in Christ when it is
dark, and to prove that the soul is united; yet some kind of disobedience, and
of contrary walking unto God, may manifest that there is no union between God
and the Soul. And therefore the Scripture when it has laid down any such sign,
always follows it with the contrary unto any such sign, proving that those
Souls that walk directly contrary, cannot be such as are united to God in
Christ. Therefore you shall see, no sooner does the Spirit of God say, hereby
we shall know that we love God, if we keep his Commandments. 1. John 2.3. But
he says, he that says he loves God and keeps not his Commandments is a
Liar; Presently he brings the point back for proof to convince Souls of want of
union, by that which is an inseparable effect of the Souls want of union. Yet
there are two or three things to be noted about this.

1. The Scripture does not lay down any defect, of any degree of Obedience, or
of Love, or of any degree of perfection of those signs laid down as being
consequences of union, as an argument of the Souls want of union. The Scripture
does not say that this degree, or that degree of Love, and this and that manner
of Obedience does follow the souls union with Christ.

2. The Scripture does not lay down, that an irregularity, or any disorder in
the Souls Obedience unto God, or in the Souls Love unto God and the like, do
manifest the Souls want of union. Neither does he require any perfection in
those signs laid down as consequent signs of the souls union, to make the union
of the soul evident by them.

3. The Scripture does not say, that the cessation of those Holy Operations, of
those Holy Qualities in the soul, nor the cessation of the acts of love unto
God, does manifest that a soul is not united unto Christ: For there may be a
cessation of those acts in the soul for a season, that are the inseparable
consequences of the souls union with Christ, but there cannot be a total want,
or contrariety in the heart to such things as are the proper effects of union.
So that he does place the evidence of the souls disjunction in a contrariety to
these; as when he says, by this we know we are passed from Death to Life,
because we love the brethren, but he that hates his Brother abides in Death;
He that hates his Brother must needs hate God. So in 1 John 4, 5. When he lays
down Obedience to Christ to be the ground of the knowledge of Christ, then
presently he says, he that says he knows him, and keeps not his
Commandments is a Liar.

There is a third question to be opened, and that is this.

Que. 3. To what purpose are all the promises made to Qualities inherent in
Souls, and to the workings of the Spirit of grace in hearts, seeing Union with
Christ cannot be evidenced from them?

Answ. 1. For answer, First there is no promise the Lord makes to any quality
inherent in a soul, as a condition upon which the promise should be fulfilled
to the soul. That is, there is no promise that the Lord has made to any
quality, so, or in such a manner, as upon the Lords beholding that quality in
the Soul, he should repute himself bound to fulfill that promise, or to convey
that mercy included in the promise to the Soul: Nor does the being of the
quality lay any such engagement upon God to perform it. Every promise is a part
of the Covenant of grace that the Lord holds forth in Christ; for the Covenant
of grace is nothing else but a bundle of promises: All the promises of God in
the word bound up in one, is the Covenant of grace, so that it is a thing
consisting of so many Articles of agreement between God and the Soul. Now the
Covenant of grace should prove no Covenant of grace, if any of those promises
were made to a quality, as a condition upon which the Lord were bound to
perform the promise.

Ans. 2. Secondly the promises of God to qualities inherent in Souls, are not
made to qualities as qualities. That is, not as they are good dispositions, and
good inclinations, not as they are works of the Spirit of grace begotten in
such Souls. All inherent qualities in souls are to be considred under a
twofold notion, either as they are qualities, that is, as they are affections
and dispositions in a soul: Or they are to be considered as they put a soul
into such a state or condition, as they make a soul either in a good condition,
or a bad condition. Now no soul may look upon any one promise that God has
made to any one quality, and look upon that quality in his heart as that good
quality, that good disposition to which the Lord has bound himself by promise,
to convey such or such mercies or benefits. As for example, should I name most
of the conditional promises in the word, you will find none of the promises
made to qualities, are made to them as qualities, but as to a state of Want,
and Penury, and Misery, out of which the Lord promises Refreshment, Ease, and
Relief, out of the Bowels of his own mercy.

1. To begin with thirsting ones. That notable place in Isa. 55.1.2. Ho every
one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye
buy and eat, yea come buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price. Come,
says he, take all suitable refreshment for your poor thirsty souls: There is
Christ holden forth to thirsty ones, in all the precious privileges tendered to
souls in Christ: Yet this is not made to thirsty ones, as thirsting is a
quality, or grace, flowing from the Spirit of grace in their hearts. And that
the promise is not made to thirsting Souls, as thirsting after Jesus Christ, or
as thirsting is a quality, will appear in three particulars: in that the
persons to whom those glorious privileges are tendered in Christ, are persons
void of any quality, or grace, proceeding from the Spirit of grace in their
Hearts: They were so far from any Holy quality, as it does appear from the
Text, that they had not any one right desire after receiving any Holiness, For

1. They are said to be such as are thirsting after false refreshments digging
broken Cisterns for their Souls to drink of, they spent their Money for that
which was no bread, that is, their desires and endeavors: They were the Jews
that sought for Justification by the Law, and Ceremonies.

2. They were such as thirsted to supply their wants in a wrong way, and were
neglecters of Jesus Christ. They spent their labors and desires after wrong
objects, that which was not Bread, things that could not profit: And these were
the persons to whom the promise was made, and therefore it could not be made to
any quality.

3. The same promise is holden forth to every Soul equally, whether thirsting
or not thirsting. This you may see Rev. 22.17. Let him that is a thirst come
(there is the same promise) yea let whosoever will come, and take of the Water
of Life freely. Every one under Heaven is joined under as equal a notion as the
thirsty ones: Therefore the promise cannot be made unto thirsty ones, as having
such a quality of grace in them, but as poor and penurious Souls, in a sad
condition, not knowing how to get their Souls refreshed, and their wants
relieved. So again Mat. 5, 6. where the promise seems to have more color to be
made to a quality as a quality, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled. This promise is not made to Souls as
hungering and thirsting after Righteousness, as Holy Dispositions in their
Souls, but the promise is made to them only as being needy and penurious, as
being in want and extremity; Therefore you shall observe in the promise, they
shall be filled, what is promised? Nothing to the quality it self, but to the
supply of the wants of the poor Soul.

2. If you observe the promises made to humbled Souls, groaning under the
burden of Sin, they are not made to any Souls as groaning under the burden of
Sin, or as groaning under the burden of Sin is a quality, or grace in the Soul.
As for example, look that promise. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Now says the Soul I am
burdened, and therefore I shall have rest: And here I am persuaded many a Soul
sits down in his being burdened, and not in his coming to Christ, and so sits
down short of Christ. Now that this promise is not made to Souls burdened as
burdened, but as being in a sad condition, ready to sink under grievous
pressures, appears in two things.

1. In regard there is nothing promised by God, to the Soul remaining in his
present estate. The promise holds forth rest, and ease, to the poor burdened
Soul, but how? Not as the Soul remains in his present estate, but through his
coming unto Jesus Christ; Come unto me and ye shall have rest, that is, receive
me as the only refuge of your Souls, and by receiving me by Faith, your Souls
shall have rest.

2. In regard there is nothing promised in this promise, to be given to the
Soul for the future, more then to other Souls that are not for the present
burdened under Sin. Whatever is holden forth in this promise to Souls groaning
under their burden, is held forth in other Texts to Souls not groaning under
their burdens, in as equal a manner. There can but two things be held forth;

First, An invitation to believe. But there is no more sutableness held forth
in this promise for an invitation for poor burdened Souls to believe in Christ,
than there is in other promises held forth in Scripture to Souls for present
not groaning under the burden of Sin. There lies as great an invitation upon
every Soul under Heaven as the burdened, there lies a command upon every Soul,
the invitation runs as equally to the dead in Sin, under the greatest captivity
to Satan, as to Souls groaning under the burden of Sin.

Secondly, The second thing that can be held forth in the promise, is Rest and
Refreshment. Now you see that the rest is held forth to them, to be received
for the future only through believing, and so it is held forth to every Soul
under Heaven: Therefore this promise cannot be made to burdened Souls under
Sin, as they are so burdened, or as they are qualified with any such quality of
grace. You will say then, what is the meaning of the promise? The meaning is
this, God discovers to poor necessitous Souls, where they shall have
refreshment. The voice of God from Heaven is, Thou poor necessitous Soul,
would have refreshment; and thou poor burdened Soul, would have ease? Come
to me, cast thy burden upon me by faith, and take my word says Jesus Christ,
thou shall have rest.

III. If you look into promises made to mourning Souls; As in Mat. 5.5. Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. So Isa. 61.1, 2. speaking of
Christ, he shall come to comfort those that Mourn in Sion. But now those
promises are not made to Mourners as having the quality of sorrow in their
Hearts, as being afflicted for their Sins, and grieving for them; no, not as
grieving for the dishonor done to God by their Sins, as if the Lord should
have respect to that in the promise. And that will appear in two things.

1. If the promise were to sorrow as a quality in the Soul, then it must needs
be as it is a good quality. Now were the promise made to the Soul as a good
quality, it were the happiness of the soul to have the good quality increase,
and continue in his soul: Whereas the promise made to the mourning soul, is to
remove the quality by comfort; comfort and mourning being two contraries. So
that if the promise were made to souls having a good quality in them, it were
rather a misery to have the promise than a happiness.

2. If the promise were made to sorrow as inherent, then the soul might claim
comfort by his mourning, or because of his mourning. And so the original of the
souls comfort should be in the quality inherent in the soul.

4. If you go on to poverty of Spirit; Blessed are they that are poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. The promise here is not made to a
soul poor in spirit, as having that quality in him: For then were the promise
of giving the Kingdom of Heaven, to be held forth to no souls but to those that
were thus poor and empty; and so the Kingdom of Heaven should be held forth
particularly, as the Lords not being willing to give it to any souls but to
such as are thus poor in spirit, that had a true sense of their own
nothingness: And so the first promise were to be received by a soul as having
true holiness, and grace in his soul, and so consequently the receiving of the
promise by Faith, should not be the first act of grace in the soul, but the
sight of grace should be necessary in the soul to make him receive a promise.

There is a fourth question to be answered, before we can pass to the
affirmative answer.

Quest. 4. Are not the promises made to faith, and believing as believing, that
through faith a man can only claim right to the promise? Says the soul, surely
faith is a quality in the soul, and if the promises be made to faith, they are
made to qualities as qualities.

Answ. 1. First I answer, That it is apparent that many promises are made to
souls actually void of faith. Though I dare not say without respect unto
believing for the future, yet I say without any present believing. The most
primary, principal, fundamental promises are made to souls void of faith
actually, they are made only to sinners, and that in their very estate of
sinfulness, though not properly as they are sinners; that is, not because they
are sinners, as if sinners were the qualification of the promise: But heinous
sinners, in that doleful condition, the Lord makes the promise to: As in 1 Timothy
1.15, that precious promise, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am chief. He looks upon himself only as a sinner, in the application of that
promise, that Jesus Christ came to save him. Thus the promises of
reconciliation are made to such actually without faith, calling them as they
are enemies, to close with Jesus Christ as a Mediator between God and them, to
make up reconciliation. Thus also that of Luke 19.20. That Christ came to seek
and to save that which was lost; another precious promise, yet made to souls
only lost, without respect to any present being of faith in their hearts.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer, that some promises are made for the begetting of
faith in souls, and therefore not made to faith as being a quality in the soul,
to which those promises should be made. As that promise Ezekiel. 36.26. A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: The promise is
made for the begetting of the habit of faith in the soul, whereby the heart
should be changed, whereby the whole work of redemption should be wrought in
the soul.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, I answer, That no one promise in the whole Covenant of
grace, is made unto faith as a quality pre-existent in a soul. That is, as a
quality to be remaining in a soul before he claim right to the promise. So that
no promise is made unto a believer because he does believe: The ground of the
promise is not the souls believing; nor the ground of the souls particular
interest in the promise is not the souls believing, though the ground of the
knowledge of that his interest is his believing. For if faith should be in a
soul as a quality, to receive the promise, then these three things would follow.

1. No promise could be fulfilled in, and to a soul, before it actually
believe. And then either faith it self must not be a gift from God unto the
soul, or else the great fundamental gift should be conveyed unto the soul, not
by virtue of the Covenant of grace, nor by virtue of a promise.

2. Then no soul might receive a promise, nor believe a promise, before he saw
his own faith. That is, a soul, till he could say, the Lord has infused the
habit of faith into my soul, he might not receive any promise: The reason is
plain, whatever the promise should be made unto, that must necessarily be seen
in the soul, before the promise can be believed. But now what a preposterous
course were this, and what an impossible thing, that I should see my faith
before I do believe, that I should see the habit of faith, before there be an
act of faith in my soul? Nay, rather that I should see an act of faith, before
ever faith did put forth an act?

3. Then the Covenant of Grace were no absolute Covenant, neither were it a
Covenant void of all conditions. For should the Lord make a promise to a
quality, as a quality, that quality should be brought in as a condition, to
which the Lord should bind himself by his own promise. Then the foundation of
any particular souls interest in the Covenant, should not be in the will of God
but in the soul it self, through the being of the quality in the soul to whom
the Covenant is made: But you read in Ezekiel. 36. and Jer. 33. The Covenant is
holden forth absolutely, the Lord undertaking every article of the Covenant:
The Lord also makes the foundation of the Covenant to be his own will alone,
Romans 9.11, to 15.

Answ. 4. Fourthly, I answer, That the promises that are made unto qualities,
do not promise any mercy, or grace, or favor unto souls, in those qualities to
which the promise seems to be made. As look over all the promises, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
The Lord does not speak peace here to the burdened soul, nor yet comfort, as
inviting and exhorting them to take comfort, because they are burdened, or in
their being burdened and groaning under sin, but does direct them unto Jesus
Christ for their refreshment; Come to me and then you shall have rest. So that
promise to thirsty ones, John 7.37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink: The Lord speaks no peace to them in their thirsting, but sends them to
Jesus Christ to receive comfort absolutely, as though there were no thirsting
in their souls. So likewise it is of every such promise.

Now from this will follow a direct answer to that question, The use of
conditional promises.
of what purpose and use these promises are of then?

First, they are of a directive use, Of directive use
to lead the soul to Christ. That the soul finding himself poor and penurious,
finding himself thirsty, and longing after this refreshment, or that
refreshment, after pardon of sin, or sanctification, or receiving more grace,
these promises are of use to lead the soul to Jesus Christ, to carry the soul
beyond broken cisterns, that he is apt to run to for refreshment, and to open
to him the everlasting fountain, where only he can have refreshment.

2. The promises that seem to be made to such qualities, they are of use by way
of Support, Support.
to underprop the poor sinking soul. The promise to poor burdened souls, though
it does not presently evidence to the soul, because he is burdened he has
rest, yet it opens a possibility, or probability of rest, and that does sweetly
underprop the poor sinking soul, when he is sinking under his burden. As it was
when the poor blind man was come after Jesus Christ, and the Disciples cried to
him to hold his peace, yet when they told him that Jesus Christ called for him,
though he had not his sight from thence, yet it could not but be some
refreshment to him, there was a ground of hope for his soul to rest upon,
whereas he saw no foo^f hope to stand upon before.

3. They are of use for the begetting of those very qualities in the soul, To
beget the qualities.
to which the promise seems to be made. By hearing the Lord inviting poor
thirsty, empty souls, the eyes of the soul are opened to behold his own
emptiness; And by discovering of the precious workings of love in the bosom of
God to poor souls, being ready to communicate himself to poor necessitous
souls, without any condidition required of them, the hearts of poor souls are
so allured, and sweetly drawn out after God, that all those holy dispositions
and qualities are begotten in them; yea faith it self, to which so many
promises are made. Therefore it is observable, Isa. 52.20. That what is there
promised to them that turn from transgression, that the holy Ghost, Romans 11.26.
applies unto Jesus Christ, as fulfilling that very quality, to which the
promise seems to be made, in souls, even making them to turn from their
iniquity and ungodliness; Christ shall perform the condition; As though it were
all one to make a promise to a quality in souls, or to make an absolute
promise, for the promise begets the condition.

4. They are of use for the revealing unto a soul his union with Christ, To
reveal to the soul its union.
when the Spirit of God opens and discovers those promises unto the soul. For
though the Spirit of God reveals not unto a soul the evidence of his union,
from any promise made to a quality in this manner, that is, by showing the soul
the quality in himself to which God has made a promise, and therefore makes
the soul to draw this conclusion, that God is bound to communicate such Grace
or Mercy to me; yet the Spirit of God may reveal to the soul his union with
Christ, in such a promise made unto the quality by manifesting the Lords
loving kindness, and free grace to a soul in that promise absolutely, as well
to beget the quality to which the promise is made, as to fulfill the promise.
And thus the Spirit of God may make the promise made to a quality, all one with
an absolute promise. Also further, The Spirit of God may also, through
revealing the souls union by such a promise, beget that very quality in the
heart, and cause the soul to apprehend the quality to be begotten in himself,
though it does not make the soul claim right to the promise by virtue of the
quality.

Now that which remains, is the affirmative part of the answer, How a soul may
know his union with Christ.
to answer didirectly, How a soul may know his union with the Lord Jesus? In
the giving this affirmative answer, there are diverse things also must be
premised further.

Premise 1. First I must premise this, That in our ordinary phrase of speech we
do make no difference between certainty, and assurance of our union with
Christ, but we call every assurance of our union a knowledge of our union, and
whatever can make a man infallibly certain he is united unto Christ, that we
say in our ordinary phrase can give a soul a knowledge of his union. And indeed
the Scripture does seem to countenance this our phrase of speaking, as in Job
19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, which could not properly be called
knowledge of his union with Christ, but only the knowledge of faith, building
upon the certainty of the Lords word.

Pre. 2. We must know that the Scripture does make a distinction between
assurances of souls union with Christ. As in 1 John 4.16. Says he, We know and
believe the love of God the father to us: He makes a twofold assurance, an
assurance of knowledge, and an assurance of faith. Now indeed both the assurance
of knowledge, and the assurance of faith, may in a large sense be called the
assurance of a souls union with Christ, in regard they have both the properties
of knowledge. Knowledge is the gathering of a necessary truth, from some
unchangable ground: Now in both these assurances, of knowledge and faith, the
knowledge of the souls union with Christ arises as a necessary truth from an
unchangable ground. The word of God is the unchangable ground from which the
soul by the assurance of faith, gathers the conclusion to himself, that he is
united unto Jesus Christ: And the beholding the peculiar inseparable effects of
a souls union with Christ, is that unchangable ground from whence the soul
gathers the assurance of knowledge.

Pre. 3. Thirdly, that both the assurance of faith and knowledge are for the
most part associates, or companions in the same soul at one time. They are for
the most part cotemporary, that is, accompanying one another, that when one is
in the soul, the other is in the soul, that when a soul has assurance of
faith, he has also the assurance of knowledge. And that for a threefold reason.

1. In regard those graces that are the ground of a souls assurance of
knowledge, are witnessed, or declared by the Spirit of God to be given to the
soul. Whenever the Lord reveals from his own word unto a soul, his willingness
to take his particular soul into union with the Lord Christ, the Lord does at
the same time witness to the soul, his willingness to confer and bestow upon
him all the grace his soul wants, all the holiness the hungry or empty soul is
breathing after: He does at the same time assure the soul he shall have love
and delight in God, he shall have poverty of spirit, and strength over
corruption.

2. Through the assurance of faith, those graces that are the grounds of the
souls assurance of knowledge are begotten immediately. Now in regard these are
thus necessarily begotten, thence it is the sight of them comes to be apparent
in the soul, at the same time that the sight of a ground for assurance of faith
is apparent in the soul.

3. The lively workings and motions of all kind of graces, are excited and
stirred up in every soul, by or through the Lords revealing unto the soul, a
ground for assurance of his faith, of his union with Christ. It is then the
soul mourns for sin more sweetly, and melts more preciously in the bosom of God
than ever before, though it may be there have been some heart-breakings under
the sense of his wretchedness formerly. It is then the soul is truly poor in
himself, and loathes and abhors himself more than ever before.

Pre. 4. Fourthly, though they be at the same time, for the most part in souls,
yet the assurance of of faith is the first according to order of nature in the
soul. For it is impossible there should be infallible evidences of the souls
union with Christ, drawn from his own graces, when there is not some
unchangable ground manifested from God unto the soul, for the assurance of
faith. So that the assurance of faith in a right orderly way, never flows from
the assurance of knowledge, but the assurance of knowledge flows from the
assurance of faith. And that arises upon these two grounds.

1. In regard it must be the manifestation of the ground of assurance of faith
unto the soul by God, that does procure a ground of the assurance of knowledge
in the soul. That appears thus; The grace, or love, or favor of God, is the
ground of the assurance of faith: Then the Lord does draw the the soul to
assurance of faith, when he does reveal to the soul his own particular grace
and favor, to take it into union with Christ, out of the mere disposition of
his own will alone, for no other respect whatever but for his own sake: Now the
grounds of the assurance of knowledge, are the effects of the grace of God
revealed, or the fruit of it; Now those are begotten in the soul, not by grace,
but by the manifestation of grace in particular unto the soul: It is through
grace revealed, that grace has its right proper effect in a soul; and
according to the measure of the grace of God revealed to a soul, it has the
measure and degree of effect. According to that in 1 John 3.2. We know that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is: That
is, when we behold him, through that sight, we shall be transformed into the
Image of God. For the clearing of this, you may consult with diverse places, as
John 15.16. Says Christ, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: He
does not mean, that they had not chosen Jesus Christ now at present as their
portion, but they did not choose Christ first: But the manifestation of Jesus
Christ choosing their souls first, is the ground of the souls choosing Jesus
Christ. And according to the light revealing to a soul Jesus Christ's choice of
him, so is the degree of strength wherewith the will closes with Jesus Christ
in the choice again. Now the choice of Jesus Christ, is the first act of any
habit of grace, that ever any soul brings forth.

There is no gracious act, truly graciously acted by any soul, till the will of
the soul be drawn in, upon the sight of the Lords choosing him to union with
himself, upon which the will also chooses Jesus Christ into union with him.
And again you may consult with that known place in 1 John 4.19. Says he, we
love him, because he first loved us: Not that from the essence of Gods love
their love did proceed, (though that be true) but from the manifestation of
Gods love: Now as the Apostle tells us, Gala. 5, 6. Faith works by Love: The
very first operation of the habit of Faith toward Christ is by love. The soul
at the same time it reaches out a hand of Faith, to grasp hold of Christ, it
reaches out also an hand of Love unto Christ. Now then observe, the Graces,
and workings of Graces, being the only ground for a soul to gather assurance of
knowledge from; and those Graces not being begotten in a soul, but according to
the degree of the Lords manifestation unto souls, a ground of assurance of
their union with Christ; Thence it is, that assurance of Faith must needs in
order of nature go before the assurance of knowledge.

2. The effects of grace, which are always the grounds of the souls assurance
of knowledge, remain dark and hidden, and obscure to the soul, when the grace
of God, that is the favor of God to the soul, remains obscure and doubtful.
The truth of graces appears most clearly from their Original, from whence they
spring, from the root upon which they grow, in regard other Fruits may have so
near a resemblance to them, as they cannot be discerned by the eye of the soul,
that has so much darkness in it, whilst it remains here below: But when the
original of grace appears, when the soul sees his love flowing merely from the
love of God to his soul, that even because of Gods love to the soul, therefore
the soul loves God again, it is then that love appears in the soul to be of the
right stamp, and indeed never till then. So that till the love or poverty of
spirit, or mourning for Sin, appear to the soul it self to be that which is the
proper effect, the proper consequence of the souls union with Christ, the soul
cannot be satisfied that his graces are of the right stamp. Now in regard the
effects of grace are doubtful, when the grace of God himself to the soul is
obscure and hidden; Thence it is, that the assurance of Faith must go before in
order of nature the assurance of knowledge, though for the most part not in
order of time.

Now these things considered; when you ask, how the soul may know his Union
with Jesus Christ? The question must be concerning this assurance of Faith, and
not of the assurance of knowledge, for you presuppose your selves not to have
any union. Therefore observe what question you ask; you ask how you may gain an
assurance of Faith, that your particular souls are united unto Jesus Christ?
Now this question will divide it self into two questions. First how souls do
attain the first, certain, infallible evidence of their union with Christ?
Secondly, How souls that do conceive, and judge, and estimate themselves to
have attained their union with Christ, may know whether their union be true,
whether their evidences be right evidences, or whether they be delusions? The
first question must resolve every poor, doubting, scrupulous soul about his
Union. But now observe, such souls cannot expect satisfaction from me about the
union of their souls, nor from any thing that man, or the Wisdom of man can
reveal unto their souls.

And that will appear in these four respects.

1. In regard the producing Faith in the soul is an act of Almighty Power. As
you may see Ephe. 1.19. When he prays that they might understand the hope of
their calling, he prays also that they might understand and know, the exceeding
greatness of his Power to those that believe, according to the working of his
Mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. It
is called a work of the Lords Power, and a Mighty Power, that is, a Power of
God, as God, as an incomprehensible essence: For it was no other Power than the
Power of God as God, that raised Jesus Christ from the dead, and the Holy Ghost
parallels that Power that draws the soul to believe, with the Power of the
Godhead.

2. The producing the consequence of Faith of assurance in the soul, is also
another mighty work of the Power of God. The consequence is the peace and
Harmony in the souls bosom, the settling of the poor tossed soul in his own
wished for Heaven: Now the begetting such Peace in the soul is ascribed to the
Power of God, Isa. 57.18, 19. He creates Peace. Creation is a work that is
proper to God alone as he is God, as he is the infinite Divine essence.
Creation is to make something of nothing, and therefore beyond the Power of all
Creatures whatever.

3. It must be a supernatural Divine light, that can reveal to the soul the
ground of the assurance of Faith. Therefore you shall see Ephe. 1.17, 18. how
the Apostle desiring that those Ephesians might be brought to understand the
depth of the Covenant of grace in their souls, he prays to God that he would
send into their Hearts the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, that they might
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints. What is the hope of his calling;] That is, what are
the things hoped for, and propounded as the objects of hope, in the Lords
calling souls: You see there is a necessity both of the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation; Not only of a Spirit of Wisdom, that is, of an habit of Spiritual
Life and understanding infused into the soul, but of a Spirit of Revelation,
that there might be a light of Revelation from the spirit, to discover those
deep hidden things, unto the spirit of understanding that the Lord has infused
into the soul. Now all the Revelations of man unto your souls scrupulous about
your union, can reveal no more than an external and outward light, to the
outward eye of your understanding: And thence it is, your scrupulous souls can
receive no satisfaction about your union, from any thing that can be revealed
by man unto your souls. But I pray, mistake not, I do not say, the soul may not
receive any satisfaction through that as a means, but rather I affirm, that
through those Revelations of truths, unto the eye of the natural understanding,
the Lord does communicate true light into the spiritual understanding: The Lord
strikes in with the revelation of truths, and puts light upon truths, and puts
light into the soul to receive those truths.

4. In regard the Lord has appointed a peculiar Officer for that end, and has
designed that work of satisfying souls about their union, for that Officer as
peculiar to him alone. Thence you shall see, the Lord has given the Officer a
name suitable for that end, which is the Comforter, John 14.26, and commonly he
is called as well by that name alone, as the Spirit of God: Now the office of
the spirit is to lead into all truth, John 16.13, and it must be truth, that is
some revelation of the mind of God, that must give such souls satisfaction
about their union. Now in regard of all this, it is evident, that souls
scrupulous about their union cannot expect satisfaction, from any thing
revealed by any man to their Souls, but only so far as the resolution of this
question will give them satisfaction, and that is in two things. First, in
revealing to their Souls the insufficiency of their commonly supposed grounds
from whence they seek for evidence of their union. Secondly in raising their
eyes of expectation, to the right original of evidences of union. We shall now
proceed to the answer of this great question, How souls attain the evidence of
their union with Christ? And yet before this question can be answered, it will
divide it self into theee Branches. First, from whence, or from what ground,
souls do attain the infallible evidences of their union with Christ? Secondly,
by what means do souls attain the evidences of their union? Thirdly, in what
manner those means produce the evidence of the souls union with Christ?

Quest. 1. The first question is, from whence Souls attain infallible Evidences
of their Union with Christ?

Answ. I answer, That there is but one only peculiar ground substantially, from
whence souls can expect to receive infallible evidences of their union; and
that is the Lords own free promise, past out of the riches of his own grace
alone, to poor despisable souls, wherein the Lord reveals his willingness to
confer or bestow the Lord Christ upon their souls. Now that this free promise
alone, is the infallible ground, from whence souls can receive the infallible
evidence of their union, will appear in these three particulars.

I. In regard a Divine word must be the proper adequate object of a Divine
Faith: And every particular act of Divine Faith, must have a Divine word.
Thence it is that in Romans 10.17. The whole Gospel, considered as the Gospel, is
said to be the word from which Faith comes, that is, the word which is the
foundation of Faith: Not that it is the bare hearing of it that produces
Faith, but through the hearing of the word, the Lord reveals that word unto
souls to be a true infallible foundation for souls to build upon. And thence it
is that the Word of God, past out from God as a promise unto souls, is made a
ground of true hope unto souls: Says David. Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy word,
[that is thy promise] unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
Now the word of promise thus considered, being the only proper object of Divine
Faith; thence it is, that it can only be from a divine promise, that a soul can
receive the infallible evidence of his union with Christ.

II. In regard there must be a revelation from God, of his free donation, and
giving Christ unto a soul, that must be the ground of the act of every assuring
faith. It must be through some light and apprehensions the soul has of the
Lords free will concerning his soul, that Christ and his soul shall be one,
that any act of assuring faith can go out of the soul. And that may appear in
two things.

1. In regard faith respects things only as they are revealed by Speech from
some person or other, and respects the authority of the person speaking, as the
ground and foundation upon which it acts, that is, upon which faith does
believe. Thus the authority of the Lords speaking was the ground of Sarahs
faith, Heb. 11.11. So the ground of Paul's faith is expressed thus, I know whom
I have believed, and that he is able. Now the Lord reveals his mind concerning
the eternal condition of such souls, only in his promise: Thence it follows
necessarily, there must be some revelation of the mind of God, in the word of
promise, or the Lords donation or giving Christ to the soul, before there can
follow any act of assuring faith.

2. It appears, in regard faiths proper exercise consists only in receiving.
Whence you may observe in Scripture, that believing and receiving are both put
for one ordinarily, John 1.12. and Chap. 3.33. So that of necessity for every
right exercise of any act of faith, there must be an apprehension of something
given, that may be received by a soul. And thence it is of indispensable
necessity, that there be an apprehension of the Lords giving Christ to the soul
to be one with it, before there can be an act of assuring faith in the soul.

III. It must be from the promise from whence the soul receives the evidence of
his union, in regard there must be a particular infallible certainty to faiths
eye, in the ground from whence faith of assurance, or faith of evidence does
act. Faith working only as a receiver, can receive no fuller certainty, or have
any fuller confidence in it self, of any thing to be effected or done, than it
sees manifest from the grounds, from whence it takes that confidence or
assurance: Now the promises alone are the infallible certainty to the eye of
faith; Yea, the Lord according to his own unchangable counsel, has determined
that there should be no other certainty, but to the eye of faith, Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end that the
promise might be sure to all the seed. And that is the answer to the first
Question, from whence souls do receive the infallible evidence of their union
with Christ, which you see is only from the divine promise. But yet here is
another Question souls will cast in, before we answer the second, By what means?

Quest. But may the soul say, Is it not from the sight of a condition to which
the Lord has made some promise of Christ, that a soul does receive the
infallible evidence of his union? It is true it must be from a promise, but the
promise is not the nearest ground, the proximate ground, but the remote ground,
the furthest off ground; And the condition of the promise fulfilled in the
heart is the nearest ground, and the immediate ground from whence the soul
receives the evidence of its union.

For answer to it, there are diverse things to be premised, and then to come to
the direct answer of the question.

Prem. 1. First, I must premise, That it is a general received division of the
promises, that they are either absolute, or conditional. Absolute, made and
founded upon the will of God alone, and so to be accomplished only according to
his own will, and because he will. Or else promises are made to some particular
condition to be performed in souls, upon which the Lord does also fulfill the
promise to the soul. Now this division divides the promises into a Covenant of
grace, and a Covenant of works; so it is all one with that known division
promises legal, and promises evangelical, promises according to the Law, and
promises according to the Gospel.

Prem. 2. Secondly, I shall premise, That there can be no promises of the
Covenant of Grace properly called conditional promises, there being not one
condition included in the whole Covenant of Grace to which any one promise is
made. So that the division of the promises, into promises absolute, and
promises conditional, cannot hold rightly in the Covenant of Grace, but every
promise considered in the Covenant of Grace, are all absolute promises: That
is, the revelation of Gods will to souls, that the Lord has simply and fully
determined to accomplish, according to the manner, and order, and latitude
wherein he does propound them unto souls, and that without any impediment or
interruption, so that whatever can possibly intervene, yet the Lords will shall
prevail in performing the promise. Thence you shall observe Jer. 31.32. that
the new Covenant, called the Covenant of Grace and Love, is distinguished from
the old Covenant God made with the Jews as a Nation, in that it was a Covenant
wholly absolute, containing nothing but promises which the Lord intended to
fulfill, whatever can intervene: Therefore I will not make such a Covenant as I
made with your fathers, which my Covenant they brake, (observe that) but I will
make such a Covenant as they shall not be able to break, For, says God, I will
write my law in their hearts, and put my fear in them; As if he should say, I
will do all things for them: So that there is not one promise that can properly
be called a conditional promise: Indeed improperly I grant, the promises of the
Covenant of Grace may be divided into conditional and absolute promises. Some
promises of the Covenant of Grace, may be called conditional in this respect,
that there are some limits and bounds set to the promises; as these two great
bounds, his own glory, and his peoples good. And only in three sorts of
promises those limitations hold. As,

1. In all temporal promises, of temporal blessings and favors to his own. The
Lord has not absolutely promised riches, and honor, and prosperity to all the
Subjects of the Covenant of Grace, though godliness has the promise of this
life, and that which is to come; And though he has tied his own sufficiency to
supply them, yet not so as it admits of no limitation; but these two come in,
the Lords glory, and his peoples own good. And likewise in dispensing all
blessings privatively, that is, the freeing the soul from all temporal evils,
from afflictions, distress, and burdens, this freedom is promised in the
Covenant of Grace, yet it admits of this limitation, so far as it may concern
the Lords glory: So that so far as the glory of God is advanced, in his peoples
groaning under burdens and sufferings for a time, the Covenant is nevertheless
fulfilled.

2. The promise of Gods giving the common gifts of the spirit, God is not bound
to them in the Covenant, without limitation. Therefore in 1 Cor. 12. Those
common gifts of the spirit God dispenses them variously; one he fills with
them, and leaves another poor and weak, void almost of any of those gifts of
the spirit, that the glory of God may be advanced in that dispensation; and
certainly every soul is not suitable to manage such a treasury of common gifts,
therefore the other limitation comes in also, the souls own good.

3. Those conditions or limitations hold only in the promises concerning the
measure, and manner, and order of Gods dispencing himself to souls in
privative, or positive things. All spiritual mercies, privative as well as
positive, that is, the preservation of the soul from all temptations, and
buffettings of Satan, the preservation of the soul from all desertions, this is
also included in the Covenant of Grace; But it is in this sense but a
conditional promise, a limited promise, so far as may be for the Lords own
honor, the soul shall be free from temptations: Yet now, though in this sense,
under all these three heads there be continual promises, yet that which is
absolutely necessary, for the soul cannot be said to come under any of these
limitations; Life and Salvation, and everlasting Communion with the glorious
Trinity, and with the glorious Saints and Angels, are so absolutely promised,
as they come not under these limitations, but that which is absolutely
necessary for the soul, the Lord has bound himself absolutely to convey to the
soul. Yet these limited promises cannot properly be called conditional, but are
absolute in themselves, as will appear in three particulars.

1. These limited promises, thus bounded, are not left in the limitations of
them unto the persons to whom they are made. So that they are improperly called
conditional promises, in regard conditional promises do imply some condition to
be performed by the parties to whom the promises are made: Now these
limitations of such promises, are not in the power of persons to whom they are
made, that they should judge and determine, when for their own good, and for the
Lords glory they should have such and such promises made good to them, but they
depend upon the sole wisdom of God.

2. These promises bounded with these extents, are simply and absolutely
determined by God to be fulfilled, according as they are propounded. Now then
is a promise absolute, when without respect to any thing whatever that can
possibly intervene, or be interposed, it is undertaken to be fulfilled to the
person to whom it is made, according to the full extent wherein it is
propounded. Now in the full extent of the propounding of those promises,
wherein God may have glory, and the soul advantage, the Lord has as absolutely
engaged to give all common gifts of the spirit, all outward blessings,
(whatever possibly can intervene) as he has also any part of the Covenant of
Grace.

3. These promises pertaining to the Covenant of grace, bounded with
limitations, are by the infinite wisdom of God, bounded with such limitations
only, as make them to be absolute love and Grace from God to the soul. For
indeed those limitations are no other than preventions of what might make such
promises to have evil interwoven with them as well as good, and then should
they not be absolutely love: For observe all Gods promises of temporal mercy to
the soul, therein come to be love to the soul, because God has bounded with
that limitation, so far as shall be for the souls own good and advantage. So
that from these considerations, even those limited promises prove as absolute,
as all the other promises of the Covenant of Grace: So that you see there are
no promises belonging to the Covenant of Grace, but what are merely Grace; No
condition may come in to challenge any thing in the Covenant of Grace.

Prem. 3. Thirdly, I must premise, That all those promises that seem to be made
to conditions in souls, they are included under one of these five heads.

1. They are made to persons having such conditions in them as put them into a
case of want and poverty, and so the Lord propounds refreshment to them,
suitable to their wants and poverty. Of this nature are the promises made to
thirsty and burdened souls.

2. Those may be no promises, but revelations of the glorious privileges that
God does freely bestow upon his own people. As to instance in those promises
that seem to be made to love to God and Christ, John 14.21. He that loves me
shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to
him: Here seems to be a promise made to love, whereas it is only a revelation
of the precious privilege that belongs to the people of God, and a discovery of
the precious purpose of God concerning his own, out of the mere disposition of
his goodness toward them. If any promise should be made to that precious grace
of love, methinks this should, it runs every way in the nature of a promise:
But yet hence it appears it is no promise, made to loving Christ, as a
condition upon which the promise should be fulfilled, in regard that
disposition, or precious habit of love to Jesus Christ in the soul, is an
effect of the Covenant of Grace it self: Now that the Covenant should be made
to that which is the proper effect of the Covenant of Grace it self, no man can
conceive. And that demonstration is sufficient to clear all other promises of
this nature. So if you examine the promise made to fear, Psalm. 34.7, 8. The
Angels of the Lord pitch their tents about them that fear him: It is taken for
a promise, but it is only the privilege of the Saints. So likewise look to all
the promises of obedience, Deuteronomy. 5.10. The Lord reserves mercy for a thousand
generations, of them that love him and keep his commandments. There is a large
promise that seems to be made to obedience: But no soul understanding the
absolute decree of God from eternity, can conceive the obedience of any soul
should be the motive that should move God to show mercy to the soul or body; or
that God should bind himself to his own people, yielding obedience to him, to
become a debtor to their posterity in respect of their obedience; for then the
mercies their posterity should enjoy, should owe their immediate being, and the
glory of their being to their immediate ancestors, and not to God as the
immediate cause of the being of their mercies: Therefore these are only
declarations of the privileges of the people of God, and all these promises
are only manifestations of his goodness to them, for the manifestation of the
riches of his Grace, for refreshing their spirits, and for the causing them to
be precious in the esteem of others.

3. If those promises that seeem to be made to qualities in the soul as unto
conditions, be not thus, then they are only descriptions of the persons of
those that God does interest in the glorious privileges of Christ, by the
special peculiar Graces that God communicates to them.

Or else 4. They are discoveries of the means through which God does convey
those privileges of Christ and of the Covenant of Grace unto persons. Of this
nature is that promise which seems to be made to a condition, Isa. 57.17. Thus
says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I
dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit. This that seems to be a promise made to a soul, endued by the
Spirit of God with the Grace of Humility, it is but either a description of
those persons whom the Lord does interest in his own special favor, out of the
riches of his own Grace alone; Or else it is a precious Cordial given to a poor
drooping Spirit, as considered in an estate of penury and poverty, as one
contrite and ready to give up himself. Of this nature are all those promises
made to believing, and repenting: He that believes and repents shall be
saved: The promise of salvation is not made unto faith, as a special grace of
God in the soul, nor to the person endued with that grace: But the thing it
self properly is no promise, but rather a description of the means through
which the Lord makes his people partakers of the special privilege he conveys
through Christ, and of the persons he communicates them to by their qualities.

5. Those words of God that seem to be promises made unto conditions (if none
of the four former things contain them, then) they are descriptions given by
the Holy Ghost, of the way the Lord requires, and inables his people to walk
in, while he communicates of his own free mercy to them. Of this nature is that
place, so mistaken, Ezekiel 36.27, 28, 29, 30, (which is the greatest place
conceived to be of weight to prove promises to be made to conditions) says the
Lord, I will do these and these things for you, I will bring you into your
Land, and make you dwell quietly and safely in your Land, and I will save you
from your Uncleanness, etc. But v. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for
this be enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. Generally the
soul conceives, here is the promise, and the condition of the promise: The
promise to be the multitude of Mercies; And the condition to be the seeking of
the face of God. But the meaning of the Holy Ghost is nothing else but to
describe the way the Lord requires his people to walk in, whilst they are in
expectation to receive those precious mercies, freely promised by God for them.
Likewise that in 1 Kings 8 47 48. Solomon prays for his people, If they bethink
themselves in the Land, whither they were carried Captives, and repent and make
Supplication, etc. Now says the Soul, here is both the promise and the
condition of the promise: The condition is seeking Gods face, humbling
themselves for their Sins, turning to God with all their hearts: And then there
is the promise that God will deliver them; but they must observe these
conditions, else God binds not himself to give deliverance. Now the true
meaning of the Holy Ghost is only this: Solomon in praying here at the
dedication of his Temple (the Typical House of God) beseeches the Lord that
the prayers of all his people made toward that Temple, (that is, toward Jesus
Christ typified by that Temple) and according to the will of God, that they
might be all acceptable to God: Therefore observe, Solomon in praying does only
describe the frame of spirit in Gods people when they come to pray, which is an
humble frame, a turning frame from their Sins. Neither does God make the
promises in either of both those places, to depend upon any of these duties
named, not so much as prayer it self.

Therefore for the clearing these Texts, I pray consider these things, which
may be useful for us for the right understanding the Covenant of grace, and the
nature of it.

I. That the duties here required by God from his people, are the way wherein
it is his will his people should walk in receiving mercies. They are not
precedent in order of time before the Lords intituling the soul to the whole
Covenant of grace, and every promise contained in it; no nor so much as in
order of nature: That is, that it must be presupposed that the soul have
performed such and such duties, before it can be presupposed the Lord to have
interested the soul in every promise of the Covenant of grace. And that will
appear in these two things.

First, that the act of the Lords will alone, before and without any act of the
will of man concurring, does fully entitle the soul to every promise of the
Covenant of grace: Otherwise it should be conceived, that there should be some
good will in man toward God, before there be any good will in God toward man;
And so some act of good will from man to God, should not flow from the acts of
Gods good will to the soul.

Secondly, in regard the performing of that duty by a soul, that the Lord
requires of it in communicating grace, mercies, and favors to it, is the Lords
fulfilling his own Covenant of grace, in, and to the soul. Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel.
36.27. Now that which is a part of Gods fulfilling the Covenant, cannot go
before the Covenant it self. So that from thence are two things that you must
conclude.

First, that the performing those duties that God requires, do give no soul any
title or interest in any one promise of the Covenant of grace.

Secondly, that the Lords promise to the Soul, has no dependence upon the
souls performance of the duty, that God requires him to perform, in reference
to Gods communicating mercy to the soul. Yet I pray here be cautelous: I do not
say that God requires no duty from souls, whilst he is thus communicating his
free grace and mercy unto them; I do not exempt souls from duty, but I only
exempt Gods promise from a dependence upon the duty, and establish Gods own
promise upon its right Basis and Foundations, which is only his own will and
absolute determination.

II. The second thing you are to observe for the clearing of these Scriptures
is this; That those duties required by God from souls in communicating mercies,
must of necessity go before the Lords intituling the soul to many mercies.
Though they cannot in order of nature, go before any promise of the Covenant of
grace, yet in order of nature at least, if not in order of time, they go before
the Lords intituling the soul to very many mercies, mercies almost of all
sorts: That is, till souls have performed those duties God requires, they can
claim no right nor title, nor have any right nor title unto many mercies: And
all the right their souls enjoy to many mercies, may, and must be conveyed to
them through the performance of these duties. As for example, in 1. Kings 8.47,
48. God promises deliverance to them out of captivity, and restoration of
them into their own land, and many privileges; yet those duties there
described by the Holy Ghost to be the way of his peoples approach to him, and
seeking his face for their return out of captivity, could not but of necessity
go before, at least in order of nature, to the Lords intituling that people in
the mercy of deliverance; so that while those duties were not performed by the
soul, there could be no right, nor title claimed of that deliverance by those
persons.

But now there are four or five things to be observed for the clearing of this.

1. That the duties here required by God, though they do, and must go before
the Lords intituling the soul to many mercies, yet they do not, nor cannot go
before the Lords intituling the soul to any absolute mercies. Those absolute
mercies are conveyed to the soul through the Covenant of grace absolutely,
without any respect or reference to any duty whatever performed by the soul, so
as the promise of them should have dependence upon the duty in the least
degree: But these relative mercies are only included in the Covenant of grace
with limitation, so as they are mercies considered with such circumstances,
considered as being communicated to such persons, in such order, in such
manner, in such degree. Now it is of these mercies only, that these duties
required by God, may go before in order of nature, to the Lords intitling the
soul to the mercy.

2. Observe, Though these duties may go before, and ordinarily must go before,
the Lords intitling the soul to such mercies, yet it is not the duty that gives
the soul the right to those mercies thus to be enjoyed. Suppose those relative
mercies to be conveyed to any particular soul, at a suitable time, in a suitable
manner, order, measure and degree, every way suitable so as they are mercies,
and then all these mercies are as absolutely promised in the Covenant of grace,
as those absolute eternal mercies, that cannot but be mercies, however they are
communicated.

3. It is not the duty, nor the performance of it, that gives the soul the
right and title to the promise. So that the duty is neither the immediate
ground of the souls right to the mercy, nor the remote ground, that is, the
furthest off ground. The furthest off ground is the promise; The immediate is
that which gives them right to the promise: Now the soul must be in the
Covenant of grace before the duty be performed, and being in the Covenant of
grace, he has right to the promise through which he partakes of such relative
mercies.

4. Though there be an ordinary necessity of these duties required by God,
preceding, or going before the souls enjoying such mercies; yet it is not the
duty simply considered in its own nature as a duty, upon which this necessity
lies, that it should go before the souls enjoyment of the mercies. I mean thus,
it is not prayer, that God requires of thy soul, that waits for the
communication of any mercy or grace, considered only as prayer, (which is to be
considered as a duty) that this of necessity must go before the souls enjoyment
of the mercy; that is, as though the Lord would have this necessity to be upon
the performing of the duty, because he would have something done by the soul,
before he will make it partake of his mercies: Only the performance of the duty
so disposes the heart, as a mercy shall be a mercy to the Soul.

5. Observe further, That the rise and exercise of the duties thus required by
God, sometimes to go before the Lords vouchsafing such mercies to souls, can be
only from the virtue of some promise contained in the Covenant of grace, which
the Lord fulfills in a soul. For without influences from the Covenant of grace,
were there the most exquisit prayers, the most continual strong wrastlings of a
soul with God, the most powerful Mourning and Weepings, and Cryings after God,
all could not dispose a soul rightly for the enjoyment of any of those relative
mercies, so as they should be mercies unto them, when they are communicated.

3. There is a third thing also to be observed for the clearing of these
Scriptures, and that is, That these duties that are sometimes precedent in
souls before their enjoyment of such relative mercies, are absolutely promised
to those that are in the Covenant of Grace, to be effected by God in their
souls. This you may see apparent. Ezekiel. 36 comparing v. 27. with v. 37. In v.
37. he says, I will be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them,
but v. 27. he says, I will put my Spirit in you and cause you to walk in my
Statutes and my Judgments to do them. And Jer. 31.33. says the Lord, I will
write my Law in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me: The Lord does
even engage himself absolutely to work that in their hearts, that he does
require to be done by their souls in his communicating mercies to them. Now
these things being thus cleared, the question that the soul propounds cannot
stand. The question was, whether it was not from the sight of the condition, to
which the promise was made and fulfilled in the soul, that the soul did
conclude his right to the promise, and so had his evidence of union with
Christ? There being no condition in the whole Covenant of Grace, to which God
has made any promise, it cannot be that it should be from the sight of any
such condition, that a soul should have his evidence of his union with Christ.
But then the question will be resolved into this question.

Quest. But says the soul, Does not the Lord first reveal those graces that he
describes his own people by, to be in souls, and then through the sight of them
clear to souls that he has given them the Lord Christ out of his own good will
alone through the promise; And so it must be through the sight of such graces
as God describes to be in his people, that a soul must see himself to be one of
Gods people?

Answ. 1. Now to this, I answer, First, That the Lord does reserve to himself
his own liberty, concerning his own particular word, from whence he does reveal
to souls infallibly their union with Christ. The Lord does not bind himself
from a revealing unto souls their union with Christ, by some word describing
the Graces of the people united unto Christ, nor from some word only inviting
souls unto Christ.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer, That the Lord does not evidence unto souls their
union with Christ, without the sight of those graces, in some measure or degree
that the holy Ghost describes the Lords own people by. When the Lord reveals
his own free gift of Christ to the soul, he does reveal to the soul his willing
accepting of Christ so given: And that is all one as if I should say, the soul
sees his own faith, and so consequently does see such graces to be in his soul.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, I answer, That the Lord does never reveal any Graces of the
Spirit to any Soul, as the ground or cause of evidencing unto the soul his
union with Christ. There are two things intended in this.

First, That the Lord never reveals those graces in souls, to be that which
gives the soul right to the promise of the gift of Christ. The Lord never
manifests unto any soul, that because there are such and such holy
dispositions, or precious heavenly qualities, that he has communicated to him,
that therefore he is inclined toward him, and is willing to confer the Lord
Jesus upon him, or to accept him into union through Christ: But the Lord
reveals himself willing to accept souls into union with himself in Christ, as
they are considered under the notion of poor, despicable, worthless Souls,
without the least good disposition or holy inclination that can possibly be
imagined in their hearts.

Secondly, The Lord never reveals those Graces in the Soul to be the foundation
of the Souls assurance. That is, the Lord does not manifest to the Soul, that
because there are such Graces, or such precious habits in his Soul, therefore
upon the sight of those, the Soul ought to believe the Lords free sender, and
free gift of the Lord Christ to it. The Lord does not make those Graces to be
the foundation of the Souls faith, So that the Souls hope and comfort should
rest upon the sight of those Graces, that God should discover to be
communicated to the Soul. And that will appear in two things.

First, If the Lord should cause the Soul, by discovering Graces to be in him,
to bottom its hope upon the sight of those Graces, then should the Graces of
the Spirit in the Soul be the object of Faith, and so Faith should not be the
evidence of things not seen, but rather the evidence of things seen. Now the
Scripture never propounds any holy quality in the Soul to be the object of
Faith, considering the quality as being inherent in the Soul: It is out of all
question, the Scripture propounds believing, without the sight of any of those
qualities, as that which every soul ought to seek after with his greatest
strength, John 20.29.

Secondly, Should the Lord manifest Graces to be in Souls first, so as to
bottom the hopes of their union with Christ upon the sight of those Graces,
then the Lord should not settle the faith of such Souls upon an immutable,
unchangable ground. The Spirit it self in all its workings, both in regard of
the person in whom it works, in regard of the manner, and time of such
workings, is well compared by Christ to the wind, that blows where and when
it lists: And so all the graces of the Spirit, and the workings of those
Graces, may be said to be changable things: and should the Lord ground, the
Faith of a Soul upon a changable ground he should walk contrary to his revealed
will, Heb. 6.18. he has given two immutable grounds, his word and oath -- the
Lords will is, there should be everlasting, constant, unchangable grounds upon
which every act of Faith should be built in relation to the Lord Christ, that
there may be unmovable and unchangable consolation.

Answ. 4. Fourthly, I answer, That the Lord may, and does to some Souls, reveal
Graces to be in them, before he does evidence unto their Faith their Union with
Christ. The Lord may manifest that there is some poverty of Spirit, some broken
heartedness for Sin, some precious change, before he does assure unto their
Faith their Union with Christ. But then there are two things to be noted for
the clearing of this conclusion.

First, That the Lord does not reveal the truth of such Graces, to be in such a
Soul unquestionably, so as to enable the Soul to conclude from thence, the
acceptance of his Soul into Union with Christ. The dreadful storm of fear and
terror, that may be risen upon the soul, may be much alayed, but alas there
will be many a wave go over the Soul still.

Secondly, That the evidence of the truth of those Graces in the Soul, holds
equal proportion with that evidence the Lord gives to Faith of the Souls Union
with Christ, or of the Lords free gift of Christ to him. The evidence of the
truth of those Graces, and the evidence unto Faith runs parallel together; They
are dark and clear together, holding one equal proportion. And therefore until
God assure the Faith of the Soul, that he is willing to accept him into union
with Christ, the Soul has not an unquestionable assurance of the truth of
those Graces that are in his Soul.

Answ. 5. It is not the discovery of Grace in a poor doubting Soul, but the
discovery of the Lords absolute uncontrollable will, to receive a Soul into
union with the Lord Christ, that is the ground from whence the Souls Faith is
assured of his Union with Christ, that is the ground from whence the Soul is
assured of his Union with him. Now this I shall desire to clear from diverse
particulars.

1. In regard the immediate ground of the certainty of the promise, or of the
Covenant of Grace unto the Soul, can be nothing else but the gift of God.
Therefore says the Apostle, Romans 4.16. It is of faith, that it might be by
grace, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed. And that the
immediate ground of the certainty of the promise, must be gift alone, appears
in two things.

First, In regard the foundation of all must be Grace. Ephesians. 1.6, 7. That we
might be to the glory of his Grace. Therefore in Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. I will
establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord;
There Is the absolute promise: What is the end? That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord. This is
strange one would think, that they should be ashamed and consounded when God is
pacified, and reveals himself to be pacified; But here is the mystery of it,
The Lord lays Grace as the foundation of all his ways toward them, purposely
that the glory of all that God communicates to Souls might be to himself alone.

Secondly, In regard there can be nothing else the object of faith. There are
but two things that can be grounds of certainty, It must be either Grace in
God, or Grace in the Soul: Either the love of God, or the effects of the love
of God in the Soul. Now the effects of the love of God in the Soul are things
seen, ad therefore not the objects of Faith, Heb. 11.1.

2. The discovery of the absolute will of God must be the only ground of
assurance, in regard faith can discern no certainty of Gods differencing one
soul from another, but what the Word of God reveals. Now the Word of God
reveals no other ground of the Lords differencing one soul from another, but
only his own will, Romans 9.12.18.

3. In regard the sight of the certainty of the souls right, of receiving
Christ into union with himself, does wholly depend upon a sight of the
certainty of the Lords will to recieve the soul into union with Christ. Though
the Spirit of God has secretly allured the heart, from those dark Visions of
Christ, to embrace him truly, so as there is a real union between Christ and
the soul, yet the soul cannot judge aright of his receiving the Lord Christ so
tendered, to be given to his soul, till he sees that he did receive the Lord
Christ upon the right ground.

4. In that it is the souls duty to receive the gifts of God, in that order
wherein the Lord manifests his giving of his gifts. Now the order wherein the
Lord propounds his gifts, is first the gift of the Lord Christ, and then the
gift of all graces, as the adjunct of the gift of the Lord Christ. And thence
the Lord invites the soul, and commands the soul first in order to receive
Christ, that so it might partake of all the graces of Christ, and all those
dispositions of Holiness the soul longs for.

5. In that the Lord judges it sufficient for assuring the Wavering Trembling
soul of a poor sinner, fearing the indignation of God against him for his sin.
You shall read Genesis 3.15. That all the promise that God gave to Adam (when out
of question the poor man was in great distress) was only this, That the Seed of
the Woman should break the Serpents Head. A mere discovery of his absolute free
will, without respect to any thing in souls themselves, that he would deliver
solely by a way devised by his own Wisdom, by a Mediator, by taking upon him
the humane nature, and conquering the powers of Hell, that did then hold poor
souls captive. Could Adam have received no evidence, nor no assurance of the
Lords accepting his soul into union with himself again in Christ from that
promise, the soul of Adam had been left altogether comfortless, there being no
description given by God, of any graces that his own spirit did communicate, to
the souls of such that he had accepted into union with himself.

6. In regard the patterns holden forth in Scripture, of such as have received
their union with Christ, received the evidence of their union from the Lords
absolute promise, from the discovery of his will alone to do good unto their
souls. In Genesis 15.6, 7, 8, compared with Romans 4.18, 19. you shall see Abraham
the Father of all believers, he received the evidence of the Lords blessing him
in Christ, (which is all one with taking into union with Christ) only by the
discovery of the Lords absolute will toward him. Another pattern you see Isa.
6.5, 6, 7; In the sense of his own wretchedness, crying out, Woe is me, I am
undone, etc. A Seraphim flew unto him having a live coal in his hand, which he
took off the Altar, and laid it upon his mouth, [you must conceive it was done
in a Vision] and said, lo this has touched thy lips, and thine Iniquity is
taken away, and thy Sin purged. Here is an absolute promise of the Lords free
love to Isaiah; It gives him no Characters at all, but tells him his Iniquity
is taken away, and this satisfied the soul of Isaiah as you may see v. 8. by
his readiness to obey the command of God, here I am, send me: And the case is
every, way parallel, only this particularizeth the person of Isaiah, whereas
other promises are holden forth generally, but yet every particular soul is as
fully included, and the promise is as absolutely spoken to every soul receiving
it, as it was unto Isaiah; And it is the light of the Spirit that shines forth
in the promise, that does put as much particularity, and does as much
particularize the promise to any one soul, as this promise was particularized
to Isaiah in a Vision. So that it is from the Lords absolute will alone, that
the soul receives a full ground of his union with Christ. That's the first
branch of the 5th Conclusion.

The second branch of the fifth Conclusion was, That it was not the discovery
of the graces of the scrupulous soul, doubtful of his union, that did thus
evidence unto the soul his union. Now the discovery of graces in the soul still
dark in his union, cannot be in order the first ground from whence the soul
does receive the evidence of his union. Though at the very same instant the
soul may by the discovering of those graces, see his union, and conclude his
union from the sight of those graces, yet in order of nature this is not the
immediate ground that gives the certainty to the soul. And that will appear,

I. In regard the gift of the Lord Christ, cannot be first received of a soul
by Faith as a soul is gracious, or by the soul being considered under the
notion of a soul that has any Graces, or Holy Habits, or Qualities inherent in
him. But the first sight of the gift of the Lord Christ to the soul formerly
dark about his union, must have respect and relation to the necessities of the
soul, to whom the gift is manifested, else the gift cannot be closed with, as
suitable; Thence it must be manifested as a gift of a Mediator, to a poor
despicable, and desperate Rebellious Wretch, against the highest Majesty of
Heaven, to mediate with the great Commander of Heaven, for pardon to such a
poor despicable Rebel. It must be received as a gift of a days man, that may
lay his hand upon both partaies, upon God and the Soul as at difference, to
make up an union. Whence it is that the Apostle in opening the work of
receiving the Lord Christ by Faith, considers the soul under the notion of an
Ungodly one in the receiving of it. Romans 4, 5.

II. It cannot be that the discovery of graces should be first in order to such
a soul, in regard, the first manifestation of the gift of God to the soul, that
has hitherto set in darkness, must be a manifestation unto his Faith of the
gift of those very graces: And the graces themselves considered as given, are
no proper objects of Faith, and therefore can give no assurance unto Faith: But
it is only the promise wherein the Lord holds forth his free will, both to
Christ and those Graces, that must be the only ground from whence the soul can
receive the evidence unto his Faith of his union with Christ. Thus you have the
first question opened, the ground from whence souls receive the evidence of
their union.

The second thing to be opened is the means by which. What means the Lord uses
to make the promise efficacious for this end, to give the soul assurance of his
union with Christ. But before we come to answer this question, there is another
question to be opened, that arises from the former.

Quest. But says the Soul, can the Lords absolute promise, be the ground from
whence the Soul can have the first infallible evidence of his union, seeing
there is no absolute promise of God, wherein he discovers his own will to
accept any one particular soul into union with the Lord Christ? All the
absolute promises, says the Soul, are made to the Church and people of God;
But the Lord in those absolute promises does not reveal the particular Souls
that are his own: Therefore, How can I, or any other know, that I am the
particular soul in the promise, there being no particularizing of any soul?

Answ. For Answer to this Question, I shall first open what is generally
granted by every soul, by way of premise, for the right understanding of
things. And then lay down two Conclusions for the full answer of the question.

Pre. 1. First it is generally granted by all, that it is by virtue of the
Lords absolute promise of accepting souls into union with Christ, that souls
are united unto Christ. The absolute promise alone is like Jacobs Ladder, it is
the Heavenly Ladder upon which the Lord Christ alone comes down into any soul.
It is the absolute promise that is the precious Golden Chain, that binds the
Lord Christ to the soul, and the soul to Christ: That the precious Marriage
knot of union is only knit by that Chain of the absolute promise, This will
appear in three things.

1. If it were not by virtue of the absolute promise that the soul were united
to Jesus Christ, then the absolute good will unto souls were not the primary,
or first ground of union between Jesus Christ and souls. For the promises are
nothing else but the Revelations, or Discoveries, of the Lords good will
concerning souls: Now thence it is, if it were not by virtue of the Lords
absolute promise that souls were united, then it were not primarily and in the
first place, by virtue of the determination of the Lords will from eternity;
And so union with Christ should not be a mercy flowing down from the Fountain
of the Lords elective love; but rather the first and primary cause of the souls
union, should be from something in the soul it self, and so quite contrary to
the stream of Scripture truth; it should be of him that wills and runs,
and not of him that shows mercy.

2. If it were not so, then there must be some grace acceptable to God,
presupposed to be in the soul before union with Christ, unto which the Lord
has made some promise of union with him. It must be either by virtue of a
conditional promise, or an absolute promise, that the soul is united: Now if by
virtue of any condition, or holy quality in the soul, then such a holy quality
must be conceived to be in the soul, as is acceptable unto God: Now if it were
possible there could be any holy quality conceived to be in the soul,
acceptable to God before union, then either the soul must receive some holy
quality, that flows not from Jesus Christ, and so deny the fullness of Christ,
which is contrary to that in Col. 1.9. and John 1.16: Or else we should
conclude that some graces, some holy qualities, should be conveyed into the
soul, that should not be conveyed by virtue of the souls union, and so there
should be a Communication of the graces of Christ unto the soul, when the soul
still remains a stranger to God.

3. If there were the least quality acceptable unto God before union, then the
soul should be a beloved one of God out of Jesus Christ, and it should not be
by his dearly beloved Son alone in whom the Lord is well pleased.

Pre. 2. That the first proper actings of Faith in union, are ever by, or in
the way of the application of those absolute promises unto their particular
souls. That will appear in two things.

1. If the first actings of Faith in union, were not by particular application
of those absolute promises; then the Devils Faith should hold equal proportion
to the Faith of souls united to Jesus Christ. The Devils themselves do as fully
believe the truth of all those precious absolute promises, as any united soul,
and do as fully expect the certain accomplishment of them unto the Church of
God.

2. Then should the souls dependence upon Jesus Christ, be without the sight of
the suitable ground for the dependence. The first act of Faith can have no
ground but the absolute promise of God, in regard all those graces that are
described in any word of God, that should seem to be conditional promises,
those are not discovered at the first actings of Faith, and therefore unless
the absolute promises prove a particular ground to the souls apprehension, that
the soul in that absolute promise sees the Lord particularly tendering himself
to accept it into union with Jesus Christ, there should be no ground for that
dependence.

Prem. 3. It is also granted, that this particular application of the absolute
promise unto Souls, does go before the actings of any other holy quality in
those Souls. Faith being the first habit in order of nature (though not in
time) that is infused into any Soul; It does also in order of nature work and
manifest it self in acting, before any other habit whatsoever; And therefore
the acting of Faith in that particular application of the absolute promise,
must be before there be a manifestation of any other holy quality to be in the
Soul. And thence in regard this particular way in applying these absolute
promises, is without any holy quality in Souls, there can be no other word but
only the Lords absolute promise, to be the ground from whence this faith can
arise. This is generally granted of all; And from thence take notice of these
two things.

1. That the absolute general promise of God, that is holden forth as made unto
the people and Church of God alone, that is a particular ground of the Souls
first confidence, or adherence unto Jesus Christ.

2. That the general absolute promise of God, does speak particularly to every
Soul who attains any right or interest in it.

Secondly, I shall answer affirmatively, That it is a particular ground of
Faith of assurance, or a particular evidence to assure a Souls Faith that he is
united unto Jesus Christ. And that I shall open in two Conclusions.

Conclu. 1. The absolute promise is sufficient to reveal to a Souls Faith a
certainty of his Union, in regard there is an equivalency in the absolute
promise of God that runs to all Souls, to any particular promise that could be
made: Paul manifested as full a certainty of his acceptance into Union with
Christ, to be holden forth to him in the absolute promise, as if he had had a
particular word from heaven, saying, thou Paul shall be accepted into union
with Christ: In 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance: What is that? That Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners. Here is as far off a remote promise as can be, That Jesus Christ came
into the World to save Sinners; What then? Of whom I am chief: As if he should
have said, The Lord Christ came to save me; where he makes Christ sent into the
world particularly to save his Soul: And certainly the same promise, were able
to give the Soul that particular certainty that Paul did receive, did the same
light appear from the promise as did to Paul. But that there is such an
equivalency in what the absolute promise can give to testify union, to what a
particular promise gives, appear in two things.

1. In the latitude, or largeness, and extensiveness of the promise it self.
The promises that are of absolute mercies, and are declared to be the absolute
will of God concerning his peoples Souls, they are all propounded as indefinite
propositions, that is, without any certain bounds: In that promise, Christ came
into the World to save Sinners; there is no bounds set to it, neither this kind
of Sinner, or that kind of Sinner, such as are thus and thus rebellious, but
Sinners. So Mark 16.15. Go Preach the Gospel to every creature: Preach the
Gospel, What is that? Preach the glad tidings of Salvation. It is as much as if
Jesus Christ should have said, Go and tell every Soul, my Father is willing to
accept their rebellious souls into union with my self: And unless this be
receive tendered, the Gospel is not Preached; Exclude the declaring of Gods
will to every particular Soul, to receive him into Union with the Lord Christ,
and you exclude the Preaching of the Gospel: And that is the reason the Angel,
Luke 2.10. when he brings the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, says, I bring glad
tidings; To whom, To such a Nation or People? No, I bring glad tidings to all
people: There is no other bounds set but the World it self. If a man comes
under the notion of a creature, he comes under the notion of the promise, he
cannot say but it is the will of God to receive his Soul into Union, if he will
embrace the Lord Christ.

2. It appears in regard of the expresness of the command to every Soul
particularly to apply the promise, 1 John 3.23. This is the command of God,
that ye believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ: And again, this is the
Word of God, that ye believe in the name of Jesus Christ. Now believing can
contain but two things: Either a giving credit to the truth of what the promise
holds forth; And surely this cannot be meant, for the Devils themselves believe
as much: Or else a receiving unto their particular Souls, what the Lord there
tenders in Christ Jesus; and if you observe it, the Scripture phrase generally
holds forth believing in this sense. Thence it is that believing and receiving
in Scripture are put both for one, 1 John 1.12. Now that the extent of this
command of believing reaches thus far, to a particular application of those
absolute promises to themselves, will be cleared by two particulars.

1. In regard all unbelief and the fruits of it, is vertually and eminently
forbidden in this command of believing. When any positive duty is enjoined by
God, the contrary must needs be forbidden by the same law vertually, and all
the evil consequences of whatever is contrary to the duty enjoined. Now
believing being enjoined, virtually unbelief and all the fruits of unbelief are
forbidden. The fruits of unbelief is doubting, and so all doubting of the Lords
will to fulfill his promise, of accepting the soul into union with the Lord
Jesus, that is content and willing to receive Christ into Union with him, all
this doubting of the will of God is there forbidden vertually, in regard it is
contrary to the duty commanded, because it proceeds from the root, unbelief,
which is directly contrary unto faith.

2. In regard the strength of Faith must needs be the extent of the command.
The Soul is to give credit to the Lord, as a thing unquestionably certain, that
the Lord is willing to receive his poor loveless Soul into Union with the Lord
Christ. So that in effect the Lord does in that command to the Soul to believe,
enjoin the Soul to receive fullness of assurance from the very promise, that the
Lord is willing to receive his Soul into union with the Lord Christ. Yet do not
mistake me, I do not say the command is of such an extent, that it does
expressly command every one to believe that he is one in Christ, for then the
promise should command him to believe a lie, in regard the greatest number are
at enmity: But the extent of the command is to assure the Soul, of the Lords
willingness to receive him into union with Jesus Christ, if he be willing to
receive him: And this the Lord enjoins the most rebellious wretches wherever
the Gospel comes; the first command to such rebellious Souls is to believe that
God is willing to receive their rebellious Souls into union with himself.

Conclu. 2. There is as great a fullness of sufficiency in the absolute promise,
to assure the soul of his union with Christ, as there is to give the soul a
ground of particular dependence upon God in Christ for union. This will appear
in two particulars.

1. In regard confidence of the particularity of the promise, is of the Essence
and Being, both of faith of dependence, and faith of assurance. Take away
particular confidence of the Lords particular will, toward such a particular
soul, to receive his soul into union with Christ, and you destroy the faith of
adherence: Take away the particular confidence, and there remains nothing but a
bare general belief of the truth of the promise of God as it is tendered.

2. Both the confidence in the says of dependence, and faith of assurance, are
of one and the same kind. Though indeed that the confidence that the soul has,
when he once acts faith by way of assurance differs gradually, that is, in many
degrees from the faith of dependence and adherence, yet they are both of one
and the same kind, they are both substantially the same; They are but a
confidence of the Lords willingness to take his soul into union with Christ, he
receiving of him: Only this differs in a circumstance of time; That faith of
assurance acts that confidence by way of the time past, that the Lord out of
his good will alone has received his soul into union with Christ; whereas that
confidence that is in the act of dependence or adherence, may work thus, that
it is the Lords will now at this present to receive my soul into union with
Jesus Christ. Now all men grant that the absolute promise is sufficient to
build says of adherence, or dependence upon; otherwise you must take away all
grounds upon which a soul must believe, and you must leave a soul under a
command to believe, having no bottom upon which to set his faith.

We shall now proceed to the opening of the second question, and that is,

Quest. 2. By what means does a soul receive the infallible evidences of his
union? It has been determined, that the absolute promise of God, to give the
Lord Jesus to every poor despicable, loveless, forlorn soul that will receive
him, is the only unchangable ground, from whence the soul does first gather the
certain infallible evidence of his union. But now says the soul, By what means
is the promise made efficacious for this end? How comes it to pass that the
bare absolute promise of God does manifest to the particular soul that he is
united to Jesus Christ?

For the answer of this question, I must first premise diverse things for the
right understanding of it, and then lay down the answer in positive Conclusions.

Prem. 1. First, I must premise, That the absolute promise of God has a
fullness of sufficiency in it self, to discover at all times, to every
particular soul, in what condition soever, under what Temptations, in what
clouds and darkness soever, that the will of God is to receive his particular
soul into union with Jesus Christ; And that he should accept the good will of
God, and receive Jesus Christ into union with himself. Though indeed the
promise works this effect very rarely in souls, yet at all times the promise
has that sufficiency in it self, and there is no addition made by God to the
promise, neither by word, nor light, neither by way of particularizing souls,
nor by way of comprehensiveness to make it conclude souls: Neither does the
soul build upon any thing added to the promise; But the promise it self is the
absolute ground, that the soul always builds upon in receiving evidence from
it. Now because the promise it self does not at every time, and in every
condition, manifest unto that soul thus his union with Christ, to whom it has
evidenced his union, therefore think some souls, it is something superadded to
the promise: And some again are ready on the other side, to conclude from the
position it self, that the absolute promise should give the soul assurance of
Jesus Christ, That it must be from some revelation of God that is added to the
promise; A kind of revelation of the souls name to be written in the book of
life; and so the soul should not build upon the word of God, but upon some
superadded revelation. But neither of both these must be conceived; But the
promise has always a sufficiency of light to discover to the soul the Lords
willingness to receive him into union with himself. Only this promise of God,
or discovery of the will of God, to be laid as the Tower of the souls
assurance, must have a wise Master builder to lay it: It is with this
foundation as with other foundations, when the timber is hewed and squared fit
for a groundsel, it must have a wise Master builder to lay it for a foundation:
So the soul must have instruction from the wisdom of God to lay this
foundation, so as he may see his assurance stand firm upon it.

Prem. 2. Secondly, I must premise, That whatsoever is employed by God in a
subordination to his will, for the effecting any end that is intended by God,
that is the means of producing or effecting such an end. This I premise that we
may understand what is meant by means; when we say by what means is this
promise made sufficient to give the soul evidence of his union; God is to be
considered as the primary efficient cause, upon which all things have their
dependence: And all things employed by God for effecting that, are inferior
causes, and in respect of God himself they are called means; though in respect
of created causes, some such inferior causes may be called a principal cause.
So that whatever is employed by God, for effecting this end of assuring the
soul of union with Christ, that is the means by which the promise is made
effectual for that use.

Prem. 3. Thirdly, I must premise, That there are diverse and various means that
do commonly concur together, for effecting one and the same end, though they
have diverse relations unto the end, and work diversely for the effecting of it.
There may be diverse kinds of influences, from diverse things, to one and the
same end; And whatever has influence into the end, comes under the notion of a
cause, and in respect of the principal cause, it comes under the notion of a
means. So in this great matter of evidencing to a soul its union with Christ,
there are many things that may and do concur, for effecting that blessed end in
the soul, for enabling the soul to draw from the absolute promise, the
conclusion, that he is united to Jesus Christ; though those various things work
in a various manner, and one have influence into the end, and another have
another influence, and so be looked at as diverse in relation to this great
matter of assurance.

Prem. 4. Fourthly, I must premise, That there are four or five distinctions
about causes or means, that are necessary to be understood for understanding
this question, By what means the promise is made sufficient, to evidence to the
soul his union with Christ?

1. The soul must understand the distinction between the Principal instrumental
efficient cause, and the less principal instrumental efficient cause. Though
there be properly unto every action but one principal cause, yet in respect of
instrumental causes, there may be many things that may have the respect of
efficient causes, for the producing one and the same thing; though there can be
but one principal instrumental efficient neither, unless it be coordinate.

2. You must understand, That the means or instrumental efficient causes, are
divided again into Natural instrumental efficient causes, and Artificial. The
natural instrumental cause is that which works by its own natural inbred
virtue, that is, by a proper disposition of its own, and by a power that it
has in it self, without dependence upon any created cause, though nothing that
is an instrumental cause can be said to work by his own virtue, in respect of
the principal efficient cause.

3. You must understand, That instrumental efficient causes are to be
considered again, either as those that are mediate causes, or immediate causes.
The mediate efficient cause is that which contributes something to the
producing the effect; That is, that which has some influence into the great
effect of the souls assurance, either directly, or indirectly, though it be but
a far off, there being many immediate things that come between, that make up
the souls evidence. The immediate cause, that is the cause that works so
immediately that nothing intervenes between the effect, which is the souls
assurance and the cause. That which has the last stroke as I may say, that is
properly the immediate cause: That which being once effected in the soul, the
soul does immediately, and without intermission of time, draw the conclusion
that he is united to Jesus Christ, that is the immediate efficient cause.

4. Instrumental causes are such as either solitary efficient causes, or
combined efficient causes. That is, such causes as work by themselves, without
others to produce such an effect; Or else such as work by other causes not
without respect: There is an efficient cause alone, and a concause with
another, and both contribute assistance to the same thing.

5. These efficient instrumental causes are divided again into subordinate
causes, or coordinate causes. That is, such instrumental causes, that though
they work together, are in a subordination to one instrumental efficient cause.
Or else such as produce an equal power jointly together for the effecting the
same thing. Its then that efficient instrumental causes are subordinate, when
one has the supremacy, and all have dependence upon one, though many things
have influence into the same thing. And they are coordinate when they have
equal dependence one upon another, one not being able to work without another.
Now all these distinctions of causes must be understood, for a right clear
understanding of this question, By what means a soul does attain the evidence
of his union? Now these things being premised, I shall lay down the answer in
positive conclusions.

Answ. 1. First, I answer directly to the question, That there are diverse
mediate and less principal causes, that do afar off help something for the
evidencing to the soul his union with Christ from the absolute promise. There
are diverse such causes, that are partly artificial, and partly natural: Of this
nature I may reckon up diverse; As the ministry of the word, in the opening and
clearing the nature, the largeness of the extent, and the excellency of those
absolute promises to a soul. Likewise the dispensation of the Sacraments,
either of Baptism or the Lords Supper: The element of water in one, being
appointed by Christ himself in the use of it, to discover the souls partaking
of the death of Christ, by being buried in the water; And to signify the souls
partaking of the resurrection of Christ by rising out of the water, and so
consequently communion with Christ in all the effects of his death and life;
Consequently sealing to the soul that Jesus Christ died for him, and lived for
him. So the other Sacrament, the elements of bread and wine, being appointed by
Jesus Christ to signify to the soul the breaking of the body of Christ, and
the effusion of his blood; And the application of those elements to him, being
elements by which his body shall be refreshed and cleared, being appointed to
show the life and nourishment of his soul to be from Christ alone: These
Sacraments in their right institution, may be instrumental immediate causes
afar off, to contribute to a soul something of his union. So Prayer,
Meditation, and Christian Conference, enquiring into the freeness of the
promise, and the latitude of it; and every spiritual ordinance of God, wherein
the promises of God are brought to any remembrance, may contribute something to
the Souls union with Christ, which are properly artificial causes, not natural,
but of a mixed kind, partly artificial and partly natural. And all these being
in this kind instrumental efficient causes, they may be said to be means by
which the Soul attains the infallible evidence of his union: And it is very
seldom (if I may not say never) but God uses one of these means, to clear up
to the Soul his union with Christ in the absolute promise.

Answ. 2. Secondly I answer, That it is commonly ^^^eived that there are three
more immediate joint concurring causes, to make up to the soul the evidence of
his union from the promise. Though those forenamed means do work Instrumentally
for that end, yet there are some that do work more inwardly, that are commonly
received to be joint causes, working for one and the same end, I mean for
assuring the soul from the promise, of his union with Christ. As

I. The Irradiation, I mean the bright shining light of Faith. That is set up
as a precious Heavenly Lamp, that shines so clearly into the dark soul, that it
makes the soul see in a sensible way that he does receive the promise, and
embrace the Lord Jesus given in that promise. Faith gives the soul such a
feeling experience, that it does receive the promise of Jesus Christ given even
when it is receiving of it, his soul graspeth Jesus Christ so powerfully, as he
feels his arms grasp Jesus Christ in the promise.

II. There is the Conclusion renewed conscience draws, by the strength of
spiritual and experimental reasons, that the promise is unto his particular
soul, and that he is united unto Jesus Christ, as appears from the promise. The
truth of it appears from Romans 8.16. The Spirit of God bears Witness with our
Spirits, that we are Sons of God: There is a two fold Witness, the Witness of
the Spirit, and our Spirits, which can be nothing but the renewed understanding
or conscience that gives the Testimony; and both of them Witness at one and the
same time, and they are both but witnessing one and the same thing, and helping
the soul to draw one and the same Conclusion at the same time.

III. There is the manifestation of the true inseparable effects of union with
Jesus Christ to be in the soul. That is, the souls beholding the very juice of
Jesus Christ the precious Vine, flowing down into his soul, as into one of his
Branches. The soul finding the same graces that are in Jesus Christ the head,
drop down into his Bosom: So that the soul concludes he must needs be a Member
to the Head, having influences from it.

Now there are three things to be opened about this, which are concauses which
may clear up to our understandings what may be safely holden forth in these.

1. That none of these, neither the shining of Faith, nor the Testimony of
Conscience, nor the inseparable effects of union, are concauses in evidencing
unto the soul, the Will of God in taking the particular soul into union with
Christ. The promise it self affords this light to the soul, by the sole aid of
the Spirit of God, without respect to any Dispositions, Inclinations, believing
qualifications, whatever can be imagined.

2. These three are only concauses in producing to the soul the effects of that
first evidence. That is, in producing in the soul the conclusion of his own
union with Jesus Christ, that does arise from the first evidence of the Lords
will, to take his soul into union with Christ.

3. That it is only the first of those three things, which is the shining forth
of the light of Faith, that's properly a coadjoyning cause, in the making up a
souls evidence from the promise of his union with Christ. Those two latter do
follow after the first clear evidence in the soul of his union with Christ from
the promise, and so cannot come in as joint concauses to make up the evidence.

Answ. 3. Thirdly I answer, There are indeed three joint concurring causes, for
the making up this union to the souls Faith, of its union with Christ: And that
is the Spirit of God, the light of Faith, and the Witness of Conscience, taking
the Witness of Conscience only for an experimental knowledge, that soul does
receive, and has received the Lord Jesus, freely given by God to be one with
the soul, so that Conscience does only answer as it were like a precious Echo
to the soul, the voice of the Spirit of God to the soul. The Spirit of God
revealing the light of the promise, or applying the promise to the soul; The
light of Faith showing the souls receiving of the promise; And the voice of
Conscience consenting to the voice of the Spirit of God, or giving the Echo to
the voice of the Spirit of God in the soul.

Answ. 4. Fourthly I answer, There be some that may be said to be concauses, or
join concurring causes, in the evidencing to the soul his union in the promise:
Yet they are all but subordinate causes, to one prime principal cause which is
the Spirit of God. Should I take these three which some have conceived to be
joint concurring causes, which is the light of Faith, the Witness of
Conscience, and the manifestation of the inseparable effects of union, yet all
these come in a way of Subordination to the principal, Efficient, Instrumental
cause, which is the Spirit of God; As you may see if you look upon the light of
Faith, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us
of God. You see the internal Vision, or internal Light they have of any grace,
of any gifts, is by the light of the Spirit of God put upon those gifts, or put
into the soul to discern those gifts. So likewise of the second, the Testimony
of Conscience, whatever Testimony Conscience would give, be it either through
practical, or experimental reason drawn from the Word of God; Or be it only to
bear Witness to the souls own act, and so taken only for a sense of the souls
own beleiving; yet also this Witness of Conscience has its Subordination to
that principal cause, the Spirit of God; As Romans 9.1. When the Conscience is
said to bear Witness of any good act in the soul, its said to be through the
Spirit: And indead the Conscience being altogether corrupt naturally, the habit
of Spiritual Light and discerning by which it Judge, being only from the Spirit
of God; Thence it must necessarily follow also, that every acting of that
renewed light that the Spirit of God has infused into the Conscience must be
by the Spirit of God: For out of all question, the acting of every habit of
grace received, does as well depend upon the Spirit of God, as the first
infusion of it into the soul did. And if you look upon the third also, which is
the manifestation of all the effects of union that comes under that in 1 Cor.
2.12. All gifts: All gifts of grace through union, must be discerned through
the Spirit of Wisdom in the heart, inabling souls to discern the things freely
given them of God; As the Apostle does well Illustrate it, v. 11, comparing the
light that the Spirit which they have received gives to them to discern the
gift of God, to the light of Conscience to discern what is in man: What man
knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man which is in him? Even so
the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: Whereby he makes it
evident, that the use of the Spirit of God dwelling in the soul, is the same
for the discovering of all the workings of the soul to it, as the use of the
Spirit of a man is, to discover to him the heart of man as man.

Answ. 5. Fifthly I answer, That the Spirit of God alone is the principal most
immediate and natural Instrumental efficient cause, of the promises evidencing
to the soul his union with Christ. Though you see there be diverse causes that
may afar off have some kind of influence, yet no Influences further then they
have a dependence upon the Spirit of God, working in them and through them: And
however the sight of Faith, and the Testimony of Conscience, may in some
measure be said to be concauses, yet the Instrumental efficient cause, that
has the Alpha and Omega, that which strikes the first and last stroke, that
assures the souls Faith that he is united to Christ, that's the Spirit of God
alone; Its that which set on work all other means for that end.

Now that the Spirit of God alone is this principal, efficient, instrumental
cause, I shall clear to you by some demonstrations.

I. It appears by the general office of the Spirit of God. The Spirit is
designed to that office alone to reveal truths, or to guide souls into all
truth, as appears John 16.43. When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth, [and observe why] for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatever he shall hear that shall he speak: He shall have a Commission from
Heaven as it were, to lead them into all truth. Now in this guiding the soul
into all truth, there are two offices that the Spirit of God is designed to:
First, the making known of truth to the soul. Secondly, the application of
truth made known.

First, The making known of truth to the soul. It is the office of the Spirit
to cast in the precious principles of Spiritual knowledge, whereby the soul
should be any ways apprehensive of any truth.

This making known of truth to the soul consists in three things.

1. In the communicating of Spiritual light to the soul, or in giving the soul
a Spiritual eye of discerning. We are all like poor Bartimeus, born Blind; The
Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit, for they are Foolishness to
him, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned; 1 Cor.
2.14; Now it is the office of the Spirit alone to make a precious Eye Salve,
that may restore spiritual sight to the soul, and make it capable of discerning
truth; Therefore it is said in 1 John 5.20. In Conversion we are said to
receive a mind to know him, that is a disposition to know him, an understanding
capable of knowing him.

2. The Spirit presents truth to that Spiritual eye t^^t that he has
communicated. Therefore in Ephesians. 1.17. The Apostle prays for a spirit of wisdom
and revelation: Not only a spirit of wisdom, that is, an internal spiritual
habit of spiritual light to discern truth; But a spirit of revelation also,
that is, of manifesting the truth unto the Soul.

3. In making known spiritual truths, the spirit of God removes all impediments
that do prevent the discerning of truths presented. Though the spirit gives
eyes, and presents truths, there may be such impediments between the Souls eyes
and the truth, that may prevent the Souls discerning, There may be some films,
or some corrupt humors, some film of lust or selfishness that may hinder the
sight of the truth.

Secondly, The Spirit makes application of the truth known. The first truth
that God discovers to a Soul, which is his own sin, his guilt, and danger of
condemnation, must as well be applied to the Soul by the Spirit, as revealed to
the Soul by the Spirit: Therefore John 16.8. The office of the Spirit is to
reprove, or convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; to
make it clear to the conscience of every particular man that there is a
judgment for him, that he is one of those sinful wretches that believe not.
That the Spirit also must make this application, will appear in two things.

1. In that there should be an equal and proportionable sense, of the effects
of Sin and Wrath, according to the measure and degree of every sinners
understanding sin and wrath. If it were not the Spirit alone, that did make
application of the truth made known, it could not be then, but so far as every
Soul did understand what Sin and Wrath was, the effect both of the knowledge of
Sin and of Wrath would remain in such a heart: But alas experience enough
teaches us, that many sinners that have large knowledge of the nature of sin,
and of the consequences and effects of sin, which is Wrath and condemnation,
yet have not the knowledge of this effect in the least manner. The effects are
two: Condemnation in the Souls Judgment; Horror and anguish in the sense of
condemnation. He that understands sin rightly in the least degree, understand
it to be damnable, therefore the effects of it must needs be condemnation in
his own Soul: But nothing is more common than for men to confess every sin to
be damnable, and to confess themselves to be sinners, but far off from drawing
a sentence of condemnation; They will be sure enough of the conclusion, though
they conclude sin to be damnable, yet they will not conclude themselves to be
in a damnable condition. So if you look upon the second effect that follows the
knowledge of Sin, and that is Horror and Sense of the dreadfulness of that
Condemnation: Though it may be sometimes a soul goes so far, as almost to
conclude it self to be in a Damned condition, yet far is it from letting it
take effect upon his heart, so as to lie heavy upon his heart as an intolerable
burden. Therefore it is plain, not only the revealing of the truth, but the
application of truth revealed, depends upon the Spirit of God: The Spirit must
say, here is thy Sin, and yonder is the Pit of Misery, before a man can apply
those truths to his own soul.

2. It must be the Spirit of God that makes the application^, in regard the
Terrors and Horrors for Sin are appropriated by the Scripture to the Spirit,
and to his work alone. Whence you shall see Romans 8.16. Fear is said to be the
work of the Spirit of Bondage: You have not received the Spirit of Bondage
again to fear, that is, the Spirit of Bondage again working Fear, and Anguish,
and Vexation of soul in respect of the guilt of Sin.

2. The Spirit alone must be the principal efficient cause in evidencing to the
soul from the promise his union with Christ, in regard of the Spirits
particular and peculiar office that it is appointed unto by Jesus Christ. The
Spirit has its office, and that is to Comfort and Refresh the souls of the
peculiar ones of Christ. Hence the name of the Spirit is, the Comforter, John
16.17. Now this being the peculiar office of the Spirit of Christ, to comfort
those that are the the Members of Jesus Christ, it must needs be, that that
must needs be the principal Instrumental efficient cause in revealing to the
soul his union with Christ in the promise. And that will appear in two things.

1. In regard the Word of promise alone is the ground of all Consolation unto
the souls Faith. Now the Spirit should give souls but small comfort, could he
not give them Comfort unto Faith; did not the Lord reveal the everlasting
Inheritance to be theirs, everlasting Union and Communion with Christ to be
theirs, and then let them see Holiness in them to be a drop of the Inheritance,
that the soul shall feed it self with to Eternity; the Comfort were but small.

2. In regard it must be by appropriating the thing promised, that the promise
is able to afford any Consolation. There must be two things for the soul to
receive comfort from the promise: Propriety, and Security. The Soul must see
propriety, or else no love, at least no satisfaction to the heart, and while
there is not the satiating of the soul there is no comfort. Comfort is the
content the soul has in beholding his desired satisfaction: Now whatever the
soul sees, it satisfies not till it has a propriety in it. And till there be
a security in that propriety, he is not satisfied, fears and doubts arise of
losing it again. Could the soul see union with Christ, unless the voice say
thus, I am thine, and will never separate from thee, it would give no true
comfort: The soul would be more afraid of the loss of that happiness, then
rejoice in the present good enjoyed.

3. It will appear in regard there is nothing sufficient to evidence to the
soul his union from the promise satisfyingly but the Spirit. There must be an
equal authority in the revelation to the soul of his union with Christ, to that
that was in the revelation to the soul of his Sin, Guilt, and Subjection to
everlasting Damnation, before the soul can receive any satisfaction, or any
true freedom from those dreadful Horrors that possess a soul, upon the true
revelation of his dreadful estate of Sin, Woe, and Misery. Now its apparent that
it is the Spirit of God alone, that reveals with Power, the Condemnation of the
soul through his own Sin: And therefore unless the Spirit of God should come
again with another voice, which has as great a power to pronounce the
absolution of the soul from Condemnation through Christ, the soul could never
receive any satisfaction, nor be free from receiving the sentence of
Condemnation in himself.

IIII. The Scripture it self testifies that it is the proper, peculiar office
of the Spirit: I need quote only that one place, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears Witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God. When he would
rise to the highest evidence, he rises to that, the Spirit of God Witnesses
with our Spirit. There are two or three things in the Text that will clear it,
that it must be meant the special operation of the Spirit it self, and that by
a special peculiar application of the promise.

1. It is said it is the Spirit it self. Intimating it is not the gifts of the
Spirit, nor the graces of the Spirit, as sometimes the Spirit is taken in
Scripture: But in a way of distinction from graces, he puts the Emphasis upon
it; the Spirit it self; that Witnesses with our Spirits; Intimating that it is
the person of the Spirit, whose office it is thus to Witness to the soul.

2. He puts it as a distinct Witness, it Witnesses with our Spirits.

3. It is by particular application: It Witnesses to our Spirits that we are
the Sons of God. It Witnesses Adoption: Now we cannot believe our Adoption
without the Witness of the Spirit, and that from a Word; and therefore that can
be nothing but the application of the promise to the soul. Thus you have the
second question opened, that is, by what means a soul does receive the
infallible evidence of his union. There is a third question.

Quest. 3. In what manner does the soul receive the first infallible evidence
of his union with Christ? It was concluded from the first Question, That the
absolute promise of God receive any Poor, Despicable, Loveless, Forlorn Soul
that would, into Union with the Lord Jesus, was the first infallible ground of
the Souls evividence of union: And it was eoncluded that there were various
means that did concur together, to enable the soul to receive his union from
this absolute promise; Though there was one immediate means that works in the
promise, assuring the Souls Faith in the promise that he is united to Jesus
Christ. The Question now remains, how this means does produce this end? Or how
the Lord works in and through these means to make the absolute promise
efficacious and effectual to manifest to the poor doubting soul his Union with
Christ?

For the opening of it I must premise something for the right understanding of
it, and then lay down the answer to it in positive conclusions.

Prem. 1. First I must premise, That all the Influences that any means
whatsoever do contribute unto the evidencing unto any doubtful soul, his union
with the Lord Christ, only produce the same kind of effects, in that soul that
does receive the evidence of his union with Christ. As suppose it is through
seeking the face of God in prayer, that the Lord does at one time bring to mind
the absolute promise, in the clearness of light it holds forth, and makes
application of that promise for the satisfying of the soul about his union with
Christ. And suppose another time the Ministry of the Word is appointed by God
for the effecting of this end; Still there is the same effect begotten by these
various means, whereby the soul is enabled to receive the evidence of his union.

Prem. 2. Secondly I shall premise, That all the Influences that any means do
contribute, for the evidencing from the promise the souls union with Christ,
are comprehended under the Influences of the spirit of God alone. So that the
efficacy of the word, or of prayer, or any ordinance toward the effecting of
that blessed end in the soul, may properly be said to be the efficacy of the
spirit of God, in regard those means contribute not the least in themselves
(otherwise than the spirit of God imploys them as his own instruments) for
assuring to the soul his faith in Christ from the promise.

Prem. 3. Thirdly, I must premise, That in regard of the manner of the working
of the spirit of God, for assuring the souls faith of union in the promise,
that the spirit of God has not limited himself to any constant particular
order, in assuring unto souls their union with Christ from the promise. The
spirit of God is truly the spiritual wind, that blows where, and how it
lists. There is no limitation propounded in the word, whereby it should
appear the spirit should bind himself, to work in the same order in all souls,
to evidence to them their union with Christ. And in like manner the spirit of
God has set no bounds to himself, of any degree of those effects that it does
produce to souls, whereby the promise is made efficacious, to assure to the
souls faith his union with Christ, but it works variously in the heart.

Prem. 4. Fourthly, I must premise, that the explication of the manner of the
Spirits working in assuring to the Soul from the promise his union with Christ,
to the full and life of it, is altogether unspeakable and inexpressable. Surely
that in 1 Cor. 2.9. is meant only of those Gospel joys that are the effects of
this union, that eye never saw, nor ear never heard, neither did it ever enter
into the heart of man (as man) to conceive the things that God has laid up for
those that love him. And likewise well may that place be applied, that no man
knows the mind of God but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. Neither does any
man or Angel know those secret discoveries of the Lords mind, and opening of
his heart to the Souls Faith, whom he does assure from the promise that he is
united unto Christ.

Prem. 5. There is a fifth premise, Though the Spirit of God neither binds it
self in order nor degree, nor is expressed to the life of it in the soul, when
he does assure to the Souls faith his union with Christ, yet the Spirit keeps
its constant order in respect of the effects it does produce in the Soul, to
whose faith it does assure his union with Christ from the promise. The effects
of the spirit are such in every Soul in this work, that they have such a near
relation to the assurance it self, that the soul receives from the promise,
that those effects are altogether unspeakable from that evidence of assurance.
If those effects perish or decay, the certainty and assurance the soul has
from the promise perish and decay: And if those effects do but live in the
soul, the evidence the soul has from the promise is maintained; they live
together, and die together.

Now these effects that the Spirit of God does produce in every soul, to whom
it does manifest his union with Christ from the promise, in some measure or
degree, are these five, (in the opening of which you shall receive the positive
answer to this great question.)

First, The Spirits Illumination.

Secondly, The Spirits Irradiation of the Gospel to the Soul.

Thirdly, The Spirits conviction of the Conscience in the Soul.

Fourthly, The Spirits excitation, or stirring up the habits of faith infused
into the Soul.

Fifthly, The Spirits Attestation, or witness unto the Soul, the Spirits
passing the determination finally upon the Souls whole estate. These five kinds
of effects are produced by the spirit from the promise, that the soul is united
to the Lord Jesus.

First, The manner in which this Spirit works, is by the Illumination of the
soul: The spirits Illumination.
You shall read Ephesians. 1.18. That the Apostle praying that the Ephesians might
understand the hope of their Calling [that is the great things hoped for, in
their calling, and the glorious privileges that they are called out to hope
and wait for] his prayer is that they might have the spirit of wisdom and
revelation; To what end? That the eyes of their understanding being enlightened,
they might know what is the hope of their calling. Observe it, The very first
spiritual work of the spirit of God to this end, is for spiritual enlightening
of the soul.

Now the work of the spirit in enlightening consists in three things.

First, In the infusion of greater degree of divine light into the soul.

Secondly, In the removal of all impediments from the eye of the soul, or from
the understanding of the soul, that should prevent the souls seeing, or
discerning the divine light infused.

Thirdly, In the quickening or stirring up, or putting into act and exercise,
the habits of divine light, that the spirit of God has infused.

First, this Illumination is an infusion of greater degrees of divine light
into the soul. Infusion of greater degrees of divine light.
The soul sits altogether in darkness, until the light of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ shines into it in some measure, Ephesians. 5.8. Now though
there be some habitual divine light infused by the spirit of God, into the
understanding of every soul that is united to Jesus Christ, yet there is after
union, a continual increase of that divine light: And therefore you shall see
Ephesians. 1.18. The Apostle prays, that the eyes of their understanding might be
enlightened: Now if you read the whole Chapter, you shall see, they were Saints,
that were enlightened already. So that this work of the spirits enlightening, is
the strengthening of the poor weak feeble pur-blind eye of the soul; and as we
partake of this divine light, so we grow up unto the perfect day, till we be
like Jesus Christ himself, in whom is light and no darkness at all.

The Second thing wherein this work consists is the removal of all impediments,
that do hinder the exercise of this divine light, Removal of impediments of
spiritual sight.
that is infused into the soul. By this spiritual light infused, the sight of
the eye may be strengthened, and yet through some distempered humors, a film
may grow over the eyes, that it is able to discern no object; some waterish
humor, or some mote or dust may prevent the seeing of the eye; There may be
some films of corruption, and of distempers, many malignant humors, (as I may
say) and rheumes that may gather together in the soul, and prevent that sight
we ha^^ (...) from the spirit: And therefore it is the next work of the spirit,
after the infusion of greater degrees of divine light, to pluck out of the
souls eye all the motes, to take off all the films that might hinder the souls
spiritual sight. Though at first we have received a faculty of seeing, we are
like the blind man that Christ cured, he saw men walking like trees, we see the
promise afar off.

There are two sorts of these hellish fogs, or mists or beams, that the Devil
chiefly labors to keep in the souls spiritual eye, to prevent the soul from a
right use of the divine spiritual light received; And both these must be
removed by the spirit of God, before there can be assurance in the soul by the
promise, that he is united to Jesus Christ.

There is first the hellish mist of the principles of darkness.

Secondly, the hellish mist of the darkness of corruption.

First, There is the hellish mist of the principles of darkness. These are like
the rheumes that distill from the brain into the eyes, whereby the sight is
prevented. Mist of the principles of darkness.
And the hellish mists of darkness of corruption, are like the distemper of
Melancholy or Choler, that have their original from the Liver, and so fume
into the souls eyes and prevent his sight. Or rather, the first is like to a
false colored glass, that makes all things look of the same color. It were
worth the while to consider of these principles of darkness; I shall name but
some of the chief of them.

The first principle of darkness is, That the Lord Christ is tendered to no
souls, but such as truly see, Principle of darkness.
and are truly sensible of their want of Christ. Says the soul, I see there is
a fullness in the Lord Jesus tendered, but says the soul it is only to such as
have a sight of their want of Christ, and groan heavily under that want, and I
know not whether ever I had a sense of my want of Christ; alas I have a
blockish heart, I am an ignorant wretch, I have a blind understanding, I dare
not trust my deceitful heart, I fear I never had a true fight of the want of
Christ, and therefore I dare not believe, (least I should presume) that Christ
is tendered unto me. This is a main principle of darkness; and that it is so, I
shall make appear briefly in two things.

1. Thy conceving the Lord Christ is tendered only to those that see the want of
Christ, must suppose either a true spiritual discerning to be communicated to
the soul, that does not come from Jesus Christ; Or else, that there may be a
light remaining in the soul from the relics of nature, which might let the
soul see his absolute indispensable necessity of Christ, or else he is undone
for ever. Now observe what a principle of darkness this is; It takes away the
peculiar office of Jesus Christ, which is, to open the blind eyes and give them
sight, Isa. 42.7. Rev. 3.18.

2. Thou must conceive, that the soul should have received Jesus Christ, before
he is tendered to him. Now no man dare own there should be a spiritual light in
the soul, before the Lord Christ heals his blindness; And no man can conceive
there should be the discerning of a spiritual object without a spiritual light;
The natural man receives not the things of the spirit, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And for the second,
that a man should receive Jesus Christ before he be tendered to him, this every
man abhors as a great absurdity. So that it is clear that this is a principle
of darkness, one of the motes the Devil would keep in the souls eyes. But it is
to be observed, there are two truths about this thing, that the Devil misses in
propounding it as a glass to the soul.

1. That there is no soul that receives Jesus Christ, but has a true sight,
and in some measure a true sense of his want of Christ, and of the
indispensable necessity of him. Though no true spiritual discerning can go
before the tender of Jesus Christ, yet thus far it is true, that at the same
instant the Lord allures the heart to accept of Jesus Christ into union, he
does beget a true spiritual sight of his absolute necessity of Christ.

2. There is a second truth that is narrowly missed here, and that is, That
this spiritual sight of the souls absolute indispensable want of Christ, is
communicated to the soul by the spirit of God, working through the offer of
Jesus Christ to the soul. Though some conceive there are some things that may
be called preparations, not begotten by the Gospel, but as they distinguish, by
the Law separate from the Gospel; yet they all grant, that no true grace,
either of light, sight, or sense, is conveyed any way but through the Gospel of
Christ, and is instrumentally an effect of the Gospel of Christ, Now that which
is an effect of the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ, must be an effect of the
tender of Christ to the soul, for that is the effect of the Gospel, to tender
Jesus Christ to the poor despicable loveless soul. Now that this is a principle
of darkness, I shall prove from Scripture. All those promises of Scripture that
offer Christ freely must be expunged, if this be a principle of light, as Isa.
55.1. Rev. 22.17. John 6.37. Where the invitation is free, whoever will let him
come; If he have but a will, let him be what he will.

A Second principle of darkness is, That there must be a sight of the actings
of the good will of God to the Soul, Principle of darkness.
before the Soul can believe any good will of God intended to the Soul in
Christ. That is thus, says the Soul, surely there must be a fight of some holy
disposition, there must be a beholding of some readiness to depart from sin,
and some casting off the principles of corruption, there must be a heart
seeking after God, and praying, and supplicating God, before the Soul may
conceive the Lord intends any good will to it in Christ. Now the darkness that
is in this principle will appear in opening four consequences flowing from it.

1. If any such holy disposition or inclination be to be discerned in a Soul
before he is to believe the Lords intending good will to his Soul in Christ,
then some particular effect of savor, or some acting of the Lords good will,
should be received by a Soul besides the Lords promise, and so should not be
conveyed through the receiving of the promise unto the Soul: And so
consequently the Lord should convey Grace into Souls out of and beyond the
bounds of his own Covenant of Grace.

2. If any of these actings of Grace were to be seen in the Soul, before it
believes the Lords good will, then should special Grace be conveyed to the
Soul, before engrafting into Christ. So that life should come down from Jesus
Christ into the Soul, and it should partake of the influences of Jesus Christ,
and of the Graces of Christ, before he receives Jesus Christ himself: And upon
this ground the Soul should bring forth good fruit, before it be engrafted into
Jesus Christ, and become a good stock or good tree; and so expressly contrary to
the Scripture, an evil tree should bring forth good fruit, a Soul in enmity to
God should bring forth holy dispositions.

3. If the Soul should behold the actings of the good will of God toward his
Soul, before he believes the Lord intends good will to his Soul in Christ, then
must the Soul conceive that he may see his own Soul beloved actually of God,
(even for the present) before the receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, to make
atonement or reconciliation to God for him. The Soul must then conceive that
there should be acts of friendship from God to the Soul, before the Lord Christ
should step in to make up the union of peace and agreement, before there should
be reconciliation.

4 If the Soul should of necessity see the actings of Grace in his Soul, before
he see the Lord intends good will to his Soul in Christ, then a divine word
should not be the primary or principal ground of the Souls faith, but rather
the Graces, or the actings of Gods good will discerned in the Soul, and
consequently all the foundation of such a believing Soul, should be merely in
the Soul it self. Now nothing is more directly contrary to the whole tenor of
Scripture, holding forth the ground of faith, than this. Abraham, who is set
forth as a pattern of Believers, his faith was only built upon the word of
God, giving authority to it, from the authority of the Speaker, Romans 4.20, 21.

A third Principle of Darkness is this, That it is Presumption for the soul to
believe, or to receive the promise of Jesus Christ, Principle of darkness.
so long as the soul sees nothing but rebellion, and Disobedience, and Enmity
in his heart against God. This is another Hellbred principle of darkness, that
smells much of the smoke that comes out of the bottomless pit, to darken the
light of the Lord Jesus. And that this is a principle of darkness, will appear
by some few considerations.

1. In regard there can be no rebellion, nor no enmity healed but by virtue
received from Jesus Christ. Sin receives its deadly wound only upon the Cross
of Jesus Christ, and it is by virtue of the application of the intendment of
the death of Jesus Christ, that any lust comes to be crucified in any Soul. He
alone is the Spiritual Physician that heals all distempers: He alone is the
spiritual Conqueror to subdue all the powers that lift up their heads against
the glorious Crown of Heaven. Now there can be none of this virtue received
from Jesus Christ, but only by fleeing unto Christ, and there is no fleeing
unto Christ but by believing. So that upon this consideration, that must needs
be a principle of darkness, that should keep off from the only healer of all
his rebellion, conceiving he may not receive him while he is rebellious, seeing
he can never be otherwise but rebellious, nor can ever have the actings of his
rebellion abated in a right way but by receiving of Jesus Christ.

2. The neglect of receiving the Lord Jesus revealed in the Gospel to the soul,
makes the Rebellion to be of a more Scarlet Die. The more gloriously the Lord
reveals his mind to a soul, the more dreadful is the Rebellion of that soul,
that neglects Obedience to that mind of God revealed. Now before the tender of
the Lord Jesus, there was but a little Glory of the revelation of the mind of
God in the Law, that which is accounted no Glory in respect of the revelation
of the mind of God in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.10. There is such a transcendent
glory in the revelation of the mind of God in the Gospel, that every one that
neglects that Glory so revealed, proves a transcendent Rebel, a Rebel of the
highest kind, Hebr. 2, 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

3. In regard the Lord Christ must be received by every soul to take away all
the Rebellion, and all the Degrees of Rebellion, that every soul has
contracted the guilt of to himself. Woe everlasting to that soul, that commits
but one act of Rebellion to cast it upon Jesus Christ; The weight of that one
Rebellion will sink the soul in hell for ever: And therefore in regard every
act of Rebellion must be cast upon the Lord Jesus, the soul ought therefore
upon the sight of his Rebellion to come to the Lord Jesus, and receive him,
that he may free the soul by taking that Rebellion upon himself; For seeing it
is impossible but all those Rebellions must at last be cast upon the neck of
Christ, and Christ must bear them, the argument would keep off the soul for
ever from receiving the Lord Christ, as well as keep off for a time, in regard
the principle of Rebellion cannot but be acting, so long as the union is not
made up between Christ and the soul. Yet there are two things to be observed
about this, that are truths.

1. That it is Presumption indeed for any soul to receive the Lord Jesus, that
he might have liberty to Rebel. This indeed were to Sin, that Grace might
abound: This were to take the Devil by the right hand, and to make a League, a
Covenant of Death with him; This were odious and abominable in the eye of the
Lord Jesus.

2. This is truth, that it is Presumption for any soul to live or walk in any
Wickedness, in respect the Lord Jesus has satisfied for his Rebellions. In
these two cases it were cursed desperate Presumption, for a soul to have a
thought of the Lord Christ belonging to him: But to apply the Lord Christ to
the poor Rebellious soul, that has nothing but rebellion working in his heart
to God, that there might be a Friendship between Christ and him, that the Wall
of Enmity might be broken down, and that there might be a precious amity
between God and him; to come thus is no Presumption, but the command of God to
every soul.

Fourthly, A fourth Principle of darkness is this, Principle of darkness.
That the person of the Lord Christ considered as filled with all glorious
excellency, Grace, Holiness, and all complete perfection, is to be the object
of the souls Faith. That is thus, that the soul is to receive the Lord Christ
his own person, and to receive him out of love to his person; and that the soul
comes but Hypocritically, so long as he receives him by any other act of Faith,
that does not work toward the excellencies that are in the person of Jesus
Christ. Says the soul, every one would be content to have Jesus Christ as a
Savior, to save from Sin; but this is but an Hypocritical coming to Jesus
Christ. This is another woeful principle of darkness; And this will appear by
diverse Considerations.

1. The Lord Christ as a Savior is propounded to the soul, as the first proper
object of his Faith. That is, as Jesus Christ was made Sin, and made a Curse
through Sin, for poor despicable sinful souls; that is to say, Jesus Christ
Crucified for Sin, to save poor sinful souls, that must otherwise have sunk
under the burden of Sin, into the pit of everlasting Woe. This you shall see is
the way in which Jesus Christ was represented to believing souls, both in the
time of the Law, and in the time of the Gospel. In the time of the Law it is
apprehended, the greatest representation of Jesus Christ was those typical
Sacrifices, the shedding of the blood of Bulls and Goats for the Remission of
Sin, as you may see Hebr. 9.22. Without shedding of blood there was no
Remission: Now this was to signify Jesus Christ Crucified, as the object of
those beleiving Jews Faith. Look also into the times of the Gospel and you
shall find Jesus Christ as a Savior, as Crucified for Sin, to be looked at as
the first object of every Beleivers Faith, considering Faith as saving: You
shall see it in 1 Cor. 2.2. That Paul comprehends all his Preaching under this,
to manifest Jesus Christ Crucified to be the object of their Faith, that is,
Jesus Christ as a Savior, as dying for Sin. Therefore Faith is called Faith in
the Blood of Christ, Romans 3.24, 25. Also the Sacraments appointed for the
Sealing of t^^ promise, do hold forth Christ as a Savior: Look upon the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, It holds forth the rending and breaking of the
Body of Christ, and the pouring out of his Blood, and therefore it is called
the Remembrance of his death. Look upon the other Sacrament, the Burying under
Water, and Rising from under the Water, holds forth Jesus Christ Dying, and
Rising; Thus primarily and properly they hold forth Jesus Christ as a Savior.
And that the Lord Christ thus as he is a Savior, is the first object of Faith
properly as saving, will appear in two particulars.

1. In regard the formal reason or the special respect and consideration of
Jesus Christ, as he is the object of Faith, considered as saving, must be
something that is in Jesus Christ, that does procure that Salvation. Jesus
Christ considered as the object of uniting Faith, must be considered under some
notion whereby he does procure this union, and merit or purchase the union;
Between the act and the object there must be a Similarity, a kind of likeness,
and near Similitude and Relation.

2. Jesus Christ considered in his personal excellency, in his precious Beauty
and Glory, is rather the object of Love, than the object of Faith, that is, the
object of Assiance and Dependence: Christ is not properly to be depended upon
as he is Holy, but as he is appointed by God as a Rock to lay the hope of
Salvation upon, that is, as a Mediator and Savior.

II. It appears it is a Principle of Darkness, In regard the most special
access of Souls unto Christ is as he is a Savior unto souls. The most pressing
arguments that are pressed upon souls to constrain them to come to Jesus Christ,
are, that they might come for Salvation: You shall see it in that Declaration
of the Commission of the Apostles themselves, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Now we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God; As if he should say thus, God has
appointed his Gospel, that we should go out to poor rebels to invite them to
come and accept of propositions of peace: And you see the reason of this, v.
21, For he has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him: That is, that we might have the
righteousness that God does convey through him. And in Heb. 7.25. you shall see
what is held forth to be the office of Jesus Christ now in heaven; He is able
to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them. I pray observe it, here is the lowest act of
faith expressed, coming to God by Christ, and you see the coming is for
Salvation.

3. Christ considered as a Savior is primarily suitable unto souls. Christ in
his personal excellency is suitable unto Angels, and Angels will count it their
glory to have him their Head, and be married to him as a Spouse: But it is only
as he is considered as a Savior, that he is primarily suitable unto Souls here
below, in regard the first thing that is necessary for such Souls is Salvation.
And thence you shall see, it is the name that God puts upon him, his name shall
be called Jesus, (a Savior) and the reason is, why? For he shall save his
people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. So that it appears this is another principle
of darkness, to persuade souls not to come to Jesus Christ for Salvation. Yet
there are two things to be observed here.

1. That many excellencies that are contained in the person of Jesus Christ, by
virtue of the hypostatical union of the humane nature with the second person in
the Trinity, may have efficacy upon a soul to allure him, to come. God may let
the beams of his beauty so shine forth, as may ravish the heart in his coming;
and though primarily the Souls faith is established upon him as a Savior, yet
his love may at the same time close with all the excellencies of Jesus Christ.

2. The love of the personal excellency of Jesus Christ, is an infallible
consequence of the Souls coming to Christ, and flows and proceeds from the
Souls receiving the Lord Christ as a Savior, though there be no such true love
before coming to Jesus Christ for Salvation.

The fifth Principle of Darkness is, That there must be a proportion between
the Souls sorrow for sin, Principle of darkness.
and sin it self, before it may apply the promise of Jesus Christ. Says the
Soul, it is common among Divines to lay down this principle, That a Soul must
drink so many buckets full of the tears of repentance, as he has drank of the
stolen waters of sin: And to this purpose says the soul, you shall see that
great sinners had always great sorrow; Those that were the murderers of Christ
( Act. 2.36, 37.) were pricked at the heart, they were much wounded before they
had a promise applied to to them: So it is observed says the Soul, that Paul
that was formerly Saul, being a notorious sinner, a blasphemer, a murderer of
the Saints, he was filled with abundance of sorrow before God applied comfort
to him, Act. 9. compared with Romans 7.11. Sin taking occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. So Luke 7.36, 37, The woman that
was a great sinner, and called (...), the sinner, the woman that was a sinner:
(Say Divines, every one is a sinner, but this woman is called a sinner by way
of eminency, passing the ordinary degree of sin) now this woman had great
sorrow ( v. 38.) before she received any word of pardon from Christ, she wept
and washed his feet with her tears: As she drank in buckets full of sin, so she
wept buckets full of tears. Now that this is a principle of darkness, I shall
make it clear thus.

1. That there is an impossibility that there should be any proportion between
a souls sorrow for sin, and a souls sin. Every iniquity is a transgression that
has a kind of infiniteness, in regard of the object against whom it is
committed, which is against the infinite God: Now the sorrow of the soul can
never rise thus high, because it can never be so suitable to the will of God, as
the other was directly contrary to his will. So that you must understand the
meaning of all Divines to be this (as some of them distinguish it) not that
there should be an Arithmetical proportion, but a Geometrical proportion
between sin and sorrow; That is, not that there should be a proportionable
sorrow to sin, but the greater sorrow where there have been the greatest sins.

2. It appears, In that the Lord has left himself to his liberty, in the
afflicting Consciences for sin, before, and in, and after Conversion. God is a
free agent, and according to his own pleasure he fills one soul with greater
degrees of honor and terror, and lets him lie longer under woe and anguish
before he give him any quiet of spirit; He strikes one soul to death with the
keen arrow of compunction, shoots at the heart of him, whereas he lets another
sinner be set upon the rock higher than himself: some souls God does prick
their hearts with a needle, and others he puts a sword to them, like a
Chyrurgion that lanceth one sore above another, and yet brings both to a
perfect cure: You read of nothing in Lydia, but only the Lord opened her heart;
And Paul was struck with trembling and astonishment; You read of nothing in the
Jailer but crying out what to do to be saved, being in fear of perishing, and
presently God gives him joy in believing, and calms his spirit.

3. In regard there is no command nor injunction from God, that a soul should
attain the least degree of sorrow for sin, before he should dare to apply the
Lord Jesus, and receive him tendered to his poor rebellious worthless soul. The
first command that God lays upon every rebel is to accept of a Mediator: God in
order of nature first enjoins the soul to receive Jesus Christ tendered, before
the doing any thing whatsoever, before the sending up one sigh to God, or
breathing out one petition; in regard the Lord commands all poor sinners at
enmity with him, to come near to him only through a Mediator, and no coming by
a Mediator, till they apply the Mediator to be a Mediator: And therefore it is
said in 1 John 3.23. It is the command of God that ye believe in the Lord
Jesus, whom he has sent. And so again John 6.29. This is the work of God, that
ye believe on whom he has sent: As if there were no other work of God but
this; But the meaning is, that this is the prime principal work, without which
all other are but works of darkness.

4. In regard the Lord takes no pleasure nor delight in the person of any
sinner most dejected and plunged into the deepest gulf of sorrow for his sin,
before he applys the Lord Jesus tendered to his soul, more than he did in that
soul before there was any of that sorrow. Do not mistake me, I do not say, that
the Lord does as much abhor a sinner that is now forbearing the acts of his
enmity against God, and is fallen to cry after God, as much as the acts of sin
before gradually; But yet I say, there is as true an abhorrence in the bosom of
God, of all those prayers, mournings and tears, as there was of those acts of
sin, the difference is only in degree. Says he Tit. 1.15. To the impure all
things are impure, whilst the mind and conscience is defiled: And who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? whilst the soul is altogether unclean, it is
impossible a clean desire and motion, or a clean tear can come from thence: So
that now the soul is looked upon as an enemy, as a Rebel, a Traitor to the
Crown of the Lords glory, whilst he remains a refuser of the Lord Jesus
tendered, though he be brought to great degrees of mourning.

5. In regard the nearest proportion of sorrow that can be attained unto for
sin, must proceed from applying the Lord Jesus tendered. The soul can never
discern what the degree, or the heinousness of his sin was, till he beholds the
Lord Jesus accepting his poor despicable, rebellious, loveless soul. Therefore
it is worthy your observation, that the same woman that is called the sinner,
by way of emphasis and eminency, Luke 7.37. drank deeply of the cup of sorrow,
whose tears flowed forth in abundance, that she could wash the feet of Jesus
Christ; This woman's sorrow did not proceed from a sight of her sin, before her
applying the Lord Jesus tendered, but from a sight of the Lord Jesus accepting
such a despicable desperate sinner as she was: The depths of sorrow were never
broken up in her heart, till she saw the arm of the Lord Jesus reached out to
embrace her poor despicable soul. You shall see it plain if you compare v. 37,
38. with v. 47, 48. The whole discourse between Jesus Christ and the Pharisees
concerning her, is worth our observation for the explaining of it; when Jesus
sees this woman come and wash his feet, he knew the Pharisees hearts rose
against her, because she was a sinner: Now Jesus put forth a parable or
similitude, Simon, says he, there were two debtors; the one ought five hundred
pence, and the other fifty, and when they had nothing to pay, the creditor
fr^nkly forgave them both: Tell me therefore which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said, I suppose he to whom he forgave most: says he, thou
have rightly judged. Now observe it, when Jesus Christ had opened to the
Pharisees this parable, it amounts to this, The cause of her mourning is from
the sense of the Lords forgiving her, for she loved much; And he said unto her,
thy sins are forgiven: This he opens to be the cause of her sorrow, that she
saw Jesus Christ had exercised compassion to her: She saw the love of Christ so
infinite, so unspeakable, his compassions so incomprehensible, that though she
had been such a desperate wretch, that Satan had had his Throne in her heart,
though she had been the Ringleader of sinners in a City, yet he was ready to
wash her forlorn soul, and make her clean, and this made her she knew not how
to express her love, but she wept: So that the cause of her tears was not so
much the sense of her sin, but the having so much forgiven her. So it is
observed of Peter, when he could deny Christ thrice, and forswear him, and not
Weep, when Christ looks upon him, his Heart melts and he Weeps bitterly: What
Peter? do deny me? what, me that left the Throne of my Glory, to stand here
before the Judgment Seat, says the look of Christ to the Conception of Peter?
this melts his Heart.

The sixth Principle of Darkness is this, Principle of darkness.
That it is very Dangerous for any soul to apply to himself the Lord Jesus too
soon. It is commonly illustrated by this Similitude: If a Surgeon applies
some healing Salve to a dangerous sore, before the Corrosives have had their
proper effects, if he does not by Corrosives first eat out all the dead Flesh,
and by Tents ransack the Wound to the very bottom, though the Wound be skinned
over, it will Fester and Ranckle again, and that to the danger of the Patients
Life. Likewise, faith the soul, it is thus in regard of the Wound of Sin: If
any spiritual Physician should apply the Lord Jesus too soon to the soul, to
heal the souls Wounds, before the Corrosive of Terror, and Fear, and Horror,
have had their proper effects upon the soul, it may be dangerous to the
Destruction of the soul. Or thus, says the soul, there may be nutritive
nourishment to several Patients, that may be destructive to some sick Bodies,
in regard there ought first to be some Purgations, before there be a
sutableness to the giving such Cordial Potions: Likewise if the precious
Cordials of Comfort that are in the Bosom of Jesus Christ, should be applied to
the soul, before there has been the bitter Pill of Terror, of Sorrow and
Anguish, and Horror for his Sin given, they may be rather destructive to the
soul; So that this is very dangerous, says the soul, to apply the Lord Jesus
too soon. This Principle of Darkness has commonly three Grounds, or three
Foundations upon which it stands, and the soul conceives a threefold
Foundation is not easily shaken, and therefore conceives the Principle to be
very firm.

I. It is built upon this ground, That all Divines generally have concluded
that it is dangerous to apply Comfort to afflicted Consciences too soon, and
that it is destructive to give Comfort before the soul be fitted for it. And
indeed if we look over all those Famous men, as Calvin, Greenham, and that
skilful Physician Mr. Rogers, etc. not one of a Thousand Ministers, but we may
extract some such Passages as these from them, as, Take heed you apply not
Comfort too soon after you be Wounded; Take heed you take not away the
Corrosive and apply healing to soon: If you take away the Tent, says one of
them, before the corrupt matter be healed, it will heal of it self too soon,
and break out most dangerously; Thus if the Tent of Fear and Horror, and
Soul-Affliction for Sin, be taken out of the Wound of the soul too soon, the
soul take Comfort too soon, the Wound will be ready to heal too soon, and so
will either break out more dangerously, or else it will be the everlasting
death of the soul. But observe how souls mistake this ground, in conceiving
these expressions, to be sufficient ground upon which to build such a
Conclusion.

1. The meaning of these Divines in giving these cautions to take heed of
applying Comfort too soon, is only this, that such as deal with Afflicted
Consciences, must take heed they do not too readily assure them that the
promise of Life in Jesus Christ belongs to them, and that they are certainly
accepted in the Covenant of Grace: Now indeed these Comforts may be applied to
the soul too soon; for this is not, nor ought to be, the first application of
Jesus Christ to souls. The very first act in the soul, in its application of
the Lord Jesus to it self, is not, that the Lord Christ is my Savior, and that
he has Redeemed my soul, and Purchased Life and Eternal Salvation for me; Thus
indeed a soul might apply Jesus Christ too soon: But the first application of
Jesus Christ to the soul, is the applying the Lords Tender of the Lord Christ
unto the particular soul; It is an assuring of the soul, from what it beholds
in the Declaration of the Will of God from his Word, that it is his Will to
receive his soul into union with Jesus Christ, and that it is the Will of God
concerning him, that he do embrace Christ to be one with him.

2. Observe, That it is upon different grounds, that a soul does receive
assurance unto his Faith that he is united to Jesus Christ, and that other
souls do manifest any Confidence that the soul is united to Jesus Christ. There
is one ground for the souls own apprehension that the promise belongs to
himself, and it is upon another ground that any soul may apply a promise, by
way of assuring the soul that he has an interest in the promise. This will
appear in two things.

1. The ground from whence the soul receives assurance to his own Faith of his
union with Christ, is invisible to all others when it is first visible to the
soul it self. The Lord may and does frequently by his own Spirit, so open the
very secrets of his Heart and Mind unto a particular soul, and his willingness,
his longing desire to accept him in Christ, as he does beget yernings in the
soul to Christ, and beget a blessed close between Christ and that soul; but
alas! no other eye but his own sees this blessed close.

2. Those grounds upon which any other may assure a soul, that he is united to
Jesus Christ, are but the Consequence of the souls own Apprehension of Christ's
acceptance of it into union with him. So that observe, If the spiritual
Physician should apply Comfort in their sense to the soul, that is, assure the
soul of his present interest in the Covenant of Grace; he may do it indeed too
soon, because he can have no ground for such a Confidence that he is united to
Jesus Christ, till he has applied Jesus Christ in particular to his own soul,
and that application has brought forth some preceious Fruit, that is, till it
has brought forth Contrition, and Godly Sorrow, Emptiness, Nothingness, a
sight of the souls own Sinking, Perishing condition, till it has brought forth
Gasping, and Longing, and Panting after Jesus Christ, no Spiritual Physician
has any ground to assure or tell the soul that he is Confident that he is
united to Jesus Christ, and this is that that these Divines call Comfort: And
therefore they propound three or four things as necessary to be discerned by
every Spiritual Physician, before he apply Comfort to them.

First, say they, it is necessary that the Spiritual Physician behold the soul
Wounded in the sense of his Sin: sensible of the Wrath and Indignation of God
that is due unto his Sin, and sensible of the unavoidableness of Wrath and
Indignation.

Secondly, say they, it is necessary the Spiritual Physician should discern in
the afflicted soul, a Sincere, Cordial, Upright, Single Purpose and Intention,
an absolute Resolution to abandon all those Sins, a purpose to Hate them, and
Loath and Abhor them.

Thirdly, say they, that he must discern a sincere purpose, to be constant in a
Universal way of Obedience unto Jesus Christ, to receive him as his only King,
and Ruler, and Governor, to be obedient to his Will alone.

Fourthly, It is necessary that he discern earnest Longings, and Pantings, and
Breathings after Jesus Christ, an unsatiable thirst after him, such a thirst as
none can quench but Jesus Christ alone, such a thirst as makes him so prise
Jesus Christ, that if all the World were turned into a Mountain of Gold, it
were nothing to him in respect of Christ; and this thirst, say they, must be
discerned by the Spiritual Physician to be only after the imputed Righteousness
of Christ, that is, that he may be free from Sin, and have the Pardon passed
from Heaven to his soul, and have the Righteousness of Christ to stand pure and
clean, and Innocent before God, and then, say they, the Spiritual Physician may
apply Comfort to the soul. So that it is apparent from their own Principles,
what they mean by cautioning souls to take heed they do not apply Comfort to
afflicted Consciences to soon. And yet further these Divines in their
application of Comfort also acknowledge, it can be but in a conditional way,
that any one can lawfully aver to a soul, and assure it from the Word, that the
promise of Life belongs to him, and that be is in the Covenant of Grace: For
say they, it must be only upon this condition, that those things I named before
be Truly, and Really, and Sincerely to be found in the soul. So that in effect
there is no Comfort that is applied by them unto the afflicted Conscience: And
I must confess, I see not any safety that can be concluded from the Word of
God, in application of Comfort in this way unto afflicted Consciences, in
regard it must rather establish the soul upon a Humane Authority than a Divine.

II. A second ground of this Principle is this, That the promise of Life and
Salvation does not strait way belong to every soul that is Wounded, and
Terrified and Afflicted in Conscience, but it is only to such as are truly
afflicted, that is, such whose Hearts are truly Broken, and truly Contrite,
Isa. 66.2. Now herein are two mistakes to be observed.

1. That though it should be true, that the promises of Life and Salvation, are
made only to such as were thus Broken and Contrite, (the contrary to which you
have heard formerly opened) yet first the tender of the promise of the gift of
Jesus Christ, is made to souls that have not the least degree of Contrition,
nor the least degree of Sorrow. That is to say, the Lords Declaration of his
Will, to receive every soul that will, into union with Jesus Christ, is as well
propounded to souls not having the least degree of Contrition in their Hearts,
as it is to those that are the most Contrite, and the most Broken.

2. If the promise of Life and Salvation were made only to those that were
Contrite, yet that Contrition could proceed from nothing else, but the
particular application of the Lord Jesus to himself. All fullness is appointed
by the Father to dwell in Christ, and whatever grace the soul receives, must be
an Influence that flows down from the grace of Jesus Christ.

III. There is a third ground and that is this, That it is for the Glory and
Honor of God, and for the advantage of the soul, that it should lie under
affliction of Conscience, and under the Burden of his Sin some time, before he
does apply the Lord Jesus. Here I must Premise one thing, and that is, That the
Glory and Honor of God, is the result of all his ways to his people. The Lord
being the Fountain of Wisdom, cannot work without an end; And his own self
alone, that is, the manifestation of his own Glory, is the highest end;
Therefore of necessity, in all the ways of God, that end must be attended. This
Premised I answer,

That properly and by it self, the souls lying under the Spirit of Bondage or
affliction of Conscience for Sin, is neither for the Glory of God, nor for the
souls advantage. It is ordinarily concluded that the soul lying under the
Spirit of Bondage, does make for the manifestation of the Glory of God.

1. In the Glory of his Justice to the Soul. Says the soul, it makes much for
the magnifying the Justice of God, in the eye and Heart, that the soul has
deserved according to justice, to be plunged into the everlasting Pit of Woe,
that he is liable to all the dreadful Torments, that the Wisdom of God can
invent against such a cursed Rebel, for breaking such a Righteous and Holy Law:
And it magnifies justice also in the eyes of others, when others shall see that
those souls do acknowledge themselves, that they did expect nothing according
to the strictness and of justice, but everlasting Wrath and Indignation.

2. That it does make for the magnifying of God in his mercy. Say they, it
makes mercy more sweet to the soul, and more highly to be prized by it, when
the spirit of bondage has lain upon the soul, and afflicted the conscience for
a time. Now though at first view it should seem thus, yet properly the
afflicting the soul for sin; that is, the spirit of bondage working fear and
terror for sin, does not magnify God neither in his justice nor mercy.

First, It does not magnify God in his justice properly. And that will appear,
because the magnifying of the justice of God in the heart of any, is only by
causing it clearly to apprehend his own infinite worthiness to lie under the
wrath and indignation of God to all eternity. Now the soul is thus made
apprehensive of his worthiness, to have the utmost justice of God executed upon
him, only through receiving the Lord Jesus tendered. There are two things that
must necessarily concur to make up this apprehension of his worthiness to have
justice executed, in his utmost indignation upon him, and so consequently to
make justice to be sanctified in any soul.

1. A spiritual discerning to behold the nature of sin. Now this must be
received from Jesus Christ, and that by infusion of influences from Christ to
the soul, by virtue of union between Christ and the soul. A spiritual object
cannot be discerned in the spirituality of it but by a spiritual eye; Now both
the justice of God and sin when looked upon aright, it must be by a spiritual
eye that is suitable to apprehend such an object.

2. There must be a discovery of the dimensions of sin, that is, the height,
length, and breadth of it, before there can be a sanctifying the justice of God
in the heart. Now the dimensions of sin are only discovered to the soul,
through the application of the Lord Jesus tendered. Till the soul sees the
right object against whom sin is committed, he never sees sin in the
heinousness and abominable wickedness of it: Now the soul never apprehends God
aright till he beholds him in Jesus Christ, as the object against whom he has
committed all his wickedness. So that the aggravations of a souls sin appearing
only from the right apprehension of Jesus Christ, thence it appears it does not
make for the glory of the justice of God, that the soul should lie a time under
affliction of conscience for sin, in regard the Justice of God is more exalted
and magnified in the heart, in one moment, in the right application of the Lord
Jesus, than it can be in twenty years, should the soul lie under the affliction
of conscience all that time, not applying the Lord Jesus to himself. Neither
can the justice of God be more magnified in the eyes of others, in case the
spirit of bondage lies upon it for a season before the tender of Jesus Christ,
more than it can by the application of that tender immediately as soon as he is
tendered. The justice of God is magnified before others, only by discovering
before them his thoughts of himself, of his own unworthiness, and desert
according to justice, to be everlastingly tumbling up and down in the gulf of
woe and misery: Now the clearest apprehension of the unspeakableness of his own
unworthiness, proceeds only from the tender of Jesus Christ to his soul.

Secondly, Hence also it necessarily follows, That the name of God is not
properly magnified in his mercy in the soul that partaketh of it, by the spirit
of bondage working upon the heart for a season, before the application of the
Lord Jesus to the soul. The more clearly the soul apprehends its own wretched
rebellion, and cursed treachery against the Crown of the Lords glory, the more
clear is the Lords mercy manifested to the soul; Now this is made more apparent
by the application of the Lord Jesus to himself, than it could be though the
soul could discern the dreadful everlasting burnings: Nay, if he could discern
by a sense and feeling, the justice of God reaching of him; though he were in
hell for a season, and should partake of the punishment of the Devils; that
could only make him see the merit of sin, but it could not make him see himself
worse than a Devil.

There is a Second branch of this ground, and that is for the souls advantage
and benefit, that he does for a time lie under the heaviness and weight of his
own iniquity, and not dare to apply the Lord Jesus. There are also two reasons
rendered of that.

1. Say they, it does drive the soul more vehemently to the Lord Jesus for
justification, life, and salvation, and set the soul in a more hot persuit
af-Jesus Christ, so as not to be satisfied without him.

2. Say they, it has advantage for sanctification, in regard fear makes him
depart from iniquity, and pursue more vehemently after holiness from Jesus
Christ.

For answer to this, First, I must premise thus much, That the Lord can, and
does improve every providence whatever, for the fulfilling of his own will in a
soul; So that the Lords will being effectually to draw a heart to the Lord
Christ, to make him partake of holiness, and of union with himself; the Lord
can, and it may be does improve, the affliction of the souls conscience for sin
for that end, to put him upon a violent pursuit after Jesus Christ: But I say
this is only accidentally; But properly and by it self, the souls resting under
affliction of conscience for his sin, before the applying the Lord Jesus to
himself, does not in any measure make for the benefit of the soul, in pressing
the soul one step toward Jesus Christ, either for justification or
sanctification, either for life, union with God in Christ, or holiness. And
that will appear in two things.

1. In regard all apprehensions of God out of Christ, do but drive away the
soul from the presence of God, and terrify and amaze, and astonish and afright
the poor soul. I mean thus, so long as the soul looks upon God, and does not
behold the Lord willing to accept his poor despicable soul, in that precious
Mediator the Lord Jesus; the more it beholds the justice of God, and the more
it feels of the effects of his justice in the conscience, the further the soul
runs from God. No sooner had Adam transgressed the will of God, and had his
conscience wounded, but he fled from the presence of God when God called him:
Thus when Judas was sensible of his sin against God, presently he went and
hanged himself.

2. In regard it is only through the infusion of the habit of grace into the
soul, that the heart is any way drawn toward Jesus Christ. Says Christ, John
6.44. No man can come unto me except the father draw him: So the Spouse, Cant.
1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee. The heart is altogether opposite to leave
those cursed ways of enmity against Jesus Christ, after the longest time that
ever any soul lay under the affliction of conscience for sin, till the Lord, by
an infusion of a precious habitual disposition from Christ, inclines the soul
to receive Jesus Christ tendered.

Now that this is a principle of darkness, we shall make it appear diverse ways.

1. The similitude it self by which the soul illustrates this principle of
darkness, is merely impertinent, and improperly applied to the souls case. The
similitude you know was, that there must be corrosives applied to the wound, to
eat out the dead flesh, before a healing medicine be applied. Now this is
improperly applied to the souls case, in regard there is no medicine to be
applied, neither corrosive, nor lenitive, but only the Lord Christ himself, for
he is the only balm of Gilead. It is Jesus Christ alone by the power of his own
death in the flesh that slew sin, and it is he only that has power against sin
and hell, Ps. 68.18. he led captivity captive, That is, Sin, Death, and the
Devil, that led poor souls captive. Now Jesus Christ being the only Medicine to
heal Souls, I shall retort the Souls own Similitude against it self by way of
contraries. You say there must be a corrosive applied to the Soul before a
lenitive; that is, before there be a healing medicine there must be some
gnawing thing, some tent to ransake the wound: Now I say, Jesus Christ being
the only medicine, the danger will be far greater in not applying the Lord
Jesus presently, in regard there is no salve either corrosive or lenitive, that
is applied to the Soul wherein Jesus Christ is neglected. If it be dangerous to
the body to apply lenitives before corrosives, then how dangerous is it to
leave the Soul without any medicine at all?

2. Jesus Christ is the very powerful corrosive. I is only he that must let
the wound be ransaked to the bottom: I mean, he only does give in light to see
into the bottom of the wound; It is only he that must eat out all the corrupt
matter, unless you can think that sin can be killed without the application of
the power of the death of Jesus Christ, and then indeed is Christ dead in vain.

3. It is impossible that any soul should too soon answer the call of God. Now
observe, the Lord calls thy soul, whatever thou art, at this moment to apply
Jesus Christ tendered. Says God, Thou poor rebel and traitor to the Crown of
Heaven, I command thee to receive the Lord Jesus; It is my will thou should
receive Jesus Christ as a Mediator, to make up a union between thy self and me.
Now do think thou can answer too soon to this call? You read of the five
foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. That for want of being ready presently to hear and
answer, when the Bridegroom should come, they were shut out, and could never
enter into the Bridegrooms Chamber, to have Communion with Jesus Christ. You
read also, Mat. 22.7. That when the King invited the people to the Marriage of
his Son (that is the Lord Jesus) because they neglected that call, the King was
exceeding wrath.

4. A soul can never too soon come into a capableness of doing any thing that
may be acceptable to God. God calls for prayer at thy hand this night; do
think it is too soon to be in a posture wherein thy prayer may be heard? Is it
too soon to come from under the hatred of God, to be in a state of amity and
love? It is more clear than the Sun at noon day, that it is a cursed principle
of darkness, that the soul should take heed that it does not too soon apply to
himself the Lord Jesus tendered.

But though this be a principle of darkness, yet by some Hell-bred Devilish
Policy, the Devil can improve it both ways; for though he cast in this
principle to hinder souls from coming to Christ; yet on the contrary he
persuades some in a confused, disorderly way, to apply, in some kind, the Lord
Jesus too too soon. And therefore there are two or three things to be anexed to
this principle of darkness.

1. Though the Lord Jesus cannot be applied to the soul too soon, yet it is
dangerous and destructive to many souls, that they do believe their own
salvation by Christ too soon. They do fancy to themselves, that though they be
vile Sinners, yet the Lord Jesus is a Savior, and they hope to be saved by
Jesus Christ. This indeed is the common principle that the Devil uses as his
grand snare wherein he catches many souls. Now there are two ways whereby
souls may conceive dangerously, and destructively, their own salvation by
Christ too soon.

1. When they conceive they shall certainly attain heaven and glory by Jesus
Christ, without having an eye or respect to any other benefit by Christ. Now
indeed does the soul conceit his salvation by Christ too soon, when it neglects
all the benefits that are propounded by Jesus Christ, and neglects the
beholding the manner how Jesus Christ is propounded, and confusedly looks
unto the end alone, which is heaven and glory, and fancies to himself that he
shall attain these by him. Though indeed the eye of the souls faith may be
fixed upon one particular benefit that is propounded in Jesus Christ, in order
of nature, before his eye is fixed upon another benefit, and thereupon it is
truly said, that Jesus Christ as he is a Savior, and as he saves, is the
primary object of faith, that is, the very first object of the first acting of
the souls Faith; yet this is still but only in order of nature, and not in
order of time. That is thus, the soul cannot rightly have his eye of faith upon
one benefit to be attained by Jesus Christ, but he must have his eye upon all
other benefits also propounded in Jesus Christ, that are suitable to his poor
needy soul.

2. A soul conceiteth his salvation by Christ too soon, when he conceives that
he shall attain Heaven, by Christ, without looking for any thing to be effected
by Christ upon the soul, That Is the reason why nothing can dash in sunder their
confidence and hope, though their consciences tell them, their nature is the
same, and their practice the same that ever it was. Yet you must conceive, it
is only herein that this conceiting salvation by Christ is said to be too soon.

1. In that it is preposterous. It is a drawing Conclusion without Premises,
that is without any thing to draw the conclusion upon. Then a soul conceives
rightly, when he conceives first it is Gods will that Jesus Christ should
mediate between God and his soul, and take away all the cause of offense and
displeasure; and then the soul concludes, therefore I must needs be saved by
Jesus Christ.

2. If this conceit of the souls salvation by Christ, does arise from the souls
giving credit to any word of God, upon which he does build this conceit, then
it is only said to be too soon in regard of order, that is, in regard of order
of nature, for indeed as for order of time, this giving credit to such a word
of God, as holds forth salvation to him by Christ, might and ought to have been
at the same time, at the giving credit to the other word of God in revealing
his union to be effected by the father through Christ.

2. Observe, That this conceiting their Salvation by Christ, is no application
of Christ to their own Souls, tendered or offered as a Savior by God. A Soul
may conceit Salvation by Christ, and yet never receive him as a Savior: And
that will appear in two things.

1. God offers the Lord Jesus as a complete Savior. Heb. 7.25. He is able to
save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him. To the [uttermost] even
unto perfection, that is, to save them exactly in all things, from all evils,
and from all fears and dangers that can possibly accrue. Now he that conceiteth
not that the Lord Jesus should save him from all kind of evils, guilt, and
misery that his Soul is cast into; does not conceit Jesus Christ to be his
complete Savior, and so applys Christ too soon.

2. The Salvation that God tenders by Jesus Christ, when he tenders him as a
Savior, is twofold.

First, From the guilt of sin. That is, the delivering and redeeming the Soul
from his obligation unto punishment. Now this Salvation in Scripture is called
reconciliation; which is the removing the displeasure of God, that should bind
it over to everlasting punishment, and bring the Soul into a state of amity,
and unity, and love to God. And this is the primary cause why Christ received
his name, Mat. 1.21. His name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins.

Secondly, God tenders by Christ to save Souls from the pollution of sin. So
that the Soul that applies Christ rightly as a Savior, applies him thus; He
sees the Lord tenders the Lord Christ as one that has triumphed over sin, and
obtained a glorious conquest over Hell and Death; and then he sees the Lord
inviting his Soul to receive the Lord Jesus, that he might be partaker of the
conquest; and thereupon his heart closes with the tender, and gives credit to
it.

There is a Seventh Principle of Darkness, and that is this, That the Lord
Christ must not be applied to the Soul too much in a way of comfort. Principle
of Darkness.
It is commonly received by many, that comfort is more dangerous for the Soul
to meddle with, than lying under horror and terror still. They commonly
illustrate it by this similitude; say they, some drops of Aquavitae may be
exceeding helpful to a poor fainting spirit, it may revive a man in a swoun;
but pouring in of much may overcome a man, and choke the natural vital heat,
and so indangers a man's life: just thus, say they, it is with the Soul, when
the heart is sinking and fainting, and pressed down through fears of the anger
and displeasure of God against him for sin, it may be good for the Soul to have
some drops of the precious water flowing down from the bosom of Jesus Christ,
but, say they, if you pour in too much, you may endanger the Souls life to
eternity. This is another Hell-bred principle to prevent the Souls sight of
Union with Christ. There are two grounds of this principle.

First, That the applying the Lord Jesus too much for comforting the Soul, may
make the soul presumptuous. Thus they prove it. Say they, the applying the Law
too much to the soul, and opening the terrible Wrath and Indignation of God too
much, may make the soul despair: so on the contrary, the opening and applying
the glorious Privileges of Jesus Christ for the comforting the soul too much,
may put it upon a desperate Rock of Presumption.

Secondly, a second ground is this, that the applying the Lord Jesus for the
comforting of the soul too much, will too soon dry up the Penitent Tears, it
will soon seal up the Springs of Sorrow and Mourning that were broken up in the
soul. Now for the clearing of this to be a Principle of Darkness, there is
first something to be premised.

First, that the soul understand what is meant by comfort.

Secondly, What is meant by applying comfort to the soul. By comfort is meant
only that strength, and that Life and Refreshment that a soul receives from
the apprehension of the good of any object. And to apply the Lord Jesus for
comfort the soul, is to receive the Lord Jesus with all his Glorious
Privileges that are suitable for the Poor, Needy, Despicable, Loveless soul,
according as God the Father tenders him to the soul. To speak more plainly, to
receive the Lord Jesus as he is offered freely to be given by God to the Poor
Despicable soul, to make up a League, and Amity and Love between the Father and
the soul, to break in sunder those Chains wherewith the soul was clogged by Sin
to everlasting Destruction, and in a word, for the perfecting of the souls
Happiness, both here and for Eternity.

Now I shall answer directly to that first Foundation, upon which this first
Principle of Darkness is built. And I say it is impossible that the applying of
the Lord Jesus for the comforting of the soul, should make the soul in danger
to miscarry through Presumption, but rather the contrary, it is the greatest
preservative against Presumption. And that will appear in three or four
particulars.

I. In regard the more the comforts of the soul are enlarged through the
application of Christ, the more clear is that cursed Root of Self-Confidence,
rooted out of the Heart. The Comforts of Jesus Christ's, in their own nature, do
empty the soul of it self and all Self-Confidence, in regard it removes the
soul from all imaginary dependence upon its self, either for Comfort here, or
for Mercy and Happiness to Eternity. The souls perfect nothingness in it self,
is only by beholding the Lord Jesus as the Father has given him to the soul:
Therefore it is said in 1 John. 3.2, 3. We know not yet what we shall be, but
then we shall be like him, for we shall know him as he is: And Ephesians. 3.19. The
Apostle prays that they may comprehend with all Saints, what is the Height, and
Breadth, and Length, and Depth of the Love of God, which passes knowledge: That
is, to know this to their own souls; And what is the end of all? That they may
be filled with the fullness of God. This fullness of God can be wrought by
nothing, but by the full comprehension of Jesus Christ, and all his Comforts.

II. In regard it raises the souls thoughts of Jesus Christ in a transcendent
manner, and fills the Heart with a high estimation of him. When the soul
applies most incomprehensively the Lord Jesus in all his Privileges, for the
refreshing of his soul, then does the soul see most largly into the
Incomprehensive Gulf of the excellency of Jesus Christ; and when the soul sees
Jesus Christ most clearly, as altogether incomprehensible, then is the Heart
filled with the highest thoughts that can be of Jesus Christ.

III. The application of the Lord Jesus for the comforting of the soul in the
largest manner that can be, does beget a more precious fear in the heart, than
all the Terrors, Sights, and Visions of the Indignation of God against the
soul for Sin can possibly beget. All the Reason that can be given, why it
should endanger the soul to Presume, is only this, that the applying Christ in
two large a measure in his comforts, should make the soul without fear: Now the
soul is never so filled with Holy Fear, as when it has the largest
comprehension of Jesus Christ; The Reason is plain, The larger comprehension
the soul has of Jesus Christ, the more natural is the love to Jesus Christ:
Now love is extended upon Jesus Christ, when it rests upon him, or fetches in
Joy through beleiving: And according as love is extended, so is fear extended;
Love and Fear go hand in hand, you cannot divide them; a man of large love is a
man of large fear, The reason is plain, The more dear any object is to the
soul, the more a man fears to lose it:

IIII. When the Lord Christ is applied most for Comfort, then does a Holy
Jealousy rise high in the heart. When Love rises high, Jealousy rises high:
Jealousy is compounded of Love and Anger, or Love and Hatred. Where Love runs
out largely in Zeal, there is a Zeal of Hatred against all that should deprive
us of it. Put a Fearful man and a Jealous man together, to Watch over a Beloved
object, and you need not fear their Sleeping; Thus Fear and Jealosie meeting
together in the soul, will make it Watchful least there should be the least
outgoing of the Heart from Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Neither can it dry up the Repenting or Penitent Tears too soon. It
is as impossible that the Springs of Godly Sorrow should be sealed up, by the
application of the Lord Jesus in the largest measure for the comforting of the
soul, as it is impossible it should make the soul Presume. The Foundation of
this Principle of Darkness is laid upon a twofold mistake.

First, that the discerning eye of the soul, whereby Sin should be discerned,
should be closed up with the sight of the apprehension of large comfort from
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, that the sight or apprehension of a defect of comfort in the Lord
Jesus for his soul for the present, should be the Original of true Godly
Sorrow, and so that Godly Sorrow should Perish, when the comforts of the Lord
Jesus, suitable to his needy soul, appear. Now it is apparent that the eye of
the soul whereby he may see his own Wretchedness, Merit, and Desert, is more
clear by the sight of enlarged comfort from Jesus Christ.

I. The eye of the soul receives more Divine light to discover Sin in the
nature of it, by how much in a greater degree the soul apprehends enlarged
comforts, through the application of the Lord Jesus. This is that precious
eye salve spoken of, Rev. 3. that Christ inviteth souls to come and buy of him.
That Is the reason Mary wept so much, and washed the feet of Jesus Christ with
her tears; Christ tells you, it was because she loved much; And what was the
cause of that love, but only the apprehension of the glorious privileges to
her in Jesus Christ?

2. The apprehension of a defect of comfort in the Lord Christ, suitable to the
Soul for the present, cannot be a spring or head from whence the stream of
Godly sorrow flows. Godly sorrow must arise from the clearest, most spiritual,
sin: Now you see, the clearest discerning of sin in a Spiritual manner, does
arise from the clear discerning of those enlarged comforts, through the
application of the Lord Jesus; And indeed as those increase, so does Godly
sorrow increase; The greatest comforted Soul, is the greatest mourning Soul.
Now you see the foundation is too weak to bear up this principle, and also that
it will appear to be a principle of darkness. There can be but two senses in
which this proposition can be taken.

First, It must either be meant thus, That the Lord Christ must not be applied
for comforting of Souls too much, that is, not applied to comfort the Soul in
his necessity with two great a confidence. Now there it crosses the precious
heavenly light that shines from the Sun of righteousness, the Lord Christ, in
regard it is the great command that the Soul ought to receive him whole, with
all his privileges propounded to the Soul, with a full assurance of faith: And
so Abraham's faith is commended, that he did not doubt at all, Romans 4.18, 19, 20.

Or, Secondly, the application of the Lord Christ for comforting the Soul too
much, must be meant thus, That he may be applied too confidently to the Soul,
with too large a comprehension of the infinite riches of all excellencies that
are treasured up for the Soul in the Lord Jesus. Now to apply the Lord Jesus
for comfort too much this way, does also directly oppose the Scripture.

1. It is commonly the frequent prayer of the Apostle for the Saints, that they
might have the fullest comprehension of Jesus Christ to their Souls, Ephesians. 1.17,
18. He prays that their understandings may be enlightened, that they may know
what is the hope of his calling: that is, that they might know the glorious
things that they are called to, in Jesus Christ. So Ephesians. 3.18. He would have
them know the exceeding riches of his grace to them that believe. He would have
them comprehend the dimensions of the love of Christ to them.

2. It is the desire of Jesus Christ, that all his people might have fullness of
joy, John 15.11. These things have I spoken unto you, that your joy might be
full. That Is also the Apostles prayer, Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you
with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope through the
power of the Holy Ghost.

3. It is according to the degree wherein the Soul comprehends the excellency
treasured up in Jesus Christ for his Soul, that it partaketh of the excellency
of Christ, and is changed into the the likeness of Christ, 1 John 3.2. So that
it is a principle of darkness, that clearly contradicts the word of truth, to
say, the Soul must not apply the Lord Jesus too much, that is, with too large a
comprehension of the privileges of Jesus Christ to his Soul.

But there are two things to be opened about this, for the clearing of it.

1. Though Jesus Christ cannot be applied for comforting the Soul too much, be
the Soul in what condition it can be, yet the Lord Christ may be looked into
for comforting a Soul too much: That is, when Souls look upon Jesus Christ for
comfort without receiving him as he is tendered by God to the Soul. Though
Christ be the object of all true comfort to the Soul, yet it is Christ as he is
in Union with the Soul; for it is not the goodness of an object, simply and
absolutely considered, that does send down strength and life into the heart in
beholding of it, but it is the goodness of an object appropriated to its self.

2. Jesus Christ may be applied by others, for comforting their Souls too much.
I mean, to affirm to any particular Soul, that the Lord Jesus with his glorious
privileges is his; this is applying Jesus Christ for comforting them too much;
the reason is plain, in regard it is out of Gods way. Though these two Cautions
are to be observed, yet it is a principle of darkness that is necessary to be
removed, before there can be a certain evidence of the Souls Union with Christ.

There is one Principle of darkness more, and that is this, That a Soul must
discern his peculiar right to, Principle of Darkness.
and interest in the particular promise, before he believe it is the will of
God to receive his particular Soul into Union with Christ. The meaning of the
Soul is this, that he must behold some promise passed over to him by Jesus
Christ, before he can believe it is the will of God to receive him into Union
with Christ. This principle being so cunningly forged in Hell, that it is
scarce discerned from a principle of light, we shall endeavor to help you to
discern it to be a principle of darkness. I find three foundations upon which
this principle is built.

1. That it cannot possibly be lawful for every Soul to believe, that it is
the will of God to take him into union with Christ. For says the Soul, then
the greatest part of the world should be put upon it to believe a lie.

2. That it must be through a Souls right to some promise, that he comes to
have a right to Jesus Christ. Now this is a false foundation, because there can
be no interest, nor right the Soul can have to one promise of God, before the
Soul is bound to believe that the Lord will receive his soul into Union with
Christ.

1. In regard the first promise is Jesus Christ himself, and the very primary
object of faith is Jesus Christ himself. This you shall observe, Genesis 3.15. The
first promise that was given to Adam was, that the seed of the woman should
break the serpents head, which is nothing but a promise of Jesus Christ.

2. When the promise was first renewed to Abraham, it was in these words; In
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: What is that seed? It
is Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.16. So the Apostles in their preaching laid Jesus
Christ as the first object of faith, Believe in the Lord Jesus.

3. A third foundation of this principle is this, That only those promises that
are made unto holy qualiqualities in sanctified Souls, are assuring promises,
or promises that can assure unto a Souls faith, that the Lord will receive him
into union with Christ. Says the Soul, there are inviting promises and
assuring promises; now inviting promises speak so general, as none can discern
his union from thence; but the promises to the graces they in a manner
particularize Souls: Now hence the Soul concludes thus, it must of necessity
be a necessary precedent before a Souls assurance that God will take him into
union with Christ, that he see some holy quality in his own spirit, to which
the Lord has made some such promise, Now observe the gross darkness and
blindness, in conceiving inviting promises not to be able to give assurance to
a Souls faith, of union with Christ. It will appear in two or three things.

1. Then the Soul must conceive, that those promises that the Lord propounds,
in the inviting of the Soul to Christ, may not be believed with a fullness of
confidence and assurance. Now

1. Thence the Soul must conceive, that some portions of the word of God, have
not sufficient authority to be believed undoubtedly by the Soul. Now what an
high indignity is offered to God, in entertaining such a thought, that any one
Iota or Tittle from the great God should not be able to command a fullness of
belief from every soul?

2. The Soul makes all these inviting promises to be merely in vain. For if
these inviting promises do not sufficiently reveal the Lords will, to receive a
poor loveless Soul, that has been at enmity, to union with the Lord Jesus, so
as to make the Soul believe it with firmness of confidence, then they are
altogether useless, they can be no incentive and motive to invite the Soul to
Jesus Christ.

2. The Soul must say thus, That those inviting promises may not lawfully be
applied particularly unto particular Souls with that fullness of confidence. Now
herein is great injury done to the truth, as will appear in two things.

1. The Soul must deny those portions of the word to be believed by any one
Soul under heaven. Now herein the Soul shows much impudence and boldness, to
set limits to the will of God, where he is pleased to set no limits.

2. Then those inviting promises should not be the object of justifying faith,
according as it does justify. For questionless that which is called justifying
faith, (according as it does justify, or in the exercise of it in that
justifying way) that does particularly apply those promises to the particular
Soul.

3. There is one imagination more of the Soul upon which it grounds this
conceit, that the inviting promises of God, are no grounds of assuring the Soul
of union with Christ, and that is this, That a Soul may with a fullness of
assurance, believe the Lords will to be, to receive his particular Soul into
Union with Jesus Christ, and yet the Soul at the same time be doubtful and
questioning of his Union. All that is possible for the Soul to say in this, is
only thus much, that a Soul may believe with all fullness of assurance, the
Lords will to take the Soul into Union with Christ habitually, though not
actually, and so be questioning his Union with Christ, though he do believe it
habitually. But alas this comes nothing to the purpose, for indeed though it
may be said truly, that a Soul has the habit of faith, to believe it is the
will of God to take Souls into union with Christ, yet a Soul cannot be said
properly habitually to believe this, for indeed the weakest believers, that
have the lowest degree of faith, have the act of faith from whence this habit
of faith proceeds, and so he does in some degree believe the Lords will to
receive his Soul into union with Jesus Christ in the promises. Thus I have done
with the first kind of beams the Devil forges to cast into the Souls eye.

There is a second kind of Beams of Darkness, and those are Dark Distempers.
Though the Devils grand policy be to keep false principles in the souls
judgment, whereby the soul may discern all in a false way that God propounds to
him, yet he has another policy to flee to, and that is Distempers in the
Heart. Now these are also dangerous, and keep the soul from assurance of union
with Christ, while those remain in the soul. Therefore that is a second work of
the spirit to pluck out those dark distempers; And these are also diverse.

The first Dark Distemper is Spiritual Pride. It is Natural Pride working
Spiritually, though sometimes it is Spiritual Pride: Dark Distemper.
And that is a kind of humor, or swelling in the Spirit; Or it is a kind of
lifting up the spirit in a crossness, and aversness to the will of God. This
the Devil causes to grow like a wen upon the souls spiritual eye, whereby he
prevents the souls seeing what the promise holds forth to him. There are two
special workings of this distemper, whereby the soul is prevented from
discerning what the promise holds sorth.

1. It inclines the soul to have his thoughts taken up chiefly in looking
after, and seeking out some excellency and goodness in the soul it self,
whereupon it might stay its soul, and uphold its sinking spirit. And hence you
shall observe (though the heart little mind it, and think it self far enough
off from pride) the souls eye is always upon his own prayers, and duties of
worship, upon his own tears, mourning and groaning, upon the desires of his own
heart, and its workings toward God, upon his own hungering and thirsting after
God; And all the soul complains of under this distemper is commonly (that which
a soul would little think proceeds from pride) that he cannot find any goodness
in himself: Whereas if the truth be found out, and the heart searched to the
bottom, he thinks he has much goodness.

2. It makes the heart averse to the thoughts of receiving all that ever he
shall have, only through mere gift alone. The proud heart will not be beholding
to God in Christ for all, but would have all in his own way. Hence arises a
three-sold distemper.

1. The soul insnarles it self in the interpretation of the promises, and
interprets all the promises against it self. Thence the souls thinks concerning
every promise, it is but given to aggravate my condemnation.

2. Hence arises a conclusion in the soul that it must not, nay sometimes that
it will not receive the Lord Jesus, till it find such and such dispositions, as
the soul conceives necessary to be in it self. Says the soul, if I could find
my heart enlarged toward God, and my deadness and coldness removed, if I could
find a mighty fervency of the spirit of prayer in my heart, I could think
indeed that the promise of the Lord Jesus might belong to me: So that here the
soul sits waiting for, and pursuing after something that he might bring with
him to the Lord Christ, that he might come with his penny, to take his penyworth
of that which God propounds in Jesus Christ.

3. From this aversness to receive all from free grace, arises a neglect and
disregard, of searching into the promises what they hold forth. Propound the
promises to the soul, alas, says the soul, what is this to me, none of these
promises belong to me? Now thence the soul is kept in his doleful blindness
and darkness, through want of gazing upon the promise, and looking upon the
beam of light it holds forth.

A second Distemper is the rashness and unadvisedness of the soul. This
rashness is an unadvised sudden drawing up determinations concerning the souls
condition, Dark Distemper.
without a due examination of the ground from whence the soul draws that
determination, and without a due weighing of those conclusions drawn from
thence in the balance of the Sanctuary. Questionless this is none of the least
distempers, nor none of the least beams that the Devil keeps in the souls eye:
It is one of the most secret dangerous snares, that the Devil catches the feet
of souls in, to put them upon looking on the things of God out of a rational
way. I know no greater difference between true faith, and the hypocrites
temporary faith, the one believes in a rational way by his judgment, when the
other have confused motions toward God without judgment. Now for the further
clearing of this distemper of spirit,

1. Says the soul (through this rash distemper prevailing in his heart) those
to whom the promises of God are intended to be made good, God draws them to
embrace them, but I do not find that God draws me, or gives me power,
therefore I am none to whom this promise is made. The principle is true, but
the conclusion is drawn rashly from it.

1. The soul commonly draws this conclusion without weighing what the drawings
of God are, and what the secret power infused into the soul, to receive those
promises tendered to it, is. I have heard a soul draw this conclusion from this
principle, but when asked what are the drawings of God in the soul, to enable
it to embrace Jesus Christ tendered in the promise, the soul knows not: Ask it,
did ever find the Lord making thy heart willing to receive the Lord Jesus to
be one with thy soul, and to make up an union with the father for thee? O yes,
says the soul, I confess my soul longs for that, I cannot but say I am
willing: And yet in the mean time, through the distemper of rashness, draws
this conclusion that he is none of the number of those to whom the promise is
made, because God does not draw him.

2. Suppose there was not this willingness, yet the conclusion is rashly drawn
from the principle, in regard there is no time that God has limited, or
prescribed to himself, wherein he will draw the hearts of those that he intends
the promises for.

3. The souls ground is false, in regard the Scripture determines not, that the
Lord always acts those inward habitual drawings of his, when he has once
actually drawn.

2. Say some souls, through this rash distemper, that those God intends good
to, he will not suffer them to grow worse and worse under the means, and to
decay in their affections and grow more corrupt: But says the soul, I grow
worse and worse under the means, more corrupt, and my affections decay, and
therefore I am afraid the Lord never intends to do good to me. Now I pray
observe but thine own rashness, in not weighing and trying and searching all
things, to search whether indeed thou be grown worse and worse under the
means or no; and to see in what degree thou art grown more corrupt, and whether
it be such a degree as the Scripture evidenceth, God lets not those that he
intends good to in Christ to fall into sin or no. Here should have been a great
many things weighed, before thou had drawn that conclusion.

I. Thou should have weighed, whether thine heart be grown more corrupt or
no. Diverse things things are considerable there.

1. Though thou judge thy self more corrupt, yet thou may not truly have
more corruption than thou had: A soul is to distinguish between corruptions
that are effectively so, and those that are formally so: It may be thou may
see corruptions formally in thy soul more than before, whereas thou may not
be more corrupt effectively: I mean thus, thou may find more motions unto sin
and wickedness than before, and yet not those motions prevail to sin
effectively, that is, to deprave and corrupt thy soul. Though indeed
interpretatively, and according to the strict law of God, those stirrings of
corruption may be called sin, yet they cannot properly be called corruption,
and thou can not be said to be more and more corrupt; for then they grow
corruptions, when the heart is inclined to them.

2. Thou may judge thy self to have more corruption, and yet there may not be
more corruption neither.

First, God may have cast more light into thy soul than before, when thou did
judge thy self not to be so full of corruption. Now through light every
iniquity has a greater weight upon the spirit than it had formerly: Now the
more weight it has upon the spirit, the more it is taken notice of. And
through more light there is a clearer discovery of the duty that the Lord
requires of the soul, and of the nature and spirituality of the duty: Now the
more exquisitly the soul discerns the duty God requires at his hand, the more
abominable he sees his own heart.

Secondly, if there be not more light, it may be there is a greater tenderness
of spirit infused into thee than formerly. So that thou feel corruptions
more, because the burden of them is more spiritually upon thy heart than
before, and so they appear to be the greater to thee.

3. Corruptions may appear more, when they are not more, in regard there may be
many occasions offered to draw forth inherent corruption into exercise. There
might be as many legions of iniquity in thy heart formerly, though they did not
appear, because they had not the same occasion.

4. Satan may be suffered by God to endeavor to draw out corruption, for the
discovery of corruption, and the mortifying of it. The Lord may suffer Satan
(contrary to his intentions) to war against his own kingdom in thy heart, in
drawing out all his power to stir thy corruptions, that thou may go to heaven
for power to slay them. So that if all these things were well considered, it
may be, the heart would not be found to be more corrupt.

II. Suppose the heart should be grown more corrupt under means for a season.
Suppose the root of sin should get some sap, and bud and sprout again, and send
forth its branches more plentifully, and bring forth more fruit; yet it were to
be weighed before a soul draws such a conclusion, whether sin may not revive
again, and grow more lively for a time even in those who are near to the heart
of God, to whom God intends all the good in the promises tendered by Christ.

III. It would be also considered, whether the Scripture warrants the drawing
such a conclusion, from a real sense of growing worse and worse. It would be
considered, whether the Lord be not tendered to at that time, that thou
might receive such influences of grace from him, as might prevent thy soul
from still growing worse and worse.

IV. It would be considered, whether the soul can find that such a degree of
declension, as it is now fallen into, be such a one as the Lord Christ has
excluded all that fall into it, from receiving himself in the Covenant of Free
Grace, If I should follow up this rashness of the soul further, I might open
that the souls real declension in affections that were formerly, may not be a
sufficient ground to conclude that the soul is grown worse and worse.

1. It would be considered, whether affections did work in the Lords own
orderly way, through the following of the judgment, in closing with the truth
propounded in Christ. It may be the novelty of the truths affected thy heart,
as being new things, and it was not from the dictate of thy judgment, declaring
the excellency of Jesus Christ tendered, that thy affections did work so
powerfully.

2. It would be considered, whether the Lord may not, and does not more
frequently, stir up higher affections in souls in the first holding forth of
the Gospel to them, than he always intends afterward to them. Do you think
that the Prodigal ( Luke 15.44.) had always those expressions of his fathers
delight in his return, that he had when he first returned? Then there must be
the best robe put upon him, and a feast, and music: But it is a question,
whether his father put him on such apparel every day, and make him a feast
every day? So the Lord may, and I believe does, at the first revealing of his
truth, give more affections than he intends to continue, and more stirrings of
grace infused than he intends afterward constantly to continue: yet though
there remain not the same activity, vivacity, liveliness of affection, yet
there may be the same affection remain; nay, it may be the affection may be
grown in its fixedness, and steadiness, and in its orderly way of working
toward Jesus Christ, though it appear not working so powerfully and mightily
as it did before. You see plainly the conclusion is rashly drawn, though from a
true principle considered in some sense.

A third Distemper is fearfulness, the timorous disposition of the soul. Dark
Distemper.
Now you must rightly understand this distemper, for though the Devil cast in
the distemper of fearfulness into some souls to keep them from union with
Christ, yet he casts in the distemper of presumption into more souls, to
prevent them from seeing the face of God in the glass of the Gospel, and so
leads their souls into the pit of darkness. We shall clear it in two or three
conclusions.

1. There cannot be too much holy fear possessing any heart. That is, there
cannot be too much awful reverence of the holy Majesty of God, nor too much
awful respect of God, as he presents himself clothed with the precious robe
of mercy and loving kindness and goodness. This fear God requires, Ps. 130.4.
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

2. There is a fear which is a terror and dread and horror of the avenging
justice of the Almighty God. There is a fear of displeasing this God appearing
in this manner, least his anger should be so kindled, that flames of
indignation should proceed from him, to the consuming of soul and body for
ever. And it is this fear that is too much in the souls of Gods dear ones. This
kind of fear is but a Judas his fear, and a Cain's fear, and a Readiness fear.

3. There is a natural affection of fear that possesses the hearts of men and
women, as men and women. That Is this, a perturbation, or a troubling, or
perplexing, or causing the heart to suffer, through the motions of the blood
and animal spirits to and fro, upon the souls apprehending some evil that he is
in danger to suffer. This kind of fear is not an evil fear absolutely
considered: But this fear becomes a sinful distemper through the
inordinateness of it. As,

1. When it exceeds the bounds of reason. That is, when the heart is perplexed
with some evil he shall suffer, and can give no ground of this fear: The soul
is afraid of the loss of heaven, and the glorious privileges tendered in
Christ, and can render no good account according to reason, why his soul is
thus afraid.

2. When it exceeds the bounds of Grace. That is, when it exceeds the bounds
God has appointed in his word, when it proves a distracting fear, and unfits
the soul for the duty God requires at his hand. And this distemper arises from
three principles, and accordingly produces three effects, whereby the soul is
prevented from discerning the light the promise holds forth.

1. Commonly it arises from the sense of the souls own guiltiness. The sense of
a soul to be a guilty person, naturally stirs up fear of punishment, according
to the disposition of men as men; and working with natural conscience it stirs
up fear of divine vengeance hereafter, and so by this means that sinful fear
prevails and clouds the soul.

2. It arises from the souls apprehension of the height of the consequence, of
the souls right establishment. Fear is begotten by looking upon the danger: It
is like a man standing upon a high Tower, and looking upon the downfall, though
he stands firm, it pales the man, and makes him afraid: So they standing upon
the Tower of Eternity come to be sensible of the great danger, and thence
arises this fear of heart.

3. This fear arises from the darkness and ignorance wherein the soul remains.
I mean his ignorance of the way of the right establishment of the soul, his
ignorance of the nature and large extent of those promises that God vouchsafes
to his soul: Like a blind man that is in continual fear lest he meet with
danger, and stumble and fall. Walking in darkness strikes a fear naturally in
any person, much more does this spiritual darkness produce fear in the soul.
Now this darkness thus risen has three effects to prevent the soul from the
sight of the promise held forth.

1. It causes the soul to create strange unheard of dangers to himself,
through the strength of imagination working by fear. The very strength of
fancy, when this distemper of fear prevails, causes the soul to make new
dangers to it self every moment, and to fear where no fear is: And thence he
multiplies one objection upon another, and the answering of one objection is
but the bringing in of another objection.

2. This distemper of fearfulness, does prevent the souls right use of the
appointed means for the Prevention of real danger discovered. The soul thinking
to escape presumption, by receiving Jesus Christ, lest it have no right to him,
prevents it self of the use of the right means to come to Christ, it makes the
soul mindless of what the promise holds forth.

3. This distemper darkens the reason of the soul, and clouds the precious
divine light that God has infused into it. It looks upon God in Christ through
the dark glass of fear, and so is driven from God in Christ, rather then drawn
to a close with fuller confidence. Now there are two things the spirit of God
is to do for the removing of this distemper.

1. The Spirit of God presents the Lord in his love, compassions, and tender
nature, clothed with the nature of loving kindness, and thereupon begins to
allay that passion of fear, to prevent the rage and dominion of it. The spirit
presents the Lord as it were, coming down with a still gentle voice, speaking
to the soul in a precious alluring, soul-conquering, heart-inamouring way, and
thereby the heart begins to have dispositions begotten in it to close with God,
to draw near to God, whereas it stood before afar off afrighted and astonished.

2. The spirit uses to expostulate with the poor trembling soul, about the
cause of his fear and distemper of heart. The spirit comes and expostulateth
with the soul, why art thou so afraid thou trembling soul? why do stand
shaking like a leaf in the forest shaken with the wind? why is thy heart so
perplexed? Says the spirit, Christ will receive thee if thou be willing to
receive Then it may be, the passion of fear is allayed, and the soul brought to
close with the tender of love in Jesus Christ, and the soul is brought to a
holy fear and trembling, laying his mouth in the dust before God, thinking
himself worthy to go into the pit of woe for ever, yet yielding to receive what
the Lord propounds in Christ.

A fourth Distemper is Over much Jealousy, Jealousy of God, and Jealousy of
his own heart. Dark Distemper.
The soul is exceeding prone out of measure, to a strange unheard of Jealousy
of God, to have evil surmisings of God. Look to some profane ones,

1. They have such evil surmisings, as they suspect God in his being, Psalm.
14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.

2. A Second sort surmise that God regards not the commission of sin so as
others would persuade them. Like those Psalm. 50, 21. that think the Lord to be
such a one as themselves, they think there need be no such strictness to go to
heaven as others would make toem believe: That Is the meaning of that, thou
thoughtest I was such a one as thy self: thou thoughtest I would admit thee
into heaven, notwithstanding all the transgressions thou live in.

3. Others surmise, that God is a hard master, one that puts heavy yokes upon
the neck of his people that they cannot be able to bear. They think it a heavy
yoke that they can take none of their cursed pleasures and delights, and
therefore they had as good be out of the world, should they come to that near
closing and joining with God in Christ; to be one with him.

4. A Fourth sort surmise that God will accept of them, though they go on in
the way of iniquity, if they repent at last.

5. A Fifth sort are the formal civil ones, who think God will be satisfied if
they pay every man his own, and do none any wrong, and perform the duties of
Gods worship he requires at their hands.

6. A Sixth sort are those that are detained from God by a distemper of
unbelief. Unbelief cannot think that the love of God should be extended to the
worst of sinners: Nay says the soul, the word of God has declared the
contrary; All shall not be the objects of the loving kindness of God in Christ,
therefore those expresions of his love belongs not to me, says the Soul. Now
there are two ways how this distemper comes thus to prevail, and there are two
or three sad effects it has in the heart.

1. This distemper proceeds from another distemper even as bad, and that is
from a sensual Judgment maintained in the Soul. The glorious things of the
Gospel being inevident unto the eye of sense, yea to the eye of reason, being
things the eye of man, as man, never saw; nor the ear of man, as man, never
heard; nor the heart of man, as man, never conceived: a man must needs pass a
false Judgment upon them, when he Judges by a sensual Judgment, and say with
Nicodemus, how can these things be? what to have such iniquities and rebellions
cast by into the bottom of the Sea, and never remembered any more; To have my
polluted Soul looked upon as righteous as an Angel it self, by the imputed
righteousness of Jesus Christ, how can it be? Now by judging the glorious
Mysteries of the Gospel thus, by a sensual judgment, the soul comes to be
jealous and supicious of God, that it cannot be, that God intends such love
toward his soul, as he manifests in his expressions.

2. This Jealousy arises from the souls measuring Gods way by its own way.
According to this principle, the soul thinks, if any man should offer such
injury to me, as I have done to God, I might profess love, but I could never
forget him; Therefore he concludes, the Lord can never forget those injuries
his soul has offered to him. But God tells us, Isa. 55.7 His ways are above
our ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts: As if he should say, do not
conceive, because it is impossible for man to pardon so abundantly, that
therefore I will not. Now in judging Gods ways according to our ways, this
jealousy prevails, and does produce these sad effects in the heart, that
prevent the souls discerning its union with Christ in the promise.

1. By this Distemper there are groundless conclusions drawn up by the soul
against it self. The soul once entertaining jealous thoughts of God, seldom
stays there, but jealousy like a Canker eats off more and more the good
thoughts it should have of God, till at last it draws full conclusions, that
the Lord has no good thoughts at all toward it. The soul commonly proceeds
from care to fear, from fear to jealousy, and from jealous suspicions to hard
conclusions.

2. This distemper causes an evil eye in the soul. I mean this, he draws an
evil conclusion from all Gods works: Let God vouchsafe precious revelations of
the mystery of his will, through the Gospel of Jesus Christ to him, while the
heart remains under this distemper, What says the heart? I am afraid it is, but
to harden me, I am afraid it is to increase my condemnation. Let God take away
his ordinances again, and there is as ill a construction made of that; the soul
under the jealousy presently concludes, i^ if the Lord intended any good to
his soul, he would let him use the means, but says the soul, I have abused the
means, and now am deprived of it, and therefore now I fear there is no hope.
Again, if you look upon the Lords dealing with the soul outwardly, if the Lord
lay affliction upon him, now I may see indeed, says he, that the Lord is
angry, the Lords indignation is kindled against me for my sin, and I know not
but it may be a beginning of my everlasting torments, and the soul never
searches whether it may out of faithfulness, that the Lord comes thus to
chastise outwardly, according to that in Ps. 119.95. Or let the Lord vouchsafe
prosperity outwardly to such a soul, ten to one as sad constructions are made
of such dealings of God too.

3. It causes the soul to rely upon sight and sense alone, in its searching
and seeking for the manifestation of his union with Jesus Christ. The jealous
heart will trust God no further than he sees him: So that hereby the soul
remains under an impossibility of attaining any assurance to his faith of his
union with Christ, in regard by this the soul does even renounce the use of
faith. Now the spirit seeks to remove this distemper, and to bring the heart
into a sweet confidence of God, and to crediting what God propounds, by these
means.

1. The spirits represents the expressions of the Lords love to the soul, in
the latitude and fullness of them. It makes it appear to be so full, so complete
and perfect a love, as there is not the least imaginable cause of jealousy:
And surely this is the very intention of the Spirit of God, in so often heaping
up expressions upon expressions, in setting out the love of God in Christ: the
Spirit of God does even rise to the highest kind of expressions that is
possible in this way for this end, seldom names the grace of God, (that is to
say the love of God) but he calls it riches of grace, nay abundant riches, and
the exceeding riches of his grace.

2. The Spirit in this case reveals the Lords strong confirmation of all those
expressions of his love. The Spirit reveals how the Lord has bound himself to
the performance of all those expressions of love, in the latitude and fullness
of them, to every Iota and point, to the least tittle.

1. The Spirit reveals the Lords promise of faithfulness, in the expression of
his love. Then in Hos. 2.19. God tells the Church, I will betroth thee unto my
self, in righteousness and judgment, and in loving kindness and in mercies.

2. The Spirit reveals the Lords confirmation of it by his own hand writing.
All the Scriptures are given as the hand writing of himself, only for the
manifestation of the sincerity, and integrity of the heart of God in the love
he intends to Souls: The very end of writing all the Scriptures is primarily to
draw Souls to believe, and secondarily, to believe gradually more and more to
perfection, till they come to this full assurance of Faith. The whole
Scriptures of the Lord and New Testament, are but one blessed letter of love,
sent from heaven by God, written by the blessed Secretary of heaven, the
blessed Spirit of God; The Inscription is nothing else but this, My love to
poor loveless rebellious souls through my dearly beloved Son the Lord Jesus:
The whole matter is nothing else but this, Come in and embrace my love.

3. The Spirit reaveals that the Lord has added his oath to it, Heb. 6.17. And
this he does that the soul may receive the strongest consolation from the Lords
intentions in the reality of his love.

4. The Spirit reveals the Lord has confirmed it by Witnesses, 1 John 5.7, 8,
9. The glorious Trinity, the three persons in one Essence, they are Witnesses
to it. Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost are Witnesses in Heaven, and the Water
and Blood are Witnesses on Earth.

5. The Spirit reveals, that the Lord has confirmed it by Seals. The common
broad Seals, I mean the Sacraments, that are outward Witnessing signs, or
Confirming signs of the Lords intentions of love to Souls in the Lord Jesus.
What is the Lords Supper but a mere confirming sign, to confirm the Soul in
believing the Faithfulness of God, and his loving Souls in Jesus Christ; To
witness to the Soul thus much, that as surely as he sees the Bread broken, as
he sees the Wine poured out, so surely did the glorious God of Heaven and
Earth, send the Dearly Beloved of his own Soul clothed with an humane nature,
to have his Body broken, and his Blood poured out, that thereby there might be
an union with himself, for such a rebellious Soul. Nay the Lord has given his
privy Signet, which is the Seal of his own Spirit, that his Spirit should
assuredly Witness and Seal up unto Souls, his love in receiving them into Union
with the Lord Jesus.

3. The Spirit reveals the nature of God himself to the soul. It is not the
knowledge of what God has said, but the knowledge of what God is in himself,
that causes the soul to trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will
trust in thee; That is, they that know the Lord indeed: while the nature of God
is unknown, unbelief of necessity bares rule in every Soul.

4. The Spirit of God reveals the Lords removal of all causes of suspicion or
Jealousy whatever, concerning the Lords faithfulness and love. There are but
two general grounds of Jealousy.

First, Some experience of the unfaithfulness of God. Now the Spirit has
prevented the least imaginary ground this way; in regard the Lord has never
failed in performing to the uttermost, all the love he expressed hitherto,

Secondly, The second ground of Jealousy must be some fear of the Lords taking
dislike of the Soul, because of the Souls unfaithfulness to God. Now the Spirit
of God reveals to the Soul, the Lords removal of all grounds of suspicion, by
showing the Lord intends not to take any mislike from loving of souls, whatever
imaginary wickedness the Soul should commit against him. That is, the Spirit
reveals the Lords declaration of passing by the treachery and filthiness of the
Soul, or remembering its iniquity no more; That is, the Spirit reveals the Lords
constant acceptance of Souls after treachery, without respect to the treachery,
to diminish his love for it, Jer. 3.1.

5. And lastly, The Spirit of God reveals the Lords pressing urgent
persuasions, invitations, and commands, to a fullness of confidence of all the
love to poor Souls that he has expressed to them. Thereupon the Spirit comes
to argue thus, Will thou not trust the Lord, that knows his own love and
compassions best of all? He alone knows himself, and thou art not able to
comprehend him; The light that thou have is but a small spark, says the Spirit
of God, to that great light that dwells in him, and will thou trust to thine own
spark of light, rather then to the fountain of light? Hereby in all these ways
the Spirit of God removes this Jealous Distemper, plucks out this Beam from the
Souls Eyes, and brings the Soul into a precious believing frame. This is the
First part of the Fourth Distemper that the Spirit of God must remove, and that
is the Jealousy of God.

There is a second Branch of this Jealousy, or a second way, how this
Distemper of Jealousy works; and that is as it works toward the Souls own
heart. The Devil endeavors to make the Soul Jealous of his own heart, and
would have him suspect that his own wicked heart cannot receive the will of God
rightly, and to make it fear it should close falsely, if it should think of
receiving the blessed will of God. This Distemper of Jealousy is hardly
healed, because it has so strong a hold, it comes under the shape of
Godliness, It has a pretense of the greatest sincerity and integrity that is
possible, it tells the Soul it is a sign of sincerity to be jealous of its own
deceitfulness, it tells the Soul it were a sign of presumption if it were not
jealous.

This Distemper we shall endeavor to discover, and for the clearing of it you
must conceive, that I do not condemn all jealousy in a Soul. There are diverse
kinds of Jealousy that the Scripture speaks of.

1. There is a Jealousy over others, least they should miscarry. Which is a
holy supition mingled with a holy fear of their departing from God, and also
joined with a strength of desire of their keeping close unto God. This kind of
jealousy was in the heart of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2. I am Jealous over you with a
Godly Jealousy, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ.

2. There may be a jealousy in the heart that is occasioned upon the sight of
good in others, and the excellency they have attained to. That Is a kind of
emulation; That you shall read of Romans 11.11. Paul tells the Jows, that God had
not cast them off altogether out of a purpurpose that they might fall, but that
through their fall the Gentiles might be called, that the Jews might be
provoked to Jealousy; that is, that they might be provoked to a kind of
emulation, to envy to go beyond the Gentiles: Thus a Christians heart may be
Jealous, least another go before him, and attain to a greater degree of
holiness then his Soul attainneth to: This is a Godly Jealousy.

3. There is a Jealousy over the deceitfulness of the heart, least the cursed
heart should delude it, and prove treacherous, and join hand in hand with the
Devil in some cursed Plot against the Soul. This is a Godly Jealousy if it be
kept within bounds: This Jealousy over the heart, if it be right, is a
compounded affection, made up of two simple affections, of the zeal of love,
and the zeal of hatred: Or rather, it is a kind of third thing that arises
from both these, that is a zeal of love to God, and the ways of God, and a zeal
of hatred against whatever is contrary to the will of the blessed God, so that
there arises a kind of suspicion of every thing that may possibly step in to
dishonor God. This Jeaiousie has but two objects to which it can work.

1. All things that may step in to be corrival with God. That is, whatever
might strive to insinuate into the heart, to steal away the heart from God, or
to be co-sharer with God, to be a fellow beloved one with God himself: Thus the
world and all the world afords, comes in to be the object concerning which the
Soul exercises this Jealousy, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life, these strive with all their strength to be corrivals with
God in the heart, to have as equal a share in the heart as God, and to be as
highly loved and honored as God. Now over these things the heart may be
exceeding Jealous, and ought to maintain a constant Jealousy.

2. The second object of Jealousy is the Souls own act toward God. That is,
whatever working there may be toward God, there may be a disposition in the
heart to deal fainedly and hypocritically. Now in that regard because the heart
is treacherous against it self, a heart false to God, filled with enmity
against God, therefore all the actions and motions of the heart, are the
objects upon which this Jealousy may be exercised in a right holy godly way.
There may be five acts of Jealousy in every Soul lawful, nay that ought to be.

1. The Soul may be so Jealous of it self, as to call his heart to a strict
account, concerning all the motions of it, throughout all the whole course of
his conversation. He may be so suspicious, as never to give credit to his heart
in any thing, any further than it can give a good account to him, in all the
motions of it.

First, It may call its heart to account, in what degree it has wrought
toward any of those objects. To call the heart to account, whether the
affections did not run out too much after the world.

Secondly, It may call its heart to account, concerning the occasions it has
had to deal with any object whatever.

2. The Soul may discover the danger, and spread forth all the evil before the
treacherous heart. The Spirit of Jealousy may work so far, that it may strive
to put a bit and bridle into the wanton heart to restrain it; It may strive to
propound principles that may prevent its treachery.

3. A soul may cry mightily to God with all his strength, to prevent the
wretched deceitfulness of his own heart: To discover all the hidden bypath
that his own heart has to walk in, to give him light from heaven to see every
step that his heart sets.

4. The Soul may summons his own deceitful heart to appear before the Lord, to
act as in the sight of the heart-searching God, in its closing with the Lord
Christ tendered.

5. It may so work as to cause the soul to renounce all confidence in it self,
of an uprightness in his own heart, in its closing with the Lord Christ
tendered. So that thus far you see, there is a Holy Jealousy of Spirit, over
the cursed deceitful heart, that may possess, yea ought to possess any Godly
Soul. But there is a distempered Jealousy too, that darkens the Soul, and
prevents the Souls receiving assurance to his faith from the promise of his
union with Christ; and that is when this Spirit of Jealousy works in these
four or five ways.

1. When the Spirit of Jealousy prevails so far, as to obtain the sole command
of the heart. Now this Jealousy comes to be the rage of a man, so as it
becomes a distempered passion, in stead of a holy affection; So as instead of
putting the soul into a precious way of searching out the deceit of his own
heart, it rather draws conclusions against it self, without weighing and
examining, what the deceits of the heart are that are suspected.

2. When this Jealousy makes the Soul negligent or careless of the use of the
means, to find out the truth of what it suspects. So that in stead of this, the
heart sits down under those fears and suspicions, crying out, my wretched heart
will deceive me, I dare not think of receiving the Lord Jesus tendered.

3. When the Soul is so overcome with Jealousy, that it takes no account of it
self, of the ground of the working of the Jealousy. It is the ordinary
distemper of Souls that are overcome with this Jealousy, that they never look
out to the precious promises, wherein the Lord engages himself to prevent the
deceitfulness of the heart, and its departing from God.

4. When this Jealousy so prevails, as it is taken up by the Soul as a
sufficient Plea against the Souls present believing and receiving the Lord
Jesus tendered. When the Soul sets this Jealousy over his own deceitful heart
like a bulwark, against all that can be propounded to him, to make him give
credit to the will of God, and to yield obedience to the Lord Christ tendered:
when the heart thinks it is enough that he is able to say, truly the very
desire of my Soul is to yield obedience to the command of God in believing,
sain would I receive the Lord Jesus tendered, but alas I have such a cursed
deceitful heart that I dare not, least my heart delude me.

5. When the Jealousy over the heart prevails so much, as the Soul spends all
his thoughts in finding out the uprightness of his heart in closing, before the
soul venture upon an actual closing with the Lord Jesus as tendered. When a
Soul through this Jealousy sets porcing and gazing upon the many windings and
turnings of his own spirit, and calling to remembrance how wretchedly his heart
deluded him formerly, and hereupon concludes with himself, that he may not
close till he can see the uprightness of his heart, in closing with the Lord
Jesus; And so thereupon afterward spends all his prayers, and pours out all
his desires to God for uprightness, for integrity of heart in closing, and in
the mean time forbearing that actual closing that the Lord requires without the
least delay from every Soul. Thus you see also how this Jealousy comes to work
in a sinful way, and becomes a sinful Distemper; And indeed when (...) comes
thus work, it exceedingly darkens the Soul, and prevents its discerning what
the promise holds forth.

1. In regard Jealousy prevents the souls gazing upon the absolute promise
that is tendered to the soul. Now the soul must needs be kept from discerning
what the promise holds forth, when it is kept from so much as looking into the
promise; for though there be habitual divine light in the promise, yet that's
not useful till it be drawn out into exercise. Habitual divine light in the
understanding, is like the eye when it is asleep, or like the eye when it is
shut, It is the exercise of that, that makes the soul discern any thing that
the Lord discovers in the promises; And then it is the very gazing upon the
promise, that draws out that divine light formerly received in exercise also.

2. This Distemper of Jealousy maintains perpetual fear in the soul, of its
false applying of the promise of the Lord Jesus. Fear is always the companion
of Jealousy, the more fearful the soul is, the more jealous, and the more
jealous the soul is, the more fearful; and those fears are like a thick fog or
mist, that darkens the divine light received: So that by this means the soul is
kept from discerning any of those beams of divine light in any clearness, that
the promise of God holds forth, and thereby the soul is kept from discerning
his union with the Lord Jesus, that might be discerned from the promises, Now
this jealousy over the heart it self must be healed, before the soul can
receive clear satisfaction to it self of its union with Christ.

Two ways the spirit of God usually heals this.

1. The spirit presses with all urgency upon the soul, the present immediate
necessity of his yielding obedience to the command of God, without any pretense
whatever of any delay and deferring. Commonly upon these distempers of
Jealousy prevailing, the soul denies not the Lord Jesus tendered, only
conceives himself to have sufficient ground to delay and defer a while, till
he see clearly a more suitable uprightness in his heart to close. Now the spirit
comes upon the soul, and presses it upon his heart to be his duty immediately
without the least delay; Hereby the soul begins to be drawn to adventure to
believe, though it be with trembling, lest his wretched heart should deceive
him.

2. The spirit discovers to the soul, the independency of his own interest in
the promise, upon any act of his own considered in himself. The spirit clears
to the soul the Lords engagement of himself, as well to make the heart
faithful, and true and upright, in receiving the Lord Jesus tendered, as to
give the Lord Jesus to the soul that would receive him. The spirit it may be
brings such a promise as that Jer. 31.33. I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God and they shall be
my people; and reveals to the soul from thence, the Lords engagement of himself
to put in faithfulness into the deceitful hypocritical heart, whereby the close
shall be in truth and sincerity, notwithstanding all the wretched wickedness of
his own heart striving to deceive him.

The Fifth Dark Distemper is, The souls measuring and judging its self, too too
much by other Christians, Dark Distemper.
by the graces and excellencies that shine forth in other souls.

We shall open it to you, how far it is lawful for a soul thus to measure
himself by other Christians, and by the rule of their graces: And then how this
distemper comes to prevail, and how it works. It must be concluded, that there
is a lawfulness in a souls measuring himself by the rule and line of the graces
of other Christians, to try his own heart and way, by comparing his own heart
and way by the heart and way of other Christians as far as he can discern.
There are seven or eight particular acts that are not only lawful for a soul in
this case, but the soul is bound to them.

1. Every soul allured toward the Lord Jesus, ought with the greatest
diligence and circumspection that is possible, to have a full prospect, a full
view, into the hearts and lives of other Christians. The Lord has intended
from eternity, to propose the whole number of Saints, like so many glorious
heavenly Stars, set in the lower region of the earth, from whence the beams of
his own excellency may shine forth: They are set like so many Suns in the
Firmament, for all the World to gaze upon; according to Prove. 4.18. The
righteous is like the Sun, that shines more and more until the perfect day:
Yea further, The precious beams of the Lords own glory, are appointed to shine
forth through their light; So that every soul neglects the beholding of the
glory of God himself, in the precious glasses that he has appointed for his
people, to see the reflection of his glory in, when they neglect to make a
diligent search into the hearts of all Christians within view.

2. Every soul ought, in the view that he takes of the hearts and lives of
Saints and their graces, to have a reflection upon his heart and life, and his
own grace. Every soul ought to look upon these Saints, as we look upon glasses,
that we may discern our own faces.

3. Every Christian ought to compare his own graces, with the graces he
discerns in all Christians within his view. First, they ought to measure the
graces themselves. Secondly, the expressions of those graces in their duties.
First, they ought to measure the graces themselves, even the inward habits of
grace, so far as they can discern them in others. 1. They ought to compare the
strength of their own graces, with the strength and vigor of those graces they
discern in other Christians. 2. They ought to compare the strength of their own
graces with the graces of others, in the fruit and increase of it. When any
Christian flourishes, like a Tree planted by the waters side, that brings
forth his fruit in due season, every Christian ought to compare the growth of
his own grace, to the growth of the grace of such a Christian. 3. They ought to
compare the time of growth of the grace of such a Christian, with the time that
their grace has had to grow. 4. To compare the means of growth of grace. A
soul discerning any grace exercised in any Christian, ought to consider what
means he has had to grow to that eminency in such a grace; whether have I had
the same means? whether has the means been as effectual upon my heart, as upon
such a Christian? 5. To compare the liveliness and activity of all those graces
constantly, with the liveliness and activity of their own. Secondly, they ought
to compare the expressions of their own graces in way of duty to God, with the
expressions of the graces of others.

First, in the quantity of the duties.

Secondly, in the quality of the duties.

First, in the quantity of the duties, in the number and bulk of them, God
sometimes stands much upon quantity of duty to his people: Therefore upon a
Souls discerning some Christians to be much in duty, it may be to spend much
time in prayer, they ought to compare themselves and their own duties, with the
duties of others. Only these two rules are to be observed in it. First, to
observe whether the duties of any such Christians be not extended too far, that
they do not place the opinion of all good in duty, that they do not bound and
stint God to such a length in duty. Now duties may be extended too far, there
may be excess in performing duties of prayer. 1. When ordinary duties are
performed in excess by a soul without an extraordinary occasion. 2. When duties
are extended beyond the souls ability and opportunity. Ability and opportunity
are constant limitations set to all the duties God requires. Secondly, this
rule also must be observed. That a soul does keep a right proportion, in all
his measuring of his own duties by others duties. 1. Every soul upon discerning
any Christian to excel in the quantity of duty, ought to compare his own
ability with others ability. According as the Lord gives so he requires, to
whom much is given from him he expects much. Luke 12.48. Though the duty of one
Christian should not be so much in quantity, as the duty of another, yet it may
be as much, considering the souls ability every way, for the duty that he
performs. 2. The soul must always look to proportion the occasion. It must
see upon what occasion such a Christian is so much exercised in duties, and see
whether the same occasion be his souls. In time of temptation, or in time of
violent corruption, or in time of much inward bitterness of soul, it ought to
exercise the quantity of duties, more than at another time. If occasions come
in extraordinary, the Lord requires extraordinary duties. As in 2 Cor. 12.7, 8,
when Paul was urged with an extraordinary temptation, a thorn pricked him in the
flesh, then Paul falls upon extraordinary duty, he prayed thrice, that is
often. So in Act. 12, when Peter was in prison, and likely to be brought to
execution, the Church went to prayer without ceasing. 2. The soul must always
proportion his own opportunity, to the opportunity of those he discerns to be
much in duty. Opportunity is a talent as well as any thing else, and the Lord
expects the improvement of that talent as well as other talents: where the Lord
gives opportunity for duty, he requires much duty. 4. The soul also is to
proportion its necessity. Now the necessities of souls are various: One needs a
great deal of food to maintain the life of his soul, and another may be
maintained with less. 5. There must be a proportion held in the spiritual
engagements and obligations, wherein a soul stands engaged to God. 1. The
proportion must be observed, in the souls reception of the spirit of adoption
from God. The more fully the spirit of adoption is come down into the heart,
the more nearly is the heart engaged to duty, and to greater multiplication of
duty, in regard by the receipt of the holy spirit of adoption, there is greater
ability conveyed into the soul for the duty. 2. The soul must hold proportion
in his revelations of the truth of God to the soul. The more clear beams of
divine light of truth, the Lord communicates to any soul, the more deeply is
that soul engaged to God and unto duty. 3. The soul must proportion the
engagement of the Lords making his person more conspicuous to the world. The
more conspicuously the Lord sets up any soul, to be gazed upon by the world,
the more does the Lord engage the soul to all kind of duty. 4. They must
proportion the degree of communion, that God vouchsafes to take the soul into
with himself. Gradually according to the degree of communion the soul has with
God, so are the souls engagements to the multiplication of duty. That Is the
first branch of this way of measuring, The soul must measure the quantity of
his duties.

Secondly, The soul must also measure and compare the quality of his own
duties, with the quality of the duties he perceives to be performed by others.
It is not the bulk only God accepts, but it is the manner, the spirituality,
the exactness and exquisitness of the performing those duties, that the Lord
especially looks at. The Israelites seldom failed in the bulk of the duty the
Lord required, they gave him his Oxen, and Lambs, and He Goats and Sheep, and
the like; but they failed in the spirituality of those duties of worship that
the Lord required, and therefore the Lord called those obblations, vain
oblations. So that though the quantity of a souls duty should hold proportion
with the quantity of the duty of others, yet he must look whether the quality
will hold proportion, whether the spirituality of the duty will proportion with
their duty, whether there be as much inward adoration before God, as much
inward self abasement of spirit, as much strength in pursuing after Communion
with God. Neither is it sufficient for the quality of duties to hold proportion
with the quality of the duties of some other Christians, but all the former
rules also must be observed as far as they can be applied to this. Where the
Lord has furnished with more inward ability, and inward strength, there he
looks for the duty to excel in quality as well as quantity. Thus you have the
third act of the soul opened, which is the comparing of his own graces, with
the graces it discerns in the hearts and lives of other Christians.

Fourthly, The soul may from comparing himself with other Christians, and his
graces and his duties with theirs, endeavor to convict himself of all the evil
that can be found out, either in his heart or life.

1. To convince him of all his voluntary defects. By discerning how the
principles of other Christians are improved to the honor of God, the soul may
convince himself of his wilful defects, that he that has received the same
principle, should walk so far contrary to God.

2. The Soul may endeavor to convince it self, of all his unsuitable walking
to his Profession, by gazing upon the brightness of that principle of
Christianity professed by other Christians, that shine forth in their
Conversations.

3. The Soul may endeavor to convince it self of his own unsutableness in his
walking, to his engagements unto God.

4. And lastly, of his unsuitableness to the rest of the Members of the Body of
Christ.

V. Every Soul ought to endeavor to break his own Heart, for any disproportion
he can discern between his own Life and the Lives of other Christians; between
his own Grace, and their Graces. There are many precious Soul-melting
arguments, that a Soul may help it self to toward the breaking of his own
heart, for any unsuitable walking toward Jesus Christ, by measuring his own
Life and Graces, with the Graces of other Christians.

1. The Soul may be helped to a clearer sight of the transcendency of the
riches of the Lords Grace in Christ to his Soul.

2. The Soul may have a discovery of the superlative degree of the perverseness
of his Heart to God. Seeing the disproportion between himself and other
Christians; he may say, Lord, what a cursed, crooked, hellish, perverse Heart
have I!

3. The Soul may have a discovery of the height of dishonor done to Jesus
Christ by him, when he shall see that those that he professes himself to be
fellow members with, so bearing up the brightness of the Image of Jesus Christ
in their Conversations; and then reflect upon himself, and see scarce so much
as any spark of that glorious Image of Christ to shine forth in him.

4. From thence the Soul may have an inward holy shame to seize upon it, to see
the growth and increase of the Members of Christ, his Brethren, and see himself
so barren, so empty and poor.

VI. Every Soul may and ought to pass the sentence of condemnation against his
own Soul, from a discovery of any unsutableness in his Heart and Life, to the
Hearts and Lives of other Christians.

VII. A Soul may measure himself so far by the Graces of others, as to draw
quickening arguments from thence, to awaken his Heart to more watchfulness,
diligence and circumspection.

1. From the sight of the Graces of other Christians excelling his own, a Soul
may and ought to propound to himself the Lords separation of his Soul as only
peculiar to himself, as well as the Souls, of those that so much excel him in
Grace.

2. A Soul may from thence propound to himself, the Lords predestination of
him, to as full a a participation of the fullness of Christ, as any of those
that he sees excel him in Grace. From thence the Soul may argue with God, why
should others have such a large spark of Grace from Christ, when I am so empty
and poor, and have scarce any thing of Christ.

3. A Soul may from hence find out this argument, that the glory and honor of
Jesus Christ as much depends upon his Soul, as upon the Souls of other
Christians that so far excel him in Grace.

4. The Soul may from thence propound to himself a necessity of conformity
between all the members of Jesus Christ, and thereby awaken his Heart to strive
for the height of perfection, or Grace, that he discerns in any Christian.

VIII. And lastly, the Soul may and ought to keep a constant view of the Graces
of all other Christians within his sight, with a constant reflection upon his
own Heart, so as to provoke him to Jealousy, to a kind of Emulation, least
other Christians should magnify and exalt the name of Jesus Christ, by a
suitable conversation, more than he. Thus you see how far it is lawful for any
Christian to measure himself by other Christians, by their Hearts and Lives,
their Graces and Duties.

The second thing to be opened is, when a Soul measuring himself by other
Christians becomes a dark sinful distemper; or when a Soul measures himself too
too much by other Christians; so that by measuring himself by others, he keeps
himself from that blessed heavenly light that should shine into his Heart,
whereby he might receive satisfaction of his union with Christ. There are four
ways, how this measuring a man's self by other Christians, becomes a dark
distemper.

I. When a man makes his conformity to the Graces and Duties of other
Christians, to be the ground of his Faith; either in the first act of Faith, in
consenting to the blessed will of God revealed, or else in the renewed exercise
of Faith again upon any occasion. That is thus, when the Soul conceives himself
to have good grounds to hope that the Lord is willing to accept his Soul into
union with Christ, when he sees the same holiness and activity of Spirit for
God, the same Heavenliness and Spirituality, the same precious Dispositions
working in their strength in his Soul to God, that he discerns to be in other
Christians: And on the contrary the Soul conceives himself to have no good
ground to believe the Lords willingness to accept his loveless Soul in Christ;
when he discerns a great disproportion between his Heart and other Christians,
when he beholds his own Heart dead, and other Christians lively; his own Heart
shut up, and others enlarged in all their faculties toward God. This distemper
is both exceeding sinful, and exceeding dark, when it grows once to this.

1. It is a proportioning the love of God toward poor loveless Souls,
according to the proportion of Grace and Holiness in that Soul. Yea the Soul by
this makes the Eternal unchangeable love of God to be alterable, various, and
changeable, according to the alterations and variations of Man's Heart.

2. It is a vailing and eclipsing at least, if not a nullifying, the freedom of
the Lords love in Christ, to poor loveless despicable Souls. It is a making the
Lords love to depend upon the Graces and Holiness in Souls, and to be conveyed
into Souls upon that ground.

3. It makes the Soul nullify, undervalue, and wretchedly disparage all the
precious promises in Gods blessed Book. The Soul makes those unchangeable Words
of God insufficient to support and uphold a poor sinking, troubled, laden Soul,
and to satisfy it concerning Gods will, to receive it into union with himself
in the Lord Jesus.

4. It is a departing from the precious Springs of Consolation, dug by the
Omnipotent God for thirsty Souls, and a choosing a poor empty dry brook.

II. When a Soul in making a just parallel between himself and others, makes
every defect that he beholds in the proportion of his own Graces and Duties, to
the Graces and Duties of other Christians, to be a sufficient ground whence to
draw a conclusion of his contrary state, to the state of other Christians, that
he beholds to excel him in so a high a measure. When it rises to this, it
becomes a sinful dark distemper, and that will appear in diverse things,

1. This may prove a measuring of Gods love, by the acts of his love.

2. It may be an arguing merely from a Souls want of light to discern Gods good
will to him in Christ.

3. It makes the Soul draw a conclusion of the total want of the being of
Grace; while a Soul thus concludes, because he sees no Graces shining forth in
himself, as he does in others, that therefore he is not beloved of God in
Christ; it may come to argue in this manner, because I see my Soul is not such
a burning and shining light, as such a Christian, therefore I am not so much as
smoking flax.

4. This argument from the defect of Grace, may be an argument from the Souls
infirmity. It may be but an argument from the Tyranny that some lust has
exercised over the Heart, to the concluding it is under the voluntary service
of his lust.

5. It may be a reasoning from the want of fruitfulness in Christianity, to the
want of Christianity it self, and the want of all fritfulness whatsoever. Now
when the Soul is about to draw such conclusions as these, from its measuring it
self by other Christians, let these things be observed;

1. He must first assure himself, that the defect he beholds in his own Soul is
a sinful defect. Four things the Soul must be assured the defect comes not
from, before he can be assured the defect is Sin.

First, That it is not barely through the suspension of the influence of the
comforting Spirit of Christ.

Secondly, It must be assured that the defects he beholds in his own Soul, of
the Graces of others, be not through the Lords suspending the arbitrary
influences of the quickening Spirit of Christ. You must conceive there are
influences that are for the Souls Being, and influences that are for the Souls
well Being. These influences of the quickening Spirit of Christ that are for the
Souls Being, are never withdrawn, But the influences that are for the Souls
well Being, are communicated in various degrees, to various Souls, which
therefore I call arbitrary influances of the Spirit of Christ, that is, such as
God disposes of according to his mere pleasure to the Soul, in diverse degrees,
at diverse times, and to diverse Souls in diverse times.

Thirdly, The Soul must be assured, that the defect he beholds in his own Soul,
in respect of the Graces of other Christians, proceeds not only from the
defects of gifts, thar others furnished with the same Graces enjoy above him.
Gifts are like a precious cundit-pipes, that the Lord has appointed to let out
the streams of the Spirit of Jesus Christ through: Now if another Soul has
more abundance of those kind of gifts, more readiness of Capacity, quickness of
Understanding, greater depths in the apprehension of the things of Christ;
clearness of light, more readiness of expression; Then thy Soul may be
deceived, in judging a greater degree of Grace in such a Soul than in thy Soul;
in regard he has a greater opportunity of expression of Grace, and a greater
aptness to hold forth Grace received, than thou have.

Fourthly, The Soul must be assured that it is not from the defect of the means
and opportunity only, without any negligence of any means by the Soul, that his
defect of Grace proceeds from.

2. The Soul must be assured, that those defects that he beholds in himself,
are such defects as are altogether inconsistent with the state of the union of
the Soul with Christ. Whatever gives a true and sufficient demonstration of its
cause, must be an effect that proceeds properly from such a cause only, that
cannot proceed from another cause.

3. The Soul must be also sure that Spiritual Rashness, and Wilfulness, or
Ignorance, or Temptation, do not overcloud his Judgment, in his searching out
and trying the defects in the Soul. Therein I shall advise to three things.

1. The Soul ought to be sure that he trust not his own light alone.

2. The Soul ought to bring all things, both in their substance, and in their
circumstances, that are worthy to be weighed, to the rule of the Word alone.

3. A Soul must endeavor that his Judgment be settled by God. That's thus; The
Soul that has his Judgment past upon his own defects, and the nature of them
to be such, as is inconsistent with the state of union with Christ, must
endeavor to draw near to God; to bring himself into the presence of the Heart
searching God, with a serious apprehension, and meditation, that all the
secrets of his Spirit are open before God; and then, and there in this frame to
view over again, and meditate upon, that Judgment that he finds himself ready
to pass against his own Soul, and then observe whether his Spirit then dare
pass this conclusion against himself.

III. When a Soul in measuring himself by others, makes the defect of Grace in
himself, to be the matter of discouragement of his Soul, and matter of
impediment to the exercise of his Faith in Christ. That is, when the Soul by
looking upon some other Christians, and beholding many precious, gracious, holy
dispositions shine forth, like so many Stars in the lower orb, when he sees
much holy fire drop down from Heaven into their Hearts, that drop forth in
their Conversations; and looks upon himself and sees a defect in all: Sees his
own Heart overgrown with dullness, stupidness, blockishness, carelessness,
forgetfulness of God, regardlesness of Communion with God in Christ, and the
Soul makes these defects of Grace apprehended in himself, matter of
discouragement to his Soul, to beat it off, and to keep it back from the
exercise of Faith. Then this distemper of Judging themselves by others prevails
too far.

1. It is a joining with the wretched, corrupt, opposite Heart against Christ,
and the furnishing the Soul with matter of cavil and scruple, against the
blessed tenders of receiving the love of Jesus Christ.

2. By this the Soul makes that part of his duty that he seems to perform, to
be nothing but disobedience. The Soul by looking upon the Graces that shine
forth in any Christian, seems to do a part of his duty, because it is one thing
commanded; and in reflecting upon his own Heart in the sight of those Graces,
seems to do another part of his duty; but both these are made disobedience,
when the Soul makes the defect of Grace, he finds in himself, when he looks
upon the Graces of others, discouragements to himself in exercising Faith.

3. The Soul crosses God in his highest end, which is to make the excellencies
of Jesus Christ shine forth in the Souls of his People.

IV. The fourth case wherein a Soul does measure himself too much by others, so
as it becomes a sinful distemper, is, when the disproportion a Soul finds out
between himself and other Christians; his Graces and their Graces, his Duties
and their Duties, are made a sufficient ground for the Soul, to draw a final
conclusion of his own estate from. As thus, when a Soul argues in this manner,
I see there are none of those precious workings of the Spirit of God in my
Spirit, that I behold, and see apparent, are in the Spirits of such and such
Christians; they have their Hearts so powerfully drawn by Jesus Christ to close
with him in a way of union, that they are enabled by a mighty power from God to
believe; but, says the Soul, I do not find that God draws my Heart, and comes
with a mighty power to constrain my Soul to close with the Lord Jesus tendered,
and therefore surely God never intended good to my Soul. That this is a dark
and sinful distemper, will appear in diverse things, for there may be many
disproportions between one Christian and another, that are not sinful
disproportions.

1. There may be a disproportion without a man's sin, in the manner, and order,
and degree, yea in the very Being of all the workings of God in the Soul,
before the actual union of the Soul with Christ, by any act of believing.

First, There may be a disproportion in the fear of Conscience, that other
Christians have had upon them, before their actual consent to the Lord Christ
tendered, and the fear of Conscience that thou have hitherto had.

Secondly, A disproportion may be in the grief of mind for sin, that other
Christians have had upon them for sin, before their union with Christ, and the
grief of mind thy Soul has hitherto had upon th^^.

Thirdly, There may be a disproportion in the effects that fear of Conscience
and grief of mind do naturally produce in Souls: As doubtfulness, and multitude
of scruples and objections against thine own Soul. These indeed are the common
effects that grief of mind and the fear of conscience produce: And there may be
a great disproportion between thy doubtings, and the doubtings of other
Christians, and yet no sin neither, as appears in this; because neither fear of
Conscience, nor doubt of mind, nor scruples and objections against the Soul, do
in the least commend any Soul to God: As all things are sin before union with
Christ, so is the fear of Conscience, and grief of mind, sin, and all those
doubts and objections, sin, and therefore have not the least virtue in them to
commend a Soul to God.

2. There may be a disproportion in the degrees of Grace without sin.

First, There may have been a difference in the time of the growth of his
Grace, and the Graces of others by which he measures himself. It may be he yet
remains but a green tender plant in the House of the Lord, and measures himself
by an old flourishing green Olive in Gods house.

Secondly, There may be a difference in the helps and means of growth. The
field is not blamed because it is not so fruitful as the garden, when the
garden is daily watered and dressed.

3. There may be a disproportion in the actings of Grace and yet no sin.

First, In regard there may not be the same necessity to occasion to act Grace
in thee, that is in others. The occasions are like the Wind to the Ship, that
set the Ship a going: They are but the heavenly Winds as it were, that blow
upon Grace, that set Graces a working; and various Graces must and ought to
work according to the variety of occasions; Now according to the necessity of
the Soul, so God binds himself in Covenant to provide for the Soul.

Secondly, The Graces of other Christians, may be acted by an extraordinary
influence of the quickening Spirit of Christ. I call it extraordinary, in regard
it is that which is not common at all times, to all Christians, that have some
of the influences of the quickening Spirit of Christ; so that by some
extraordinary gale from Heaven his Graces may be acted, and through thy want of
those quicknings of the Spirit of Christ, thy Graces may not be so acted, and
yet not sin.

Thirdly, There may be a difference in the outward excitation, and quickening
unto the actings of Grace. A Soul stands not only in necessity of the inward
breathings of the Spirit of Christ, but of the outward excitation too, in
regard it is through the outward excitation, that the Lord has appointed those
inward breathings of his quickening Spirit: Now if other Christians by whom thy
Soul do measure it self, should enjoy more excitations, that is, that they have
more Bellows blowing upon Grace in their Hearts than thine, though there may be
difference in the acting, the bare disproportion may not be thy sin.

Secondly, There may be many sinful disproportions, that yet destroy not the
Being of the Souls union with Christ.

1. There may be a disproportion in Faith it self.

First, There may be a want of most of the highest and excellent operations of
Faith, and yet not the Being of union destroyed.

Secondly, Faith may be oppressed with doubting and distrust, and yet not be
suppressed.

Thirdly, There may be the want of almost all stedfastness, stability and
constancy in the acting of Faith; so that a Soul can seldom keep his Heart in a
believing frame one moment, and yet that sinful defect may not nullify the
union with Christ.

2. There may be a sinful disproportion in all the Spiritual life of the Soul,
and yet the union with Christ hold. That is, all the principles of Spiritual
motion toward God, may be unactive, when thou see others full of life and
activity, and yet this sinful disproportion does not destroy the union. Now it
appears to be a sad distemper thus to measure the Soul by others.

1. In regard there is such a disproportion between the one and other
Christians that can possibly be found out, discovers nothing but the
heinousness of the Souls sin, in its neglect of union with Christ. Now from
hence to conclude God intends no good to the Soul, is contrary to the blessed
will of God revealed, Isa. 55.7. where God has promised, abundantly to pardon,
to multiply to pardon.

2. In regard when the greatest disproportion between the one and other
Christians is found out, yet thou art one of those that Jesus Christ now comes
to woo, and persuade, and beseech to be one with his Father.

Now I shall show you the grounds of this distemper upon which it is built, or
whence it arises in Souls.

I. It is commonly built upon this principle, That the Lord maintains a
proportion in his Gifts and Graces unto his people. Now what a dark blind
principle is this. For the clearing of it,

1. You must conceive, the Lord does equally dispense to all his peoples Souls
all kind of Graces. He leaves suitable dispositions in the Heart to yield
obedience to all his blessed will: Thus far the Lord proportions Grace; but
then the Lord does not proportion the degrees of Grace.

First, In regard of the concord and agreement in the whole Body of Christ that
is necessary to be attained. It is for the bettering of the union of the Body
of Christ, that Christians have particular different Graces, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.

Secondly, It it necessary to preserve the beauty and comeliness of the Body of
Christ, that the whole Body should be so compacted together, that one member
should not receive all the excellencies of the other members.

Thirdly, That there might be a full manifestation of the absolute freedom of
God, in the manifestation of all his Graces. The Lord will not only have the
glory of his free love, in dispensing Grace to whom he pleases, but the glory
of his free Grace in dispensing it in what manner and degree he please.

2. From the necessity of different degrees of Grace, arises a necessity of the
dispensation of various Gifts.

II. The second distemper upon which this principle does arise is this, That
the Soul does conceive there must be a large portion of Grace go before the
Souls attaining unto the assurance of Faith, that he is united to the Lord
Christ. And thence the Soul seeks into the Lives and Hearts of other
Christians, and measures himself by those, thinking upon a sight of a
conformity in himself to them in their Graces and Duties; he might then proceed
to the actings of Faith in a way of assurance, and then have some confidence of
his union with Christ: And hence so long as the Soul conceives a defect in
himself, in those Graces he beholds to be in other Christians, he sits down
discouraged from the exercise of Faith. That this also is a vile principle of
darkness must be also made appear. Yet, first, for the clearing of it I must
premise two things.

I. That the very act of Faith in a way of full assurance, of the Lords
accepting the Soul to be one with him in Christ, is a most superlative degree
of Grace.

II. That every Soul that attains unto that assurance of Faith, to receive with
a fullness of confidence, the Lords good will concerning his own Soul, to accept
him to be one with him in the Lord Christ, does attain a large portion of all
kind of Graces also. There are the special workings of the love of God in the
Spirit of holiness, wherever there is this assurance unto Faith of the Souls
union with Christ. To make it clear,

1. There is a large portion of knowledge. Ignorance of God is the mother of
all vice, the very womb wherein unbelief is conceived withal its Brats, withal
its scruples and objections whatever. And according to the degree wherein that
Ignorance of God is healed, so is the degree of the Souls attaining toward the
assurance of Faith.

2. There is a large portion of Spiritual life begotten in the Soul.

3. There is a large portion of contentment in God and Christ.

4. There is a large portion of love to God in Jesus Christ communicated to
him. Love begets love, and according to the degree, wherein a Soul apprehends
the love of God to his Soul in Christ; so is the answerable degree of the
workings of love toward God in Christ again.

5. There is a large portion of raisedness of Spirit, above all things below. I
give but a taste of the large portion of Grace, which of necessity must be in
Souls where Faith of assurance is attained. But now to speak more directly to
the principle it self: notwithstanding this, yet the principle it self is a
dark principle.

I. In regard there is no necessity of a large portion of Grace, going before
the Souls assurance of Faith, to prepare the Soul for assurance. Only in this
sense, that the habit of Grace prepares the Soul for the acting of Grace; so
the habit of Faith is received before there be an act of Faith; and so a Soul
may be said to be prepared for assurance unto Faith.

II. There is no necessity of any large portions of Grace, to give the Soul any
better ground to act Faith in fullness of assurance and confidence. The only
ground of the Souls confidence of the Lords will, to accept his loveless Soul
into union with Christ, is the Lords word, wherein he reveals that his blessed
will: Now the Lords word speaks as plainly, and reveals his will as clearly to
the Soul, not having the least portion of Grace to accept his loveless Soul
into union with Christ, as it does to those that have the largest portion of
Grace.

III. There is no necessity of any portion of Grace to make the actings of
Faith of assurance to be the Souls duty. Even when a Soul is a rebel, when he
is an enemy, the Lord does as strictly command him from Heaven, to give credit
to his blessed Word, revealing his good will to accept his loveless Soul, if he
will be one with him in Christ, as he does command the Soul to believe it,
after the communication of all Grace.

IV. Those very portions of Grace, great or small that are attained to, when
the Soul has assurance unto Faith, they are all attained through the Souls
believing with that fullness of assurance. Faith is the Alpha and Omega of
Sanctification, and of the whole work of Grace.

The Sixth and last dark distemper is, Dark distemper.
The Souls unconstancy. This unconstancy is of two kinds; the one in the
thoughts and imaginations; the second is the unconstancy of the Souls
determinations and conclusions. Naturally we are unstable as water, seldom stay
a moment in the same place. For the right understanding of this distemper there
must be diverse things opened.

I. We must know, it is not a strict, close, unmovable adherence to their
determinations of truth, that are once drawn up in a Soul, that these commands
require from any Soul; that may be as bad a distemper on the other hand.
Therefore observe there are three cases in which a Soul may be too much
settled, and adhere too fast to his own conclusions.

1. When the Soul sticks fast to any conclusion, without Spiritual divine
light, compelling and constraining the Soul to it.

2. When a Soul is so taken with any determination, that he has drawn up in
his own Spirit concerning truth, that his own Spirit will not suffer him to
take a right view of any thing that the Scripture seems to propound to the
contrary.

3. When a Soul is so affected with any determination drawn up in his own
Spirit, that he has a prejudicial opinion against whatever seems to contradict
that his own determination.

II. You must know there are cases wherein there must and ought to be
alterations and changes, in a Souls own determination concerning Truth, and
concerning the State of his own Soul. And those cases are especially two.

1. Where there is clearer evidence concerning the object conveyed into a Soul.

2. When there is a clearer evidence in regard of the Soul it self, which we
commonly call a clearer evidence in regard of the subject. If a Soul through
weakness of light received, conclude or determine of any thing concerning his
Soul, then there must and ought to be a change of these determinations, when
there is a clearer evidence come into his Soul.

III. There may lawfully be a suspicion, and a jealousy over it self in regard
of its own unconstancy. A Soul may have a holy fear of his own deceitful Heart,
when he sees it settled upon a conclusion, lest it should not be so rightly
settled as God requires. There are two acts a Soul may do upon this ground.

1. He may be making a continual search into the grounds of those conclusions
and determinations that are in his own Spirit.

2. A Soul may and ought to draw up his Spirit unto God, and to bring his
determinations into the presence of God, and the ground of his determinations,
and lay them all open before the Lord.

Now it must be opened, when a Soul is guilty of this sad distemper of
unconstancy, in his determinations and resolutions. There are three cases
wherein the Soul is guilty of this.

I. When the Soul remains wavering, in an unfixed unsettled frame of Spirit,
upon any determination that it does draw up within it self. When a Soul
apprehends reason on both sides, and weight in both reasons, and thereupon
suffers his Soul to stand like Scales, with weights in both Scales almost in an
equipoise, now turning this way, then that way, and stand steadfast no way: Now
he conceives it is the will of God to accept his Soul into union with him, the
next morning he conceives no; surely it cannot be that God should have a
thought of kindness for such a wretch as he. Yet do not mistake here, for I
must grant there may be such an equipoised Spirit in Souls without sin, so it
be with these limitations.

1. That the truth of Christ concerning which the Soul remains in this wavering
state, be not a matter of duty that God requires from the Souls hands. Some
truths are more Theoretical, some more Practical; now if it be not a practical
truth that God requires from the Soul, it may not be sin: But if it be a
practical truth, concerning the Souls acting of Faith upon Jesus Christ
tendered, or the Souls worshipping God in some ordinances of continual use; then
though it be through weakness, and want of light, that the Soul is not able to
have his Spirit settled upon a conclusion; yet I dare not excuse the Soul from
sin, for I suppose no case can come, but the Soul is guilty of too much
ignorance that he might have avoided, or guilty of unbelief that keeps his
Spirit in the present case unswayed.

2. Take this limitation, That such an unsettledness of Spirit concerning a
truth, be after a Souls strict endeavoring for a full satisfaction and
determination of his Spirit concerning that truth.

II. The Soul is guilty of this inconstancy, when the strength of imagination
only does unsettle the Soul from any determination or conclusion, concerning
that truth of Christ that he has formerly drawn up in his own Spirit. The
Devil has a secret door into every Heart through the fancy; it is as it were
the Devils back door, it is his secret sallyport door that he comes out of, to
fight against the Soul. The Devil steals into the Heart by the fancy, before
ever the Soul is aware of it, without any alarm, and by the working of the
fancy he does suggest strange imaginations in the Soul, without suggesting a
ground and foundation, upon which such imaginations are built.

III. Then a Soul is guilty of this sad distemper, when it is unsettled and
removed, from its determinations and conclusions, with every just objection,
without a just comparison of the strength of the objection, and the reasoning
of the objection, with the strength of the reasoning of the former persuasion
and determination. This is that sad distemper the Scripture speaks of, To be
carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine, and to be soon shaken in mind,
2 These. 2.1, 2.

Now the distemper being thus opened in general, you must note that there are
three special conclusions, in reference to the case in hand, concerning which a
Soul becomes guilty of this distemper of unconstancy.

1. That the tender of union with the Lord Jesus, do reach to every particular
Soul. The Devil and the corrupt Heart, strive to maintain a constancy of Spirit
in this determination, either keeping the Soul wavering here, not daring to
resolve this blessed Truth to be a Truth; or else in suggesting strong
imaginations to keep the Soul from giving firm credit to that Truth, or by
keeping up objection upon objection against that precious Truth, that the Heart
may not be settled upon that conclusion; but if it be settled upon it in the
evening, if possible, it shall be removed in the morning.

2. That no wickedness, wretchedness, nor desperate vileness that can be
imagined, is any impediment to the Lords acceptance of the Soul into union with
the Lord Jesus. All the strength of reasoning, that the Machiavilian brains of
Hell can produce, shall be brought to evade this Truth.

3. That it is the duty of every particular Soul, immediately and at all times,
without the least delay, to give credit to the Lord, and believe that he is
willing to accept that particular loveless Soul into union with Christ. These
precious Truths, being that precious heavenly Crystal glass, through which the
Spiritual eye comes to discern the very Heart of God toward it in Christ; if
it be possible that either the power or policy of Hell can foment that
distemper in the Heart concerning this principle, to prevent the Soul from
settling a full conclusion in this particular, it shall be effected.

Now this distemper prevents the Souls evidence of union with Christ from the
promises, by these five several effects that it has upon the Heart.

I. It prevents the Soul of the enjoyment of a sufficient time, to discern the
inward of the Lords promise, of accepting a Soul into union with Christ, even
when he does behold the promise. There are four things that a Soul must discern
in a promise, in reference to the discerning of his union with Christ from the
promise.

1. The Soul must discern the largeness of the extent of that promise, of
acceptance of a Soul into union with Christ. He must discern the compass of the
promise to be so wide as to take in his own particular Soul.

2. A Soul must discern the infinite freedom of God in the tendering of the
promise, to accept the Soul into union with Christ. It must see that God
requires nothing, either to prepare or dispose the Soul aright, for the
enjoyment of the promise, or to give the Soul a right and title to the promise.

3. The Soul must see the very bowels of the mercies of Jesus Christ in the
promises. It is the sight of the readiness of the Heart of Christ, to embrace
the loveless Soul, that makes the bowels of the Soul yern toward Christ again.

4. The Soul must discern the sufficiency of the promise, to assure the Soul of
what it longs after. Now it being of necessity that all these must be
discerned, in the promises of acceptance of the Soul into union with Christ,
before the Soul can be satisfied from the promises that he is united to Jesus
Christ; an hours view, or a days view, in an ordinary way I mean (unless the
Spirit cast in superlative light extraordinary) will not suffice a Soul to
discern all these through the promise.

II. This inconstancy in the Souls resolutions, exposes the Soul to the
violence of all temptation. This will appear in three things,

1. In regard the sword of the Spirit to fight against the Temptations with, is
made void. The sword of the Spirit is the precious word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. Now
the Soul being unsettled in his own determinations, concerning the truth of the
Word of God to his own Soul in particular, he has no precious use of that
precious sword, the Word of God, to resist the tempter with.

2. The habit of Faith is weakened. I mean, the readiness of the disposition of
Faith to be in exercise, is in a great measure hindered: The Heart is more
indisposed to the exercise of Faith, by how much the seldomer Faith is drawn
out to exercise.

3. Carnal reasonings of the Heart grow strong. The more any corruption
prevails, the more strength it gets: Sin is never decrepit, the older it grows
the stronger it grows. Thus carnal reasoning of the Heart growing old, by the
constant prevailing over the Soul, it grows stronger. All these concurring, a
Soul is in a dreadful measure exposed to the tyranny of all Temptations.

First, Temptations that batter down the hopes of Election.

Secondly, Temptations unto slavish fear, and dread and horror of execution of
present vengeance.

Thirdly, A Soul is exposed to the power and violence of that temptation, that
it is wicked abominable presumption for his wretched Soul to have a thought
that God will be willing to accept him in Christ.

III. Through that inconstancy, the Devil himself is provoked to tempt. It is
observed in Scripture, that the rule the Lord gives concerning our fighting
with Satan is to resist, and the rule concerning fighting with sin is fleeing,
1 Pet. 5.9. Now it is thought it is upon this occasion the Lord gives this
rule, because fleeing gives the Devil advantage, and makes him more violent in
his temptations. There is nothing that gives the Devil discouragement in
tempting, but a sight of an impossibility of prevailing.

IV. The inconstancy of the Soul in these resolutions and determinations,
prevents the increase and growth of all the knowledge of Jesus Christ. You
shall observe in 2 Pet. 3.18. That the Holy Ghost urging the Saints to grow in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, he gives them an admonition
to take heed they fall not from their own steadfastness; intimating thus much,
while their Souls remain unstable, in receiving and giving credit to those
precious Truths of Christ that were revealed, there could be no growth in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ.

V. This inconstancy of the Soul, does leave it like a lost one in a mere
wilderness. It leaves it wandering in devious paths it knows not whither. When
the Judgment of the Soul is thus unstable, concerning those precious principles
forenamed, the Soul is left without a Pilot, without a Compass; so that the
Soul knows not how to steer its course to the precious haven of happiness. So
that this distemper must be healed, before the Soul can discern its union with
Christ. Now the Spirit heals this distemper two ways.

1. By vouchsafing a clear and full manifestation to the Soul, of those
precious forenamed principles, by casting in such a high degree of divine
light, as makes the truth of those forenamed conclusions out of question. It is
according to the evidence the Soul receives of a truth, that the judgment is
settled either more or less firmly upon it. Now the Spirit does so manifest
those precious Truths, and so clears the Eye, as it sees them without scruple,
and then the Judgment begins to be settled with some firmness upon them.

2. The Spirit heals it by a continuation of the first manifestation of those
Truths. So that a fullness of evidence of the Truth that the Soul concludes
upon, remaining in the Soul, the Soul remains in a fixed settled way, cleaving
and sticking to those Truths so concluded upon. Now thus you have the second
work of the Spirit, in that first general effect of it upon the Heart opened,
which is the removal of all impediments that hinder divine light; and you have
seen what beams of the principles of darkness, and also what dark distempers
are pulled out, before the Soul is fit to discern the light of Jesus Christ
held forth.

Now the third work of the Spirit in this illumination, is the Spirits acting
by its own power, the Divine light communicated to the Soul. It is necessary
not only that a Soul receive a faculty from the Spirit, but also the acting of
the faculty too: Though all acts of the renewed man, be firmly the acts of the
Mind, yet they are originally the acts of the Spirit it self. So that also in
this case concerning illumination, there is a necessity not only that the Soul
has a seeing Eye, but that it must also have the seeing of the Eye from the
Spirit. Though the Soul has an Eye disposed to see the divine light that the
promise discovers, yet there must come in a power from the Spirit also, whereby
the Soul may be enabled to act that very power received. As it is in the
cleared Eye, it has a fitness to see any color, but it must be acted by the
rational Soul, otherwise the inward disposition of the Soul effects nothing;
that's the reason the Eye sees not in sleep, because the rational Soul is bound
up as it were in its operations: Thus it is with the divine man, though
influences be communicated from Jesus Christ to the Soul, that the Soul has a
spiritual Eye, rightly disposed to see spiritual objects, yet there must be
also the Spirits power to act that very Eye, that is so disposed to see the
spiritual object. So that thus the Spirit comes in by a renewed power, and as
it were blows up those holy sparks of divine light, that are communicated to
the Soul, and makes them to work in their own proper natural way, to make them
see that precious divine light, that the promises of the Lord discover to the
poor dark Soul.

Thus you see the first work, or the first effect, that the Spirit of God has
upon Souls, toward the revealing to them from the promise, that they are
united to the Lord Jesus.

The Spirits Irradiation.
II. We are now to proceed to the second work of the Spirit upon Souls, in the
evidencing to them from the promises their union with Christ, and that is the
manifestation, or Irradiation of the promise it self, or of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. There are two ways how the Spirit does reveal any thing to a Soul.

The 1. is by infusing of divine light. The 2d. is by manifesting the object to
that divine light. It is not sufficient light communicated to the faculty of
discerning, that inables it to discern a thing presently, but there must be
also an enlightening, and manifesting of the object to be discovered, unto that
light communicated. The most acute Eye that is, of the greatest perspicuity and
clearness, can discern nothing any further then the things themselves are
presented to them. So that the Spirit in evidencing to the Soul from the
promises, must cast as it were beams of light, some kind of holy rays from the
promise it self upon the Eye, as well as light into the Eye, to discern the
light that is cast upon the Eye. That's the reason, that a Soul at one time
shall discern the very Heart of Christ toward him in the promises, or in the
Gospel; and at another time looking upon the same Word, the same promise, with
the same diligence, and yet it not so much as gives a sufficient ground for an
imperfect hope, or an act of Faith in way of adherence, and this is from a
different manifestation of this Irradiation of the Spirit unto the Soul. Now
this manifestation, or Irradiation does consist in two things.

1. The Spirit presents the Gospel, or the promises to the Soul. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. There
must be as well an application of the object to the Eye, as an application of
the Eye to the object, and yet both must be also by the Spirit of God:
Therefore, John 14.26. it is put as a part of the office of the comforting
Spirit, or the evidencing Spirit, to bring the precious things that Christ had
spoken to his Disciples to their remembrance again.

2. The Spirit does evidence the promise, or the Gospel, that it has presented
to the Eye. It brings it to remembrance and then opens it, and reveals the very
nature and intent of it. You must conceive there is a twofold evidence of
things; there is an evidence of narration, and an evidence of the matter it
self: Now the Gospel is always evident in matter of narration, that is, as
spoken from the mouth of God in his written Word: But the Gospel is very
inevident in regard of the matter, or of the thing it self; it is an hidden
mystery, so dark a riddle as cannot be found out, without the help of the
Spirit it self: Now though the evidence only of narration of the Gospel, be
sufficient to excite the Soul to act Faith by way of adherence and recumbency
upon God, yet it is not sufficient to excite the Soul to act Faith by way of
assurance. Diverse things there are in the promise, or in the Gospel, that the
Spirit does evidence to the Soul, when it is revealing its union with Christ.

First beam of divine light.
First, It presents and evidenceth to the Soul, the Lord Christ fully,
unquestionably, and everlastingly, taking away all sin and wickedness, from
every Soul that shall embrace him. You shall observe, Romans 8.33, 34. that it
was through the knowledge of this, that the Faith of Paul took wing first, to
mount above in a tryumphant way: says he, what shall we say to these things?
What things? Things that he had before spoken of in the beginning of the
Epistle, especially Chap. 5. where he had made it appear clearly, That where
sin did abound, grace did much more abound, super-abound, abound without
measure, in that Grace did triumph over sin through Jesus Christ: Now, says
he, what shall we say to these things? He stood in admiration at the thoughts
of it, and then began to say, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? Here Faith began to triumph from the knowledge of Christ's complete
removal of all sin, from every Soul that did embrace him. Now the Spirit
evidenceth diverse things to the Soul, for the clearing of this.

I. The Spirit makes it evident that the Lord Christ took upon him to be surety
for every Soul that would embrace him. He became the surety of the new
Covenant, Heb. 7.22. The Spirit makes the Soul discern that Christ stepped into
his Father, to undertake to be bound to pay all the debts, for every Soul that
shall hereafter embrace him. And herein the Spirit is wont to evidence two
things concerning the suretyship of Christ.

1. That Christ undertook to be a surety of the whole Covenant for Souls. That
he undertook to fulfill all that Justice or Mercy it self should require, to be
fulfilled, for those Souls for whom he undertook.

2. That he became such a surety, as he undertook to pay the debt alone. Hence,
Isa. 49.8. he is called the Covenant it self: Intimating that the whole
Covenant concerning taking away sin, is only between God the Father and Jesus
Christ: Hence it is said, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the World
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them.

II. The Spirit evidenceth, that Christ as Mediator stood in the relation of a
common person, and took upon him to represent all the persons of those, that
should hereafter believe on him; so that whatever satisfaction he should give
to his Fathers justice in regard of sin, should be not only in stead of
satisfaction to be given to the Father by the Souls themselves; but also to be
done as it were in their stead to be accounted as if they themselves had given
satisfaction. This the Spirit may evidence from the promise, from some such
place, as 1 Cor. 15.48. which shows that Jesus Christ stood as a common person
in stead of all those that should believe on him; as Adam the first man stood
as a common person, to represent all those that should come out of him: Or from
such a place as that, Romans 5.14. where the old Adam is called a Type of Jesus
Christ that was to come.

The second thing the Spirit clears, is the things themselves done by Jesus
Christ in those relations unto Souls, as he stood as a common person, and as
the surety for those that should hereafter believe on him.

I. Therein the Spirit comes to clear the effusion of the Blood of Christ, the
offering himself by death as a sacrifice for sin. Thence you shall observe, the
first thing Paul instanceth in, when he lets his Faith look upon the removing
of all Sin, is Christ dying; says he in a holy Triumph of Faith, who shall
condemn? Why? Christ has dyed; As if he should say, how shall either carnal
reason, or conscience, or unbelief, or Justice, or Law, or Hell, or Devil,
bring any accusation against our Souls, seeing Jesus Christ has died; he has
offered up himself by death as a propitiatory sacrifice for sin, out of a
purpose and intent fully to take away the sins of all those that shall believe
on him: Hence the Spirit evidenceth such a place as that, 2 Cor. 5.21. He has
made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: That we might have remission of sins, and that
justification that God had prepared for Souls by him: Or such a place as that
in 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all men to be
received, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am
chies; That Jesus Christ undertook to be humbled so deeply, to vail the
brightness of his own glory in such obscurity, as to come down from Heaven into
the World, to take away the sins of poor perishing wretches. Now in the Spirits
evidencing this fullness of satisfaction, it ordinarily evidenceth these things,
for the satisfying Faith so fully as it may work by way of assurance, and
fullness of confidence.

1. It evidenceth the full satisfaction of the Father by his death, in regard
it was the Lawmakers himself that was subject to the Law, and made under the
power of the Law, to satisfy for the transgression of the Law.

2. In regard the brightness of the Fathers glory was debased by Christ's
debasement, in opposition to the debasement of the Fathers glory, that was by
the transgression of the Law. What can conscience or carnal reason say more
concerning the nature of sin, and the height of its merit; but only that it is
a debasement of the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, it is a vailing and
eclipsing of the highest Majesty of Heaven, it is a bringing a cloud as it
were, over those precious unspotted beams of the Lords excellency, over the
Lords high Sovereignty in commanding Souls, and over Gods holiness and equity
in commanding, and therefore the merit of sin is infinite. Now the Spirit can
answer by evidencing to the Death of Christ, a fullness of satisfaction, in
regard it was Jesus Christ that was debased; he that was the express image of
his Father, the lively pattern of his Fathers glory; and therefore the Spirit
evidenceth from the Gospel that God himself speaks in a way, as if he were more
than satisfied, as if Grace through Christ did triumph over sin: According to
that in Romans 5.17. If by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which have received abundance of Grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Much more they which receive, that is, they
that partake of the merit of the death of Christ, much more shall they reign:
As if there were a higher degree of equity that such should reign, then there
was that such Souls, that were before under sin, should die. So Paul speaks in
1 Timothy 1.14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, the word is, (...),
was more than enough. There was more than a sufficiency of Grace through Jesus
Christ, still speaking as if God had so satisfied himself, through the
contrivance of the death of Christ for sin, that he had satisfaction, as it
were, over and over again.

3. In that it was the Godhead it self clothed in flesh, that gave the
satisfaction. Now herein the Spirit evidenceth a fullness, and abundance of
sufficiency of satisfaction, in regard there is a higher worth upon the
satisfaction to the Godhead, from the Godhead clothed in the flesh, then there
could be evil by offending of the Godhead that was done by man: The Godhead was
only the object against whom the sin was committed; but in the satisfaction,
the Godhead it self clothed in the flesh became the subject, from whom the
satisfaction is given, as well as to whom the satisfaction is given; so as the
satisfaction does in a manner, in the worth and height of it, transcend and go
beyond the height of the offense, the satisfaction going from a higher subject,
a more subject, than the offense was committed by.

4. In regard of the full weight of sin, that Jesus Christ bore in his giving
full satisfaction to the Father. He died under the reputation of the vilest of
sinners that can be imagined, and though this was unjust in regard of men that
did so repute him, yet not in regard of God who had ordained, that the
iniquities of all that should embrace him, should be laid upon him: And indeed
their iniquities were laid upon him to the highest, if you consider under what
notion of sin he died; he died under the notion of a Traitor to his own Prince,
as one that took pleasure in all kind of sin, a friend of publicans and
sinners, as they reputed him: he died as a wretched blasphemer of the most high
God, as one that did strike at the Throne of God, to dethrone God himself, and
he died as an imposture, as a vile seducer: Nay more, he died under the notion
of a Devil, yea the Prince of Devils, they say of him that by Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils, he cast out Devils: Now therein the Spirit evidenceth a
fullness of satisfaction to the Father, in the Death of Christ, in regard Christ
who is holiness it self, who was the spotless Lamb without the least blemish,
that he should take upon him to be accounted, and so to suffer, as the highest
kind of sinner that can possibly be imagined. The Spirit can evidence here
clearly, a sufficiency and fullness of satisfaction, for the sin of every Soul
that shall embrace him, whatever Conscience can object against the Soul, seeing
Conscience cannot object a higher kind of wickedness than was laid upon the
back of Christ as a surety.

5. In regard the Lord Christ took a fullness of pleasure and contentment in
bearing the Justice of the Father, executed upon him as a sinner. Justice
receives satisfaction, when its sentence is executed fully against any
transgressor, that it passes sentence against; and thus Justice was satisfied
through the Death of Christ: But there is a satisfaction as it were over and
above, when the sentence of Justice past out against a transgressor, is not
only executed upon the transgressor, or him that stands in stead of the
transgressor; but the sentence is received with delight, pleasure and
contentment: Now thus Jesus Christ through his Death gave fullness of
satisfaction, in that it was the pleasure of his Soul to bear the determined
will of his Father for sinners in this way: says he, Psalm. 40.8. Lo I come to
do thy will, my God, expressing the readiness and willingness of his Heart to
beat that will of his Father for sinners: Nay so great was his delight in
bearing the sentence of Justice past upon him, as he stood as a transgressor
and sinner, that he says himself be was even straightened till it be
accomplished, Luke 12.50.

Now as the Spirit evidenceth by the effusion of Christ's Blood, a satisfaction
given to the Father: So secondly, it evidenceth the sutableness of the
satisfaction, and that in two things.

1. In regard of the things suffered by Christ to give satisfaction: Those
things every way suitable to what Justice could require, from the Soul it self,
in regard of his sin. Two things sin declares the Soul has merited to suffer
for ever.

First, The Death of the Body wherein sin is acted and committed.

Secondly, The Death of the Soul it self, in the separation of it from God,
which was the chief actor in the transgression of the Law. Now the Spirit
evidences the Death of Christ a suitable satisfaction in regard of the things
suffered by Christ.

First, In regard the humane Body died, that stood in the stead of those that
had been the transgressors of the Law: he took upon him flesh, and so died for
sin in the flesh, in the same nature, in the same kind of Body that sin was
acted in.

Secondly, In that there was a separation of the Soul of Christ from enjoyment
of communion with his Father: as appears, Matthew. 27.46. My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? That is, why have thou deprived me of communion with
thee? And though indeed the separation was not eternal, yet in regard of the
person bearing the separation, it was equivalent to an eternal separation: One
moment of separation was as great an evil inflicted upon such a person, as an
eternal separation could have been to have been inflicted upon a poor finite
Creature.

2. The Spirit evidenceth the sutableness of satisfaction to the Father, in
regard of the sins themselves laid to the charge of Christ, in his suffering
what Justice could require should be suffered by the transgressor; and that
both in the kind of sin, and also in the degree of sin, yea and also in the
circumstance of sin too. That which was equivalent to all kind of sin, was
imputed to Christ to be suffered, that should have been suffered by
transgressors: Apostasy from God was imputed to him, by being imputed to be a
Devil: Enmity to God in the highest degree was imputed to him, in that he was
imputed the Prince of Devils: All kind of fighting against God was imputed to
him, in that he was imputed a Blasphemer, and a striver to sit down in the
Throne of God himself, and an impostor and deceiver. So that no kind of sin,
that Conscience can object against the Soul, but the Spirit can and does
evidence at such a time was imputed to Christ, and Christ suffered for such a
sin that was equivalent to that kind of sin.

II. In the Spirits evidencing the Lord Christ to have fully and everlastingly
taken away all the wickedness of what kind soever from every Soul that shall
embrace him, it evidenceth the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. This
is clear, Romans 8.34. It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again. In
this the Spirit evidenceth three things to the Soul.

1. It evidenceth the Fathers acknowledgment of his own satisfaction for the
sins of all the persons that should ever embrace Christ and believe on him. The
Spirit evidenceth to the Soul, Christ having once taken upon him, as a surety,
to bear the transgressions of all that should believe on him; having entered
into Bond to pay all their debts, and suffered himself to be arrested by the
Justice of God; yea to be carried to the prison of the Grave by the Hand of
Justice for those transgressions, he must never have come out till he had paid
the uttermost farthing: And that is the reason that in 1 Cor. 15.14. the Apostle
tells them, That their Faith is vain, and their Preaching of Christ is vain,
unless Christ be risen: Whence the Apostle notes, That though the Death of
Jesus Christ, was the matter of sattisfaction to the Justice of the Father, for
the Justifying of all the persons that Christ sustained; yet there is no
evidence unto Faith, that God the Father is satisfied, for those transgressions
by the Death of Christ, unless Christ be risen.

2. The Spirit evidenceth to the Soul Christ's own triumphant victory over sin,
and all the concomitants and consequents of sin. Now therein the Spirit
evidenceth Christ's removal of all kind of sin, from every Soul that shall
hereafter embrace him, in regard he has now captivated sin, he has got sin
under his own power, to trample under his Feet, and to do with as he please; he
has taken sin and tied it to his Chariot wheel, as the word imports.

3. The Spirit does evidence in and from the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, as he was a surety, that the Lord does account his acquittance given
to Jesus Christ for sin, that was charged upon him, to be an acquittance of all
those that ever should embrace Christ through believing; and also that Christ
in receiving that acquittance from God, did receive it in the room, and in the
stead of all that ever should embrace him. And thence the Spirit evidenceth to
the Soul, that the Scripture attributes unto every believer, a participation of
the resurrection of Christ, yea that it attributes to them a Co-resurrection
with Christ, Col. 2.13. You being dead in your sins, has he quickened together
with him; that is, has made you partakers of the virtue of his resurrection,
and raised you with himself; and verse. 14. Blotting out the hand writing of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his cross; that is, Justifying our Souls from all that
ever Sin, Conscience, the Law, or the Devil could bring against us.

III. The Spirit evidenceth to the Soul, the Ascension of Jesus Christ to the
right Hand of the Father, as he was a surety, and as he did represent sinners
that should receive him to be their Mediator. Thus Romans 8.34. Paul through the
Spirits manifestation of Jesus Christ at the right Hand of the Father, had such
a full evidence, as he could make a challenge to the Law, and to Sin, and Hell,
and the Devil, to bring all their accusations, and see if they could lay any
thing to his charge: Who shall condemn? says he, Jesus Christ is gone to the
right Hand of the Father. Now from Christ's Ascension to the right Hand of the
Father, the Spirit is wont to evidence these four things.

1. That the Lord Christ as a surety for all sinners, that should embrace him
as their Mediator, has now received an acknowledgment in Heaven, that he has
fully taken away all the sins of all that ever so receive him. The Spirit
brings to the Souls remembrance what welcome, as it were, Jesus Christ had into
Heaven: It shows the Soul from such a place as that, Psalm. 110.1. The Father
said to Christ when he came into Heaven, Well done thou obedient Son, sit thou
down at my right Hand. There are two things observable in that.

First, In that welcome given by the Father, there is an evidence that the
Father acknowledges the work by Christ to be fully done. Sitting imports a
rest after a work fulfilled, Heb. 10.1.

Secondly, The Spirit evidenceth that high favor, that Jesus Christ had in
Heaven, as he was a surety for those sinners that should embrace him to be
their Mediator, Heb. 1.5.

2. The Spirit evidenceth from Christ's Ascension, that he as a surety for all
those sinners that should embrace him, has fully prepared Heaven. Now this
Spirit evidenceth by two things.

First, That the very end of the Ascension of Jesus Christ into Heaven, to sit
at the right Hand of the Father, was to prepare places in Heaven for all that
should embrace him, John 14.2.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ is gone to Heaven as a forerunner of those that
should embrace him, Heb. 6.20. Now a forerunner implys many followers.

3. The Spirit evidenceth from Christ's Ascension, that he has a Sovereignty,
and Supremacy of all power committed to him. This Christ himself hints, Matthew.
26.64. Hereafter shall you see the Son of man sit at the right Hand of power.
That is, exalted in the highest power. So Ephesians. 1.20, 21. And thence in two
things the Spirit evidenceth the Lord Christ's taking away all kind of sin from
the Soul.

First, The Spirit evidenceth that Christ has such a supremacy of power over
all things, that it is impossible that the power of sins guilt should prevail
against any for whom Jesus Christ has undertaken, seeing he has the keys of
Hell and of Death, and has all things under his Feet in a vassalage to him.

Secondly, The Spirit evidenceth to this supremacy of Christ as Mediator, that
the Lord was well pleased with him as a surety, for such Souls as should
embrace him.

4. From the ascension of Jesus Christ to the right Hand of God, the Spirit
evidenceth that the Lord Christ had the highest authority of Judgment
committed to him. Sitting is the posture of Judges, Prove. 20.8. and John 5.21,
22. The Father has committed all Judgment unto the Son. Thence in Ephesians. 1.21,
22. he is said to have all things put under his Feet, and was given to be Head
of all things to the Church. Now from hence the Spirit evidenceth by two
things, the Lords full complete taking away all sin, from every Soul that shall
embrace him.

First, In that no Judgment of condemnation can be passed upon such a Soul, but
what Judgment Christ as surety passes, seeing all Judgment was committed to
him as the Son, and as Mediator. And what can be more sure than that all sin
and guilt shall be completely removed, seeing the Son himself that is the
surety for Souls, must pass the Judgment concerning all guilt that must be
imputed to lie upon Souls.

Secondly, In that no Judgment of condemnation or guilt, can pass against those
Souls that shall embrace him as their Mediator, but what shall pass against
themselves. The Spirit manifests that whoever embraces Christ, must be
interessed in every sentence of Judgment that pass out; because the Judgment
that Christ passes as he is the surety of Souls, and represents them, it must
pass out in their names, even with their votes: So that no Judgment of
condemnation for guilt can pass out against them without their joint vote and
consent.

IV. The Spirit evidenceth the intercession of Jesus Christ with the Father,
for all those Souls that shall embrace him. Therefore in Romans 8.34. the Apostle
proceeds to that step, Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again, that sits at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Now in the Spirits manifesting this, it does manifest
diverse things for the satisfying of the Soul, for the full and everlasting
taking away all sins by Christ, for every Soul that shall embrace him.

1. In the Spirits evidencing the intercession of Christ for sinners with the
Father, it does evidence the Lord Christ to be a Son to the Father, and to
plead as a Son with the Father for sinners. This you shall see Heb. 7.25.
compared with verse. 28. he tells you, he is able to save to the uttermost all
that come unto God by him; and verse. 28. he puts an emphasis upon it, that he
was a Son. This the Spirit commonly reveals to Souls in drawing them to Faith
of assurance, that Jesus Christ as the natural Son of God intercedeth in Heaven
for Souls. Now from thence there are two evidences given to a Soul, of Christ's
fully taking away sin from every Soul that shall embrace him.

First, The Spirit evidenceth, that it is impossible that any guilt whatever
should cleave to the Soul, in regard the Son can ask nothing but what the
Father will. The Father and I am one, says Christ; so their wills are one, and
their thoughts and dispositions one.

Secondly, The Spirit evidencing that it is impossible for the pleading of
Jesus Christ to be denied. There is such a complacency, and acquiescence of
delight of the Father in Jesus Christ, that the Father has no more power to
deny what the Lord Christ pleads for, then he has power to deny himself, and
that is impossible.

2. The Spirit evidenceth the intercession of Christ, does evidence that the
Lord Christ pleads with the Father as an obedient Son to his Fathers will. Now
from this the Holy Ghost evidenceth in two things, the full, complete,
everlasting taking away of sin from every Soul that shall embrace him.

First, The Spirit evidenceth that there is an obligation upon the Father, to
accept his Sons entreaty for poor sinners.

Secondly, The Spirit evidenceth, that it was the fulfilling the same will of
the Father that Jesus Christ pleaded for, when he pleaded for the pardon of the
sins of those that embrace him. It was his Fathers design originally out of his
love to poor lost wretches, to take away their sins, only it was his purpose to
effect it through Jesus Christ, doing and satisfying his Justice for sin: So
that Jesus Christ in yielding obedience unto his Father unto Death, did it to
effect the end of his Father in the pardon of the sins of lost sinners.

3. The Spirit evidenceth in this intercession of Christ, that though he died
as a common person, and rose as a common person; yet he does not intercede as a
common person, not in their steads, but for them. That you shall observe Heb.
7. comparing verse. 22. with verse. 25. He was made the surety of the new
Covenant, verse. 22. And then he tells you, He is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come unto God by him. There are two things the Spirit evidenceth in
that.

First, It evidenceth that he pleaded as a surety appointed by his Father for
Souls: According to Heb. 5.5. he did not glorify himself to be made an high
Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. His Father ordained him to the office of an high Priest, which contains
the suretiship.

Secondly, He pleads as a surety to his Father to accomplish the full salvation
of Souls through his pleading. The Father ordained him to be a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedek; hence he, as an high Priest, is able to save to
the uttermost all that come unto God by him. Then the Spirit reveals the things
done by Christ in his intercession as a surety. Two things there the Spirit
reveals.

First, That by Christ's intercession as a surety for Souls, there is a vertual
continuation of the sacrifice of the Blood of Christ, for the satisfaction of
the Fathers Justice. Now from thence the Spirit brings in full evidence for
taking away all sin, from every Soul that shall embrace Christ, in regard the
satisfaction is continued in the Fathers Eye. Thence it is observable, Heb. 8.
comparing verse. 2, 3. with verse. 12. That the Apostle from the meditation of
the continued Priesthood of Jesus Christ, ministering in Heaven, does conclude
the firmness and stability of the new Covenant, there mentioned in the latter
end of the Chapter, and concludes from thence Gods remembrance of sins and
Iniquities no more.

Secondly, The Spirit evidenceth, that through Christ's interceding as a surety,
there is a continual suing out of the benefit of the satisfaction of the Father
by his death, for sinful Souls according to their necessities. Hence you may
observe in 1 John 2.1. That the Apostle directs those believers that should
sin, to be acting of Faith upon Jesus Christ, as he was a present advocate with
the Father.

4. The Spirit manifests to the Soul's Faith, from that beam of light in the
Gospel, that the Lord has everlastingly removed all sin from all that shall
embrace him; That the Lord Christ in his intercession with the Father, for the
perfect Salvation of those that shall embrace him, does plead for nothing but
what the Father himself, and of himself, is as willing to give to those Souls,
as Jesus Christ is willing to ask it at his Fathers Hand. Therefore in Isa.
53.10. The whole work of Salvation that Jesus Christ was to accomplish for
Souls, is called nothing else but the Fathers pleasure; The pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his Hands: Now this the Spirit clears up convincingly and
satisfyingly, that the Father is altogether ready, yea that the Fathers bowels
do as much yern after the full Salvation of those that embrace the Lord Jesus,
as the bowels of Christ himself, who is the Head of those Souls. Now the Spirit
may, and does sometimes evidence this parallel willingness of the Father in
these three things.

First, The Spirit clears it that an amity and oneness comprehends all kind of
near relation in it, and manifests that those that embrace Christ, are admitted
into unity with the Father himself, to be one with the Father. According to
that in John 17.21, 22. That they may be one, as thou and I are one, and that
they may be one in us, as thou Father art in me and I in thee.

Secondly, The Spirit may evidence, that the relation between the Father and
Souls, is the very foundation of all relation between Christ and those Souls.
And therefore there must needs be as great willingness in the Father, to accept
Christ's pleading for perfect Salvation, as there is in Christ to plead for it:
So that though Christ have those that embrace him, engraven as it were upon his
Heart, yet it was there engraven by the Hand of his Fathers love, John 17.6.
Thine they were, and thou gave them me: They were made mine because they were
first thine.

Thirdly, The Spirit may manifest here, that the willingness of Christ to plead
for them, proceeds from the willingness of the Father that he should so plead,
that he should become an intercessor. Christ in all his pleadings is but a
Priest, which Priesthood is but an office to which God the Father had ordained
him, Heb. 5.5.

. The Spirit evidenceth that Christ in his intercession with the Father, for
the perfect Salvation of those Souls that shall embrace him, pleads for nothing
but what he has power to command to be effected. As in Psalm. 2.6, 7. He has
set his King upon the holy hill; that is, as he that God the Father has
appointed in his own stead and room as Mediator, to dispense all things
communicable, to dispose of all according to his will, only God the Father will
be acknowledged as a Father to him, and he to be a Son; therefore the Lord
says in the next verse, Ask of me, and I will give thee, it shall be by
intercession: yet John 5.22. All judgment is committed to the Son still, and he
has the power and command of all: Therefore you shall read, John 17.24. in
that prayer that is the pattern of his intercession in Heaven for Souls; he
prays thus, Father I will that those that thou have given me be with me; he
prays as it were in a commanding way.

Second beam of Divine Light.
There is a Second beam of the same Spiritual Heavenly light, that the Spirit
does necessarily also cause to shine resplendently before the enlightened Souls
Eye, before Faith can receive such full assurance, as to work by way of fullness
of confidence and assurance, and that is this, The Spirit does evidence from the
Gospel, or from the promise, The Lord Christ's unquestionable willingness to
embrace every poor lost sinner that is willing to embrace him. Indeed the Lord
Christ does primarily embrace lost sinners into the bosom of his love, and
joins them everlastingly to himself, yea and compleats the relative union,
between himself and their Souls whilst they are mere patients, altogether under
an impossibility of any such Spiritual action, or so much as any concurrence
with the Lord Jesus, in the completing of the relative union: But this union
remains invisible till by the virtue of this passive, or this relative union,
the dead Soul is enabled by actual believing, actively to close in union with
the Lord Jesus, and to embrace him to be one with him. And therefore to the
least degree of the knowledge of a Souls union with Christ, of necessity the
Spirit must present the Lord Christ with his precious everlasting arms of love,
to embrace such loveless sinners as will embrace him, that thereby the Soul may
be satisfied concerning the object that he believes, and may close with the
Lord Christ propounded, and make application of that union tendered in the Lord
Jesus with himself. Now for the Spirit evidencing this to the Soul
satisfyingly, and to make the Soul in believing to triumph, the Spirit is wont
to evidence diverse particulars.

1. The Spirit is wont to evidence the consent and agreement of the blessed
Trinity from all eternity, in that glorious design of the Lord Jesus
entertaining every lost despicable sinner that will embrace him.

I. The Spirit reveals the consent of God the Father to that glorious design,
and that in diverse particulars.

1. In that God the Father imposed a command upon the Lord Jesus to embrace
every such despicable lost sinner, that would give him entertainment as his
Mediator. This you shall see in John 6.37, 38. whoever comes unto me, says
Christ, I will in no wise cast him out; that is, whoever receives me through
believing, I will in no wise reject him or cast him off, or refuse to be a
Mediator between God and him: I will in no wise cast him out, that is, under no
respect, no notion or consideration that can be imagined: Now observe what is
the reason of this, you shall see verse. 38. For I came down from Heaven, not to
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me; and this is the Fathers
will, that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing; that is, of all
that he should draw to believe on me, I should lose none, but should raise him
up at the last day; and this is the will of him that sent me, that he that
sees the Son and believes on him, should have everlasting life. So John
10.15, to 18.

2. The Spirit reveals God the Fathers infusion of a disposition of love into
the Heart of Jesus Christ, purposely that he might embrace every lost sinner,
that would entertain him as his Mediator. Says he, Psalm. 40.7, 8. Lo I come to
do thy will, O my God, thy Law is within my Heart, that is, a disposition to
yield obedience to this thy will, and in effect it was a disposition of love;
the Law of being a Mediator was nothing but a Law of love, and this Law was
written in the Heart by God the Father.

3. That the Father prepared a suitable body for the second person in Trinity to
become Mediator in, Heb. 10.4. A body have thou prepared me; that is, thou have
prepared me a Body fit to be offered up for sin; that is, fit to become a ready
willing sacrifice for poor lost sinners, that I might redeem them.

4. In that God the Father did engage the Lord Jesus by his own love to him, to
love every such lost undone sinner as should embrace him. This you shall see if
you compare John 10.17, 18, with John 15.10. Says Christ, therefore does my
father love me, because I lay down my life that I may take it again: And says
Christ to his Disciples, If you keep my commandments, you shall abide in my
love, even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments and abide in his love: Hence
Christ intimates, not only that his Father loved him, for his undertaking that
work of mercy and pity to poor lost undone sinners, but that his Father did
lay the engagement of his love upon him; So that as he respects his Fathers
love, and desires the continuance of it to him, so he should be pitiful to
every lost sinner that embraces him.

II. The consent of the Son the Lord Jesus himself, is revealed by the Spirit
for the clearing of this. And that the Spirit may and does reveal in two things.

1. In the free ready consent of the Lord Jesus, to the blessed will of his
Father. The Lord Christ made no objection against the blessed command, though
take it in all the latitude of it, it was the hardest command that ever was
imposed upon any creature in heaven or earth, a command to spend his dearest
innocent blood, a command to become a curse, a command to deprive himself of
the ravishing vision of his Fathers face, yet this command he never stuck at,
but says, in the Volumn of the Book it is written, Lo I come to do thy will.

2. In that he took infinite delight in the yielding obedience to this his
Fathers will, Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; He took pleasure
in it, and was straightned in his Spirit till it was accomplished.

III. The Spirit reveals the consent of the blessed Spirit, proceeding both
from God the Father and God the Son in this blessed design. And that is in this,
that the spirit freely, and in the very fullness of it, took up his habitation
in the Lord Christ, thus constituted to be Mediator, to fill him with grace,
and love and pity, for the accomplishment of this blessed work of gathering in
lost sinners into union with himself. This the Spirit reveals in two things.

1. In the manner or form of the Spirit descending down upon Christ. Luke 3.22.
It came down in the shape of a Dove, to show it came on purpose to furnish the
Mediator with mercy and pity to poor despicable loveless sinners, that he
might be nothing but a lump of love wrapped up in flesh.

2. The Spirit reveals the end for which the Spirit was thus poured out upon
him in the fullness of it. The end is revealed, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. To preach good
tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken hearted (that is, poor captivated
inslaved souls, under the power of their hellish enemy) and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, that is, deliverance of them that are held fast
in the chains of darkness, under the power of the Prince of darkness) to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.

Secondly, The Spirit reveals the suitable Office, that is established upon the
Lord Christ, purposely to engage him to show mercy and pity to every lost
sinner that should embrace him. The Spirit manifests that he is ordained by God
the father to be an High Priest, to sacrifice for the sins of the people. Here
the Spirit reveals two things.

1. That the qualifications that God looks upon in Christ, in ordaining him to
be the High Priest, were suitable dispositions to show mercy and pity to poor
undone Sinners. This you shall find in Heb. 5.2. He can have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way. Therefore Heb. 4.25. That Is made
a special qualification in Christ as High Priest, that he was one who had a
fellow feeling of those that he was High Priest to, that he had a sweet
sympathy rolling in his bowels to them, under the infirmity of Sin and misery.

2. The Spirit reveals that the end of that Office of the Priesthood that was
established upon him, was to show mercy to poor despicable undone sinners. You
shall see in Heb. 5.1. what are the ends of an High Priest;

First, he is ordained to come to the Mercy-seat for man, that is, for the good
of poor miserable men.

Secondly, that he might offer gifts and sacrifice for sins, that he might
pacify the angry God, that was incensed against sinners, that he might
reconcile perishing, lost, undone sinners to God the father.

Thirdly, For evidencing that unquestionable willingness of the Lord Jesus, to
accept every sinner that will embrace him: the spirit reveals the exact and
exquisite care, the Lord Jesus has taken to reveal himself, to prevail with
poor undone sinners to gather them into union with himself. This the spirit
evidenceth in five things.

1. By revealing the provision of Officers that Jesus Christ has made, to
allure and beseech souls to accept the Lord Christ to be one with them. After
Christ was gone into heaven, and had left pleading with undone sinners with his
own blessed lips, you see Ephesians. 4.11, 12. he sends out others in his own room,
such as might be Ambassadors representing his own person, to beseech and pray
undone sinners to accept of reconciliation with the father through their union
with him.

2. By revealing that the Lord Christ took care to furnish such as he sent
forth, to allure undone sinners into union with him, with a suitable spirit for
that work. Therefore before Jesus Christ would go to his father, John 20.22. he
goes to his Disciples and gives them a Commission to allure souls into union
with himself, and when he had given them the Commission, he breathed on them,
and said, Receive ye the holy spirit.

3. By revealing the Lords assimilating those whom he betrusts, to reveal
himself to lost sinners. Not only in furnishing them with abilities of the
spirit; but also in conforming them in their very dispositions unto his own
likeness, he conveyed his own bowels of mercy and pity and compassion into
them, that their bowels might yearn toward the gathering lost sinners into
communion with him, as the bowels of Jesus Christ himself yearned. This you
shall see, Ephesians. 1.8. That Paul tells them he longed after them all in the
bowels of Jesus Christ; That is, I longed after your perfection in union and
communion with Christ, in the bowels that Jesus Christ has infused into me, as
some interpret it: But indeed the interpretation may rather be of Jesus Christ,
in the same bowels that Jesus Christ longed after souls, in the same kind of
pity and compassion, that Jesus Christ had working in his bosom toward undone
sinners.

4. By revealing the Lord Jesus choosing out some desperate sinners, on purpose
to be as patterns of love before the eyes of other lost sinners, that he would
take into union with himself. This is declared by the spirit, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.
to be the end of God to show mercy to that blasphemer, that persecuter, that
injurious one to Jesus Christ, that he might show forth a pattern to other
sinners that should hereafter believe on him.

5. By revealing the Lord Christ to have improved all his interest, in those
that are his own, to engage them to help forward the work, in gathering lost
sinners into union with him. As in John 21.15, 16, 17. when Jesus Christ was to
leave the earth, and would engage Peter to do some great thing for him, he
engaged him to reveal himself to poor miserable souls; that is under the term or
notion here of feeding his Lambs and Sheep.

IV. For the evidencing the willingness of the Lord Christ to accept into union
every loveless sinner that will embrace him, the spirit reveals the absolute
engagement of Christ, by his own joy, and by his own glory that is
supernatural, to embrace every loveless sinner that is willing to entertain
him. The Lord Christ considered as head to a mystical body, may be said to be
imperfect, till all sinners that shall ever belong to him be gathered in; And
Jesus Christ even wants his Joy and Glory that he shall enjoy as a Mediator, so
long as there is but one lost sinner belonging to that mystical body to be
gathered in: Therefore it is impossible for Jesus Christ to reject one sinner
that shall embrace him, unless he will reject himself.

There is a third beam of divine light, and that is, Third beam of divine light.
The insatiable longing and thirsting of the Lord Jesus, to embrace every soul
into union that would be united to him. The spirit is leading the soul from one
degree of satisfaction to his faith, to another, till at last he comes to give
a full ground of satisfaction to the soul, to make his union with Christ
appear, that faith has ground not only of confidence but of triumph. Now the
spirit does evidence this unto the soul for his satisfaction two ways.

First, The spirit reveals the grounds from whence the longings of Jesus Christ
after union with the soul do proceed.

Secondly, The spirit reveals the expression of those longings of Jesus Christ
by himself.

First, The spirit reveals the ground whence those longings proceed.

1. The spirit evidenceth the near alliance, and precious relations, that Jesus
Christ accounts himself to have, unto all those lost Sinners that long after
union with him, or that ever shall be brought into union with him.

1. The Spirit reveals, that the Lord Christ accounts all those lost Souls his
Brethren. Therefore Christ in John 20.17. when he sends Mary to tell the
blessed news of his resurrection to his Disciples, says he, Go tell my
brethren, that I ascend unto my father and your father, to my God and your God.
[Go tell my brethren.] That is, those that are joint adopted ones by my father,
as my brethren, the joint beloved ones, as I am beloved of the father as
Mediator. Now from hence the spirit manifests, that the soul of Christ cannot
but long after union with all those souls, that will embrace him into union.

2. The spirit reveals that the Lord Christ accounts all those that shall
embrace him to be as his Spouse, as those that are to be married to him. Jesus
Christ has infinite longings after himself and his own glory, and then Ephesians.
2.28. He that loves his wife, loves himself, therefore Jesus Christ does but
love himself, and his own glory, in desiring the union of souls with himself,
and therefore his longings cannot be less than infinite and incomprehensible.

3. The spirit evidenceth, that Jesus Christ accounts all souls that shall
embrace him, as his own members, without which he is not complete as Mediator.
The fullness of Christ mystical is the Church, and he accounts not himself
perfect till all his mystical body be gathered to him. Now hence the spirit
manifests infinite longings in the bosom of Jesus Christ, after every soul that
would be one with him, as he longs after his own good.

4. The spirit reveals that the Lord Christ accounts every soul that will
embrace him to be a part of his own glory. Christ accounts not his own glory to
be full, till all those lost souls that ever shall embrace him, be perfectly
and completely joined to him. Now hence the spirit manifests, that there cannot
but be infinite longings in the bosom of Jesus Christ, after the union of such
souls with himself, as would have union with him, or are willing to embrace
him, seeing he cannot but infinitely long after the perfection of his own
glory; And seeing he cannot long after his own glory in the perection of it,
but he must long after the union of every lost soul that will embrace him into
union with himself.

2. The spirit also remembers the soul of those dreadful sufferings of Jesus
Christ, for all those souls that ever shall embrace him. Now from thence the
spirit evidenceth three ways, that there cannot but be such longings of Christ.

1. That the love of Christ to those souls is augmented. There is no more
prevailing argument of love, than suffering evil for the beloved one.

2. The spirit evidenceth from thence, that Jesus Christ has a nearer interest
in them. The propriety of Christ is as well augmented by his sufferings as his
love. Therefore says the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your own, why?
for ye are bought with a price.

3. The spirit reveals that there is a higher degree of Joy in the bosom of
Christ, in the obtaining of union with them. Therefore, Isa. 53.11. Christ is
said, to see of the travel of his soul, and to be satisfied. That is, he shall
see souls gathered in to him as the fruit of all his sufferings, and this shall
satisfy him. Now from hence the spirit reveals the unsatiable longings of
Christ, after the union of those souls that shall embrace him.

3. The spirit reveals the sensibleness of the Lord Christ of his own duty, as
he is Mediator, to gather such lost souls as will embrace him, into union with
him. This you may find John 10.15, 16. Says Christ, I have other sheep which
are not of this fold, them also I must bring in: As if Christ should have said,
there is necessity, I am engaged by duty to my father, in respect of the
command my father laid upon me, to gather those lost souls into union with me.

4. The spirit reveals, that it is only suitable to the nature of Jesus Christ,
to be gathering lost undone Sinners into union with him. His nature is nothing
but an abstract or quintessence of love, as Mediator, and therefore it is only
natural to him to be pouring out of his love into empty souls.

Secondly, the spirit evidenceth the expressions of those longings of Jesus
Christ by himself.

I. The spirit presents Jesus Christ seeking after such lost sinners, to gather
them into union with him, when their backs are altogether turned upon him, and
when they have altogether forgotten him. This spirit causes the soul to hear
from the mouth of God himself, Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek and
save that which is lost. It is my office, says Christ, for which I came down
from heaven.

II. The spirit manifests the Lord Christ's strong compassionate cries of love
after such souls, to accept of a blessed union and communion with himself. This
the spirit causes the soul to hear, Rev. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come,
and whosoever will let him come, and take of the water of life freely. So Isa.
55.1, 2. Ho every one that is in any want, in any necessity, any poor thirsty
soul, come ye, says he, buy wine and milk without money and without price.
Here the spirit causes the soul,

1. To discerern the loud cry of Jesus Christ after such poor, dead, sluggish
souls to embrace them.

2. The spirit causes the soul to see the redoubling of his cry and call. Come
ye, says Christ, yea again, come, and again, come, as if his bowels yearned.

3. The spirit lots the soul see, his propounding all the precious arguments,
that can possibly be imagined, to prevail with souls. Come, says Christ, buy
Wine and Milk, take the most precious soul-ravishing comforts, the sweetest
Cordials to thy poor needy fainting soul.

III. The spirit reveals the low condescension of Jesus Christ to become an
intreater, a beseecher of souls to accept of that union propounded. According
to 2. Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled to God, that is, be ye one
with God.

IV. The spirit reveals that the Lord Christ has put his own Spirit in
commission for that end, to make all these longings of his evident to the soul,
and these expressions of his longings in his Cries and Entreaties, effectual
upon souls. The spirit reveals to the soul, the strength of the desires of
Jesus Christ, to be so superlative, as to take care least after all the
expressions of his longings, the soul should still remain unconquered, and
therefore he adds as it were a supplement to all his former desires of union
with him, he adds his own spirit to stand as a constant Officer for that end,
to convince the soul of his longings that they should have union with him.
Therefore he sends the comforter, John 16.7.

V. The spirit reveals the Lords Tender, Pitiful, Compassionate discovery of
the dreadful danger of neglect of union with him. According to that in John
3.17, 18. God sent not his Son into the World to condemn, but that the World
through him might be saved: I tell you souls, says Christ, the very intention
of my Father in sending me, is not to augment your Sins, that your condemnation
should be augmented, but it is his intention that you might be saved: And then
v. 18. he reveals to them the desperate state of them that neglect this
Salvation that he brings, He that believes not, is condemned already.

VI. The spirit reveals that the Lord waits to be gracious, and even waits as
it were the leisure of poor lost undone souls, to accept of that blessed union
tendered. The spirit presents the Lord Jesus standing at the door of hearts and
knocking, till his head is wet with the dew, and his locks with the drops of
the night, waiting for the souls accepting of that blessed union with himself
that he tenders.

There is a fourth beam of divine light the spirit causes further to sparkle
forth from the Gospel in this work of Irradiation, or manifestation of it,
Fourth beam of divine light.
and that is this. The absolute independency of this willingness of Jesus
Christ to accept souls into union, upon any thing in the Souls whom he is thus
willing to accept, and after union with him his soul thus longs. There can be
no act of Faith by way of fullness of confidence or assurance, till there be
such a clear apprehension of the acceptance of the particular soul into union
with the Lord Jesus, that all matter of fear vanishes, and all occasion of
doubt is taken away, by the clearness of that light that the spirit casts into
the understanding, and by the clear satisfaction it gives the soul concerning
his acceptance by Jesus Christ, to be one with him. Therefore the spirit in
respect to those Multitudes of fears, that commonly arise in souls, concerning
the unsutableness of themselves to be taken into union with Christ, for the
taking away those occasions of fear, does reveal to the soul that the
willingness of the Lord Jesus to accept it into union, and the longings of
Jesus Christ after union with souls, has not the least dependence upon any
thing in the soul it self, whence he accepts it into union. Now for the
evidencing of this, the spirit may and does evidence these three things to the
soul.

I. The spirit evidenceth the impossibility of the will of the glorious Deity,
to be moved (...) any thing without it self, in any of the motions of his love
whatever. So that thence the spirit evidenceth to the soul, that it were a
denying of the glory of the Godhead, to conceive that God should look out of
himself for any argument, any motive, any incentive, that should either excite
or incline the divine will to any motions of love whatever to wards any
creature.

II. The spirit evidenceth the absolute will of the Father alone, to be the
first principle, and also the only cause of admission of souls into union and
communion with the Lord Jesus. So that both the purpose of God to accept souls
into union, and also the execution of that his purpose, do depend only upon the
Lords bare will, and good pleasure. According to that in Ephesians. 1.5, 6, compared
with ver. 9.

III. The spirit evidenceth the Lord Christ's willingness to accept of souls
into union, to be only done through the Commission that he received, from the
good pleasure of his Fathers will concerning such souls. According to that in
John 6.37, 38. When he says he would reject no one soul in no wise, under no
consideration whatever; he gives this reason, for I came down from Heaven, not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

There is a fifth beam of light that the spirit causes to shine forth from the
Gospel, and that is, Fifth beam of divine light.
The admirable and incomprehensible fullness of all perfection of love and
mercy, that is comprehended in this tender of union with the Lord Christ, to
every particular Soul that will accept it. Notwithstanding those former beams
of divine light, there is a two fold necessity for the Spirit to cause this
beam of divine light also to sparkle before the souls eyes.

I. That there may be a fullness of sufficiency to produce acts of Faith in a
soul, by way of fullness of confidence and assurance. And in this regard, there
is a necessity of the spirits casting this beam of light also before the souls
eyes, to open the incomprehensible perfection of all kind of love, that the
soul soul can imagine he should have the least necessity of.

II. To excite and quicken the affections to more enlarged operations or
workings. Though there has been a former apprehension of the infinite
perfection of love, in the tender of the union, yet there is no answerable
working of affection toward the union, unless there be that very actual
Vision: Now when the operation of the affections toward the union tendered are
but small, then the souls assurance of its acting of Faith, by way of fullness
of confidence of its union with Christ, is but in a small degree. Therefore it
is in this respect, that the spirit does manifest the absolute, complete,
incomprehensible perfection of love that is included in the tender of union.
And this the spirit does in diverse particulars.

1. The spirit reveals the Lords tender of passing over himself, and all that
is in himself, wholly unto souls through this union with Christ. For the
evidencing this, the spirit only brings to remembrance, the sum of all the
promises, according to the Lords own abstract and Compendium that he has made
of them; And that is this, That God has said he will be the souls God in
Christ. Here are two particulars included under this one depth.

First, The spirit manifests that the highest interest that is possible to make
a soul capable of, in the infinite perfection of God himself, is offered to be
passed over to the soul in the tender of union.

Secondly, The spirit manifests that the Lord offers in this tender of union to
interest the soul in himself, with such an interest as should be most suitable,
for the fullest communication of himself to the soul, that it shall be as
proper and peculiar for God to love the soul, as it should be proper to the
nature of God to be loving himself.

2. The spirit reveals that the Lord has laid the highest obligation upon
himself, to be the souls own in all that he is, in his passing over himself
unto the soul through that union with Christ. This the spirit manifests by
bringing to remembrance the Lords asseverations, and protestations, and highest
oath that he adds unto that his word, that declares him to pass over himself
unto souls through their union with Christ. Hebr. 6.13.

3. The spirit reveals the Lords establishing the transactions of himself, and
all that is in himself over to the soul, through its union with Christ, upon
his own will alone, on purpose that there might be a fullness of all love
contained in him. Three particular ends the spirit may bring to the Souls
remembrance for the clearing of this.

First, That there might be no possibility of an alteration of that perfect
love of his to a soul through union with Christ, by any Power or Possibility of
the soul. The Holy Ghost affirms Romans 11.9. The Lords Election of love to be
merely established upon his own will, for that end that the Election might
stand being not of Works but of Grace; That is, that it might be certain, being
unchangable; So as the souls wickedness and wretchedness, rising to what height
soever, yet it might not be able to make an alteration in that perfect love. So
Romans 9.16.

Secondly, That there might be a fullness of love, and to make a constant
immutable ground for his peoples faith to rest upon him for the perfection of
of his love toward them. This the spirit may reveal to the soul from that in
Hebr. 6.17, 18. The Lord is said to add the confirmation of his Oath, that
there might be two immutable grounds, in which it was impossible for God to Lie.

Thirdly, That his people might have a sufficient satisfactory consolation,
from that fullness of his love, in all necessities, upon all occasions, and at
all times. That by two immutable things they might have strong consolation.

4. The spirit reveals the Lords undertaking, to effect in, and for the soul,
the whole transaction of himself over unto the soul, through his union with
Christ by the Almighty Power of his own love alone. Ephesians. 2.5. The whole work of
Salvation is attributed to nothing but love. The Spirit reveals this two ways.

First, The spirit reveals that the Lord has engaged himself by promise, to
effect the transaction of himself over unto the soul, by the Almighty Power of
his love. Isaiah 41.10, 11.

Secondly, The spirit remembers the soul, of the necessity that the Lord has
imposed upon Jesus Christ to effect it. John 10.16.

5. The spirit reveals, that the Lord has undertaken the suitable tempering and
disposing of the soul, for all suitable walking in union with the Lord Jesus
that is tendered. This the spirit may and does evidence from that in Jer.
31.33. Where the Lord reveals it to be the very Covenant: This shall be my
Covenant, or this shall be the love that I will promise; This is part of Gods
love to souls united to him, to Write his Law in their Hearts, that is, to
conform their spirits to all his Blessed Will, to make their Hearts answerable
and suitable to the union with Christ, and all the ways of God that they ought
to walk in by virtue of that union.

6. The Spirit manifests the Lords undertaking the preservation of the Soul by
his own power, to the full everlasting enjoyment of all the fruits of union.
This the Spirit may and does reveal, it may be from that in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
when the Lord declares it to be his own resolution, concerning those he accepts
to be partakers of those promises of Love through union with Christ, that his
own Spirit shall dwell within them, and he will cause them to walk in his
Statutes and do them, and keep them that they shall not depart from him: That
it shall not be in the power of the Soul to bereave it self of all those
precious fruits of that blessed union with the Lord Jesus, but the Soul must of
necessity (unless the Almighty power of God should fail) enjoy the fullness of
all love and communion, as the consequence of the union with Christ. And for
the further evidence of this, the Spirit may and does reveal it by two things.

First, The Spirit remembers the Soul, that the Lord has made it his own
chosen delight, to be carrying on the Soul toward the enjoyment of that
fullness and perfection of love, and through his union even the perfection of
communion.

Secondly, The Spirit reveals the Lord to hang the highest manifestation of his
glory, upon the filllng those with all fullness of love and mercy, that are
received into that union with the Lord Jesus. And hereby the Spirit satisfies
the Soul and convinces it, that the Lord himself is so interested in
perfecting the fruits and consequences of the Souls union with Christ; that
unless the Lord should deny himself, there is an impossibility of the Lords
failing to preserve the Soul by his own power, unto the perfect and full
enjoyment of the perfection of communion, as the consequence of the union with
Christ.

The Sixth beam of Light the Spirit manifests from the Gospel is this, Sixth
beam of Divine Light.
The Spirit manifests the complete sufficiency, yea the abundancy and
superabundancy of security that is given, to secure Souls of their enjoyment of
all the Gospel thus discovers to them. Now for the making this beam of light
shine forth in its Beauty and Glory, the Spirit may and does evidence many
things.

I. First, The Spirit evidenceth the Lords entering into Covenant with Jesus
Christ the Mediator, and engaging himself in that Covenant, to effect the mercy
and love that the Gospel discovers, for every Soul that shall embrace him. Two
things are to be opened here.

First, That the Lord did thus enter into Covenant with Christ.

Secondly, What security the believing Soul has from thence, of the Lords
effecting of what is so discovered in the Gospel.

First, That the Lord did thus Covenant with Christ himself is apparent.

1. In regard all the whole bundle of the promises, that make up the whole
Covenant of the Gospel, they run primarily to Christ, and in his name. To show
that God and Christ were the Covenanters together, that the Covenant was struck
up between the Father and the Son, from before the foundations of the World
were laid. If you observe the first promise that ever God the Father gave, or
the first discovery of Gospel that ever was unto Souls, in Genesis 3.15. The seed
of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: There is the whole Gospel, the
whole Covenant; but observe in whose name it runs, in the name of Christ, The
seed of the Woman, that is Christ; that is, Christ mystically, including his
Members too, but it is Christ primarily; He shall break the Serpents head, that
is, shall triumph over Satan, shall get the victory over Hell, and spoil him
that has formerly taken Souls captive.

2. It appears in regard Christ himself takes God the Father as his God, John
20.17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. So that
hence it appears, that God the Father has engaged himself in a solemn
Covenant, unto Jesus Christ as Mediator, from before the foundations of the
World were laid, to effect what ever the Gospel discovers, for every Soul that
should embrace him. And it is from thence that Christ prays, in John 17.24.
Father I will that those that thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory.

Secondly, We may see what assurance this affords unto Souls of their
unquestionable infallible enjoyment of all that the Gospel thus discovers.
There is a two fold security from hence.

1. In regard God the Father stands engaged in a solemn Covenant, to effect all
that the Gospel thus discovers unto those Souls that have, in believing,
received Christ to be their Husband and Head.

2. The believing Soul is to know and understand, the Lord Christ to have
represented every Soul that shall embrace him, in entering into Covenant with
the Father. Though the Covenant runs to Christ, it was but as Christ was the
first Elect of God, representing all the other Elect; it was but as Christ was
a common person, a second Adam, that had all that should believe in him, in his
person; as the first Adam had all that were to come out of his loins included
in him, and bound up in him in the first Covenant.

II. Secondly, The Spirit reveals the Father to have paid the highest and
dearest price, for the effecting it, and for every Souls embracing Christ, what
the Gospel discovers in the surest way unto Souls apprehensions. This the
Spirit reveals in discovering God the Father, to have given the dearly beloved
of his Soul for that end, to bring about Gospel mercies to be conveyed to
Souls, in the surest way to Souls own conceptions and apprehensions. According
to that, in John 3.16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. For the clearing of this, there must be two things opened.

First, That the Father was at the highest cost and charge, and did pay the
greatest price, to effect those mercies for Souls.

Secondly, That one intent of the Father in paying so high a price for Souls,
was to satisfy Souls of the enjoyment of them in their own apprehensions.

First, That the Father paid so high a price, for the effecting that mercy and
love, that the Gospel discovers for Souls that will embrace him; will appear in
three things.

1. In that it cost the Father the abasement for a season, of his own essential
glory. I do not mean, as if there could have been an extenuation of the
essential glory of God; but I mean there was a vailing of that essential glory,
so as those resplendent beams of his glory shined not forth. This the Father
did in that his dearly beloved, his only begotten Son, (that had but one and
the same essence, and so the same essential glory with himself) should take
upon him that frail, vile, despicable nature of Man.

2. In regard the Father deprived himself for a season of his highest delight,
his most infinite contentment, for the effecting those Gospel mercies. The
Fathers delight is in Communion, and the higher degree of Communion, the higher
is the delight of God. Therefore it is said, Prove. 8.31. That he delights in
the habitable parts of the Earth, and with the Sons of Men; that is, because
there are Creatures capable of Communion with God, there are empty Vessels that
he may be pouring out of his transcendent fullness into. Now God deprived
himself of his own highest delight, in withdrawing the communications of
himself from that his dearly beloved Son, that he was forced to complain, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

3. It cost the Father the very death, yea the accursed death, of the most
dearly beloved of his Soul, the Lord Jesus. He delivered him up to death, for
us, says the Apostle. Yea it cost the Father the suffering the execution of
his full wrath and indignation, upon the dearly beloved of his Soul.

Secondly, It must be opened, that the Father was at the highest cost and
charge, in effecting that mercy for Souls, that shall embrace the Lord Christ
tendered, on purpose to make it the surer to Souls apprehensions, to give them
the fuller security of all that the Gospel discovers. This will appear in three
things.

I. In regard there was no absolute necessity in respect of God himself, to
effect that which the Gospel discovers, for Souls embracing Christ in that way,
at such high cost and charge to himself. That will appear in two things.

1. In regard there was a fullness of power in the Lords mercy, to give absolute
pardon unto sinners, irrespectively to satisfaction. The Lord being the high
Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, whose sole incommunicable property is, that his
will is the original of all Law, the original of the being of all goodness, he
has an absolute power in his own mercy, to have given an absolute pardon to
every transgression, committed against his own Law: The Lords Will being the
only rule that he walks by; and that Will of his being altogether independent,
has a power within it self, to have given an absolute pardon to every
transgression against his Will.

2. In regard the Lord in the effecting of the love and mercy, that the Gospel
discovers to Souls, did not proceed according to the exactest rule of Justice.
Do not mistake me, I mean not according to the height and rigor of Justice as
Justice, which of necessity must have been, had the Lord been bound to his
Justice to proceed that way. That appears in two things.

First, The highest exact rule of Justice, admits of no surety in capital
Crimes. It requires the individual person to be the sufferer of the evil
threatened for the breach of the Law that was the transgressor of the Law. The
voice of exact Justice was only in this wise, The Soul that sins shall die,
without any admission of any Surety. Now it is apparent that the Lord himself
in the bringing about, or effecting the Love and Mercy that the Gospel
discovers unto Souls, he propounds this way to admit of a Surety. Those that
were the offenders of Justice were not sufferers under Justice; but another
steps in, and bears the stroke of Justice, that in regard of his own personal
transgression, was not guilty of the breach of the Law, or of the Offense
against Justice.

Secondly, Were it possible for exact Justice to admit a Surety, yet not
possible for exact Justice to find out a Surety, working still as Justice:
Justice never looks further than the Transgressor himself to exact Justice
upon, unless it be to lay the merit and desert of the transgressor, in some
degree, upon all that have dependence upon him. Never came a thought into
Justice, as Justice, of remitting the least degree of punishment of the
Transgressor; yet you see in the way that he proceeds, he casts about in his
own thoughts, to find out one sufficient to bear all the burden of wrath and
indignation that is due to Transgressors themselves. The Lord in his design of
glorifying his Justice, in effecting Love and Mercy for Souls discovered in the
Gospel, he proceeds only according to Love it self; yea, according to nothing
else but Love in respect of Souls; it being an act of simple, absolute, pure
Love, to impute the transgression of the poor guilty Spirit to the spotless
Lamb, the Lord Jesus; as if he had been to have pardoned those Transgressors,
and to have delivered them clearly from Sin, without the imputation of those
Transgressions to another: Therefore observe the whole Work of Salvation,
though contrived by the infinite Wisdom of God, that Mercy and Justice might
meet together, and kiss each other, it is attributed to Love alone, Ephesians. 2.5.
By Grace (or Love) ye are saved. So, Tit. 3.4, 5. Not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us. Still the whole
Work is attributed to the Fathers Love.

2. There was no absolute necessity of Gods being at that cost and charge, to
procure Love and Mercy for Souls that would embrace him, in respect of the
Souls themselves that were to be partakers of it. That will appear in two
things.

1. In regard Souls partaking of that Love and Mercy that the Gospel discovers,
were not the Objects of that Love and Mercy primarily, by that cost and charge
that the Lord was at in the Death of Christ, to effect that Love and Mercy. If
you observe the whole Current of the Scripture, it runs thus; God so loved the
World, that he gave Christ: To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given: So
that Christ being a Gift of Love unto the Soul, it could not be, that they
should be made objects of Love primarily by that Gift, that is, originally in
the first place: Christ was therefore given, because they were first beloved,
and not they beloved because Christ given; seeing the Love of God was fixed
upon all its peculiar objects that ever it should be fixed upon in that Gift,
and then Christ himself came forth as a Gift of that fixed Love, it could not
be that they should be primarily made objects of Love, by the Lords effecting
that Love and Mercy for them, through his great Cost, of giving the dearly
beloved of his Soul for them.

2. Those Souls that shall embrace Christ tendered in the Gospel, were the
Objects of that Gospel-Love and Mercy discovered in order of nature before the
Lords intention to effect that Gospel-Love and Mercy for them, by that his own
cost in giving his own Son. The Lord Christ is discovered as the Means by which
God brings about the conveyance of his Love unto his beloved ones: and the End
is discovered in the Gospel, to be the Glory of his own Love, to make his Love
glorious in those objects: Therefore the End must in order of Nature, according
to our conception, be before the Means (though all things are at once, and by
one Act done by God) so that according to our conceptions, the Love must be
first fixed and settled upon Souls in order of nature; I mean, the intention of
Love must be first unto Souls, before the conveyance of that Gift of Love
through Christ. Thence it is that the Scripture speaks of Christ, not only as
given, but also called out to the work of Mediatorship, Heb. 5.1. He was
ordained to be the High Priest by God the Father, to offer Sacrifice for Souls.

3. There can be no End of the Lords being at that high charge for the
effecting of the Love and Mercy that the Gospel discovers to Souls that will
embrace him, but his own praise, and his peoples comfort. Seeing there was no
necessity (I speak of absolute and indispensable necessity all this while; I
would not be mistaken in a thing of so high a nature) I say, seeing there was
no absolute simple necessity for the Lord to be at such high cost, in respect
of himself, and in respect of Souls, to partake of this Mercy; but it is done
freely of God according to his own wisdom. Thence it appears, there can be no
higher End than the Lords own praise, the manifesting the Beams of the Lords
transcendent Glory more abundantly in the Eyes of Saints and Angels: And this
you shall find to be the very End of it, Ephesians. 1.4.6. Says the Apostle, He has
chosen us in Christ: That is, He has chosen us as the Members of Christ, the
first Elect of God, and that Head of the Mystical Body, that God has glorified
himself in: This he has done, says he, before the foundation of the world;
and therefore he destinated us to the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ.
Here is the Fathers Love in the Means, and in the End. v. 6. To the praise of
the Glory of his Grace, that is of his own Love; wherein, that is, in which
Love, he has made us acccepted in the Beloved, that is in Christ. Now this may
be taken rwo ways: Either for his praise actively to be given to him, by the
Soul that partakes of that Love and Mercy that the Gospel discovers: Or else
passively, to be manifested through this way, unto those that partake of that
Love and Mercy that the Gospel discovers: In both ways the Lord intended to
have his glorious Love admired and adored, and himself sanctified in the
beholding of it; through the effecting and conveying of that his Love and Mercy
unto Souls, through such cost and charge, in giving his dearly beloved Son. Now
observe it; There are especially two ways, how the partaker of that Love and
Mercy the Gospel discovers, does actively give the Lord the praise of the glory
of his Love.

1. In admiring the unmeasurable dimensions of his Love, in gazing upon the
height, and depth, and length, and breadth of his Love, so as to see it
unmeasurable and bottomless, and to adore God in beholding it. 2. In their
Souls relying with a fullness of confidence upon God, for that his Love in
Christ. It is always in the same degree, wherein a Soul takes up its rest in
God for any thing, that a Soul sanctifies God in his heart; therefore Is. 8.13.
when the Prophet exhorts them to sanctify God, he says, Fear not their fear,
but make him your fear and your dread; as if he should say, therein you shall
sanctify him, when your spirits take up their rest in him alone. Now as God is
thus sanctified in the heart in general, so he is sanctified in the heart in
respect of every particular Attribute of his, in this way only, when a Souls
confidence is in him alone: And thus in particular in respect of his Love: God
has the praise of the glory of his Love from the Soul, when the Heart takes up
its full rest in God, with a fullness of confidence for all Love through Christ.
Now observe, these being the two special ways how the Lord has the praise of
his glorious Love from Souls that partake of the Love that the Gospel
discovers, and then both these proceeding from a Souls apprehension of the
certainty and infallibility of the Lords Love in Christ; thence it must needs
appear, that the Lords being at the high cost to effect all that Love and Mercy
discovered in the Gospel for Souls, through the death of that dearly beloved of
his Soul, that this must be on purpose done by God, for the making that his
Love and Mercy that the Gospel discovers, more sure and certain unto Souls
embracing it in their own apprehensions.

Thirdly, The Spirit discovers the Lords own Bond, given out to the persons
themselves that shall embrace the Gospel, for their assurance of all that the
Gospel discovers. All the Promises written in the Lords Blessed Book are but as
so many Bonds of Gods own writing, by the hand of the great Secretary of
Heaven, the blessed Spirit of God, on purpose to confirm and assure Souls of
all that the Gospel discovers. The Spirit reveals Promise upon Promise, to seal
to and confirm the same thing; as you may see, Heb. 6.12, 13, 14, 15. The
Promise is said to be given there as a Discovery of the Immutability of the
Lords Counsel, that is, of the infallible and unchangeable certainty of all
that the Gospel discovers.

Fourthly, The Spirit rises higher; he adds the confirmation of his own Oath,
the highest Oath that was possible for God to swear; which was by himself, that
the Soul might have security upon security to his weak apprehension.

Fifthly, The Spirit reveals the adding of the Blood of Christ as the Seal to
the Bond. The Spirit manifests the Lord to have employed Jesus Christ to be the
Testator to Souls, that by the Death of the Testator, the Testament, or the
Will of God revealed in the Gospel, might be made unquestionably certain, that
the Soul might have fullness of security to his poor scrupulous Spirit; now
security comes in upon security, to a superabuddance of it.

Sixthly, The Spirit reveals the Lord to have engaged the Honor and Credit of
his ever-blessed Name, for the better securing Souls, and fuller assuring them
of all that the Gospel discovers to them. This you shall see in Exodus 33.19. I
will proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee (says God to Moses) and will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy; which does both include a disposition to be gracious, and a free
disposition to be gracious; and it includes that Grace of his to be ordered
only according to his own will. Now did not the Lord freely love loveless
sinners upon no other ground but his own will (which is the very Sum of all
that the Gospel says) then this Title of Gods Honor should be defaced and
blemished. But God says, Exodus 3.15. This is my Name for ever, and this is my
Memorial to all generations: That is to say, this is the distinction whereby I
will be known to all generations, that I am the God that send out a Redeemer to
lost sinners; which implicitly and virtually includes thus much, as if God
should say, Mine own honor, the highest Title of my glory should fail, if I
fail of embracing every loveless sinner through the Lord Jesus, that will
accept me. And thence you shall observe, when the Lord made the clearest
Revelation of himself to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7. The very Name whereby he calls
himself, is that which includes all that the Gospel of Christ reveals to
sinners: The Lord passed by him, and proclaimed, The Lord merciful, and
gracious, long-suffering, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Here is
the whole Mystery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and nothing else but the
Mystery of the Gospel, that the Lord owns to be the Name of his Honor, that
the Lord would have to be his Title, whereby he would be distinguished from
others, and whereby he would be known unto Souls.

Two things must be opened for the clearing of it sufficiently to the
satisfaction of Souls.

First, It must be opened that the whole mystery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ
is vertually contained in the name of God.

Secondly, That particular Souls may have security unto themselves from that
name of God, and may safely through believing look upon the honor of his name,
as engaged to them, to fulfill what the Gospel reveals.

First, It must be opened that the whole mystery of the Gospel, or whatever the
Gospel reveals, is included in the name of God: We shall open it from that of
Exodus 34.6, 7. which God owns as his name. There are eight titles, that the
Lord assumes to himself, that make up in the Lords account his name, wherein he
will be known unto Souls.

I. The first Title of his honor, that concurs to the making up of his name,
is Merciful, the Lord [Merciful] which includes two things.

1. That there are bowels of pity and compassion in the bosom of God, that
there are precious dispositions unto infinite compassions, naturally dwelling
in God. The word is the same with that in Jer. 31.21. which may be rendered
[Bowels.]

2. It includes that the Lord is ready to act those bowels of compassion,
toward Souls drowned in the depths of the most extreme misery. Misery and
Mercy are Relatives, and according to the depths of Misery, so is the height of
the working of Mercy. Now under that very one title, is comprehended the sum
and substance of all that the Gospel discovers. There is but one voice that the
Gospel of Jesus Christ speaks in, and that is this, that the Lord is full of
bowels of pity and compassion, toward every loveless sinner that will accept
his compassions tendered.

II. The second Title of God is Gracious. This implies two things.

1. The Lords acceptance of loveless sinners into favor.

2. The acceptance of miserable ones into favor merely out of the freedom of
the workings of his own favor, from motives out of his own bosom, without
respect to any desert. Therefore the whole voice of the Gospel is, by Grace ye
are saved.

III. The third Title that concurs to make up the honorable name of God, is,
The Lord long Suffering; or as it may be rendered [he is Slow to anger.] Here
are two things included.

1. It implies a long time of forbearance in God to execute Judgment upon
sinners, according to their own demerit, 2 Pet. 3.9.

2. It implies that that forbearance to execute Judgment upon sinners,
according to their sins, is on purpose that sinners might be accepted into love
and favor, and prevent the execution of Judgment, Isa. 30.18.

IV. The fourth Title of the Lords honor is, The Lord abundant in Goodness, or
excelling in Kindness. That implies three things.

1. The complete fullness of all Goodness that can be necessary for a Soul, to
be treasured up by God, in the bosom of Christ for Souls.

2. It implies a transcendency of all supply for empty Souls, to be in himself
through Christ. It implies a Superlative Fullness, a Fullness that is more then
sufficient, a Fullness that infinitely exceeds what ever a Soul can want.

3. It implies the readiness and facility of God, to be dispensing that
goodness unto Souls.

V. The fifth Title of the Lords name is, That he is abundant in Truth. Truth
does not here imply Justice and Righteousness, but it implies Faithfulness in
God, to be true according to the Revelation of himself. So that Truth implies
the certainty, the infallibility of the Lords fulfilling unto Souls whatever he
promised to be treasured up in himself for them.

VI. There is a sixth Title that concurs to make up the Lords Honor, that is,
his reserving or his Keeping Mercy for thousands. This implies two things.

(1.) A large comprehensiveness of love and mercy, to be comprehending
multitudes of miserable undone sinners; Keeping Mercy for Thousands: It is a
Synechdochical Speech, a finite Number is put for an infinite.

VII. There is a seventh Title that concurs to make up the Lords Honor, and
that is, Forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. Here are three several
Expressions, that in a large sense point at the same thing; every iniquity
being a transgression, and every transgression being a sin: yet certainly
something is intended by the Blessed God in proclaiming his Name thus. Some
have conceived by Iniquity to be meant Sins against God himself; by
Transgression, to be meant Sins against our Neighbor; and by Sin, to be meant
Sins against our own Souls. Others have made them to be sins of Malice, and
sins of Infirmity, and sins of Ignorance. Others conceive by Iniquity (because
the word comes from a Root in the Original that signifies Crookedness) to be
meant the Corruption of Nature; and by Transgression to be meant the Breach of
the Law through infirmity; and by Sin, to be meant Stubbornness against God.
However, thus much we may affirm to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, that
under these three are comprehended all Sins whatever, of what nature and degree
soever. Then this Title of the Lords Honor implies thus much, an impossibility
for any degree of Sin whatever to hinder the Lord from showing mercy, and being
gracious in that way of fullness of Love, that he reveals himself to be inclined
to, and to be his own Nature.

VIII. The eighth Title of the Lords Honor includes a Gospel-Discovery too;
and that is in those words, That will by no means clear the guilty, visiting
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon the Childrens Children,
unto the third and to the fourth Generation. This seems indeed at first view,
to have little of Gospel in it. But I dare not consent here to the Paraphrase
the Translators have given upon the words: But the words are to be rendered
thus, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, and in purifying he will not
purify, or in absolving will not absolve; not mentioning either wicked ones,
or guilty ones, or any person whatever. For indeed it seems to be a kind of
contradiction, should the words run thus, The Lord forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin, and will by no means clear the guilty; therefore I shall
hold to the words as they may be most nearly rendered; that is, forgiving sin,
and cleansing from sin he will not cleanse, visiting the Iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children. And then if you observe, this title of the Lords
Honor is only thus much; That he is the Lord forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin, and upon whom he will, visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers upon the
Children; including thus much, that the Lord does and will exercise his Mercy,
his Grace, his long-suffering, and his abundant goodness unto Souls, only upon
the motions of his own will; upon no other ground but because he will, and to
no other persons upon no other respect, but only to those whom himself freely
will: And then that includes the last Beam of the Gospel Light, after all the
other formerly discovered (which indeed is the very Mystery of the Gospel it
self) and that is, that all those Gospel-dispensations are only to those
persons whom the Lord will, and upon no other ground but the Lords Will, though
they be so tendered to every loveless Soul in general that will embrace him. So
that thus now you see the first thing cleared; That all Gospel-discoveries are
at least virtually included in the Lords own Name.

Secondly, It must be cleared, That the Soul may behold by believing, the
Credit and Honor of this blessed Name of God engaged for his security, and for
the fuller assurance of the Soul of all that the Gospel discovers to it. This
may be opened two ways.

1. In general. 2. More particularly, discovering the particular security the
Soul may have against all fears and scruples, that is possible for the Soul to
apprehend in its security.

First, In general it appears, That the Soul may behold the Credit of the Lords
Name engaged for his security and assurance, in regard there is nothing that
the Gospel discovers unto Souls, but the same is included in the blessed Name
of God. Two things follow from hence.

1. The Soul may be assured that there is an impossibility of the Lords
changing that his ever blessed Name. The Word is gone out of the mouth of God,
that that is his Name for ever, and that is his Memorial to all Generations.
Thence the Soul may assure it self, that though Heaven and Earth pass away, and
melt like wax, yet not one Title of what the Gospel discovers can possibly fall
to the ground, seeing it is impossible that the highest Majesty of Heaven and
Earth can change.

2. From thence the Soul may conclude, That thete is a Necessity for the
blessed God to deny himself, and to trample under his feet his dearest Glory,
if the least Title of whatever the Gospel reveals, should fail, seeing all is
included in his Name for ever.

Secondly, The Soul may behold through believing, the Credit of the Lords Name
to be engaged for his security of what the Gospel discovers in particular,
against all fears and scruples.

1. The Credit and Honor of the Lords Name is engaged, That there can be no
depth of misery so deep, as relief and succor should not be in Christ for the
poor, perishing, sinking Soul. That Is the very first Title of the Lords Honor,
that concurs to make up his Name: He is merciful; that is, he has bowels of
mercy for Souls in the depth of the greatest misery. Thence the Soul may
conclude, that the honor of that blessed Title of the Lords Name must fail,
that Link in the Golden Chain must be cut asunder, should the most unspeakable
depth of misery that ever Soul was plunged in, be a case hopeless or helpless.

2. The Credit and Honor of the Lords ever blessed Mame is engaged, that there
may be a free receiving of the most loveless Soul into love and favor, that
has nothing but what is abominable to the blessed pure eyes of God within him.
You see the second Title of his Honor is The Lord Gracious; that is, receiving
into favor freely undeserving wretches, undesired wretches, without respect to
any thing in them: So that when the poor scrupulous Soul shall begin to fear
that there is not ground enough in the Gospel of Jesus Christ for him to roll
himself into that blessed open bosom of the Lords love in Christ, with a
confidence of the willingness of the Lord to accept his loveless Soul into
favor, then he may behold the Credit and Honor of his Name to be engaged for
the Souls security, to assure it that the most forlorn Soul, that is nothing
else but Sin, that can do nothing else but sin, may be freely admitted into
that bosom of his love, to be an object of all favor, and all kindness
whatsoever.

3. The Credit and Honor of the Lords blessed Name is engaged for the bearing
with the most crooked Soul in his crookedness for a season, and his waiting to
receive the most crooked Soul into favor and love. The Name of the Lord you
see is Long-suffering; that is, he that bears long before he executes any
wrath. Hence the Credit of the Lords Name is engaged to secure Souls of what
the Gospel reveals in three particulars.

(1.) To secure the Sinner of acceptance into favor, that has most
desperately and rebelliously for a long time neglected Grace and Mercy.

(2.) Hence the Credit of the Lords Name is engaged for the continuance of his
Favor toward the most crooked perverse heart, notwithstanding his
crookedness. So that the Gospel reveals an impossibility for Sin or all the
Powers of Hell to force the Soul from the blessed bosom of the Lords love in
Christ, where it has once taken up its rest.

4. The Credit of the Lords Name is engaged to secure the empty Soul of all
fullness of Grace and Mercy that is suitable to his necessity, to be contained in
the bosom of God in Christ for the Soul embracing him. The Gospel says, Ephesians.
3.8. there is unsearchable riches in Christ; and the Lord calls his Name
Abundant in goodness: what is the difference between these two? Riches is
nothing but goodness, or good things considered as they are in abundance; and
you see the Lords Name is called Abundant in goodness. So that here the Credit
of the Lords Name is engaged to secure the Soul against all that can possibly
be objected, in regard of his own emptiness, poverty, and nothingness. So that,

1. In case the Soul fears it has no strength to yield obedience to what the
Lord commands, and thereupon begins to fear that all the Gospel discovers to
him shall be made of no effect; presently through believing the Soul may
behold, not only that the Gospel has revealed a fullness of all goodness (and so
strength it self to the Soul) but he may behold the Lord to have called himself
by that Name of Abundant in Goodness.

2. The Soul is secured by the Credit of the Lords Name, against all fears of
his not prevailing with God in Christ to be partaker of that Mercy, and Love
and Goodness that the Gospel discovers. He may behold the Lords Name to be
Abundant in Goodness; not only goodness, but abounding, having more than a
fullness; so that it should run over into empty Souls, like Rivers abounding
with water, freely overflowing his Banks.

5. The Credit of the Lords Name is engaged to a complete, perfect fulfilling
of his revealing mercy and goodness toward loveless Sinners. His Name you see
is Abundant in Truth. So that God must lose that Beam of the glory of his
blessed Name, which is Abundant in Truth, should the least Tittle, the least
Iota of any word revealing Mercy and Love to loveless Sinners fall to the
ground.

6. The Credit of the Lords Name is engaged for the accepting every Soul into
grace and favor discovered in the Gospel, without making any exception against
any one Soul whatever. The Lords Name you see is, the Lord keeping Mercy for
thousands, that is, for infinite numbers. That is to say, his Name is, he that
is ready to show mercy to every Soul without exception.

7. The Credit of the Lords Name is engaged, to secure Souls, that no kind or
degree of wickedness can be a prevention of his acceptance of a Soul into his
favor and love. His Name you see is the Lord forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin, that is, forgiving all kinds and degrees of sin.

8. The Credit and Honor of the Lords Name is engaged, that the ground of his
receiving Souls into love and favor shall be only his own precious will. His
Name is, He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, Exodus 33.9. So that
when the Souls confidence begins to waver about the Lords willingness to accept
him into love and favor, because he beholds no ground or argument of love,
then the Soul may behold the blessed Name of God, that has mercy upon whom he
will have mercy, looking for no Arguments of his love and mercy, but his own
Will. Thus you see that the Credit of the Lords blessed Name is engaged for
assuring Souls of whatever the Gospel discovers. And that is the Sixth
Particular.

Seventhly, The Spirit reveals the Lord to have given in his blessed word
Presidents, Examples and Patterns, suitable to the Case and State of every Soul,
upon whom the Lord has already effected whatever mercy and love the Gospel
discovers to forlorn, despicable, loveless Sinners. The Lord has so abounded
and superabounded in the riches of his own love, that out of the bowels of
those his compassions toward loveless Sinners, he has condescended beneath
himself and his own super-excellent Majesty, to give all kind of securities
whatever are possible to be given to poor doubting Spirits concerning his
Gospel-love. There are eight particular Cases wherein the Lord has given
Paterns and Examples unto Souls; which Cases comprehend all kinds of Estates
and Tempers, that it is possible for any Soul to be under.

I. In the case of the superlative height of Souls wickedness, the being
plunged into a bottomless Ocean of all kind of abominations and pollutions that
are imaginable. In this case the Lord has given eminent patterns.

First, If you look into that place, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and read over the black
bill of almost all kind of abominations that are there reckoned up,
Fornicatours, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners: And you shall
see v. 11. that some that are contained in the black bill of all pollutions,
were Washed, Sanctified, Justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, all Gospel
mercy and love was discovered unto them; for says the Text, Such were some of
you. Another pattern the Lord left, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13. of Manasseh who
heaped up wickedness upon wickedness, yet the Lord made him a pattern of
Gospel-love and mercy. Another you have in Paul, in 1 Timothy 1.15. One drinking
up the blood of Saints like water, one blaspheming Jesus Christ, offering all
kind of injuries and indignities to the name of Christ, and yet the Lord did
show forth all long-suffering, that is all kind of love, manifested in patience
and forbearance, and admitted him into union and communion with himself through
Christ; and this he did on purpose that he might leave it as an experiment of
his Love and Mercy to them who should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting. So Act. 2.30. those that had washed their malicious and envious
Hands, in the innocent blood of the Lord Jesus, were not excluded from Gospel
Mercy and Love. So if you look into the doleful story of our first fall, by Eve
who did first provoke the anger and indignation of God, yet she was made a
pattern of Gospel Mercy and Love, Genesis 3.15.

II. The second case wherein God has given patterns is in the case of
unbelief, the potency and prevalency of unbelieving dispositions. I shall
propound but two patterns to you in this case: First of David, who under the
rage of unbelief, Psalm. 116.11. said in his have, all men are liers; that those
Prophets that had revealed to him from the mouth of God that he should inherit
the Kingdom were but dissemblers, notwithstanding he had been satisfied of the
truth of the message coming from God. The second pattern is in unbelieving
Thomas, John 20.24, 25, 26. that would not believe the resurrection of Christ,
except he should see in his Hands the print of the nails, and thrust his Hands
into his side; yet Gospel Love and Mercy was discovered to him, verse. 27. under
this case come in these two cases of Souls, wherein they are much perplexed.

1. In case of the Souls not feeling the Lord by his Almighty power, drawing
their Hearts to believe. Says the poor perplexed Soul, surely the Lord draws
all that he intends should come to Christ through believing; but alas, says
the Soul, I do not see that God has drawn my Heart, therefore surely God has
not chosen me to be an object of Gospel Grace and Love; now the Spirit may
witness from hence, that there has been a Soul as much under the dominion of
unbelieving dispositions as his unbelieving Spirit, yet the bowels of Love and
Mercy revealed in the Gospel were not restrained from them.

2. Here comes in that case of the weakness of affections and desires toward
believing, and of the strong inclination of the Spirit, to receive security of
the Lords willingness to make him the object of Gospel Mercy and Love, from
something that should be visible and sensible to the Soul. That's also a common
case of Souls, that they cannot discern any disposition in their Hearts, to
believe the Lords willingness to receive them into the bosom of his Mercy and
Love, revealed in the Gospel, from the bare word of God alone, but if they
could see any fruit of that Love and Mercy in their bosoms, then they think
they should believe. You see the Spirit has here in this case also evidenced
the Lord to have afforded a real experiment of his Mercy and Love to a Soul; in
the case of unbelieving Thomas, who was not only inclined to see ground of
believing in a visible way, from the sight of his Eyes, and the feelings of his
Hands; but he was resolved to have it that way or no way: unless I see thus and
thus, I will not believe.

III. A third case wherein the Lord has given presidents, is in the case of
loathsome, horrible, dreadful and most hateful imaginations working in the Heart
against God. In this case the Lord has not left himself without some
experimental witness of the discovery of his Mercy and Love. Now the case being
very high, I find an experiment of Gospel Mercy and Love, discovered in a case
that is as high. In this case the Lord has left Jesus Christ himself as a
pattern, his Heart and Spirit was perplexed and troubled with as hateful,
horrible imaginations propounded to him, as ever were propounded to any Soul;
in Matthew. 4.6, 9. the Devil propounded to him that he should murder himself, If
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down.

Secondly, That he should presume upon his Fathers promise to him, and be
careless of walking according to his Fathers will; says the Devil, He has
said that his Angels should have charge over him, least he should dash his foot
against a stone.

There is a third sort of thoughts propounded to his imagination worse then
these, and that is that he should worship the Devil: What more hateful and
horrible thoughts could be injected into any bosom than this, to worship the
Devil himself? Now under this general are comprehended these two particular
cases.

1. There is comprehended the cases of all blasphemous thoughts, that are wont
to perplex distressed Souls. That if a Soul should say within himself, sure
never any object of the Lords Love ever had such hellish thoughts, as are
presented to my mind, such thoughts as my Heart trembles to name; the Spirit
may then bring to the Souls remembrance this precious pattern of Christ; the
Devil injecting into his pure mind, thoughts that were as dreadfully derogatory
to the honor of the Lords highest Majesty, thoughts that had as much of the
poison of Hell in them, as ever thought that was injected into thy cursed Heart.

2. Under this comes in all kind of Temptations concerning self murder, or self
destruction. In this case the Spirit may bring to remembrance the Lord Christ
himself, as the Souls president or pattern, the Lords letting him be perplexed
with temptations of the same kind.

IV. A fourth case is the want of all sensible manifestations of God to the
Soul, either in quickening and reviving, or in comforting. In this case you may
take the dearly beloved one of God, David, Psalm. 22. (wherein indeed he speaks
typically relating to Christ especially, yet also speaks but the thoughts of
his own Spirit at that time too) says he, v. 1. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my
roaring? And v. 14. so Psalm. 77.3, 4. I remembered God, and was troubled, I
complained and my Spirit was overwhelmed, etc. Another pattern the Lord gives
us of the Holy man Job, he cries out, Chap. 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty are
within me, the poison whereof drinks up my Spirit, etc. So Chap. 13.24, 25,
26. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? etc. Now
under this come in two particular cases of the Soul.

1. The case of the defect of all the workings of the quickening Spirit into the
Soul.

2. Under this comes in the case of the Souls wanting the manifesting light of
the Spirit, to reveal the Gospel in its beauty and glory to its Soul. So that
if any Soul wanting this manifesting light of the Spirit, should begin to cast
off all confidence, and to waver, and stagger, and doubt, least the Lord should
not be willing to accept it to be an object of Gospel love; then the Spirit
may, and does sometimes bring to remembrance these eminent patterns, of those
who were in the very same temper, under the same wants, and yet they were
really the objects of that love and mercy that the Gospel in Christ reveals.

V. A fifth case is the case of fruitlesness, inefficacy of the breathings of
the Soul after God in prayer. In this case also the Lord has given eminent
patterns: Those two forenamed ones, both Job and David, you shall find to have
been in the same case, Job 23.8, 9. Behold I go forward, but he is not there,
and backward, but I cannot perceive him, on the left hand where he does work,
but I cannot behold him, etc. His meaning is, he used all kind of means, the
utmost diligence in seeking after God, but he would not be found. So if you
look upon David, Psalm. 22.2. O my God I cry in the day time, but thou hear
not, and in the night season I am not silent. So that here God shows Souls an
experiment of some who were in the same case, and yet objects of his love and
mercy.

VI. A sixth case is the inability of the Soul to pour out requests. That in
Isa. 63.17. will show the Lord to have left his whole Church as a pattern in
that case; Why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? These Souls complain of the Lords suffering such senslesness,
and blockishness of Spirit to be upon them, as made them unsuitable for every
duty of the Lords worship, and yet notwithstanding these were objects of mercy
and love.

VII. A seventh case is the beholding all arguments that are possible to be
imagined in a Soul, against those promises of love and mercy that the Gospel
tenders. In this case the Lord has given that precious pattern of Abraham,
whom he chose to be the pattern of all believers, Romans 4.18, 19. He against
hope believed in hope; that is, against all ground and reason, and arguments of
hope that could be imagined. Though he saw all possibility against that promise
of love and mercy, that the Lord had given him concerning the Messiah to come
through his loins, to be his lawful seed by Sarah, yet notwithstanding he
believed, though he saw his own body dead, and the deadness of Sarahs womb, yet
it is said, v. 20. he staggered not at the promise through unbelief, his Spirit
did not so much as waver. Under this general may be comprehended these three
particular cases of the Soul.

1. The case of the Souls thinking himself to be the most unlikely under
Heaven, to be an object of Gospel mercy and love. The Soul considering himself
to be a poor despicable useless wretch, a low contemptible worm, not having any
thing wherein to be serviceable for the Lords honor as others have; yea, being
far deeper drenched into sin than other Souls are: Here is a pattern the Lord
has made to stand upon sacred Record, of his fulfilling a promise of mercy and
love, notwithstanding all unlikelihood that can be imagined.

2. Under this comes in that particular case of the Souls inability, and
insufficiency to receive and embrace that mercy and love the Gospel reveals,
according as the Lord requires. That is, when the Soul in gazing upon those
blessed tenders of love and mercy, begins to say within it self, I am so dead
in sin, that I have not the least ability to receive that mercy and love
tendered, according as God requires; and therefore I shall never be the object
of Gospel mercy and love, seeing I cannot receive it. Now in this case also,
this precious pattern that the Lord has given of Abraham, may be brought to
the Souls remembrance by the Spirit, to testify that the Lords promise of
mercy and love to Abraham, was fulfilled when he was in the same case, when he
could do nothing, had not the least ability and power to effect what was
necessary to be effected by him, for the fulfilling of the promise.

3. Under this comes in that particular case, of the Souls beholding nothing
but opposition in his Heart, against that mercy and love that the Gospel
reveals. So that if the Soul should begin to say within it self, it cannot be
that he should be admitted by God to be an object of that Gospel mercy and
love, seeing his Heart nothing else but speaks against it: Then the Spirit may
bring to the Souls remembrance, that which the Lord gave as a promise of mercy
and love unto Abraham, He against hope believed in hope: There was not only no
hope, but all things against hope of that promise being fulfilled to him, that
he might be a pattern of believing.

VIII. There is an eighth case of wretched, treacherous backsliding from God,
after mutual closures and embraces between God and the Soul. In this case the
Lord has given precious presidents of his Gospel love and mercy, that have
been communicated unto Souls so backsliding. You may first look upon Aaron's
case, who was none of the least backsliders, Exodus 32.2, 3, 4, 5. Aaron that
had made choice of God alone to be his God, here became a wretched backslider
from the pure worship of God according to his own will, to an Idolatrous
worship, to make a graven Image, (an Idol after the manner of Egypt) and to
make an Altar too, still all contrary to the way of the Lords worship: And yet
if you look into Exodus 40.12, 13. you shall find this very Aaron,
notwithstanding this backsliding, taken to be an object of that love and mercy,
so as to be chosen Minister of the Lords Sanctuary, to be of the very highest
office of the Lords worship here below, to be made the most immediate type of
representing Jesus Christ, that blessed true High Priest. Another pattern of
backsliding you may behold in Solomon, in 1 King. 7.11. He built an high place
for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab: yet this backslider notwithstanding was
an object of his special Gospel love and mercy, as appears Psalm. 89.32, 33. My
love will I never take from him. I need not name Peter's case, and David's case,
it is known to you all. You see it is apparent, the Lord has given eminent
patterns in this case of the Souls backsliding. So that herein many particular
cases of Souls come in, as the case of negligence and slightness of Heart
toward God; the case of estrangeness from God, after it once tasted of
communion with him: The case of all kind of wretchedness that the Soul can call
to remembrance against it self, or that possibly the Soul can be guilty of,
after the enjoyment of the discovery of the Lords love and mercy in the Lord
Jesus to him. So that in case upon any such ground as the Souls wretched,
wicked dealing with God, after union and communion with him, and its turning
aside from God, the Soul should suffer its Confidence to waver concerning the
will of God to accept his loveless backsliding Soul into the bosom of his love
and mercy, then the Spirit may bring to its remembrance those precious parterns
that the Lord has given concerning his acceptance of such backsliding
wretches, after such discoveries of himself. That Is the seventh Particular that
the Spirit may reveal, and bring to Souls remembrance, to show that the Lord
has given Security upon Security, abundance and superabundance of Security, to
assure Souls of what the Gospel reveals,

Eighthly, The last particular that the Spirit brings to the Souls remembrance,
or does or may reveal to it is this; That there are peculiar, near invaluable
Engagements upon God himself, in respect of himself, to fulfill those precious
Gospel-Discoveries to every Soul that shall embrace or accept them. The Lord
out of his incomprehensible wisdom, has so curiously contrived that
Gospel-love to loveless Sinners, that he has sweetly interwoven his own
interest with their interest: And certainly the Lord has revealed his own
interest thus to be in the completing of his Gospel-love and mercy to loveless
Sinners, that shall embrace him, on purpose to secure their wavering, unstable
Spirits, and to settle them in a more fullness of confidence in Christ, that
their Spirits might be filled with joy and peace through believing. The
engagements that are upon God himself, in respect of himself, to fulfill
Gospel-love and mercy to Sinners that shall embrace him, are diverse.

1. The first Engagement upon God himself, in regard of himself, from whence
Souls may have security, is this; That the Lord has chosen every such
particular loveless Sinner as shall accept of his Gospel-discovery, to be one
of his own Family, and his own Household. Hence you shall find in Ephesians. 3.15.
That all Believers are called but one Family. And they are called the Household
of God, Ephesians. 2.19. And in Heb. 3.6. The whole Church is called The House of
Christ. Now what abundant security may the believing Soul receive concerning
fulfilling Gospel-discoveries, from the Spirits bringing to remembrance this
Engagement of God in respect of himself, to fulfill Gospel-discoveries.

1. From hence the Soul may behold through believing, God himself to be engaged
to remove all Jars, Differences, Breaches and Disagreements from himself and
every Soul that shall accept those Gospel-discoveries. From thence the Soul may
argue sweetly within his own Spirit, against all Objections and Scruples
concerning its Rebellion and Disobedience, and say thus, Will not the God of
Peace have peace in his own Family, in his own Household?

2. From thence the believing Soul may behold the Lord engaged to complete and
perfect a work of Sanctification in his own Soul, if he will embrace the
Gospel-discovery, though he be altogether unclean, though he be polluted in the
most superlative degree. The Soul may argue within its own Spirit thus, Seeing
every Soul that will embrace Gospel-discoveries, is chosen to be one of the
Lords Household, his own Family, surely the Lords Family shall be all suitable to
himself.

3. Thence the Soul may discern the Lord to be engaged to communicate all
suitable love and mercy to his poor needy Spirit. The Soul may say within it
self, Seeing every Soul that shall embrace or accept Gospel-discoveries, is
chosen to be one of the Lords Family, surely there can be no provision wanting
for the Family of God himself.

4. Hence the Soul may discern through believing, God to be engaged to
accomplish, perfect and complete the whole work of Salvation, against all
impediments whatever, if his Soul will embrace those Gospel-discoveries. The
Soul may say within it self, Seeing every Soul that will embrace the
Gospel-discoveries, is chosen to be of the Family and Household of God, it is
beyond the power of Hell and the corrupt heart, to deprive the Lord of any of
his own Family.

2. A Second Engagement that is laid upon God in respect of himself, to fulfill
Gospel-discoveries unto loveless Sinners embracing him, is, That every
particular despicable Sinner accepting Gospel-discoveries is chosen by God
himself to be one of his peculiar Children. According to that in John 1.12. As
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God. They are
called Christ's Brethren, John 20.17. Now what full complete Security may every
Soul through believing receive from thence!

And here first, I shall open to you what full Security Souls may have for the
fulfilling every Gospel-discovery to them.

Secondly, What security they may have of these Gospel-discoveries being
fulfilled to them, in every case that it is possible for them to be in, when
the Gospel-discovery shall come to them.

First, We shall show you what security Souls may have for the fulfilling every
Gospel-discovery to them, from the Engagement.

1. From hence the Soul through believing, may discern the Lord to be engaged
to accept every forlorn Sinner that will accept these Gospel-discoveries, into
the nearest union and conjunction of Love that is possible,

2. Hence it may behold the Lord engaged to receive its forlorn Soul into that
near union of Love, though there is nothing that is amiable in it.

3. Hence it may behold the Lord engaged to communicate all fullness of love and
mercy that the poor empty Soul shall be capable of, if it will accept these
Gospel-discoveries, If the Soul be chosen to be one of the Lords Children, it
is chosen to be an Heir, Romans 8.17.

4. The Soul may behold the Lord engaged to an everlasting unchangeable
continuance of all love and favor to it in its embracing these
Gospel-discoveries.

Secondly, Hence the Soul may have a fullness of Security for the fulfilling
those precious Gospel-discoveries to it, in whatever case it is possible for
any Soul to be in, to whom these Gospel-discoveries come.

1. In case of desperate wickedness, and great unworthiness. In this case the
Soul may have Security, and behold the Lord engaged in respect (...) himself,
to fulfill those Gospel-discoveries to it, notwithstanding his superlative
degree of wickedness, and highest unworthiness. The Soul may argue thus, Will
not a tenderhearted Father accept a poor rebellious Child to Amity, Love and
Agreement with himself, though he have been rebellious in the highest degree?

2. In the case of the most horrible Temptations. The worst the Soul can
imagine of it self in this case, is this; That through some accursed wickedness
it should wilfully cast away its own Soul, and join in League and Amity with
those infernal powers; and suppose this, yet from hence the Soul may discern
the Lord engaged to fulfill all his Gospel-discoveries of love and mercy to his
particular Soul in this case, if he will accept those Gopel-discoveries.

3. Hence it may have Security in the saddest damps, straitness, and deadness,
and indisposedness that ever possessed any Soul in Prayer. The Soul may say,
Suppose a tenderhearted Father should have a beloved Child that is sick and
distempered, that he cannot so much as speak to him for succor, but look upon
his Fathers face with watery eyes, with sighs and groans, what think thou, O
my Soul, would not the dearest pangs of compassion in the Father be working
toward the Child?

4. Hence the Soul may have full Security for fulfilling Gospel-discoveries
into his bosom, though he be in that doleful state of captivity to an
unbelieving heart, void of all sensible visible dispositions in his Spirit. The
Soul in this case may, and ought to argue within it self thus; O my Soul, it is
true indeed, thou have neither power nor disposition in thee, to yield
obedience to the precious Command of the ever blessed God, who commands thee to
accept of love and mercy tendered to thy loveless Soul in the Lord Jesus, but
do thou think it possible that thy want of power to believe, should prevent
the Lords acceptance of thee into the bosom of his fatherly affection? Yea, I
may add more in this case, from this engagement of God to fulfill
Gospel-discoveries, the Soul may behold him engaged to contribute believing
dispositions.

5. The Soul may have full Security concerning the fulfilling the
Gospel-discoveries to it self, though it be in the case of slavery and
vassallage to the most crooked, untoward, perverse heart that ever dwelt in any
Son or Daughter of Adam. It may thus say, O my Soul, is it possible for thy
crookedness to have an influence upon the heart of the immutable unchangeable
God, to blot out the Name that is written there from eternity, if thou will
accept Gospel-Discoveries?

6. The Soul from hence has full security of the fulfilling all
Gospel-discoveries into his bosom, though it be in the saddest backsliding case
from what his Spirit was once allured to, that ever any was guilty of, since
the first Apostasy from God in the Loins of Adam. Now may it say, O my
backsliding Soul, has not the blessed Redeemer of poor loveless Sinners, said
in Luke 15. That the Blessed Father will run to receive such a backsliding
wretch as thou art? He will fall on his neck and kiss him, and call to the
Angels to rejoice at his Return. And then may the Soul add, and shall not he
that dwelt in the bosom of the Father from eternity, be credited by thy Soul?

3. A third Engagement upon God the Spirit may or does remember the Soul of is,
That every Soul that will and shall embrace the precious Gospel-discoveries, is
chosen from eternity into the Order of Royal Priesthood, whereof Jesus Christ
himself is Head or High Priest. Thence we are said to be Kings and Priests unto
God, Rev. 16. And to be a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. Now from hence the Soul
through believing, may discern God engaged to fulfill to the uttermost all the
precious Gospel-discoveries to every Soul that shall accept them.

1. Thereby God is engaged by his dearest love to his own delight and
contentment in the ministration of all his holy things here below, to make the
person of every Soul that shall accept Gospel-discoveries, to be completely
acceptable and well pleasing in his own eyes. The delight of the Lord in every
act of his own Worship, has its primary dependence upon the delight that the
Lord takes in the Worshippers, as in Mal. 1.10. Says the Lord to them, I have
no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand: Their
persons were not amiable in Gods eyes, and therefore their offering could not
be acceptable. And so it is said, The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his
Offering: It was through the respect the Lord had to Abel's person, that he had
any respect to his Offering. So that now seeing the Lord has predestined
every such Soul accepting Gospel-discoveries, to be a Priest to minister to
himself in all his holy things, should not the Lord make the person of every
such Soul completely acceptable in his own eyes, he must rob himself of all his
Contentment and delight he should take in all his holy things here below.

2. Hereby the Lord is engaged by his tender care of preserving his holy things
from pollution, to purify, cleanse and sanctify the most unclean polluted
Soul that shall accept those Gospel-discoveries. Every approach to God with an
uncircumcised heart, was accounted by God a pollution of his own Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 44.7. And likewise the Lord accounts every approach to himself by an
unregenerate and unsanctified heart, now in Gopel-times, to be a pollution of
any Ordinance whatever that the soul makes his approach to God in. This the
Lord typically signified to his Church in its minority, in the manner of the
consecrating the Priests to himself that were to offer those Legal Sacrifices,
Lev. 1.6. When Moses consecrated Aaron and his Sons, he washed them; which
signified the cleansing of them from pollutions; the Lord intending to reveal
this, that they were only sanctified, cleansed, purified hearts, who were
suitable to offer any Spiritual Sacrifice, that should be acceptable in his
eyes. Neither must you conceive this to be a bare revelation to Souls of what
their hearts ought to be in their approach to God; but it is also a revelation
what the Lord intended they should be, through his mighty power working in
their hearts. Now hence the Spirit may give the Soul full security, concerning
the fulfilling Gospel-discoveries to it, in its embracing and accepting them.

1. When the heart is staggering and wavering, in regard of the want of all
holy, enlivened, heavenly dispositions in his Spirit, and finding uncleanness
and filthiness. The Spirit may here reveal the Lord to be engaged, that in case
the polluted unclean heart of his shall accept Gospel-Discoveries, it shall be
sanctified, cleansed, purified.

2. When the strength and tyrannizing power of any cursed Lust is causing the
Soul to question whether love and mercy revealed for loveless sinners, that
will accept it, should be made out to his Soul in his embracing it; The Spirit
may here discover the Lord as well to be engaged in the Souls reliance upon
him, to make him the Object of that love and mercy, to cleanse his Soul from
that cursed pollution, to deliver it from under the tyranny of such a hellish
disposition, as well as to be engaged to make out love and mercy to the Soul in
any other kind whatever.

4. A Fourth Engagement the Lord has laid upon himself for the fulfilling
Gospel-discoveries, is this; That every Soul accepting those
Gospel-discoveries, is the peculiar chosen Vessel of the Lords most superlative
mercies and compassions. This you may see in Romans 9.23. That he might make
known the riches of his Glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before
prepared unto Glory. You may observe that every called Soul, that is, every
Soul answering those sweet, Soul-melting invitations of the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus, is here affirmed to be a Vessel of mercy prepared by God himself from
eternity for that very end. Now from hence the Spirit may give abundant
security to the questioning scrupulous Soul, of the infallible fulfilling of
all the Gospel-discoveries to every Soul that shall embrace them.

1. Herein the Spirit may manifest the Lord to be engaged by his entire and
infinite love, to his own glory and mercy, to redeem and deliver every Soul
that is plunged into the most bottomless depth of sin and misery, if he will
and shall accept those precious Gospel-discoveries to it. So that the Lord
through his own admirable contrivance of his design of love toward loveless
forlorn sinners, has so interested himself in the perfecting of that precious
design, that he stands engaged as strongly and powerfully to give perfect
redemption and deliverance to lost sinners, that shall embrace
Gospel-discoveries, as he stands engaged to maintain and support the honor of
those his glorious Attributes of his own mercy and compassion.

Now there are three things wherein the honor of the Lords mercy consists.

First, In the free workings of it toward the most miserable objects, that are
the most unworthy of any pity and compassion that can be imagined.

Secondly, In the transcendency of its operations or motions.

Thirdly, In the infinite Almighty power of its workings, toward such unworthy
objects of it. That's thus, it has such an Almighty power in it, not only to
succor and relieve those perishing undone ones in their misery, but also to
confer the highest degree of all happiness upon them. Now the honor of the
Lords mercy and compassion consisting in this; hence the Lord stands engaged by
his dearest love, to that honor of this his mercy, to give perfect redemption
to the Soul, that is plunged in the most unfathomed depth of sin and misery, if
the Soul shall and will embrace those Gospel-discoveries.

2. Hence the Spirit may manifest the Lord to be engaged, by the inseparable
properties of his Divine nature, to communicate a fullness of all mercy and
compassion, to every Soul accepting those Gospel-discoveries. The Essential
property of the Divine nature, is to be issuing forth the bottomless depths of
perfection that are included in it, into the bosom of poor needy empty
penurious ones. It is as natural to the Divine nature to be communicating of
its own perfections, as it is natural for the Sun to send forth its own
precious rays: And then this being the very nature of the Essence and being of
any good, by how much the higher the goodness of any thing is, by so much the
more strongly is it inclined and disposed to the communicating of himself: So
that goodness it self in its perfection, being in the Divine nature; thence it
is that it is the inseparable property of the Divine nature to be communicating
all its perfections, so far as they are communicable. Now thence the Spirit may
cause the Soul to conclude, that seeing it is the property of the Divine nature
to communicate all its perfections, (so far as they can be communicable) and
also seeing every Soul embracing Gospel-discoveries, is the proper object to
which that perfection of the Lords mercy and compassion is to be communicated;
thence the Spirit may cause the Soul to conclude, that the Lord stands engaged
by the inseparable property of his Divine nature, to make every such Soul
accepting Gospel discoveries, to be the object of the highest mercy and
compassion.

Now from hence the Spirit may give the Soul full security, of the fulfilling
the Gospel discoveries into his bosom, whatever objections it is possible for
the wisdom of Hell and the corrupt Heart to make against it: All the objections
that are possible to be imagined, by the extract and quintessence of all Wisdom
that is enmity against God, say no more but this concerning the Soul, that it
is a miserable lost undone Soul: If the Soul objects the superlative height of
his own wickedness, if I^ object the long continuance in its wickedness, if it
object the wretched contempt of mercy and love tendered, if it object the want
of holiness, the want of every good disposition imaginable; if it object the
most cursed crookedness and enmity of Heart against the blessed tenders of
love, and begin to draw these conclusions from these premises; therefore surely
Gospel discoveries cannot be fulfilled into my bosom, if I should rely upon the
Lord for the fulfilling of them; yet the Soul in all these objections says but
this one thing, I am a poor miserable despicable wretch in the depth of misery:
Now then the Spirit may manifest to the Soul, that in its accepting those
Gospel discoveries, it shall be the proper object of all mercy and compassions:
So that God shall be engaged by the inseparable property of his own nature, to
let out his transcendent bowels of mercy and compassion, in their freedom of
working toward the Soul, so as to fill it with the fullness of mercy and
compassion: And thence the Spirit may convince the Soul, that either he must
conclude that his finite misery exceeds the infiniteness of the Lords mercies
and compassions, or else the Soul must conclude that notwithstanding all
objections that can be imagined, yet in his accepting the Gospel discoveries,
they shall infallibly be fulfilled to the utmost into his bosom.

3. Hereby the Spirit may manifest the Lord to be engaged by all his sweetest
contentments, his most pleasing delight that he naturally takes, in beholding
the workings of his own perfections toward poor imperfect creatures, to supply
every want that can possibly be imagined to be in any Soul. As it is the
property of the Lords nature to be dispensing of his fullness to empty ones; so
it is the Lords infinite delight to behold those streams of his fullness,
running down in a suitable way into their Souls. Now the Spirit may manifest the
Lord to be engaged, by that his own contentment that he naturally takes in
beholding his own perfections communicated unto others, to communicate all
suitable succor, relief, help and comfort, to every such Soul as shall embrace
those Gospel discoveries.

5. A fifth engagement the Lord has laid upon himself, to fulfill Gospel
discoveries is, That every particular Soul that shall and will embrace Gospel
discoveries, is the peculiar chosen object of the Lords highest, most
unspeakable, everlasting delight and contentment. Thence it is that the Word
reveals that the Lord takes such infinite pleasure in his own, as in Psalm.
147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in
his mercy: I pray observe it, in this is comprehended every Soul that does in
the lowest degree embrace Gospel discoveries: This manifests that the Soul that
does in the most trembling timorous way, but reach out a feeble Hand of hope to
lay hold upon that rich mercy tendered in the Lord Jesus to it, is the object
of the Lords pleasure and contentment, even those Souls that are far from
drawing any conclusion, only they cast out the anchor of hope, and venture
their lost perishing Souls upon the rock of mercy that is discovered in the
Lord Jesus.

1. The Spirit may reveal them to be the object of the highest most superlative
everlasting delight and contentment; that is, the object of the highest delight
that God takes in any object out of himself: The same superlative delight that
the Father takes in Jesus Christ as Mediator, he takes in the Soul united to
him.

2. Every such Soul is destinated to be the object wherein the Lord would as it
were concenter together in one, all the blessed motions of his own delight and
contentment. Jesus Christ mystically considered, that is, considered with his
Body of holy Angels, and Souls of those that were lost sinners united to him,
is the very center wherein all the lines of the Lords delight and contentment
meet perfectly together in one: Now every Soul embracing Gospel discoveries,
being taken into the perfect unity of the mystical Body, becomes through its
union into the mystical Body, as it were a part of the center wherein all the
lines of the delight of God meet together.

There are four kinds of the Lords delight, that every such Soul that embraces
Gospel discoveries, is the chosen object of.

1. Every such Soul is the chosen object of all the highest everlasting delight
of God, that he takes in the letting out his love in its perfection toward any
thing without himself. The Lords most natural peculiar delight is in love,
because his Essence and being is love. Now every such Soul is the chosen object
of the highest perfection of love, considered as one of that mystical Body:
Hence it is said, Zeph. 3.17. He will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest
in his love; that is to say, he will take satisfaction and contentment to his
own Soul in loving of thee; for indeed delight is nothing else but love in
rest, as desire is love in motion.

2. Every such Soul so considered, is the object of all the most superlative
delight of God, that he takes in the actual communication of his goodness. It
is so natural for God who is goodness it self, to be communicating his goodness
to others, that his Soul is filled with pleasure and contentment, in the
letting forth of his goodness.

3. Every such Soul embracing Gospel discoveries, is the object of all the
delights and contentments that the Lord takes in himself, in the contemplation
of the transcendent glory of his own supereminent excellency. Now there are no
other objects than that mystical Body of Christ, that are the objects of any of
the delights of God, that he takes from the contemplation of his own
superlative glory, seeing his own excellencies that he contemplateth upon, are
no other then he communicates to that mystical Body; So that all the delight,
pleasure and contentment that the Lord can receive from the precious views of
the brightness of his own glory, when he looks out of his own bosom, it must
arise only from that mystical Body; and so consequently the mystical Body,
being looked upon but as one, with one single Eye, every Soul in that mystical
Body, may in the same sense be said to be the object of all the delight of God.

4. Every such Soul as shall and will accept Gospel-discoveries, is the
peculiar object of all the delights and contentments of God, that he takes from
the contemplation of the result of the mystical workings of his own wisdom, in
the disposing of all things from the creation of the World, to its final
dissolution. It is the property of God to reflect as it were upon the workings
of his own attributes, as he did upon the whole world when he had made it, to
behold how good it was, that he might delight himself in beholding the workings
of his own excellency. Now the Lord only beholds the result of the admirable
workings of all his attributes, in that mystical Body of Christ: And so
consequently the mystical Body only, is the object of his delight that he
takes, in the result and issue and consequence of the working of all his
attributes. Now the Spirit may and does reveal from hence, that there are firm
engagements laid upon God himself, to fulfill whatever the Gospel discovers to
every Soul that shall embrace him.

I. Hence God is engaged by his express Love to the content and satisfaction of
his Soul, to let out his Love in the most absolute, complete, perfect, divine,
unspeakable workings of it, to every loveless sinner, that does embrace and
accept Gospel-discoveries. So that from hence consequently the Lord stands
engaged.

First, To let out his love to work freely with out motive, incentive, or
argument inclining his love, to work toward every such Soul embracing Gospel
Discoveries. The freedom of the working of his love toward souls, is one of
the Divine Glorious Perfections of love, and should that be wanting, some
degree of the Lords own delight and contentment, that he has resolved to
receive from every such soul to himself, must also be wanting.

Secondly, Thence the Lord stands engaged to let out his love wonderfully,
beyond the comprehension of Men and Angels.

Thirdly, Thence he is engaged to let out the Discoveries of his love, to such
souls as shall embrace Gospel Discoveries, fully, and completely, to the
satisfaction of the soul.

Fourthly, From hence also the Lord is engaged to let out his love, to work
infinitely without measure, to every soul that shall embrace these Gospel
Discoveries. The love of God is but God himself, and therefore works not
according to its perfection, till it works infinitely. Now from hence,

1. Here is full security that the spirit may give any doubting Soul,
concerning the fulfilling of the Gospel Discoveries into his bosom, in his
embracing of it, when the soul does doubt because of the indisposedness of his
spirit, to any duty that the Lord requires of him, and because of his inability
to those duties.

2. Hence the spirit may give full security to the Wavering Unstable soul, who
stands trembling least he should presume, in casting his Forlorn Loveless soul
into those everlasting arms of Love, because of the abominable Perverseness,
and Crookedness of his Heart against God in all things.

3. Hence the Spirit may give security to any wavering Soul, whose hands as it
were shake and quiver, and dare not with any confidence grasp the blessed
tender of Union and Communion with the Lord through Christ, because of his
wretched abuse of the precious working of the Lords love toward him in Christ
already.

II. Hence also the spirit may reveal the Lord to be engaged, by the same
dearest love to his own delight and satisfaction, to dispose every soul that
shall embrace Gospel Discoveries, into a capacity for the enjoyment of nearest,
most absolute, entire Communion with himself. Under this particular, the Spirit
may reveal the Lord to be engaged to these three things.

1. To remove all the opposition unto Communion with him, that remains in any
heart, to Suppress, Overpower, yea to Heal all the Crookedness, and all the
Averseness of any Heart embracing Gospel Discoveries.

2. Hence the spirit may reveal the Lord to be engaged to infuse into the Soul
such Dispositions, as shall be fully, completely suitable to his own nature, so
as to make so blessed a concurrence, between his own purest nature, and the
Souls Corrupt nature; as that there should be nothing in the nature of God
himself opposite to the Souls Disposition, nor nothing in the Souls Disposition
or nature opposite unto God.

3. In this the Spirit may reveal the Lord to be engaged to heighten, or
elevate and enlarge the faculties of the Soul, that are to receive those
Communications and Influences from God. Now what abundant security may the
Spirit give to any soul that trembles to embrace Gospel Discoveries, against
fears!

1. What security may the Spirit give to Souls, fearing to give credit to those
Gospel Discoveries, because of the Averseness and Contrariety of their Spirits
unto Communion with God! Hence the Spirit may say to every Soul without
exception, that shall embrace Gospel Discoveries, it is a chosen object of the
highest eternal delight of God, in the Communication of his goodness.

2. Hence the Spirit may give full security unto the Soul against all fears,
because of the Unstableness, and Fickleness of his Heart, in any degree of
Communion once attained.

3. Hence the spirit may give security fearing that the Gospel Discoveries may
not be Grasped and Embraced by the soul, because of the Straitness and
Narrowness of his Heart, void of all Thirstings and Longings, yea of all
Desires. The Spirit may hence declare the Lord to be engaged, by his love to
the pleasure of his own Soul, to enlarge every such Heart to a kind of infinite
Capacity for Communion.

III. Thence the Lord is engaged by his infinite Valuation and Estimation of
the delightful Contemplation of his own Transcendent Excellencies (as they
sparkle forth from the creatures) to effect the nearest, most entire Union of
likeness that is possible, between himself and every such Sinner that shall
embrace Gospel Discoveries. The Lord stands engaged by this, to make every such
Soul a Partaker of his own spotless Purity, and Holiness, yea to make it
Participate of his Divine Nature, of his own life, so as the same life that
dwells in himself, and that himself lives by, should also dwell in every such
Sinful Soul embracing those Gospel Discoveries. Nay the Engagement is so
Invincible, that if the Lord should not Communicate the highest degree of his
Communicable Perfection to every such Loveless Forlorn Sinner, as shall and
will embrace Gospel Discoveries, he should bereave himself of that sweetest
Pleasure and Contentment, that his Soul takes in the Contemplation of the Beams
of his own Glory, seeing every such Soul is the chosen object, in whom the Lord
determins from eternity to delight himself, by the sparkling forth of his own
Glory through it.

VI. A sixth Engagement that God has laid upon himself to fulfill Gospel
Discoveries is this, That every unlovely Sinner that shall embrace them is
prepared from Eternity by the Lords infinite Wisdom, to be an Orient bright
shining Pearl in the all beautiful Crown of the Lords accidental Glory. Mistake
me not, the mighty Sun of the Lords infinite essential Glory, cannot admit
either of Augmentation or Diminution, I mean, either of Lessening or Increasing
its Transcendent Brightness: But the Lords accidental Glory, that is to say,
the manifestation and Discovery of those precious Beams of his essential Glory,
may and do admit of Eclipses and Overshadowings, and also of an increase and
augmentation in their Brightness and Excellency. Now every Forlorn Soul that
shall embrace Gospel Discoveries, is laid as it were as a precious Golden
Thread, in that rich Broidered Robe of that Glory, that the King of Heaven
Clothes himself with, to make himself Glorious in the eyes of Saints and
Angels. This is clearly manifested in Isa. 43.6, 7, if you compare it with John
1.12, Bring forth my Sons and Daughters, says God, whom I have Created for my
Glory; Now they are only those that receive the Lord Jesus tendered in the
Gospel; To as many as received him, even to them that believe in him, to them
gave he Power to become the Sons of God. And hence you shall observe, that the
people of God are not only said to be Created for his Glory, but they are
called his glory, Isa. 46.13. Nay more, they are called the Crown of the Lords
Glory, Isa. 62.3. Nay further the Lord looks upon them as his Ornament, Ezekiel.
7.10. And hence also they are called the Portion of God, Jer. 12.10. Yea hence
the Scripture declares the Saints in Heaven to shine as the Stars in the
Firmament, Dan. 12.3. In regard they shall be very Bright Shining Pearls that
shall stand in the Crown of the Lords Honor. Now there are three respects,
wherein every such Unlovely Sinner embracing Gospel Discoveries is one of the
set Pearls that shine forth in the Crown of the Lords Glory.

1. In regard the All beautiful Unparalleld Crown of the super added Honor of
the Lord Jesus, is Composed of all those Souls that shall embrace those Gospel
Discoveries. Thence it is, that such Gospel Embraces are called the Glory of
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. And thence it is that the Church (which is the Company of
those) is called the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 1.23. Now the Honor of Jesus
Christ, through the perfect Unity between the Father and the Son, is also the
Fathers Honor; and so consequently every such Soul being one of those
Beautiful Flowers in the Garland of Christ's Honor, he becomes also one of
those rich Diamonds wherewith the Crown of the Fathers Glory is richly beset.
According to that in 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. where the whole Glory that Jesus Christ
attains as he is Mediator, is revealed to be Terminated and ended in the
Fathers Glory. [All is yours] That is, all things are finally for your sakes;
Or rather all things have a natural tendency through the Everlasting Decree of
God, unto your good. And [ye are Christs] That is, and all you by virtue of the
same Decree, have a natural tendency to all the good you attain unto, the good
of Jesus Christ: All the Glory that is put upon you, has a natural tendency
unto the Glory of Jesus Christ, to make up the perfection of his Glory. And
then observe, and says he [Christ is Gods] That is, all the Good, the Glory,
the Honor that Jesus Christ attains, through his being the Center wherein all
your good meets all that meets in the Father; that is all his Honor tends only
to the exalting of the Fathers Honor.

2. In regard the brightest Beams of the Fathers essential Glory are manifest
in every such Soul. The Lord from before the Foundations of the World were
laid, made choice of those Souls to be as so many Crystal Glasses, through
which the Beams of his Incomprehensible Essential Glory should shine forth.

First, In every such Soul is manifest, the infinite Unsearchable depths of the
Fathers Divine Wisdom. The manner of the Fathers Disposing of those souls, to
suffer them by the free working of their own Wills to lose themselves, and
bring themselves under the Power of everlasting Wrath and Indignation, and then
his Wisdom in contriving a way to save the Honor of his own Justice, and the
Redemption of those Poor, Lost, Perishing Souls, so wonderfully, to make the
Honor of Mercy and Love and Justice to meet together in one, to make Mercy and
Justice kiss each other, is that which will be the matter of Admiration to all
those Inhabitants of the Sacred Palace of Heaven to all Eternity.

Secondly, The Brightest Beams of his unspeakable, unconceivable love appear,
and are manifested to every such Soul. The highest perfection of Love that ever
the Lord manifested, is in Loving such Unlovely, Forlorn, Loathsome Souls as
these, and that also while he Rejected and Disregarded Creatures far more
Glorious according to their first Creation.

Thirdly, The Almighty Power of the Lord is also Gloriously manifested in every
such Soul, in that he should create anew those Loveless Sinners that were
opposite to their own new Creation, I mean their own Regeneration. Therein
indeed did Power appear, in that the Lord did raise the Soul from the lowest
degree of Enmity, into the nearest Union with himself, and that against all the
Oppositions that Hell can make, and against all the Powers of the Soul it self,
when both concur together against God.

Fourthly, The Glorious Independency of the Lords Will, in all the Motions and
Operations of it, is manifested abundantly in every such soul. The Freedom of
the Lord in all his ways, does not shine forth so clearly in any of the Works
of God, as in that Precious Mystery of his Election, in making of the same lump
one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor, there being no Engagements, no
Motives to incline his Precious Will either this way or that way.

3. Every such Soul is a set shining Diamond in the Crown of the Lords Honor,
In regard it is destinated from Eternity, to stand as a constant clear Crystal
Glass, through which the Lord would manifest the Transcendency of his own
perfection unto all Eternity. And it is through those Communications of the
Father unto the Soul, that the Fathers Glory is discovered, and thence it is
that the Brightness of the Fathers Glory shall be shining forth Resplendently
unto all Eternity in every such Soul. Now we are to consider what full security
the Spirit may give from hence to every such Soul, concerning the Infallible
fulfilling of all Gospel Discoveries to the utmost, into its Bosom that shall
embrace them.

1. From thence the Spirit may reveal to the Soul, that the Lord stands engaged
by the Inseparable Disposition of his own nature, (which naturally tends to his
own Glory) to Complete and Perfect an Union between the Lord Jesus, and every
Loveless Sinner that shall embrace Gospel Discoveries. The Crown of the Fathers
Glory being but the Issue and Result of the Glory of the Lord Jesus, and then
the Glory of Christ having its full and sole Dependence upon the complete Union
of all those with himself, that shall embrace the Gospel, thence the Father
stands engaged to Perfect and Complete that Union between Christ and all those
Souls, seeing his natural Disposition does necessarily incline him, to be
completing the Crown of his own Glory.

2. The spirit may reveal to the Soul, that the Lord stands engaged by the
property of his own precious Nature, to Love Completely and Perfectly every
Gospel Embracer, without the least Dependence upon any thing in the Soul, or
any thing to be done by the Soul. Now what abundant security may every Soul,
Trembling and Fearing least the Lord should not be willing to accept it into
Union and Communion with himself, receive from hence against all his fears!

3. From this consideration the Lord stands engaged, by all his tender respects
to the bright Shining Splendour of his own Imperial Crown to Beautify and Adorn
every Forlorn Sinner Embracing Gospel Discoveries, with the most Glistering
Beams of his own Matchless Perfection, that can be comprehended by any Finite
Creature. Now Gospel Embraces being chosen by the Lord from Eternity, to be the
precious matter whereof he will Compose that his everlasting Crown of Glory,
whereby his Honor and Majesty should Glitter forth before the eyes of Saints
and Angels, brighter than ten Thousand Suns in their Strength; Thence if every
Gospel Embracer shall not be Beautified and adorned with the most Sparkling
touch of Perfection that they are Capable of, the Blessed Majesty of Heaven
should become negligent of Dignifying himself with the Brightness of Majesty
and Honor, through the Transparent Brightness of his Imperial Crown of Glory.
And therefore according to this,

1. The Scripture reveals, that the Celestial Glory and Surpassing Excellency,
wherewith every Gospel Embracer shall be Adorned and Beautified, does Transcend
and go beyond all Comprehension of Finite Brains and Created Understandings:
According to that in 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has
it entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for those
that love him: Mark what the Apostle affirms; He affirms that the Sublime
Mysterious Workings of Heavenly Wisdom about Gospel Embracers, was never
Comprehended yet with any finite brain by any mortal heart: and O how
infinitely unconceivable then are the workings of that heavenly wisdom in
themselves! Alas what the Gospel reveals of them, is but like a small
reflection of the Sun beams to the Sun it self, It is but a small grain to a
golden Mine, it is but a drop of the bucket to the great Ocean: O then how
great an exaltation of such unlovely Sinners to most superlative perfection and
unconceivable glory, must needs be the effect of such a depth of heavenly
divine wisdom being employed about them from eternity! This depth of the
mystery of divine wisdom about Gospel embracers was never fathomed by Angelical
Understandings, 1 Pet. 1.12. which things the Angels desire to look into, says
the Original (...) Into which things the Angels earnestly with all their
strength and intention of mind desire to look into: The word signifies such a
looking into things, as to stoop down with the head, and bow down with the
body, that it might be the thing it looks upon to discern it fully. It is the
same word the Apostle uses, John 20.11. concerning Mary Magdalen, she stooped
down and lookked into the Sepulcher, that she might see narrowly into the thing.

(2.) The Scripture reveals more particularly, that most unconceivable
perfection, most celestial glory, shall be put upon the persons of
Gospel-embracers in every part, power and faculty that belongs to them.

I. According to this Engagement of God, he resolves that the very bodies of
Gospel-embracers shall be beautified, and endued with most transcendent,
bright, shining glory, with almost incomparable perfection. That one Scripture
is enough to clear it out, Phil. 3.21. He shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. O how did the quintessence of all
perfection meet together in the glorious body of Christ! You may remember in
the Transfiguration of Christ, which was but a glimpse of his beauty and glory,
the hearts of Peter and John were amazed, their Souls were ravished to behold
it, they were transported beyond themselves, and began to cry out, let us make
Tabernacles, Let us dwell here to behold this Glory for ever: But how much more
transcendently excellent is the Glory of the Body of Jesus Christ, now he is
exalted to all Glory! And yet the Bodies of Gospel Embracers must be like his
Glorious Body.

1. All Privative Perfection shall be put upon them. An everlasting Exemption
and perfect Freedom from all Defects and Imperfections, all Infirmities and
Deformities, all Pains, Perplexities, Ministries, so as there shall be no
necessity of the Aid and Assistance of their fellow Creatures, to support and
uphold, to relieve and Refresh them as there is here below, but their Bodies
shall be like Angels. Mat. 22.30.

2. The Scripture reveals that there shall be most admirable Positive
Perfection put upon them; Immortality it self: their lives shall be extended to
duration, equal with the Life of the eternal God, they shall run Parallel with
the Life of God in the longest lines of Eternity. 1 Cor. 15.54. This mortal
shall put on immortality.

3. They shall be endued with Incorruptibleness. They shall in a manner be made
impassive, not being made capable of any passion, by any corrupt quality. 1
Cor. 15.42. It is Sown in Corruption, it is Raised in Incorruption.

4. They shall be endued with almost Incredible Angelical Power, Potency, Might
and Strength. They shall be made every way suitable to the desire of the Souls
themselves, and made suitable for he Soul to act in the highest way, in the most
Sublime way of Operation, without Weariness, without Interruption, without
Intermission, They shall be able to bear the infinite weight of Glory, the
least drop whereof they are not able to bear for the present.

5. The body shall be endued with most excellent spirituality. 1 Cor. 15.44. It
is Sown a Natural Body, it is Raised a Spiritual Body: They shall not be turned
into spirits, but the Body shall be made so spiritual, through the fullness of
the spirit in it, that it shall be as ready to the Blessed Will of God in every
thing, as the soul it self that shall be purely Holy: And also it shall have a
Wonderful Nimbleness, and Agility, and Activeness, to be able at the souls
desire, to move hither or thither with most Incredible speed.

6. The Scripture reveals, the very Perfection and Quintessence of Beauty it
self, shall be put upon the Vilest of the Bodies of the Gospel Embracers. 1
Cor. 15.43. It is Sown in Dishonor, it is Raised in Glory, it is Sown in
Weakness, it is Raised in Power: There shall be the exactest Form and Feature,
the Perfection of Comeliness and sweet Proportion, a most admirable Congruent
Symmetry of all the parts, there shall be the sweetest pleasing mixture of the
loveliest Color of Red and White, there shall be a continual actuating to the
Life both these Colors and Parts, so as they shall be Preserved in a perpetual
Orient Freshness; yea the Materials of Beauty, through the Unspeakable
Cheerfulness of the Heart within, and through the admirable excellency that the
Soul shall be raised to, shall be so actuated to the very Life, that the very
Beauty of the Body shall Sparkle and Glitter, as Bright as the Brightest
Glistering Beam of the Sun in the Firmament, Dan. 12.3.

II. The Scripture reveals the highest perfection to be put upon their Souls.
It were a work infinite and endless to search into the various, glorious
excellency and faculties, wherewith every Soul embracing Gospel-Discoveries
shall be endued: Our capacities are narrow here concerning the Soul, we know
little of it and of its Original, yet thus much we may affirm of it from the
Scripture, that every faculty of the Soul shall be adorned with the most
suitable perfection and excellency that it is capable of: The understanding
shall be extraordinarily and supernaturally irradiated with the highest
illumination, the largest comprehension: The Will shall be extended to the most
perfect operation toward God himself, all the motions of it working in their
perfection terminatively upon God alone, which indeed is the very perfection of
holiness: So as the height of the Souls perfection shall be every way
answerable, and proportioned to the superexcellent glory, wherewith their
bodies shall be endued and adorned.

III. From what the Scripture reveals concerning the beautifying the body with
such high perfections, and the beautifying of the Soul also, I may add a word
by consequence: That a most admirable, unspeakable glory, shall appear in the
persons of those Gospel-embracers, when a body filled with such perfection, and
a soul raised in a manner infinitely higher, shall be united into one, to make
up one person: O what Honor and Majesty will shine from the very countenance
of such a Person! When Stephen stood before the Face of the Council, through a
sweet Vision of Heaven opened, his Countenance appeared like the Face of an
Angel: But O what Beams of Majesty, Honor, Beauty, and Glory, will Glitter
from the Persons of Gospel Embracers, when they shall be Inhabitants in the
Palace of Heaven it self! Now all this admirable Perfection, wherewith every
Sinner Embracing Gospel Discoveries shall thus be Clothed, is but the Effect
and Consequence of the Precious, Eternal Determination of God, to make every
Unlovely Sinner Embracing Gospel Discoveries, to be as one of the Diamonds that
should stand to glitter in the Crown of his own Glory.

7. There is a Seventh Engagement, that the Spirit also may reveal the Lord to
have laid upon himself, in respect of himself, to fulfill all
Gospel-discoveries into the bosom of every unlovely Sinner that shall embrace
him, and that is this; every such unlovely sinner, that shall and will accept
the Gospel-Discovery, is chosen from Eternity to be a Royal Inhabitant of the
Sacred Palace of the Empyrean Heaven, there to attend the Majesty of Heaven
perpetually, to behold the Brightness of his Glory and Majesty. When the Lord
who from Eternity subsisted only in himself, did please from the Motions of his
own Will alone to create a World, to be a goodly Theater wherein he would
manifest his Power, Bounty, Goodness, and Love, then did that Blessed Majesty
please to Compose on purpose that Vast Empyrean Heaven, and to Beautify, and
Adorn it with the most Exquisite Excellency, and Transcendent Glory, to make it
shine with the Brightest Beams of Majesty and Glory, that it might be a Sacred
Palace for himself, wherein he resolves to Communicate himself most
Beatifically, to the Noblest Creatures, Elect Saints and Angels, and wherein he
purposes to discover the most Transparent Beams of his unspeakable Majesty and
Glory that ever Creature should behold: Now in like manner the Lord also
determined, that every of the Souls of Mankind, (whom he foresaw should fall
into a perishing lost condition) accepting union and Communion with himself,
should be one of his Household Servants, admitted into his Blessed
Presence Chamber, in whom he would delight himself, by Revealing his
Incomprehensible Glory. Hence it is that you shall find in Scripture, that the
Kingdom is said to be given to those Gospel Embracers. Luke 12.32. And hence it
is that the Saints are said to have an Inheritance Incorruptible, that Fades
not away, 1 Pet. 3, 4. And hence it is also that every Gospel Embracer is said
to be an Heir of Heaven, Romans 8.17, And Heirs of a Kingdom. Jam. 2.5. All these
Scriptures Compared together, abundantly evidence, that every such Gospel
Embracer, is chosen to be a Royal Inhabitant of the Sacred Palace of the
Empyrean Heaven. Now that they are chosen to dwell there on purpose, that they
might attend, and behold the Beauty of his own Majesty and Glory, this is
abundantly evidenced from many Scriptures; Christ himself speaks it in John
17.24. Father I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me. Now the Glory of Jesus
Christ is so Interwoven with the Glory of the Father, that they cannot be the
Beholders of the Glory of Christ, except they be also Beholders of the Glory of
God the Father. And again in that 1 John 3.8. Now we are the Sons of God, and
it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. So that from these Scriptures
jointly considered, we may conclude,

I. That every Gospel Embracer is chosen, to behold the Brightness of his
Majesty and Glory, by beholding the Divine Essence it self.

1. He is chosen to behold the Blessed sweet Simplicity, and Indivisible Unity
of the Godhead. To discern the Lord, and to see him to be as one most Pure
Simple Act.

2. Every Gospel Embracer is chosen to behold the Sacred, and Secret Mystery of
the Holy Trinity. To behold that one Indivisible Essence of God, consisting in
three manner of ways; To see three Subsistences and but the same Essence.

3. Every such Soul is chosen to behold the Eminency of the Divine Essence.
They are chosen to behold a Transcendency of all Imaginable Perfection that
ever their eyes beheld, to be Comprised in that one Divine Essence with
absolute Perfection.

4. They are chosen to behold the Divine Essence, in all its most Glorious
Operations. They are chosen to be admitted into the Presence Chamber of the
Divine Majesty, so as to behold all the Records of Heaven.

II. Every such Soul is chosen perpetually to behold the Brightness of his
Majesty and Glory, in Beholding the Glory of Jesus Christ as Mediator.

1. They are chosen to behold the admirable Mystery, of the Union of the Divine
Person to the Humane Nature. That which is now an Inexplicable Mystery to the
Believers Eye, shall then by Gods choosing them to behold his Glory, be
Discerned.

2. It is chosen to behold all the bright Beams of Glory, that appear in the
Mystical Union of so many Lost, Rebellious, Sinking, Perishing Souls, to the
Lord as to one Head.

3. Every such Soul is chosen to behold the Transcendent Perfection of the
Secret Love of the Lord Jesus, to such Unlovely Sinners, while they were
altogether Loveless, while they were altogether Abominable, matter of Loathing
to his pure Eyes.

III. Every such Soul is chosen from Eternity, to attend upon the Royal Majesty
of Heaven in his Sacred Palace, that they may behold his Glory in the Brightest
manner.

1. He is chosen to behold those bright Beams of Majesty and Glory, in a
positive way.

2. It is chosen to behold the Beams of his Transcendent Majesty and Glory in
an immediate way. There will be no need of Speeches to Represent the Lord to
our Understandings, as there is now.

3. It is chose to behold the Brightness of the Lords Majesty and Glory, in a
Simple Pure way. Not relatively, or by Relations, as Gospel Embracers for
present behold the Light of the Lords Glory: As when we conceive of the Glory
of the Majesty of Heaven, we conceive of him as the most absolute Monarch of
Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; This is but Relation,
but we shall then see the Lord in a suitable way, even as he is.

4. It is chosen to behold them fully. Not to behold the Reflection only, but
the Sun it self of Glory.

5. It is chosen to behold them everlastingly. Hence the Soul may discern God
to be engaged, by his highest Relation of his own Eternal Contentment, to
perfect both Union and Communion, between himself and every Unlovely Sinner,
that shall and will accept Gospel Discoveries, seeing every such Soul as shall
accept Gospel Discoveries, is Designed by himself from Eternity, to be one of
his Royal Attendants in his Sacred Palace, that should behold the Brightness of
his Majesty and Glory.

Now before I can pass from this second work of the Spirit upon Souls; There
are Five or Six things that every Soul of us must remember, least we
misunderstand the manner of the Spirits irradiating the Gospel unto Souls.

I. We must observe, That the Spirit of the Lord does in a different manner,
cause these Glorious Beams of Divine light, to shine forth from the promise
into dark Souls. The Spirit in this Blessed work of Irradiation of the Gospel
unto dark Souls, does to some reveal only some of those Precious Soul Ravishing
Beams of Light, that you have heard opened; To others he causes more abundance
of those Precious Beams of Light, to shine into the heart: And from hence,
various Souls have various Degrees of this assurance of Faith, and various
Degrees of Joy and Peace slowing forth from that assurance of Faith.

II. You must also observe concerning this work of Irradiation of the Gospel,
That the Spirit does manifest those Beams of Divine Light from the Gospel, in
different Degrees of Clearness unto Souls.

III. You must also observe, that the Lord does in a different degree continue
the manifestation, and Irradiation of the Promise or of the Gospel unto
different souls. I speak still of those souls that do receive through the
spirits Irradiation of the Gospel, some assurance unto their Faith of their
union with Christ.

IV. You must also understand, that the spirit does reveal the substance of all
this Heavenly Light, the Sum and Compendium of all that you have heard, and
cause it to shine into souls from the promise. This the spirit does cause to
shine into every soul, that attains unto any degree of assurance of Faith:
Though the spirit works variously, in regard of the clearness of revealing what
it does reveal, and variously in regard of the time and continuance of its
manifestation of that Heavenly Light unto souls, yet those precious Beams of
Heavenly Light, that the spirit causes to Glitter forth from the promises unto
souls, are of necessity to be revealed unto every soul that attains unto any
assurance of Faith.

V. We must observe, that the spirit of the Lord does out of his own infinite
Wisdom, select the particular truth of the Gospel, whereby he will assure any
particular soul of his union with Christ. Though those particular Beams of
Divine Light mentioned, be in the substance revealed to the Faith of every soul
to whom the spirit gives union, yet the particular wherein the spirit makes the
Brightness, the Glory, the Luster, the satisfying and Over-powering Glory of
those Beams of light to appear to the souls eye, these are selected by the
Wisdom of the spirit it self, though it is but the substance also, or the
effect of those particulars, whereby we have revealed those Beams of Divine
Light to you.

VI. You must observe, that the spirit does reveal or manifest, all the bright
shining of Divine Light from the promise, at one and the same moment to the
soul, when it draws forth the souls Faith unto acts of assurance. The spirit
may be Instructing the dark soul many Years, in the Precious Mystery of the
Gospel of Christ, before it raises the souls Faith unto assuring acts, and may
be increasing the strength of the souls confidence gradually, in every
Ordinance in all those years; But yet wherever the spirit draws out the God
believing Dispositions, that it has infused into any souls, to act by way of
fullness of confidence, then the spirit presents all this Precious Light of the
Gospel at once, and gives the soul one Glorious view of it.

Thirdly the spirit of the Lord proceeds from Illumination of the soul, and
Irradiation of the Gospel to the soul, to Conviction. The Spirits Conviction of
the Conscience.
From the Powerful Efficacy of that Divine light, infused into the
understanding, and the Precious Concurrence of the sweetest light of
manifestation of the Gospel unto the Light Inherent, arises a Powerful Inward
Conviction of the Conscience: According to that in John 16.9, 10. The Spirit
shall reprove, and convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment: It shall [Convince the World of Righteousness,] that is, of free
Justification of Despicable, Forlorn, Guilty Sinners, through the Lord Jesus
alone. This Conviction of the soul or of the Conscience, it is a clear
Unquestionable, and Infallible Demonstration, given by the spirit to the
doubtful soul, of the Lords Will, that even that his particular Forlorn,
Worthless, Stubborn soul, shall be received into the nearest union with himself
in Christ. Or rather it is a Commanding Power of the Spirit of God, exercised
upon the soul, whereby it constrains it to receive that clear Infallible
Demonstration, that the Blessed Word of God gives of the Lords Will to receive
his Stubborn, Rebellious, Unworthy Soul, into union with the Lord Jesus. Indeed
by the Spirits Illumination, and the manifestation of the Gospel to the Soul,
there is a most Unquestionable Demonstration given, of the Lords Will to accept
any one particular soul to be one with him, if he will accept him: but in the
Work of Conviction is most properly the Mighty Overpowring work of the spirit
upon the Mind and Conscience, constraining it to receive the Demonstration.
Conviction is properly the silencing all Cavils, Doubts, of Contradictions of
the mind, against any truth propounded, and a making of it undeniable to it,
that it dare not make any objection, or raise any one Cavil more, to what the
Lord propounded to his particular Loveless soul, but to sit down satisfied, and
confess the truth of what the Lord propounded to him, to confess that it is the
Will of the Blessed God indeed, that it should be one with himself in the Lord
Jesus, and enjoy everlasting Communion with him. There is a necessity of the
Spirits thus convincing the Soul, besides its Illumination and its Irradiration
of the Gospel to it, and that in two respects.

First in respect of the Mind, or Understanding.

And Secondly in respect of the Conscience.

First, In respect of the mind. The Power of Corruption has so Captivated the
Mind and Understanding, that both the Illumination of it, and Irradiation of
the Gospel unto the mind would be Ineffectual, should not the spirit strike in
to make up the souls Conviction. There is a four fold Disposition in the Mind,
that does cause a kind of necessity of this Conviction of the spirit, besides
the Irradiation of the Gospel to the Mind.

I. There is a Wretched Unteachableness, that naturally possesses all our
Minds. There is not only Darkness possessing the mind, but an opposition
against the receiving Light. Now in respect of this Disposition of our minds
naturally, we are unapt to receive any thing the spirit reveals, should there
not be a further Power and Efficacy of the spirit upon the Heart.

II. There is a most Superlative incredulity that remains in our minds. The God
of the World has blinded the mind. 2 Cor. 4.4, not by a privative extinction
of Light infused (that is beyond the Devils Power) but by a positive darkness,
a positive Ignorance, by persuading the minds of all to believe other
Principles, such as contradict those blessed Principles of Divine Truth. Now in
respect of this Incredulity that possesses our Minds, there is a necessity that
the Spirit should have a further work upon the soul than bare Illumination, and
Manifestation of the Gospel to the soul.

III. There is an Indisposition in our Minds, to receive any thing that they
cannot Comprehend. Now all the Glorious Discoveries in that Mystery of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ being Incomprehensible, thence the mind would receive
none of those Precious Discoveries, though the Spirit did Irradiate the Gospel
of the Lord Jesus to it, if another Mighty Power of the Spirit should not come
in upon the Heart, to Convince the Soul of it.

IV. There is an absolute Enmity in the mind against those Divine Truths. Romans
8.7. The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God. Now this Cursed Enmity dwelling in
the Unregenerate part, makes its constant Opposition with all its Power and
Strength, against all that the Spirit reveals; And so all the Precious
Discoveries of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus to the Mind would be ineffectual,
should not another Mighty Power of the Spirit come in to Conquer the Cursed
Enmity, and to Constrain the Soul to receive those Demonstrations of the Will
of God, to receive the Loveless Soul into union with himself as a thing
undeniable.

Secondly there is a necessity of it in regard of the Conscience also.

The Conscience is a Register, Might and Power, placed by the Lord in the
Understanding, What Conscience is.
to record all the Motions of the whole Man, and to Discover the Equity or
Iniquity of them, and to determine of them either with the Soul, or against the
Soul. Now the Conscience is also so Corrupted, that there is a necessity of
this Conviction of the Spirit, besides this Illumination and Irradiation, for
the mind and Conscience is defiled, Titus 1.15.

Now there are two that are the most eminent Works of Conscience.

I. To Discover the Equity or Iniquity of any thing Propounded to the Soul to
be done, or of any thing that is done by the Soul. Now in this the Conscience
is dreadfully Corrupt, here the Conscience calls Iniquity Equity, and Equity
Iniquity, calls Good Evil, and Evil Good, naturally in a great measure. Now
thence there is necessity of this Conviction of the Spirit also, in regard the
Conscience will never determine that it is good for the Soul, to receive those
Precious Discoveries of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to it, unless the Spirit
Overpowers the Corrupted Conscience, and Convince it of the Equity of receiving
it.

II. The second act of Conscience is, to determine of any thing that is already
done by the Soul. Its work is to Accuse, and Excuse the Soul, both in its doing
of things, and after the doing of them. Now Conscience is so dreadfully Corrupt
naturally, that like a Corrupt Judge, or a Bribed Judge, it accuses when it
should Excuse, and Excuses when it should Accuse, it Frees the Guilty, and
Condemns the Innocent. Now in respect of this Corruption of the Conscience,
though the Spirit of the Lord does Illuminate the Soul in part (for its never
higher) and then present the Gospel to the Enlightened Understanding, and gives
clear Manifestations of the Lords Will, to admit the Soul into Union with
himself in Christ; yet the Corrupt Conscience will never determine with the
soul, to Excuse the Soul in receiving those Precious Discoveries of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ to it, but would and will perpetually Accuse the Soul as a
Presumptuous Wretch, unless the Spirit of God should exercise this Convincing
Power upon the Conscience, even after the work of the Irradiation of the Gospel
to the Soul. So that this work of the Spirit in Conviction, draws clear
unquestionable Demonstrations for the soul from the Gospel, to prove that it is
an Infallible certainty, that it is the Lords Will to accept that Particular
Despicable, Forlorn Sinner to be one with him; and it consists also in the
Commanding Power of the Spirit of God upon the Determination, whereby it
silenceth all Cavillings of the Soul, and puts a Holy Constraint upon the Mind
and Conscience, to receive that Determination as True and Undeniable: So that
the Spirit makes him to confess with his own Mouth, that it is the Will of the
Blessed God, that even this my Forlorn, Loathsome, Despicable, Unlovely Soul,
should be one with himself for ever. This is the Spirits Conviction, which is
the third work of the Spirit upon the Soul, toward the drawing forth its Faith
by way of assurance, or by which the Spirit does proceed, to give the Soul a
full assurance of his Union with Christ.

There is a fourth effect of the Spirit of God upon Hearts, for revealing to
them their Union with Christ Certainly and Infallibly, The Spirits Excitation.
so as to give the Demonstration, and that is the Spirits Excitation of the
Habits of Grace formerly Infused, into their proper and peculiar Exercise. Now
here you must observe, the Spirit does not Quicken, Inliven, and Actuate all
kind of Gracious Dispositions Infused into the Sanctified Soul, in any
immediate Revelation; assuring its Faith of his Acceptance into Union with the
Lord; For indeed the Souls assurance unto Faith, does not properly arise from
any of the actings of those Holy Dispositions that are Infused into it, but
proceed only from the right Apprehension of the good Will of the Lord in Christ
unto Loveless Sinners: For indeed the Spirit in this work of Excitation, as it
stands in Relation to the assuring the Soul through Believing, of his Union
with Christ, has only and peculiarly, the Believing Disposition that was
Infused into the Soul, at Christ's first Comprehending the Soul, for its proper
Object, and as Exercising Influences chiefly flow down from that believing
Disposition: Now the Spirits Excitation of the Believing Disposition, does
necessarily follow the three former effects of the Spirit upon Hearts, in
regard all these effects of the Spirit upon the heart, are but preparative to
this fourth effect, for indeed it is this fourth effect, which is the Spirits
drawing forth Believing Dispositions into act, which is the Formality of
Assurance, or Assurance it self: The other only are absolutely necessary
Preparatives unto the assurance, they are Preparations indeed both Privatively
and Positively; But they are but Preparations.

First, These three acts of the Spirit are Preparations privatively, by
preventing all Impediments and Obstructions, that hinder the Soul from acting
Faith by way of assurance.

I. The first work of the Spirit which is its Illumination, that does
privatively prepare the Soul for the assuring act of Faith,

1. By preventing the Soul from bottoming its Confidence upon the Sands. Before
the Blessed work of Illumination, souls mistake the right Bottom of their
Confidence of the Lords accepting them into Union with Christ, and so
consequently cast out the Anchor of their Souls, upon the ground of their own
Humiliation for Sin; another time upon the Quickenings and Enlargings of their
Hearts, through the Sanctifying Spirit, and so Consequently never entertain the
least Confidence of the Lords accepting of them into Union with Christ, any
further then they can discern those Quickening Enlarges (...) Inlivenings of
that Sanctifying Spirit in their Hearts.

2. That does prepare privatively for the assurance, by Preventing the Soul
from seeking in a false manner after the attaining of Confidence upon a true
bottom. Before the Spirits full Illumination, the Soul commonly mistakes, about
the manner of casting out an Anchor of Confidence upon that true ground, as
conceiving there is no right manner of any Souls casting himself with
Confidence upon the Lord, unless the Soul does first discern himself to be a
Beleiver.

II. The second work also of the Spirits Irradiation of the Gospel unto Souls,
is to prepare privatively for the assuring of the Souls Faith of his Union with
Christ. Through the Spirits Irradiation, all Misapprehensions about the Tender
of Union with Christ with the Soul are removed.

III. By the Spirits Conviction the Soul is prepared Privatively, for the
assuring his Faith of his union, and that three ways.

1. By removing of the Contrariety of the reasoning that possessess the Soul.
Before the Spirits Irradiation of the Gospel in some Degree, and Conviction of
the Conscience by that Irradiation, the Heart is haled hither and thither, by
an Apprehension of reasoning that always dwells within him: The Heart sometimes
Inclining to a Dreadful Conclusion, that the Lord will never accept of his
Forlorn Soul into Union with the Lord Jesus: Another time again inclined to
believe, that the Lord is willing to accept even his Soul into Union with
Christ: Now by the Irradiation of the Gospel to the Soul, and the spirits
Conviction of the Conscienee, the Contrariety of Reasoning in the soul is
removed; The Reasons for accepting the soul into Union with the Lord Jesus,
bearing more weight with the spirit, than all the Objections and Contradictions
that Hell, and the Corrupt Heart can make against it; So that the soul discerns
more ground to imagine, that the Lord is willing to accept his soul into Union
with Christ, than he discerns ground to think the contrary.

2. Through the spirits Conviction, the Uproar and Tumult in the souls
Affections are Allayed and Helped. Through the Contrariety of reasoning in the
soul, all the Affections are put into a Tumult and Rage: When one kind of
reasoning Prevails, then one kind of Affection works strongly, and when
contrary Reasonings prevail, then contrary Affections work as highly.

3. The spirits Conviction that is annexed to the spirits Manifestation of the
Gospel, does prepare for the souls receiving assurance unto his Faith of his
Union with Christ by removing the Distraction that possesses the souls
thoughts. As the Affections commonly are in a Confusion, so the thoughts also,
the mind is constant in nothing else but unconstancy, staying, or fixing upon
nothing. Now this being a great Impediment to the souls receiving assurance
unto his Faith of his Union with Christ, the spirit privatively to prepare the
soul for it, removes this Distemper.

Secondly they are Preparations positively also.

I. The spirits work of Illumination, that does prepare the subject for
assurance. It is through that Illumination that the soul is disposed into a
possible condition, and a capable condition, to discern that everlasting Rock
of Ages, whereupon the Confidence of the souls union with Christ shall be cast.

II. The spirits Irradiation, or Manifestation of the Gospel, does also prepare
positively for the assuring the soul of his union with Christ, in regard that
prepares the very matter of assurance. That Discovers the true ground,
whereupon the soul may be Confident of his Acceptance into union.

III. The third work of the spirit which is Conviction, that prepares the soul
for receiving the assurance unto his Faith of his union with Christ, by
applying the matter of assurance particularly unto souls. It is the spirits
manifestation of the Gospel, that Discovers the ground whereupon souls may be
confident of their acceptance into union with Christ; It is the spirits
Conviction, that makes particular application of that ground of Confidence.
Those three former works of the spirit are only Preparative unto assurance, the
Formality of assurance is still behind: Therefore the spirit comes with this
fourth work, which is the Exciting and Stirring up this believing Disposition
into Exercise.

Therefore now we must open to you what this Excitation of the Spirit is, and
what the particular acts of the Spirit upon the soul are, that are Included
under this work of the spirits Excitation of the believing Disposition unto its
Operation.

The Spirits Excitation is a Gracious, Free, Extraordinary Concurrence of the
spirit, with the believing Manifestation, What the Spirits Excitation is.
formerly Infused into the Soul. Or it is a Precious, Powerful influence of the
spirit, upon the believing Disposition. The Holy Disposition that Inclines the
Heart Habitually to believe, is as it were the Seed of assurance Sown in the
Heart, but there must be the Concurrence of the Spirit with the Seed, or the
Influence of the Spirit upon the Seed to make it Fructify, so as there shall be
an act of assuring Faith in the Soul. So that this Excitation of the Spirit, or
the Spirits stirring up the believing Disposition, is but a Continuance of that
Holy Influence into the Soul, that was begun at the Souls first passive Union
with the Lord Jesus, whereby the Holy Disposition that was then Infused, is
Maintained, Preserved, Increased, Actuated and Enlivened.

Yet to open this more particularly.

I. I say it is a Gracious Concurrence of the Spirit with the believing
Disposition. I do not call it a Gracious Presence of the Spirit, because the
Spirit takes up its Everlasting Habitation in the Heart, at that passive Union
between the Soul and Christ, that is, when it first Comprehends the Soul; and
the Habitation of the Spirit may be said to be equal at all times in the Soul,
but its Conveyance of Grace into the Soul is not always equal.

II. This Excitation of the Spirit to the believing Disposition, is a Gracious
and Free Concurrence of the Spirit with the believing Disposition. Free, not
only as other Holy Motions of the Spirit in the Heart are free, which is in
respect of their sole Dependence upon the free good Will of God to a Loveless
Sinner; But it is a free Concurrence of the Spirit to the believing
Disposition, in regard of the Lords absolute freedom that he Exercises in
Vouchsafing this unto Souls. That I may speak the more clearly, you must
conceive there is a Twofold Influence of the Spirit into believing Souls. The
first is an absolutely necessary Influence: The other is a more Free Arbitrary
Influence. The absolute necessary Influence is Twofold.

First, That that is absolutely necessary to Maintain the Life of a believing
Soul.

Secondly, That which is absolutely necessary to Maintain the Growth of a
believing Soul.

1. The Influence of the Spirit that is absolutely necessary to Maintain the
Life of the Believing Soul. Every Creature that has any Life, has some
Maintenance for that Life, which Maintenance being withdrawn, the Creatures
Life would decay: However do not mistake me, every Living Creature must have
some kind of Influence, from the first Being of Beings to maintain its Life: As
the Angels have a more immediate Spiritual kind of Influence from God. Now that
that the Wisdom of the Lord has Determined, should Maintain the Spiritual Life
begotten in a believing Soul, is the Influence of the Holy spirit into the
soul. Now this absolutely necessary Influence is that which is never wanting to
any one Believing soul: The Covenant of Grace that the Lord freely passes to
the believing soul, lays an Engagement upon the Blessed God, to maintain the
Influence of the Life of the soul; So that the Blessed God of Heaven and Earth
is no more at Liberty, in that he is Bound and Obliged to Maintain that Life he
begets in a believing soul; According to that in Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear
in their Hearts, and they shall not depart from me; they shall never dye again
a spiritual death.

2. The absolute necessary Influence of the spirit, is that which maintains the
Growth of the believing soul toward Perfection. Now that Influence of the
spirit also, the Lord has absolutely engaged in the Covenant of Grace, to
communicate at all times to a believing soul, in regard he has engaged to
perfect the likeness of Jesus Christ in every believing soul, and therefore the
spirit does continually issue down life from the head of the Lord Jesus, into
every believing soul which is a Member unto that Head: every Member receives
from the Head continually some kind of virtue. Now both these Influences of the
spirit being absolutely necessary, though they be free originally, yet the Lord
having passed his promise to sinners embracing the promise, he stands obliged
to Communicate those Influences of the spirit continually. But now this other
Influence is a free Influence in another manner; It is not absolutely necessary
to the Life nor Growth of the soul, in this manner that we are now speaking of,
and therefore the Lord is not engaged to Communicate it unto the souls of his
People, but he stands at his own Liberty, to Dispense it to whom he will, to
send this Exciting spirit into what soul he pleases out of the number of all
believing souls. So that it may in an eminent superlative manner, be said of
this Exciting work of the spirit to the believing Disposition, what Christ
says of the Breathing of the spirit in general, that the spirit breaths
where it lists; It is merely according to the good pleasure of the Lord, that
any believing soul partake of this Exciting work of the spirit to the believing
Disposition.

III. You must observe in the Description, That it is a Gracious, Free, and
Extraordinary Concurence of the spirit with the believing Disposition infused.
There is an ordinary Exciting Influence of the spirit to the believing
Disposition: no Gracious Disposition Infused would show forth any of its
Operation, did not the spirit Concur with the Gracious Disposition, and so
consequently there would be no Operation of Faith at all: Now in regard there
are constant Operations of Faith in every believing soul, in the course of his
Conversion, in one degree or other, therefore it must needs be concluded, there
is an ordinary Concurrence of the spirit, into the believing Disposition that
is in every believing soul: But this Exciting Influence into the believing soul
that I now speak of, is not that ordinary, but it is extraordinary; It is an
abundant Breathing of the spirit upon the believing Disposition, mightily
drawing it forth into Exercise in its full Strength and Power, causing the
believing Disposition to be Victorious, and Triumph Gloriously over all Doubts,
Objections, and Questions. This is the spirits Excitation of the believing
Disposition infused into the soul.

Now we may conceive that there are three Particular acts of the spirit on the
soul, that may be included under the spirits Excitation of the believing
Disposit^on in the soul, which do all tend unto the Full, Powerful, Mighty
Excitation of the believing Disposition in the soul unto exercise.

I. It affects the Heart sweetly with the Precious Divine Light Discovered unto
the soul, by the Manifestation of the Gospel to it. The light of truth
Discoveries affects not the Heart any further, than the spirit concurs with the
Light Revealed. Now,

1. The spirit causes the soul to be filled with a Holy Complacency, in
beholding the Precious Divine Light that the Gospel Reveals.

2. The spirit moves an insatiable Thirst in the soul, after the continuance of
that Precious Divine Light shining from the Gospel, into his Poor Obscure Heart.

3. The spirit melts the Heart by the beholding that Light that the spirit puts
into it, so as the Heart is made most pretiously Tender, and Pliable, and
Flexible to the Blessed Will of God in every thing.

2. The Spirit impels, constrains the Soul to believing strongly. The Lord
rules in the heart of believers by the Royal Scepter of his Word, but not as
the Word is barely revealed unto a Soul in the letter of it, but as the Word is
brought into the heart by his own Spirit. And therefore when the Spirit sways
not the Scepter of the Word in their hearts, the word loses its Imperial
Royal Authority that it has over the Soul, and so the Soul lies not under so
strong an Obligation to any Duty, as it does when the Spirit brings the Word to
the heart.

3. The third Act is the inabling the soul powerfully to believe: According to
that in Phil. 2.13: By him we receive both to will and to do, that is, both the
disposition, and the Act of the Disposition, both an inward bent of Spirit to
believe, and power also to act that Disposition, This is that mighty Power that
works in those that believe, Ephesians. 1.19. So that the Soul that could only
Believe waveringly, that it was the Lords will to receive his despicable,
loveless Soul into union with the Lord Jesus, shall by the powerful ability of
the Spirit infused into the Soul by the Spirit, be able to receive it fixedly,
to believe it undoubtedly, unquestionably, without the least inconstancy for
the present, that the blessed God of Love, will out of his own free love,
accept his despicable loveless Soul into the nearest union with the Lord Jesus,
and himself through him. That is the exciting work of the Spirit.

There is now the fifth and last work of the spirit unto souls for that end to
be opened, which is the spirits Attestation to the soul, The Spirits
Attestation.
that is to say his Witnessing unto the soul that it shall be certainly,
Infallibly, in its Cleaving to Lord Jesus, admitted into Union and Communion
with him. It is the good pleasure of the Lord, not only to show the
immutability of his Counsel concerning believing souls, and the infallibility
of their acceptance into Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus in their souls
cleaving to him; but it is also the good pleasure of the Lord to show more than
Sufficiency, the Unchangableness of his Counsel to such souls: According to
that Precious place. Hebr. 6.17. The Lord willing more abundantly to show the
Immutability of his Council: Ex Abundanti as Beza Translates the Original; The
Lord having a Precious good will to show, in a way more and beyond what was
necessary to believing souls, the Impossibility of their souls failing of Union
and Communion with the Lord Jesus in their cleaving to him, he does therefore
now add his Blessed Spirit to be the Comforter of Believing souls, not only in
a Degree that is necessary for them, (for which end all those four former
Effects of the spirit upon souls were appointed) but the Lord appoints the
Spirit to be a Comforter beyond what is necessary: And therefore after the
Spirit has given to Believing souls, a clear Evidence of their Acceptance into
Union with the Lord Jesus, so as thereby the spirit had filled their souls with
strong Consolation; Yet the Lord appoints the Spirit to add a higher work,
which is its Attestation. This Attestation of the Spirit is that you shall find
Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also after that ye Believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy
Spirit of promise: Or as the Word may be rendered, In whom Believing ye were
Sealed, which Imports the near Conjunction of these two Blessed works of the
Spirit, or the immediate following of the Spirits Attestation, upon the Spirits
Excitation of their Souls to Believing. And this work of the Spirit is that you
find also in 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Now he that Establishes us with you in Christ,
and has Anointed us, is God, who has also Sealed us, and given us the
earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. And this you shall find also. Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the Spirit of God by which you are Sealed unto the day of
Redemption. And so Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our
Spirit tha^ we are the Children of God. Now least any should question whether
the Spirit does thus work in a Witnessing way, it would be necessary to clear
the Interpretation of most of those places from some other Glosses that are
Frequently put upon them. It is true say some, the Scripture speaks of the
Sealing work of the Spirit unto Souls, but the meaning of the Spirit of Truth
is only, that by Graces and Holy Dispositions, that the Spirit Communicates
unto Believing Souls, it does confirm Souls in the certainty of their
Acceptance into Union with Christ: So that by the receiving of the Spirit by
Belive^s, spoken of in the Scripture of Truth, is only meant Believers
receiving the Precious Working of the Spirit in their Hearts, in Holy Habits
and Dipsositions.

For Answer, I must acknowledge that by the Spirit is frequently meant in
Scripture, the Holy Dispositions infused by the Sanctifying Spirit into
Believing Souls. And I must acknowledge also, that the Graces or Holy Habits
infused by the Spirit in Believing Souls, are spoken of as Witnesses unto Souls
of their Union with Christ: And indeed it is questionless that an effect may
Witness its own proper cause: And the Scripture speaks expressly, that the works
of God are Witness of God, Act. 14.17. And so Christ's works were Witnesses of
his Godhead, John 5.36. Yet this is not that which is primarily intended in the
former Scriptures by the Spirits Sealing the Believing Soul, which may appear
to you by two or three Reasons.

I. In regard the Spirits Sealing the Believing Soul, is declared to follow the
Souls act of Believing in order of Nature. As in Ephesians. 1.13. In whom after ye
Believed ye were Sealed. Or, In whom ye Believing were Sealed by the Holy
Spirit of Promise. Now all the Precious Holy Habits, that the Sanctifying
Spirit Infuses into any Soul, are in order of Nature Infused before there is
any Believing act in the Soul: Though the Believing act in a Believing Soul may
be Contemporary (that is at one and the same time) yet the Infusing of all the
Holy Habits and Dispositions into the Soul, must be conceived to have a
precedence in order of Nature, before there can be a Believing act. I confess
some (and those learned ones too) have imagined, that the Sanctifying Spirit
should work as an external agent, an outward agent upon the Soul in the first
act of Believing, and then take up its Habitation in the Soul through the Souls
Believing in the Lord Jesus. But reason it self is sufficient Confutation of
those Imaginations. Reason will tell us of an Impossibility of a man merely
Unregenerate, to put forth an act merely Spiritual; Reason will tell us an
Habit or Disposition must go before there be an act, a Tree there must be
before there can be fruit; And then also the Spirits Sealing of the Believing
Soul being declared to follow, at least in order of nature, the Souls
Believing, it cannot be that by the Spirits Sealing spoken of in these
Scriptures, should be meant the Infusion of the Spirits Graces into the Soul:
it must be something besides the Graces Infused.

II. All kind of Holy Habits or Dispositions, that are Infused into any one
Believing Soul, are Infused in order of nature before the Souls Believing. Now
if the Spirits Sealing were only the Infusion of the Spirits Grace, then every
Believing Soul should have the same Seal of the Spirit, whereas experience
brings Testimony enough to the contrary.

III. The Spirits Sealing mentioned in those former Scriptures is Attributed in
a particular manner to the person of the Spirit, The Spirit it self bears
Witness with our Spirits: It does not say only, the Spirit, which might have
been meant the Graces of the spirit, but the spirit it self, even by a personal
act the spirit attests to us that, we are the Sons of God. So it is also in
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also after ye Believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy
Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance. It is Translated
Which, but it is most agreeable to the Original, to say, Who is the earnest of
our Inheritance; The relative being in the person of the spirit, not the Gifts
of the spirit. So that it stands as an Undoubted Truth, that the Lord does add
unto Believing souls for their abundant Consolation, even a Witness from his
own Blessed spirit of their admittance into Union and Communion with the Lord
Jesus in their cleaving to him, besides all those other Blessed necessary works
of the Blessed spirit upon their souls.

Now I must further Observe, that this Attestation of the spirit does not
pertain peculiarly and solely unto Faith, as having reference unto Faith only,
and to the begetting of assurance of Faith; But by Divine Appointment this
Witness of the spirit pertains also to sense, to spiritual sense, or spiritual
Knowledge, and does beget assurance of Sense and Feeling, as well as it begets
assurance of Faith; Yet there is such a sweet Mixture in this Blessed work of
the Spirits Attestation, that it does at one and the same time raise the soul
to assurance of Faith, and Assurance of Sense and Feeling: And indeed such is
the nature of the spirits Attestation, that it never bears Witness to the souls
Faith in any measure of clearness, that the soul in its Cleaving to the Lord
Jesus shall be admitted into Union and Communion with Christ, but the spirit
bears Witness at the same time to the souls sense, that it is actually admitted
into Union and Communion with Christ. Yet because we are speaking at present of
the manner how the spirit does first reveal to the souls Faith certainly, and
infallibly his Union with Christ, and so assure the souls Faith of Union, we
must first speak of the spirits Attestation unto the soul in reference unto
Faith. Though we must also for opening the full work of Attestation, open the
manner of the spirits Attesting to the souls Sense and Feeling.

For the opening the first, the spirits Attestation in Reference unto the souls
Faith, to assure Faith of its Union, The Spirits Attestation unto Faith.
I shall open to you two things.

First, Those Respects in which the Lord does appoint the spirits Attestation
to be added to all the former works, as a Redundancy of his Mercy and Love to
the Despicable soul.

Secondly, We shall open what the spirits Attestation to the souls Faith is.

For the first, There are four or five Respects, why the Lord adds this work of
Attestation to the souls Faith, after he has persuaded the soul to believe
thus powerfully with Confidence.

I. In respect of the Multitude of fears that remain in the Believing Soul,
after the clearest Evidence of the Gospel unto the soul, and the most full
persuasion of the soul by the spirit to Believe. There are three kinds of fears
that still remain in some degree, both in the Seed of them, and in the Fruit of
them, though none of them remain in their absolute Dominion.

1. There is both the Seed and Fruit of Slavish Fear. Though through the Mighty
Exciting Power of the spirit, following the spirits Irradiation and
Manifestation of the Gospel to the soul, it is raised to a fullness of
Confidence, of the Lords Acceptance of his soul, into Union and Communion with
the Lord Jesus in his Cleaving to him, yet there is not a perfection of
Confidence; And it is only perfect Confidence that begets perfect love, and
only perfect Love that casts out Slavish Fear.

2. There is a pure natural fear that still remains. The matter of Believing is
of such high concernment, that the very remembrance of it strikes the soul with
some natural fear; It is the venturing the precious Immortal soul for Eternity,
and unless there were a Perfection of Confidence, a soul cannot be void of fear.

3. There is a Spiritual Holy fear that remains also in the Believing soul,
after the strength of Believing. The souls Vision of Union and Communion with
Christ, Inflames the Believing Souls Heart with Love unto Union and Communion:
And proportionable to the degree of the Souls Love, so is the Souls fear; That
is to say, the Soul fears the loss of Union and Communion, in the same degree
wherein he loves Union and Communion, and this fear is exceeding prone to go
beyond its Bounds, and to suspect the loss of it, where there is no cause of
Suspicion.

II. The Lord adds this Attesting work of the spirit to souls, In regard there
is a natural Distrust that in some degree remains in every Believing soul,
though raised to a fullness of Confidence. There is not only an Indisposition
naturally in the soul, to give Credit to the Blessed Word of the Majesty of
Heaven, by reason of its Inability, fully to comprehend the reason of the Lords
fulfilling such a Word into his Bosom; But also there is a natural Disposition
in dwelling in every soul, that Inclines the Heart strongly to give the Blessed
Majesty of Heaven the Lie, to distrust that Blessed Record that the Lord bears
of his own Son.

III. There is a Holy Jealousy that possesses every Believing Soul, least his
Corrupt Deceitful Heart should Delude him. Every Believing soul is so conscious
to himself, of a Multiplicity and Variety of Couzening Deluding Tricks, that
his Corrupt Heart has put upon him from time to time, as it dare not trust its
Heart when it deals most Plainly and Uprightly. Now from this Holy Jealousy,
there arises a Difficulty to settle and Establish the Heart, and to free it
from all Wavering in its Conscience: Now in respect of this, the Lord adds this
work of the spirits Attestation, that the soul may have a full Satisfaction,
that there may be no inward Misgivings of Heart, in its Confidence of the Lords
acceptance of it into Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus, in its Cleaving
and Adhering to him.

IV. There is a natural Unconstancy, that possesses every such Believing soul
in some degree. Ever since the Heart of Man was drawn from that first Blessed
Center, it has naturally been Unconstant in all its Restings: Now from this
Unconstancy of the spirit, the Heart is exceeding prone to have its Confidence
shaken when the spirit has raised it to a high Degree; And in respect of that
the Lord Vouchsafes to add the work of Attestation, for the perfect
Establishing of the Wavering Soul.

V. There is all the Concurrent Rage of Hell Employed, against every Soul
attaining that Confidence of his Acceptance into Union and Communion with the
Lord Jesus in his Adhering to him. Now should there not be a Witness from
Heaven, or greater Authority in the souls Apprehension, than any Dictates of
the Counsel of Hell, the Believing soul would soon call in question the
Precious Word of the Majesty of Heaven, and Incline to give Credit to the
Dictates of Hells Counsel. Therefore in respect to this, least the Believing
soul through this means, should be Robbed of that Precious Joy and Peace in
Believing, that the Lord intends, the Lord has Determined that his Blessed
spirit should become the souls Comforter, by way of Attestation to bear Witness
to the certainty of the souls Acceptance into Union and Communion with the Lord
Jesus, in the souls Cleaving to him, that so the Witness of Heaven might be of
higher Authority to the soul, than all those Cursed Lying Dictates of Hell
frequently propounded to that Believing soul.

Now the second thing to be opened is, what this Attestation, or Witness unto
the souls Faith is? What the Spirits Attestation unto Faith is.
I conceive that this Attestation unto Faith, is a Precious Beam of Heavenly
Light, darted into the Understanding, whereby the spirit clearly Demonstrateth
to the Believing soul, the Lords Approbation of the souls act of Believing or
Confidence, and that with such an unspeakable Divine Authority, as is
irresistible by the soul, so that hereby the soul is Established in a
Plerophery, or more than a fullness of Confidence.

There are four things in this Description that you must observe.

I. This Attestation unto Faith is a Precious Beam of Heavenly Light, darted
into the Understanding. That is the nature of the Witness: This is (as commonly
called by Divines, and* Christians) a secret Voice, or a sweet Whispering of
the spirit: And thence many have sadly Mistaken, and Conceived that Witness to
be some strange kind of Revelation by a Voice from Heaven; But indeed it is
therefore spoken of, as a secret Voice, because it is a secret Beam of Heavenly
Light: And thence it is rightly called the Witness of the Spirit of the Lord,
Witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Sons of God: Witness, that is, bear
Record, give a Testimony; Now to give a Testimony is to declare a thing
Verbally: Now indeed in this respect, it is not unfitly called the Voice of the
Spirit; for a Voice is nothing else but an Expression of the inward Conception
of the mind by words: Now by this secret Beam of Heavenly Light, darted into
the understanding, the spirit of the Lord does secretly express the mind of God.

II. This Attestation or Witness of the spirit unto Faith, is such a Beam of
Heavenly Light as does Clearly, and Infallibly, and Unquestionably, Demonstrate
or Manifest to the soul, the Lords Approbation of his act of Believing, or of
his act of Confidence. All the Unquiet Tossings and Agitations, and Perplexing
Waverings of souls, from what occasion soever, they have their Original in some
kind of Doubting, whether it be according to the Blessed Will of God, that
their Forlorn, Despicable souls, should be so Confident of their Acceptance
into Union with the Lord Jesus, in their adhering to him: Now therefore the
Light that the spirit casts into the Understanding, is on purpose to clear, and
make it out of all doubt to the soul, that it is Infinitely pleasing to the
Blessed God, that even that particular soul should be so Confident of his
Acceptance into Union with the Lord Jesus. That is the matter it self that the
spirit does Testify to the soul, or the Testimony it gives.

III. You must observe in the Description, That this Attestation of the Spirit
is such a Beam of Heavenly Light, that so clears to the Believing Soul, the
Lords Approbation of his act of Believing, or his act of Confidence, that it
carries along with it an Inconceivable Divine Authority. It is such a Beam of
Light as has such an Impression of the Majesty of the Blessed God upon it,
that it is impossible for the Heart to make Resistance.

IV. Observe in the Description, that it Establishes the Soul in a Plerophery,
a more than a fullness of Confidence, a Triumphing Confidence. That is the
peculiar Inseparable effect of this Testimony that the spirit gives, it fixes
the Wavering Unconstant Soul. This is the Spirits Attestation unto Faith. Now
we shall come to the Spirits Attestation unto Sense; But there is an Objection
will be cast in, that must first be opened, whereby the depth of this
Unspeakable Mystery may be something more Unfolded.

Obj. Some Soul may say, If the Spirit gives no other Testimony to the Soul
than this, That his particular Soul shall be Certainly and Infallibly Accepted
into Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus, in his Adhering to him, and
Produce no other Confidence in the Soul than this, that I, even I, this
Unlovely Soul of mine, in Adhering to the Lord Jesus shall Infallibly have
Union and Communion with him to all Eternity, then says the Soul, even after
the Witness of the Spirit unto the Soul, it may remain doubtful of its Union
with Christ still, seeing by this Testimony of the Spirit unto Faith, the Soul
is not assured of his own Cleaving and Adhering unto Christ, and seeing the
certainty that the Spirit gives, by the Testimony to the Souls Faith of his
Union with Christ, has its whole Dependence upon the certainty of the Souls
Cleaving and Adhering unto Christ.

Ans. 1. For Answer to this Grand Objection,

First, When this Testimony of the Spirit is given unto the Souls Faith, and he
is assured that his particular, Unlovely, Forlorn Soul, shall certainly and
Infallibly be accepted into union with the Lord Jesus in his resting upon
Christ for union, it is not then possible that there should be any Solid Ground
for that Believing Soul, to question his own Cleaving and Adhering unto Jesus
Christ unto all Eternity. And that will appear in two things.

I. In regard there is a sufficient ground revealed to the Soul, that has this
Testimony of the Spirit unto his Faith, of his Confidence of his Everlasting
Cleaving unto Christ, as there is of the Lords Acceptance of his Soul into
Union and Communion with him in Adhering to him. The promises of the Covenant
of Grace that are tendered in the Lord Jesus, do as perfectly and as clearly,
contain and include in them strength to enable Souls to Embrace and Accept
those Promises, as they do contain in them a fullness and alsufficiency of Love
and Mercy for those Souls that do Embrace them. The Lord that has said, It is
my Will that such Perishing, Sinking, Despicable Souls as will accept my
Tender, shall be one with me through the Lord Jesus, and have Everlasting
Communion with me, has also said, will Allure and draw your Hearts to Embrace
and Accept according to my Will, this Union and Communion with me in Christ
that I freely tender you. According to Jer. 31, 32, 33. This shall be my
Covenant, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and Write it in their
Hearts: That is to say, I will infuse suitable Dispositions into the Hearts of
all the Embracers of the Lord Jesus, to Incline, Dispose, and Enable them to
fulfill all my Revealed Will in some Measure and Degree. So that the Soul has
as sure a Word Revealed to it to depend upon, from whence may arise a
Confidence in it, that the Lord will Enable him to Cleave and Adhere
Everlastingly to Christ, as it has a Word whereupon his Soul may Depend, and
may be Confident, the Lord will accept him into Union and Communion with him in
Cleaving unto Christ.

II. In regard that very Confidence that the Spirit does produce in the Soul,
of its Infallible Acceptance into Union and Communion with him, is the very act
of Cleaving and Adhering unto Christ. There are four particular acts of the
Soul, Included under this Confidence of the Souls Acceptance into Union with
Christ in its Cleaving and Adhering to him.

1. In this is Included the Election of Union with Christ, by the Will of the
Soul. Now this is but the receiving of Christ that the Gospel requires; To as
many as received him to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, John
1.12. Now the consent of the Will to close with Christ in Union and Communion
that is tendered to it, is the very Receiving of Jesus Christ.

2. In that very act of Confidence there is Included the Souls Credence, or
giving Credit to the Word of God. When the Soul is Confident of the Lords
Accepting of it into Union and Communion with him, in the Souls Cleaving and
Adhering to him, it is only because of such a Word of Promise from the Mouth of
Christ, to which the Soul gives Credit, or which the Soul Believes.

3. In this act of Confidence there is a Resignation of the Soul wholly unto
Christ. Such as that which is spoken of in 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have
believed, and I am Persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
Committed unto him: That is to say, I know whose Word it was that I gave Credit
to, and that I was so Confident of the Truth of, That I leaned my Soul upon the
Truth of that Word for its Everlasting Happiness. So that then in this act of
Confidence, there is Included that Mutual Interchangable Covenanting, that the
Word of the Lord requires from Souls in Accepting the Lord Jesus Tendered.

4. In this very act of Confidence there is Included a full Dependence of the
Soul upon Christ, a hanging the Soul upon the Faithfulness of Jesus Christ and
his Word. So that indeed all the acts that the Gospel Requires from Souls are
Included in this one act of Confidence that is produced by this Testimony of
the Spirit to the Souls Faith: Now the act of the Souls Confidence, being also
the act of its Cleaving and Adhering unto the Lord Jesus, and the Souls
Cleaving and Adhering unto Christ being Gradually as strong, as the act of its
Confidence of Accepting into Union and Communion with Christ, in his Cleaving
to him; Thence it appears that there can be no solid ground of the souls
questioning his own Adherence unto the Lord Jesus, when the spirit gives this
Testimony forementioned unto the souls Faith, and produces (...) Confidence in
the soul, of his Acceptance into Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus in
Adhering to him. In this very thing lies the whole Mystery of assurance unto
Faith; The very Confidence that the spirit begets in the soul, of the Lord
Jesus his Accepting it into Union and Communion with him in Cleaving to him,
the very act of Confidence is the act of the souls Cleaving to him.

Answ. 2. Secondly I Answer further, that whenever the Spirit by its Testimony
to the souls Faith, does beget that Confidence in the soul, that the Lord will
Accept it into Union with himself, in his Adhering to him, then the soul cannot
question his own Adhering unto Christ, any more than he questions the Lords
Acceptance of his soul into Union and Communion with him in his Adhering to
him. The spirits Testimony unto Faith is or such a nature, that it does equally
beget a Confidence in the soul, of his Everlasting Cleaving unto Christ, to the
Confidence that it does beget, of the Lords Acceptance of the soul into Union
with himself in the souls Adhering to him. And that will appear in three things.

I. In regard the spirits Attestation unto Faith, is concerning the truth of
the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, or of all the promises. The spirit in the
Irradiation of the Gospel, clears that it is the Lords Will to have the whole
Glorious work of the Union of Loveless Sinners with the Lord Jesus, to have its
sole dependence upon himself; So that it manifests Believing Strength to enable
the soul to Cleave and Adhere to the Lord Jesus, fully to be tendered in the
Covenant of Grace, as well as Union with Christ himself is tendered: Now then
the spirits Attestation, which follows this Irradiation of the Gospel, is as
large as its Irradiation work, I mean, the spirit does in a Judicial,
Authoritative way, Witness the truth of all those Gospel Truths Revealed to the
soul: So that the soul cannot possibly resist that Determination, that the
spirit gives into its Bosom. Now then there being the same Witness of the
spirit unto the souls Faith, that the Lord will enable it to Cleave and Adhere
to the Lord Jesus, that there is unto its Faith, that the Lord will Accept into
Union and Communion with himself in Christ, every soul that will Adhere to him;
Thence it cannot be that a soul should more question his Adhering unto Christ,
than he should question the Lords Acceptance of him into Union, through his
Adhering to him.

II. In regard the spirits Excitation of the Believing Disposition into
Exercise, is General and Universal. Now there being strength to Enable the soul
to Adhere unto Christ tendered, as well as Union with Jesus Christ is tendered,
and the spirits Exciting work being thus General and Universal, it cannot be
but the Heart should be Established in the constant Expectation of the one as
of the other; To be as Confident of the souls everlasting Cleaving unto Christ,
as of his Acceptance into Union with Christ, upon his Cleaving to him.

III. In regard the spirit does Adjoyn a Testimony unto the soul, that it does
Cleave unto Christ, to its Testimony that it gives to its Faith, that it shall
be admitted to the Lord Jesus infallibly, in cleaving unto him. The Spirit is
so blessed a Comforter, that it sends down living streams of refreshing, both
to faith and spiritual sense: when it has once testified to the souls faith,
that unquestionably and infallibly, that particular soul shall be accepted into
union with the Lord Jesus, in his embracing of him; it then also testifies to
the soul, that it has embraced Christ, and that the soul is already actually
instated in union and communion with him. Now having opened the spirits
attestation unto the souls faith: The spirits attestation unto sense.
The second act of the attestation of the spirit, is it is attestation unto the
souls spiritual sense: in this we must open three things to you.

First that there is such a witness of the spirit to the souls sense and
feeling, besides the former Record that it gives unto Faith.

Secondly, In what respects this witness of the spirit is added unto the
spirits witness unto the souls faith.

Thirdly, what this witness of the spirit to the souls sense and feeling is.

First, that there is such a testimony of the spirit unto sense and feeling,
may appear from that one place alone, Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears
witness mith our spirits, that we are the sons of God: this holds forth, that
there must be a witness of the spirit unto the soul, above and besides those
holy dispositions, or precious gracious habits that the spirit does communicate
unto souls, and therefore that there is such a witness of the spirit unto
faith. Now from hence appears, that there is such a witness of the spirit unto
the souls sense and feeling, in that the spirit is said to give a particular
testimony unto particular souls, of their actual union with the Lord Jesus. The
spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are the sons of God; that we, it is
not only a determinating sentence, that the spirit passes upon the truth of
what the Gospel reveals in general, unto every soul that shall embrace him, for
that is only thus, that thou or thou, or that particular soul in his accepting
the Lord Jesus tendered, shall infallibly be one with Christ; (which is still a
testimony unto faith) but the Scripture speaks it plainly, the spirit gives
testimony of their souls real accepting of Jesus Christ tendered. The spirits
testimony of says could be only thus much, to witness from the promise, that
this or that particular soul, shall be adopted to be a Child of the Blessed
Majesty of Heaven, in his accepting the Lord Jesus tendered: But this testimony
is a witness to the particular soul of it is actual adoption already, that we
are the sons of God, therefore this must be a testimony of the spirit unto the
souls sense and feeling, in regard the proper object of faith, is to receive
what is promised, not receive what is done.

2. The spirit is said to be a Co-witness with believers spirits, that they are
united unto Christ, and adopted sons and daughters of God through their union
with Christ.

Says the Original, the spirit does bare witness together with our spirits; so
that the spirit is said here to bear witness to the soul, of the same things
that the souls own spirit (that is the renewed understanding, or the sanctified
Conscience) bares witness to: Now the renewed conscience in the believing soul,
can only bear witness unto the souls sense and feeling; and therefore the
spiris witnessing the same thing, that the renewed conscience in a believing
soul does witness, it must needs be, that this witness of the spirit must be a
witness to the souls sense and feeling.

III. It appears from the peculiar office, to which the spirit of the Lord is
destinated. The spirit is appointed to be the comforter, the most superlative
eminent comforter: now should not the spirit witness unto the souls sense and
feel^ng spiritually it is union with Christ, it could not comfort in the highest
manner. There are three degrees of spiritual comfort.

1. A souls appehension that union and communion with the Lord Jesus, is
tendered to his despicable lost soul. There is a degree of comfort from the
possibility, that his poor lost sinking soul may be admitted into union and
communion with Christ; but alas this is weak.

2. There is the souls actual embracing this union with the Lord Jesus
tendered. There is infinite sweetness and peace in that very believing act of
the soul, though as yet there is no sensibleness in the soul of that his own
believing, and so no sensibleness of his union with Christ.

3. Which is the Top Stone of the Souls Consolation, and that is the
sensibleness of the souls union with the Lord through believing. Now if the
spirit should not give such a witness to the believing soul as this, to witness
to the souls actual close with Christ, in union and communion, the blessed
spririt who is sent from the Lord Jesus, on purpose to be a comfort to
believing souls, should not comfort in the highest manner, he should not be the
most eminent comforter.

II. The second thing to be opened, is the reasons of the additions of the
spirits testimony unto the souls sense and feeling, to the testimony that it
gives to the souls faith. There are five or six reasons of it;

I. To prevent the souls receiving that determination of its corrupt conscience
concerning its everlasting estate. In all the various actings of conscience, as
a Law, Witness and Judge, it is corrupted by virtue of our first Transgression;
so that in whatsoever state the soul remains, when its conscience works
according to its natural disposition and inclination, it bears false witness,
and passes false judgment: Now therefore does the Lord vouchsafe to add the
spirits testimony of the souls union unto sense and feeling, that the false
sentence that conscience passes upon the soul, might not be received by it.
There are three respects wherein the Lord vouchsafes to add the spirits
testimony to sense unto the the testimony it gives to faith,

1. The depravedness and perverseness of conscience in its testimony.

2. The unavoidableness of the souls hearing that testimony that conscience
gives, when the soul is once alive through the life of Jesus Christ.

3. The readiness of the soul, naturally to concur and agree with the testimony
of corrupted conscience, while it bares witness against Faith.

The reason is evident, in regard the full bent of the spirit stands to judge of
all things according to sense and reason. Now therefore the Lord adds this
testimony of the spirit unto sense and feeling, to give matter for conscience
to build a new judgment upon, concerning the souls everlasting estate.

II. The Lord adds the testimony of the spirit unto sense and feeling, to its
testimony unto faith, that the evidence of the souls union unto Christ, might
every way counterpoise the evidences that the soul has received of its
separation from Christ.

There are three evidences unto a soul of his separation from Christ, and this
testimony of the spirit unto sense and feeling, does parallel the soul with a
sufficient evidence of his union with Christ, answerable to those three
evidences of the souls separation from Christ.

1. There is the blessed word of the Majesty of Heaven, determining that every
Son and Daughter of Adam, is by merit and desert everlastingly separated from
the Lord Jesus, and actually the first moment of his Being, void of union and
communion with Christ.

2. There is the evidence of the souls work.

The contrary, opposite, rebellious working of the soul against Christ, does
evidently declare that there is no union between Christ and any soul naturally:
as the Apostle says, 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin, (that is, with full
purpose and bent of spirit, with a full determination of his judgment and
will) is of the Devil.

3. There is the testimony of conscience founded upon these contrary workings
of the Heart unto Christ that a soul is separated from Christ. Now in
opposition to these three, the spirit gives testimony unto faith, that even
such a particular despicable lost sinner, shall infallibly in his cleaving to
the Lord Jesus, enjoy everlasting union and communion with him: And then the
Spirit adds this Testimony also unto sense and feeling, whereby he makes the
Soul discern even from the moving and working of his Heart toward the Lord
Jesus, that he is actually united to him; and from thence Conscience cannot but
bear witness, that the Soul is actually united unto Christ.

III. The Lord does vouchsafe to make a super-addition of the Spirits Witness
to sense, that the whole blessed word of God might sweetly concur together, in
bearing Witness to the Souls union with the Lord Jesus. As for example, that
word in 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know that God dwells in us, and we in him, (that
is, that we have union and communion with God in Christ) because he has given
us of his Spirit. This word bears not Testimony to the Souls Faith of its
union with Christ, but it bears Testimony unto the believing Souls sense that
is united, when the Soul is sensible that the Spirit is conveyed from God into
its Bosom. Likewise that other word in 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves,
whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, (that is to say, that the life, and
grace, and holiness of Jesus Christ is communicated to you, that Jesus Christ
acts and works in you, and through you) know ye not this, except ye be
Reprobates? Now this Word bears no testimony to the Souls faith of its union
with Christ, because the indvvelling of Christ in the Believing soul, is not
the object of Faith, but the object of spiritual sight.

IV. The Lord adds the testimony of his spirit unto the souls sense, that
believing souls might receive the earnest of their everlasting union with the
Lord Jesus here below, according to that, Ephesians. 1.13. Ye were sealed with the
Holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession. So in 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed
us, and given us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts. The earnest imports
two things.

First, That the Lord gives the soul part of his everlasting portion before
hand.

2dly, That the Lord gives that small portion as a pledge to assure the soul of
the enjoyment of the full inheritance. Now in the spirits testifying unto
sense, the souls union, the spirit does clearly manifest the very entrance of
the soul into union, and its participation of some degree of union with Christ
already, in regard it discovers some of the graces of Christ to be actually
inherent in the soul.

V. The Lord superadds the testimony of the spirit unto sense, unto its
testimony unto faith that he might effect the fuller degree of conformity to
his whole will in the soul. Two commands are impossible for the soul to yield a
perfect obedience to, without this Testimony of the spirit to the souls sense,
of his union with Christ.

First, The command of examining and proving the soul whether it be in Christ,
and all commands of the like nature, that enjoin the soul to examine whether
this, or that fruit of the spirit be in the soul? whether love to God, or love
to the Brethren be in the soul or no? There can be no effectual obedience to
any command of that nature, without the spirits testimony to the souls sense,
of his union with Christ, in regard it is the proper and peculiar Office of the
spirit only, to discover all its precious workings to the soul, to be in the
soul.

Secondly, The command of perpetual rejoicing in the Lord, could not be
effectually obeyed without the testimony of the Spirit unto the souls sense.
Though indeed believing be the primary original of all spiritual joy, yet the
souls sense of its believing, is a necessary adjunct to make up the perfection
of that spiritual joy.

VI. The Lord adds the testimony of the spirit to the souls sense of union with
Christ, to his testimony to faith, that the believing soul might be filled with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory. All those glorious portions of the Lords
word, whereby believers are described by the precious habits of grace infused
into their hearts, would be as so many strong holds for the powers of Hell to
fortify in against the Believers soul, and would be turned by the policy of
Hell into condemning sentences against the soul, so as the precious Tower of
the souls consolation would be always battered, the sweetest streams of comfort
would always meet with one interruption or other, in their flowing down into
the bosom of the soul; did not the Lord add the testimony of his spirit unto
sense.

What the Spirits witness is unto sense.
The third thing to be opened is, what the spirits attestation to the souls
sense, and feeling of his union with Christ is. It is a precious, secret,
immediate, clear, and authoritative irradiation of the souls believing act, or
confidence, causing the truth, sincerity, and uprightness of the heart in
believing, to shine so resplendently, that the soul in the act of believing is
made sweetly conscious to it self, that it does rightly believe: whence the
renewed Conscience determines boldly, that the soul is everlastingly one with
Christ.

That I might the more perspicuously unfold this work of the spirit, we shall
take the description in pieces, and open it in parts.

First, You are to understand in the description, the act of the spirit in this
testimony unto sense. The act is an act of irradiation, a clothing the
Believers soul with a transparent glory and brightness. In a word, it is but a
precious beam of Heavenly light, that the spirit casts upon the act of
believing, for indeed it is nothing else but light to faith, and light to
sense, that is the original of all the comfort to believing souls. There are
three acts to be observed concerning this irradiating work of the spirit.

I. It is an immediate irradiation; Nay it proceeds from that blessed spirit so
immediately, that nothing can concur with the spirit in casting that precious
light upon the souls believing act.

(1.) It is so immediate, as none of the precious Ordinances of the Lord can
properly be said to effect, or produce instrumentally, this precious
manifestation of the souls believing act to it self. Though it is frequently,
yea constantly, through some precious Ordinances, that the spirit does
vouchsafe, thus to irradiate or manifest to the believing soul, the truth of
his own believing act, yet it is not by virtue of any of these Ordinances.

(2.) It is such an immediate work of the spirit upon the soul, that
demonstrations either from the antecedent or consequent, from the cause, or
from the effect of believing, has no place here. Though it is certain, there
may be infallible demonstrations drawn by a believing soul, from the effect of
his believing, that his heart was true, sincere, and upright in believing, yet
the Spirit does so immediately manifest this believing act, in the truth,
sincerity and uprightness of it, to the believing soul, that it does not send
the soul to this or that work, to see what holiness, or strength of love or
affection unto Christ, nor what readiness of heart to all obedience to the will
of God, were the consequence of his believing, but the blessed spirit does
immediately in the very moment of the souls acting that believing act, cast a
beam of Heavenly light upon that very act, that there is evidence enough in the
act it self, that the act is a true believing act, according to the evidence of
the Lords revealed will.

3. This act of the spirit is such an immediate act, that the spirit uses not
the assistance of the discursive power of the mind, to collect from the
description of true Believers in the word, that his act of believing is upright
and sincere, according to the Lords will. It is certain, that in the spirits
irradiation of the souls believing act, it does discover clearly, infallibly,
and unquestionably, all the properties whereby believers are described in the
word, to be in the soul also, yet in this that is properly called the witness
of the spirit unto sense, in its manifesting the believing act of the soul, it
does not make the discursive power in the mind, the instrument whereby the soul
should compare together his own believing act, and the description of the true
believing act that the Lord requires in the word, so as thence to collect by
discourse, that the believing act is true.

2dly. It is a clear act, full of perspicuity and transparency. The spirit in
this irradiation casts as clear a light upon the souls believing act, to make
it discover it self, as the rational soul does cast a natural light upon its
own natural act; so that it is proportionably evident to the soul, that his
soul does believe, as it is evident that the soul lives, or that the soul
wills, or that it has a being.

3dly. The act of the spirit in irradiating the souls believing act, is
authoritative, irresistibly powerful. This beam of light that the Spirit casts
upon the believing souls act, has such a commanding power included in it, that
it even commands the be^; yea, it commands undeniably, so as it is not possible
for the believing soul to shut its eyes, but it must see.

II. The second thing to be observed is, the object of this act of the spirit
in its testimony unto sense. The object named in the description is, the souls
believing act or confidence. That is to say, the very act of credit that the
soul gives to the blessed word of God, testifying that it is his will that
that particular loveless souls should adhere and cleave to the Lord Jesus to be
one with him and to have communion with him; and likewise testifying, that in
the souls giving credit to that word o^ God, it shall everlastingly enjoy union
and communion with the Father, and the Son and Spirit. Now there are 4. things
observable under this to prevent mistakes.

I. You must observe, that it is only the present believing act, that is the
object of the Spirits manifestation, or irradiation. The Spirit does not cast
those beams of Heavenly light upon the souls former and past acts of believing,
though they have been multiplied, but only upon the present momentany act of
believing, that the Spirit has drawn forth from the soul, by its manifesting
of the Gospel, and revealing the tender of union and communion with Jesus
Christ to the despicable sinner, in its Glory and Brightness.

II. You are to observe, that the believing act of the soul is only the
principal and primary Object of the spirits irradiation or manifestation. So
that the spirit casts beams of Heavenly Light upon no other act in the
believing soul at present, but only upon that act commonly, the spirit does at
the same time so cloth the act of Love, with such a Glorious splendour and
brightness, as that is also visible in the same moment to the believing soul,
that it sees unquestionably his Arms of Love grasping the Lord Jesus, as well
as he sees the truth of his own confidence in the Word of Christ, that he will
admit him into union and communion with him.

III. You must observe the virtue of the spirits irradiating, or manifesting
this believing act to the soul. The Virtue of it is to discover the Truth,
Sincerity and Uprightness of the heart in believing.

1. The Truth and Sincerity; To make it unquestionable and Undeniable to the
believing soul, that his Wretched, Corrupt heart does not delude nor deceive
him, but that his heart does rely with some degree of strength, and embrace the
Lord Jesus tendering union and communion to the soul.

2. It makes apparent the uprightness, that is, the strait Conformity of the
heart in some degree, to the rule and command of believing.

IV. You may observe here, how the spirit is the earnest of the souls
everlasting inheritance, or of the souls everlasting union and communion with
Christ. It is only as the spirit does irradiate the souls believing act to it
self, that it becomes the earnest of the souls inheritance; That is, that it
becomes as a small portion given by the Blessed Majesty of Heaven to the soul
in hand, in Testimony that it shall enjoy the full inheritance. The spirit is
such an earnest in irradiating the souls believing act three ways.

1. In regard the spirit manifests its own presence in the believing soul, by
its irradiating the souls believing act, in discovering to the believing soul,
that it does uprightly according to the Will of God believe. It does discover
Holiness to be infused into the soul, and so consequently discover it self to
have taken up its Habitation in the believing soul. So that the believing soul,
by the sight that the spirit puts into the believing act, making it Visible to
his own eye, discerns the presence of the holy spirit in his heart; and thus
indeed there is a precious earnest given to the soul of his everlasting union
and communion with the Lord Jesus.

2. In regard the communion between Jesus Christ and the soul, by the sight of
his believing act, appears to the soul to be begun. The soul discerns Jesus
Christ and himself to be partakers of one and the same life, by discerning
infallibly the truth of his own believing act.

3. In regard it enters the soul into the very fruition of union with Jesus
Christ, and so becomes indeed a first Fruit of Heaven, gives it actual
possession of that highest blessedness that sanctified souls shall possess in
Heaven. The fruition of it consists in two things.

First, In the certain knowledge that it has of union and communion with
Christ.

Secondly, In the sense of the sweetness and comfort of union and communion
with Christ.

Nothing though it be possessed, can be said to be enjoyed, unless the party
possessed of it has a sense of the sweetness and comfort of the good that he
is possessed of.

III. The third thing observable is, the effect of the manifestation, or the
enlightening of the believing act in the soul. That is a precious, sweet
consciousness in the believing soul in his very act of believing, that he does
rightly believe, It is by the spirits irradiation of the precious Gospel of
Jesus Christ to the souls understanding, that the soul discerns by faith the
bosom of that blessed Redeemer, the Lord Jesus, ready to receive his loveless,
perishing, sinking soul, into the nearest union and communion with him: so
likewise by the spirits irradiation of the souls believing act, the spirit
makes the soul see also as clearly, that it does, as it were, creep into the
open bosom of the love of the Lord Jesus.

IV. The fourth and last thing observable in the description of the spirits
witness to the souls sense of its union and communion with the Lord Jesus, is
the inseparable adjunct, or concomitant testimony of the spirit unto sense.
That Is the determination of the renewed Conscience in the believing soul, that
he is everlastingly one with Christ. This is properly the effect of the spirits
testimony unto sense, whereas the light of every Grace (though they be luminous
Bodies, and proceed from the spirit of light) is such a small light in it self,
that unless there be an addition by the Spirit unto sense, it shines not
apparently to the believing Soul; and therefore the infallible testimony of the
Believers own Spirit, or of his renewed Understanding or Conscience, is but the
consummation, or the consequent of the Spirits irradiating the Souls believing
act; yet it is inseparable from it; no sooner has the Spirit witnessed to the
Souls sense, that it is one with Christ, but the renewed Conscience answers
also, Thou art one with Christ. The witness of the Believers Spirit, or of the
renewed Conscience is but the Echo of the witness of the Lords own Spirit,
according to Romans 9.1. My Conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost. It
is the Spirit, as it were, that puts words into the mouth of renewed
Conscience; it does but answer what is the voice of the Holy Spirit, as the
Echo answers our voice. Now when the Spirit has witnessed unto the Souls
Faith, that in its cleaving to the Lord Jesus, his Soul shall be infallibly
admitted into Union and Communion with him, and in that witness has drawn out
the believing disposition to act in its strength, and then casts a brightness
and splendour upon the believing act, that it shines thus apparently in the
Souls eye, yea so apparently, that the renewed Conscience bears witness that
the Soul does rightly believe; then does the Soul say with those in 1 John
4.16. I know and believe the Love that the Father of the Lord Jesus bears to
this my Loveless Soul; then is the poor wavering Soul established and settled as
upon an everlasting Rock, the Rock of Ages.

Then, 1. All the beginnings of Hell in his own Spirit are past. All the
condemning Sentences of Conscience that he was wont to hear every day, are
obliterated and blotted out; I mean, so long as the testimony of the Spirit
thus continues, all the Frowns of Conscience are gone.

2. All tormenting Fears are banished. The inward perplexity, anguish and
vexation that perplexed the Soul, through the fear of his everlasting
separation from the Glory of the presence of the Majesty of Heaven, all cease;
and there is a blessed Calm possesses the Soul, and then the Soul is brought
like a weather-beaten Ship, into the sweetest and most commodious Haven of rest.

3. The Spirit of Glory possesses the believing Soul. Then is its contentment
in union and communion with the Lord Jesus infinite, unspeakable, then does it
rejoice, yea triumph in the Lord Jesus, Romans 5.3. Thus through this testimony
unto Sense, added to the testimony unto Faith, the Soul is even set down with
one foot, as it were, into the great City of the King of Heaven, sweetly
expecting his full fruition of that transcendent Glory that it solaceth it self
in the sweetest expectation of, till time shall come that Faith and Expectation
shall cease, and Sight and Vision shall only take place. Thus you see what the
sealing-witness of the Spirit is unto Sense. There are now some Cautions that
of necessity must be given to you, believing Souls, to prevent any sad Mistake
about this great Mystery.

Caution. 1 First therefore you must understand, That though the fullness of the
Souls infallible certainty of his union with the Lord Jesus, does depend upon
this attestation of the Spirit unto his Faith and Sense; yet the Lord does
vouchsafe much comfortable evidence to many believing Souls of their certain
and infallible union with the Lord Jesus, to whom he does not send this blessed
Spirit, thus to avouch and attest to their Souls their Union with Christ,

1. The Spirit may and does; by those four former precious effects upon the
believing Souls, establish their Souls in a sweet Soul-chearing, Soul-reviving
confidence of the Lords acceptance of them into union with Christ. There is the
whole Materiality of the Spirits witness, of the Souls evidence unto Faith and
Sense, before the Spirits attestation unto Faith and Sense; though the Spirits
witness is the Formality, as I may call it, its that which gives the being of
the Souls evidence both to Faith and to Sense, yet you must observe the
certainty of the union principally belongs to the Souls Faith,

2. Whatever degree of evidence unto the Souls sense and feeling any such
believing Soul does enjoy, before the witness of the Spirit unto Faith and
Sense, the witness unto Sense is exceedingly weak, imperfect and unsatisfying
to the believing Soul. Now the Soul conceives that he does feel his heart
rightly answering that precious tender of union, immediately again fearing that
that wretched cursed heart of his does but delude and deceive him.

3. You must observe, that this comfortable evidence that the Spirit does
vouchsafe to many believing Souls, of their union with Christ, it is frequently
an addition unto Faith only, and to Faith principally. And indeed this is very
common, that the Lord does vouchsafe thus a comfortable evidence unto Faith,
when his blessed pleasure is to withdraw all evidence of union from the Soul's
sense and feeling. This was the case of that blessed head of all believing
Souls, the Lord Jesus, Mat. 27.46. Says he, My God, My God. Here was a clear
evidence that vouchsafed to the Faith of the Lord Jesus his certain and
infallible union with the blessed Father; but the evidence unto Sense was
totally wanting: Why have thou forsaken me?

4. You must note also, that this comfortable evidence of union with Christ,
that the Lord does vouchsafe to many believing Souls, to whom he does not send
the Spirit to attest their union, is never an evidence to the Sense of those
believing Souls, without an evidence unto their Faith. Though the evidence unto
Faith has no such dependence upon the evidence unto Sense, but it may consist
without it, yet the evidence of union unto the Souls sense, has an entire and
full dependence upon the Souls evidence unto Faith, that it cannot consist
without it. The very matter or original of the Souls evidence unto Sense of his
union with Christ, is the believing act, the Souls reliance upon the truth and
faithfulness of the Lord Jesus to fulfill his blessed Word, offering
reconciliation unto every unlovely Sinner that will. Now without evidence unto
Faith of that Souls particular admission into union with the Lord Jesus, that
believing act is never drawn forth in the believing Soul.

Caution 2. Secondly, You must understand, That there is much variety in this
testimony of the Spirit, both unto Faith and unto Sense. It does witness in a
various manner, to believing Souls their union with Christ.

1. There is much variety in the Spirits testimony unto believing Souls of
their union with Christ in the full perspicuity and clearness of the Spirits
testimony. The Spirit speaks both to Faith and unto Sense, only by a secret
resplendent Beam of heavenly Light, and that Beam of heavenly light has
various degrees of Brightness, wherein it shines in a various manner, unto
various believing Souls: To some believing Souls that precious Beam of heavenly
light shines with such an orient transcendent brightness, with such transparent
heavenly Glory, that no Curtain of Darkness or Distrustfulness, or Unbelief, or
sinful Jealousy, can keep out the virtue of that precious Beam; but to some
other believing Soul, that precious Beam of Light to Faith, or light to Sense,
shines only like a Beam of the Sun through a Keyhole, when the Door remains
shut still. There is a threefold degree of its clearness and perspicuity, that
may be collected from Romans 5.1, 2, 3. where a threefold effect of it is
mentioned.

1. There is such a testimony as procures rest and peace to the tossed,
perplexed, believing Soul. That Is laid down in the first Verse; Being justified
by Faith, we have peace with God.

2. A second degree, We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. There is a kind of
joy and contentment in the Souls rest.

3. Sometimes the testimony is so clear and perspicuous, as it produces a holy
triumph and glorying in the believing Soul; verse. 3. Not only so, but we glory
in tribulation also. Yea this full perspicuity and clearness of the Spirits
testimony, is that which procures such a general Triumph of the Soul, that it
does not only triumph over all external evils, as being more than a conqueror
over persecutions and tribulations; but the heart in that moment also triumphs
over all temptations, even all the evil workings of natural distrust and
unbelief in his own Spirit.

2. There is also a variety in the testimony of the Spirit, both unto Faith and
Sense, in regard of the permanency and continuance of the Testimony. To one
believing Soul the Spirit bears witness of union, by a precious beam of
heavenly light shining to Faith's eye, and by sweet holy Rays cast upon the
Souls believing act, but these are but like a flash of Lightning, shut up again
in a moment; but to another believing Soul, the Spirit renders this testimony
unto Faith, and unto Sense, in an abiding way.

3. There is a variety in the testimony of the Spirit unto believing Souls, in
regard of the frequency of its renewing the same Testimony. To one believing
Soul the Spirit will testify again and again; upon every occasion, the Spirit
will step in very opportunely, when the Soul is at a pinch, and renew its
Record; to another believing Soul, to whom the Spirit vouchsafes also the same
Testimony, it shall be rarely, and for a moment.

Caution 3. Thirdly, You must understand, That whenever the blessed spirit does
avouch and attest most fully to a believing soul its union with Christ, this
testimony does not always actually abide in the believing soul, without
interruption and intermission. This heavenly Light, that the spirit of light
and wisdom vouchsafes to a believing soul, may like Elijah's fiery Chariot,
mount the soul to the third Heavens for a season, yet it must come down again;
though Paul be wrapped up into the third Heavens, yet he must not abide there
while he remains in the flesh: Though Peter might have a soul-ravishing view of
the glory of the Lord Jesus for a season in the Mount, yet he must not have a
Tabernacle there.

There are four or five reasons, why it is the blessed pleasure of the Majesty
of Heaven, that the testimony should not actually abide in the believing soul.

I. That there might be a difference between Heaven and Earth.

II. That the Lord might have his honor in believing souls, in his
predestined way. The prime and principle way wherein the Lord has determined
from Eternity, to have honor from his Saints, while they are here below, is
from their believing his Majesty upon his bare word, 2. Cor. 5.7.

III. That there might be a constant, lively, experimental sense of the souls
absolute dependence upon the Lord still, for the evidence of his union.

IIII. That the Lord might instruct all others the better, by his dealings with
some believing souls.

God instructs weak believers in this, that the evidence of union is not
essential unto union.

V. That the glory of the precious Saints may be Veiled and hid, and this may
be in judgment to the world, that they may stumble at the Saints, and judge
them dispicable fools, that spend their time in sadness and melancholy.

Cau. 4. Fourthly, there is a fourth causion, and that is this, that the
efficacy of this blessed Record, that the spirit gives to a believing soul, of
his union with Christ, ought to continue when the Record it self does not
actually continue. The Record of the blessed spirit is the judicial sentence
the spirit casts upon the souls final estate, and therefore ought to be totally
definitive, never to be called in question by that believing soul, but the soul
for ever after, even in the saddest interruption of that blessed spirit ought
to say, though I do fall, I shall arise, though I have no vision of the
sweetest face of my Redeemer, yet I shall see him face to face, when I shall be
altogether like unto him. It is infinite sinfulness, for that believing soul,
ever to call in question the love of the blessed Majesty of Heaven, after the
spirit has thus avouched it to the soul.

Thus you have heard in some measure the grand question opened, which is, how a
soul may certainly and infallibly know, that he is united to the Lord Jesus. I
shall now come to answer to the second question, which is this;

Que. 2. How Souls that conceive themselves to have received certain and
satisfying evidence of their union with the Lord Jesus, may konw certainly and
infallibly, that their evidence of this union with Christ received is only from
God, and not a diabolical Enthusiasm, or Inspiration, or a delusion by the
Devils translation of himself into an Angelical glory?

Now for the clearer explication or unfolding this question, there must be
diverse things premised.

There be four things I must premise concerning those diabolical inspirations.

And there are Four things concerning the manner of the Souls trial of his
evidence received, whether it be a delusion, or whether it be from the Lord in
Christ.

Pre. 1. First, I must premise, that all the dimensions of the implacable
malice of the infernal powers, is directly set a^ work against every believers
evidence of his union with the Lord Jesus. The darkning the precious evidence
of the Souls union is in a manner the Center wherein all the Hellish designs
that are practiced against a believing soul meet together in one.

All the fiery darts that he shoots from his Hellish Quiver against Believing
souls are intended to batter down the Tower of strong confidence of the Lords
acceptance of his Soul into union with the Lord Jesus. His most cursed
insinuations into any believing heart, alluring to any corruption intentionally
tends toward the darkning the light of the Lords countenance that shines upon
the believing soul; certainly the Devils acting with so high a hand against the
Apostle Peter, that caused him to deny his blessed Lord and Master, the Lord
Jesus, intentionally ended in this, to overthrow his confidence in Christ, and
therefore Christ tells him, he had prayed for him that his faith fail not. Nay,
the blessed head of all believing souls, the Lord Jesus himself (who was a
perfect example and pattern to all believing Souls in temptation) he was
encountered withal in this way by the grand Adversary the Devil, the Devil made
his close and strongest battery against his confidence of the hypostatical
union between the Father and him; therefore says he, if thou be the Son of
God, command these Stones to be made Bread. And in like manner, all the powers
of Hell are in a particular manner employed against every Believers evidence of
his union with Christ, and therefore he especially endeavors to strike down
their faith. Whence it was that the Apostle was chiefly over the Devil in that
particular, 1 These. 3.5. Says he, I sent to know your faith, least by some
means the Tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in vain. Indeed there are
many reasons why the peculiar malice of Hell should work in all its strength
against believers evidence of their Union with Christ.

I. In regard the faith that is necessarily drawn forth into exercise with
strength and power, upon receiving evidence of the souls union with Christ, is
a peculiar object of the Devils malice. And that in Three respects.

1. That faith which is drawn forth into exercise, is the most direct opposite
of the Devil, it is the Devils grand Adversary. In that lies all the strength
of the believing soul, against all the Devils encounters: It is the Shield that
quenches all the Devils fiery darts, Ephesians. 5.6. It is that whereby the soul
resists the Devil till he gains the conquest, and puts that infernal Adversary
to flight, 1 Pet. 5.9.

2. In regard it is the most triumphant Conqueror over all his Army, that he
calls in for his assistance against the believing Soul. This is the victory
whereby we overcome the World, 1 John. 5.4. That is, all that either within or
without the Soul shall concur to the drawing it from obedience to the Lords
will.

3. That faith that is necessarily drawn out into exercise, upon the receiving
the evidence of the union, is that which gives the Lord his most peculiar glory
and honor of his precious truth: By this the believing Soul sets to his Seal
that God is true, John. 3.33. Now the Devils peculiar malice being against the
blessed Majesty of Heaven, thence his malice is against this faith, that is
drawn out into exercise upon the Souls receiving evidence of union with the
Lord Jesus.

II. In regard the joy and comfort that is the unseparable consequence of the
Souls receiving the evidence of his union, is another peculiar object of the
Devils malice. Envy works infinitely in the Devils bosom, upon the sight of
such unspeakable joy as poor believing Souls are filled with; seeing Angels
whose nature are more glorious, are lef^ absolutely destitute of joy and
comfort. Now from these workings of envy, hatred works also infinitely and
unspeakably in the Devils bosom, against the evidence of the Souls union with
Christ.

III. The believers evidence of his union with the Lord Jesus, being the
peculiar work of the blessed Spirit, of necessity must be the peculiar object
of the Devils malice, there being such a diametrical opposition between the
Devil, and that blessed Spirit. Every work of that blessed Spirit is infinitely
abominated by him: And thence this evidence of the Souls union is the
particular object of the Devils malice, in regard it is the Office of the
blessed Spirit to be the comforter of those believing Souls.

IV. In regard the believing Soul, through that evidence of his union with the
Lord Jesus, has some kind of fruition and enjoyment of Union and Communion
with the Father through Christ. The Soul does not only possess Union and
Communion, but has the knowledge of it, the sweet and comfort of it, and that's
the fruition of Union and Communion. Now the Union of Souls with the Father
through Christ, is the most proper object of all the Devils envy and malice.

5. The very firstborn power of his malice works against the Believers
evidence of his Union, in regard Believers through their enjoyment of that
evidence of their Union with Christ, do hold forth the most orient brightness
of the Lords grace and love in Christ. Now the Lords peculiar delight being in
receiving the honor of his love from poor despicable worms; thence the Devils
malice works infinitely against the Souls receiving evidence of his union with
the Lord Jesus, because it works infinitely against the Lords receiving his own
intended glory.

Secondly, I must premise, That all the most profound policy, subtilty, and
craft of all the Princes and Rulers of the Region of darkness, is employed in
that most cursed insinuation to a believing Soul, that the evidence of his
Union with Christ, received either to faith or sense, is but a diabolical
delusion. The policies of Hell all concur together in its strength in this
temptation or insinuation to a believing soul that his evidence is but a
delusion.

I. In regard by the Devils prevailing in this temptation, he leads the Soul in
the most extricable labyrinth, that there is no possibility by all the
diligence the soul can use to evade or escape, and find the way out. The Soul
once passing a Sentence against his own evidence, that it is nothing but a
fancy, or a hellish delusion, he is lost in a wood as it were of fear and
perplexity, of questions and scruples, he is then caught indeed in the Devils
thicket, in the briars that are of Hells own planting. There is nothing then
left to clear the Souls way (I mean if the actual evidence of that Souls Union
be suspended) until a renewed actual evidence of the same Spirit comes to the
Soul: There is no way left for the Soul wherein it is possible for it to make a
trial of his own estate; The Soul can make no proof from the light of his own
Grace, that light must be supposed to have been discovered to the Soul in its
union received, that being rejected, no other light can manifest Grace to be in
the Soul.

II. In regard the prevailing in this temptation grieves the very Comforter
himself, it wearies the Spirit of the Lord, whose Office is thus; To reveal to
the Lord its acceptance into union with Christ, it causes the Soul to make a
direct opposition against the blessed Comforter. So that now in the Devils
prevailing in this insinuation, he no^ only leaves the Soul in a most
inextricable labyrinth, but provokes the blessed Spirit of the Lord to withdraw
himself, and to withhold all renewed beams of light from that believing Soul.

3. In regard the prevailing of that temptation would bereave the Soul (at
least of the fruition and benefit) of all that is past over to the Soul in
Christ. If that temptation take hold upon the Spirit, that the Soul draws that
conclusion, that his evidence is a delusion, then all the boldness and freedom
of access to the Throne of Grace for supply, is vanished in a moment: In a
word, by the prevailing of this, the Devil in a manner snatches the believing
Soul from among the number of the Friends of the Almighty, and sets him among
the poor strangers; by the prevailing of this, he snatches the believing Soul
from among the Vessels of honor (I mean in the Souls apprehension, and in
regard of the Souls enjoyment) and places it among the Vessels of dishonor, it
makes the the Soul disclaim all interest, right and title to any mercy and love.

4. In regard the prevailing of this insinuation with the believing Soul, does
reduce or bring back the believing Soul, and make it liable and subject to the
power and force of all other cursed insinuations from the Devil. The prevailing
of this suggestion brings the Soul under the force of all those temptations
that his Soul was formerly delivered from, all the temptations grounded upon
the Souls unworthiness, all that were grounded upon the Souls long continuance
in sin.

Pre. 3. Thirdly, Every believing Soul that has received the evidence of his
union to faith and sense, must expect all the rage, power, and strength that
Satan can afford, to be employed against the Soul, to darken and obscure that
evidence.

1. All the powet of Hell is employed to suggest false reasonings, carnal
sensual arguments into the mind of that believing soul.

2. All the power in the corrupted Conscience of that believing Soul, is and
will be employed to accomplish that design, to persuade the believing Soul that
the evidence of his union received, is but a diabolical delusion. His power in
the corrupted Conscience will be employed to edify and stir it up to bring in
false Accusations against the believing Soul.

3. His whole power and strength will be employed in stirring up passions, and
disordered tumultuous affections in that believing Soul. Any believing of fear
and terror, the Devil will foment and nourish, and by his mighty power over
those passions and affections, make such a confusion and tumult, as if the Soul
and Hell were to come together immediately.

The Devil will employ his power over the affections themselves, and his power
upon the humors of the Body, through which those passions and affections work.
The Devil upon the very suggestion, that the Souls evidence of his union is a
delusion; will exercise his power so upon the humors of the Body, as to
dispose the Body to a timorous trembling, it may be almost every joint shaking,
upon the imagination it may be deluded, and then nourish and augment, by
bringing in renewed accusation upon accusation, against a believing Soul. So
that all the false reasonings of the mind, and the false accusation of the
conscience, has a more power upon the Soul in regard of the disposition of the
body, and the working of the affections.

Fourthly, I must premise, That all the utmost power and possibility of
corruption that remains in a true Believer, are ready to comply with, and
second the Devil in the exercise of his malice, policy and power against the
believing soul, to receive that cursed suggestion of Hell, that his evidence of
his union received; is but a delusion. Wretched Man in his first transgression
joined a cursed amity with the Devil himself, and ever since Man's Heart has
set at the Devils Council Table joining all the strength of its policy and
power with that infernal Spirit, to maintain his tyranny over the poor Soul,
that whatever Hell-bred design the Devil acts against the believing Soul, the
Heart does immediately comply with that hellish design; And though indeed Man's
corrupt heart be ready to comply with every motion and insinuation and
suggestion that proceeds from Hell, yet there is a more peculiar disposition in
a believing Soul, to comply with that cursed suggestion of Hell, that the
evidence of his union received is but a delusion, and that upon these Four
grounds.

I. In regard there is a peculiar endeavor of sense in every believing Soul to
regain his first dominion; to have the prime commanding authority in the
believing Heart. Hence you shall observe, that the most precious Saints have
maintained a mighty battle to the power of their Souls against sense, striving
to prevail over faith; and yet the strongest Saints have been inclined and
readily disposed to judge of all by sense, that is to judge according to what
they see and feel of the dispensations of God to them, and workings of God in
them. So you see the holy Man Gidion, Judge. 6.12. The Angel of the Lord (which
indeed was Jesus Christ himself) appeared to him, and said the Lord is with
thee thou mighty man of valor: but mark, now sense strives for the dominion
over faith; says Gidion, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all
this befallen us; and where be all his Miracles which our fathers told us of,
saying, did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? But now the Lord has forsaken
us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. Thus sense says in
another case, if the Lord will accept me to be one in Christ, why is my heart
left thus and thus, why are my corruptions thus strong? so again you shall
observe, Psalm. 73.2. The godly man Asaph confessed that sense did so strive for
the mastery, that his soul by that had well night lost its standing in faith;
my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped; nay sense wrought so
far that you shall observe, v. 13. the holy man had concluded, that he had
cleansed his heart in vain, and washed his hands in innocence. There is a
peculiar disposition in every believing soul, to comply with the suggestion of
Hell; that his evidence of his union with Christ received, is but a delusion.
There is a concurrence in this to all the arguments of sense.

1. There is a concurrence with sense, in the cause that sense argues against
the soul. Senses arguments tend all to prove an impossibility to forlorn souls
should be united to the Lord Jesus: Now this is the very matter of the
suggestion, that the soul is not united: so that there is such a degree of
sutableness, that the soul is glad of such a suggestion, as the proof of what
sense maintains against the soul.

2. There is a concurrence in the medium, that sense uses to disprove the
souls union with Christ. The grounds of that suggestion from Hell, that the
believing souls evidence of his union is but a delusion is setched always from
some defect, or some miscarriage in the believing soul, either from some want
of holiness, or some unsuitable working in the spirit, to what the soul
conceives is the temper of the spirits of those who receive such evidence of
their union: Now Senses arguments are the same; It is always the voice of sense
in the believing soul, my heart is thus and thus vile; I am dead, vain and
formal, blockish, carnal, sensual, sleighty and loose, I am little better than
a block under Ordinances; therefore it cannot be that I should be united to the
Lord Jesus.

3. By senses complying with this suggestion to the believing soul, that his
evidence of union is but a delusion: sense does immediately aspire to the
Throne again in the believing Heart, and does immediately endeavor the
dispossessing of faith. If the heart comply with that suggestion, that the
evidence of his faith is but a delusion; then seeing the souls evidence of
union was primarily and principally unto faith; faith is made wholly subject to
the souls sense, so that sense then bares the prime and principle rule in the
soul.

II. There is a peculiar disposition in a believing soul to comply with the
suggestion of Hell, that the evidence of his union with Christ is but a
delusion, in regard of that desperate enmity of carnal reason against faith in
every believing soul. The Apostle says, Romans 8.7 The carnal mind (which is the
seat of reason) is enmity against God, so against all the holy workings of God
in a soul, and therefore in a peculiar manner it is enmity against that special
working of the spirit of God in the soul, which is the believing disposition.
There is an irreconciliable opposition between carnal reason and faith in every
soul: carnal reason cannot comprehend that gracious unspeakable mystery of the
union with the Lord Jesus through believing only; and because it cannot
comprehend it, therefore it is opposite to the utmost of his power. Carnal
Reason is always for self-advancement; and therefore directly opposite to the
souls believing; which is the lowest debasement of the soul; and thence carnal
reason is opposite to the first act of faith, and to every consequent act of
faith also; so that there could not be a believing act in any soul, did not the
spirit of the Lord come with a mighty power to throw down those strong carnal
reasonings; according to that, in 2 Cor. 10.45. throwing down the strong holds
-Imaginations-Original it is as Beza renders it, the very reasonings of the
flesh are thrown down, whereby the flesh had fortified it self against the
spirit, drawing the soul to believe. So opposite is carnal reason to faith,
that it invents a multitude of false reasons, and rotten grounds, to persuade
the unregenerate soul to a good opinion of his own estate, that did not the
spirit of God throw down those reasons, it were impossible the soul should
believe. Likewise again after the first act of believing carnal reason turns
the mouth of his great ordnance, whereby it mannages the Battle against faith
another way: Then carnal reason mannages it against the right of the soul to
believe, and persuades the soul it has not believed, and it may not, it ought
not to believe there is no ground for such a dispicable soul as he to believe.
Now in regard of this enmity of carnal reason in the heart against faith, there
is a ready disposition in the soul to comply with the suggestion, that his
evidence of union with Christ is but a delusion.

1. the evidence is suitable to carnal reason. Carnal Reason leaps now in the
soul in its suggestion, and says thus, you should not believe; and yet you
would presume though you were unholy, and altogether unsuitable to the promise;
and now you see you have undone your own souls, and cast your selves into the
inextricable Laborinth.

2. In regard there is a powerful inclination in every soul, to comply with
carnal reason. Carnal Reason is our own, and because our own, we are willing to
put our selves under its power.

3. In regard there is an oppiniativeness in the soul of the excellency and
strength of the arguings of his own carnal reason. This you may observe in
Asaph, Psalm. 73 16. he confessed the conceitedness of his own carnal reason,
when he says, I thought to know this; but he confesses when he went into the
Sactuary, to consult with the word of God, and let faith be judge, then he
found himself as ignorant as a very Beast.

III. There is a peculiar disposition in the believing Soul to comply with the
evidence of Hell, that his union is but a delusion; in regard there is such
corrupt affections remaining in every believing. Soul in some degree, that
makes the suggestion of the Devil, that his evidence of his union with Christ
is but a delusion, to be in a manner plausible and pleasant to the believing
Souls. Jealousies and suspicions of God, and his faithfulness in r^^^iwing such
a dispicable forlorn Soul into union with Christ do in some degree possess
every believing Soul; now in regard that suggestion from Hell, that the Souls
evidence of union with Christ is but a delusion, and all the reasonings of the
flesh that concur with that suggestion also, do nourish and increase the Souls
suspicion, and afford matter to the Soul of Jealousy: thence through the
strength of the Souls Jealousy and Suspicion, even that very suggestion that
under one respect is like a dreadful poisoned Arrow, that sticks in the Heart
to wound the Bowels, yet in another respect it is in a manner plausible and
pleasant.

IV. There is a peculiar disposition in the believing Soul, to comply with this
suggestion that his evidence is but a delusion, in regard the remaining
corruption in the believing Soul does evade the mighty power of faith, in
crucifying, mortifying and suppressing them, by complying with this suggestion.
Faith's power against corruption, consists especially in two things.

1. In holy boldness, claiming power from the Majesty of Heaven against
corruption, in his holy bold engaging his blessed God in Christ, to come in for
his assistance. Now this power of faith against corruption is abundantly
weakened by the heart complying with that suggestion from Hell, that the
evidence of his union is but a delusion.

2. It consists in faiths holy oratory, in arguing within the soul against
corruption. Indeed there is Faith's mighty power in bringing in such
impregnable arguments, as all the Sophistry of Hell it self cannot devise an
evasion from them.

These things I have premised concerning delusions, only in reference to
believing Souls.

First, that believing Souls might not account it strange to meet with that
suggestion, that the evidence of their union with Christ is but a delusion.

Secondly that Believing Souls might not subscribe suddenly to that suggestion,
that the evidence of their union with Christ is but a delusion, without due,
holy examination of the ground and reason that backs and fortifies that
suggestion in the soul.

But now in reference to unbelieving Souls, there is much more to be added
still by way of premise concerning these delusions.

Pre. 5. Fifthly, I must also premise, that the most profound Policy, the
depth of subtilty and suggestion of all the Spirits whose habitation is in the
Region of Darkness is employed to the utmost to delude multitudes of Souls,
with false hopes, counterfite joys, self-deceiving, and soul-destroying
confidence of their union with the Lord Jesus, and reconciliation with the
Father. Thus the Policy of Hell was employed to delude those poor foolish
Virgins. Mat. 25.11, 12. by arguing from their profession of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; (signified there by their Lamps) that they were joined to Jesus
Christ, and should be everlastingly saved by him; whereas poor foolish Souls,
they saw at last to their everlasting horror and amazement, that they were
merely couzened by the Devils Sophistry. Thus certainly the Wits of Hell were
employed to deceive those self-flattering Jews, John, 8.18. to make them
conceive their natural Birth from Abraham, was ground sufficient, whereupon
they should conceive the blessed God of Heaven to be their God: whereas the
dearest compassionate Redeemer of lost Souls, was constrained to tell them,
they were of the Family of Hell, and the Devil was their Father. Thus was that
proud Pharisee, Luke. 18.11. by the subtle Sophistry of the old Serpent deluded
also; he was even triumphing, as if he were sure of Heaven, he was thanking God
before hand for it.

But indeed, as it is the Master piece of the Devils Policy to persuade true
Believing Souls, that the evidence of their Union with Christ is but a
delusion: So on the contrary, the result of all those cursed counsels of Hell
concerning Unbelieving souls, (living under Gospel Preaching) is to persuade
them that they are certainly joined to Christ, and shall be everlastingly saved
by him. And indeed there are Various grounds of this different practice of the
Policy of Hell against believing and unbelieving souls. The Persuasion that the
soul has, to conceive that his evidence is but a delusion, is most suitable for
the Devils purpose to work upon a believing soul.

I. In regard every believing soul is for ever out of conceit with himself.
Such a view has every such soul received of his loathsome filthiness, and
Forlorness, that in some degree he does for ever abhor himself, he is utterly
out of love with himself, and all that he is and has; Now thence it is, the
persuasion that the evidence of his Union is but a delusion is suitable to
fasten and take Impression upon such a soul.

II. Every believing soul has experimentally found, the dreadful self-Flattery
that his spirit is exceeding prone to: His heart has flattered him into a good
opinion of his own estate, from various rotten grounds: Believing soul has
experimentally found, that one time he imagined his estate to be safe, and sure
and secure, merely upon the ground of his own Change and Reformation from what
he was; Another time he thought his estate to be secure, merely from the
performance of the duties the Lord required public and private. Now from these
many experiences of the sandy foundations, that his heart had caused him to
build the hope of his security and safety for eternity upon every believing
soul is apt to be Jealous, and ready to entertain any scruple about his own
estate, he is very fearful least he should build upon another sandy Foundation.

III. Every believing soul has been sensible, of infinite invaluable worth of
Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus. In matters of great concernment, the
spirits of Men are naturally suspicious of Disappointment; So that from the
sense of the infinite value of Union with Christ, naturally flows Suspicions
and Jealousies of being deceived in the greatest matter of Union, And thence
the Suggestion that the souls evidence of Union with Christ is but a Delusion
is suitable and feeds that suspicion.

IV. Every believing soul is sensible of the infinite danger of the loss of
Union, by fostering false Hopes, and groundless Conceits of Union, by
Flattering himself in a good Opinion of his Union with Christ, without
sufficient ground from the Lords Blessed Word. Now the soul apprehending the
danger of Miscarrying is filled with Fear, yea prone to fear where no cause of
fear is: Every thing makes a man already in fear to be more afraid; Fear clouds
the Understanding with Darkness, and makes every thing seem black and
dreadful; So that thence believing souls are suitable Objects for the Devil to
work upon by that Persuasion, that the Evidence of their Union is a Delusion.

V. Every believing soul does pry and search into the Rottenness and
Unsoundness and Hypocrisy of his own Heart, and discerns some degree both of
Unsoundness, and Rottenness and Hypocrisy. And thence it is that the Devil
Imploys his Power against the believing soul, in regard he has a foundation,
whereupon to build his cursed suggestions, that the soul is deluded.

Now on the contrary, the depth of the Devils policy is employed to persuade
unbelieving souls of their certain reconciliation with God in Christ upon these
grounds.

I. Because self-flattery has a high Throne erected in every unbelievers
heart. There is a cursed Principle of self-love that naturally possesses every
heart, and from thence proceeds this wretched principle of self-flattery, a
powerful inclination to speak pleasing things to our own souls. Now from the
power of self flattery in unbelievers hearts.

1. There proceeds an inward aversion or turning their hearts away from all
fears and doubts of their own acceptance of God in Christ. It is a Thorn in
their sides, and a Thistle in their Eyes, that the Spirit of God should but
cast in a doubt, whether they be joined to the Lord in Christ, or be still in
the state of nature.

2. From the power of self-flattery proceeds also an indisposition in every
unbelievers heart, to examine the ground whereupon he builds his confidence and
hope of his union with Christ.

3. From the power of this self-flattering proceeds also a readiness in the
heart, to give credit to all vain hopes, and cursed suggestions from Hell to
his unbelieving soul. Now in regard of the strength of self-flattering in
unbelieving souls, as it is backed with these three attendants, the depth and
policy of Hell is employed to persuade unbelieving Souls that they are
unquestionably accepted of God in Christ, and shall everlastingly be saved by
him.

II. The depth of the policy of Hell is concerning unbelieving souls, to
delude them with false hopes of their union with Christ, in regard there is a
dreadful spiritual blindness, fallen upon every unbelieving soul, whereby the
Prince of darkness has his advantage to lead the blind soul to those cursed
paths of darkness.

First, There is a privative blindness fallen upon unbelieving souls.

Secondly, A positive blindness.

First, There is a privative blindness that is various. Privative blindness.


I. There is an inability in the unbelieving Soul, to discern the nature of the
caelestial mystery of a Souls union with the Lord Jesus. All the things of God
are but dark to a Soul, who is under the power of the Prince of darkness, 2
Cor. 4.4. The God of the World has blinded the minds of them that believe not.
And 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man cannot discern the things of God, because they
are spiritually discerned. But there is a more peculiar blindness upon an
unbelieving soul, in the mystery of the Souls union with Christ, than in most
of the things of God besides, because the mystery of union with Christ has
supernaturalness in it, and is more contrary to carnal reason; Thence it is no
great difficulty to persuade the soul, that a false groundless qualification is
the true believing act that the spirit of God requires; that this blind
confidence is that strength of assurance that the Lord commands the soul to
receive through faith.

II. There is such a privative blindness in an unbelieving soul, that there is
an inability, an insufficiency to discern in any degree, the infinite
transcendent excellency of their souls union with Christ. The most Eagle-eyed
carnalist that ever proceeded from the loins of Adam, the most accurate
disputant, the most deep sighted politician, never saw the least glimpse of the
transcendent excellency of a divine union with the Lord Jesus: likewise the
multltude of unbelievers, they conceive of union with Christ in a carnal way,
apprehending that it should save them from torment, and that it should bring
them to some kind of joy, they know not what nor how; Now thence the depth of
Satan's policy is active in persuading their souls that they are certainly one
of Christ's.

III. There is such a privative blindness in unbelieving souls, as disenables
them to conceive of the infinite danger of the loss of union. The multitude of
unbelieving souls, apprehend nothing but some restless torment that will seize
upon them in case they fail of union with God in Christ: Now from their
ignorance of the danger of the loss of union, thence it is that their thoughts
are little taken up about their union.

IV. Such a privative blindness is fallen upon unbelieving souls, that there is
an inability in their souls to discern the matter and ground of suspicion, that
the Lord should not receive their souls into union with Christ. The souls
enmity against God, and the nature of the enmity is the ground whereupon
suspicions are built, that the Lord will not accept their souls into union with
the Lord Jesus; Now unbelieving souls discern not that enmity wherewith their
hearts are filled, against the blessed majesty of Heaven, Thence the policy of
Hell is employed to persuade them, that they are certainly joined unto the Lord
Jesus.

V. There is such a privative blindness fallen upon unbelieving souls, as that
there is an utter inability in them to discern the ground and occasion of
suspicion, that their hopes of union with the Lord Jesus are delusions.
Commonly the experience of that wretched guile and deceitfulness, of the
corrupt treacherous false heart is the original of those suspicions, that their
union is but a delusion; This unbelievers cannot discern, and thence it is that
the depth of the policy of Hell work against unbelieving souls, in persuading
them of their certain union with the Lord Jesus, when as they are utterly
strangers to him.

Positive blindness.
Secondly, There is a positive blindness also: That is, a multitude of false
Principles, and notions of darkness, doctrine of Devils possess the minds of
every unbelieving soul, commonly unbelievers minds are possessed with wretched
Principles, that surely God will damn none of those whom himself created; Or
with that Principle, that if Men do what they can, surely God will accept them,
the Lord will take the will for the deed; Or else that Principle that such
strictness, severity and austerity of life, such a height of holiness
constantly in all their ways, is not required of God, men may be saved without
such strictness of holiness. Now from this positive darkness there is some
suitableness in the spirits of unbelieving souls to receive that suggestion,
that they are certainly joined to the Lord Jesus, and reconciled to the Father
when they are still at enmity. That Is the second, a dreadful blindness that is
fallen upon unbelieving souls.

3dly. The policy of Hell works in unbelieving Souls, to persuade them of
their certain union with the Lord Jesus, in regard every seeming counterfeit
shadow of holiness, appears glorious in an unbelieving eye. Every vain empty
shadow of holiness, or holy duties, appear very glorious to a Soul under the
power of the Prince of darkness, whose eye the Prince of darkness has blinded
through unbelief. There are two principal reasons why the policy of Hell works
against unbelieving Souls, to persuade them that they are certainly united to
the Lord Jesus.

I. By the prevailing of this suggestion, unbelieving Souls are bound with
Adamantine Chains in the Devils slavery.

1. In regard the power of all the blessed invitations, and the most sweet
Soul-melting exhortations unto union, and amity and agreement with God in
Christ are prevented. The unbelieving Soul then looks upon himself as no object
of any of those precious invitations, because he thinks he is already united to
the Lord Jesus.

2. In regard the restraining power of all the Lords menaces and threatenings to
the actings of enmity is prevented. So that the Soul says within it self upon
every threatening from the Lords word, that it is not to him, he hopes Jesus
Christ has made peace for him; God and his Soul he hopes are reconciled in
Christ.

3. In regard there is enmity against the brightness, and luster and beauty of
holiness, excited and stirred up in that unbelieving Soul against the
conversations of all those Souls that profess union with the Lord Jesus; who
walk in a higher pitch of holiness, than his Soul walks, in that it eclipses
and condemns his life, and vertually Judges him still to be a Stranger to the
Lord Jesus, and void of union with him.

4. By the prevailing of this suggestion with unbelieving Souls, they are even
devoted unto blindness. Their Hearts endeavor to expound the truth in a
suitable way to themselves; yea, their Hearts work with a kind of infinite
enmity against every truth that they cannot prevent, that contradicts their
false hopes, and soul deluding joys.

II. The depth of the Devils policy against unbelieving souls, is to persuade
them of their certain union with Christ, in regard the false hopes, the
Soul-deluding confidence of such unbelieving Souls, is a most mighty means to
strengthen the hands of wickedness. It is the most powerful Orator to persuade
other unbelieving Souls, to proceed from one degree of wickedness to another,
without restraint of their wicked Hearts, from their full swing in their cursed
way.

Pre. 6. Sixthly, There is a Sixth Premise, and that is this; That the Prince
of the power of darkness does exercise a mighty power upon Souls to effect that
politic design of his, in casting them into a fools Paradise of imaginary
spiritual safety; in deluding them with vain hopes of union with the Lord
Jesus, when they are Strangers and Enemies to him. This power that the Devil
exercises upon Souls for that end is Threefold.

First, There is a power that he exercises upon the mind or understanding.

Secondly, A power he exercises upon the Conscience.

Thirdly, A power he exercises upon the Passions or Affections.

First, The Devil exercises a mighty power upon the minds and understandinngs
of Souls, Satan's power upon the mind.
to delude them concerning their union with the Lord Jesus. The understanding
is to the Soul, as the Compass to the Ship, if the Compose be marred, the Ship
may be easily guided into a devouring Gulf, instead of a safe Harbor. If the
understanding be once deluded, the Soul may easily steer his course toward the
Gulf of everlasting woe, instead of that blessed Haven of everlasting
happiness. Thence it is that the Devil exercises a mighty power upon the
understandings and minds of Souls to corrupt and delude those. Now this power
that he exercises upon the understanding is also various.

There are Eight degrees, or various acts of the Devils power exercised upon
the minds and understandings of Souls, to delude them about their union with
the Lord Jesus.

I. The first act of the Devils power upon the understanding is his forgery,
invention, and suggestion of false reasons, rotten arguments, and fallacious
means, from his high endeavor to persuade Souls of their certain infallible
reconciliation or union with God in Christ, when they are separated by a brazen
Wall of enmity from him. There are Six or Seven false reasons, and rotten
arguments, that he does ordinarily suggest unto believing Souls, from whence he
insinuates to them fasly their certain union with the Lord Jesus.

1. He suggests to the understandings of some Souls, their vast difference and
disagreement from other Souls, and thence secretly insinuates to them, that
certainly they are of the number of those that are joined to the Lord Jesus.
This the Devil suggested into the mind of the deluded Pharisee, Luke 18.12, 13.

2. The Devils suggests unto some other Souls, their enjoyment of special
peculiar privileges, different from the privileges that the multitude of the
World enjoy, and thence also insinuates into them their certain infallible
reconciliation to God, and acceptance with him in Christ. This the Devil
suggested to those self-deceived Jews, John 8.37, 38. Say they, we are Abraham's
children, and thence certainly think they, we must be Gods Children also.

3. The Devil suggests to some other Souls, their moral duties and acts of
righteousness, and from thence insinuates to them, that they are certainly
accepted with God in Christ. This fallacious argument was that whereby* the
Devil persuaded the young Man (mentioned Mat. 19.20.) that his Estate was an
Estate of spiritual safety. Thus also were those poor blind Jews deluded by
Satan's hellish sophistry, Romans 10.3. They rejected the righteousness that is by
Christ that was freely tendered to them, upon this ground, that their own
righteousness, their outward observation of the Law was sufficient for their
justification before God, and acceptance with him.

4. The Devil suggests to some other Souls, their constant diligent use of the
Lords Ordinances, appointed for them to worship the Lord in. By this kind of
false argument, did the old Sophister deceive those poor deluded Souls, Luke
13.26. Says they we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught
in our Streets; That is, they had the nearest communion with him in his
Ordinances, they were diligent hearers of the word, and waited upon him
wherever he brought a message to them.

5. The Devil suggests to other Souls, their forward profession of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and thence insinuates into them, that surely in their
perseverance in that profession, they shall be admitted into union and
communion with Jesus Christ, the Lord is at peace with them, their state is
good enough. This was the very fallacy whereby the Devil deceived those poor
foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.8, 9, 10. They had Lamps like unto the Lamps of the
wise Virgins, they had a profession agreeable and suitable unto the profession
of sincere Christians, and thence they never imagined but their estate was sure
enough, till they felt by dreadful experience, that the Lord abhorred such a
heartless, formal, external profession as theirs was.

6. The Devil suggests to other Souls, their change and alteration from what
they were formerly, and thence insinuates into them their spiritual safety,
their reconciliation with God in Christ. This the Devil did suggest in some
degree to Herod, Mark 6.20. That his hearing John Baptist gladly, and his
reforming many things, was a certain ground of the goodness of his own estate.

7. The Devil may and does suggest to some other Souls, the death of the Lord
Jesus, though generally, brokenly, and confusedly; and from thence he
deceivingly insinuates into many souls, their certain and infallible union with
Christ, when the high Wall of enmity stands between Christ and them. There is
much difference between the blessed Spirits insinuation of the death of Christ
brought to remembrance, that a Soul shall be admitted to the Lord Jesus, and
this insinuation that th^n proceeds from the Prince of darkness.

1. The Devils suggestion of the death of Christ unto Souls, whom he intends to
delude with false hopes of union with Christ; it is only in a general notion
and apprehension of it. It is a constant maxim, Dolus latet in universalibus,
that deceit lies under universals and generals: Therefore the great Master of
deceit chiefly endeavors to keep his poor deluded souls, in general notions of
all the truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Though the Devil suggests the
death of Christ unto some understandings and minds, whom he intends to delude,
yet he avoids the suggestion of it in any particular manner, He brings to the
souls remembrance, that Jesus Christ died for sinners, but he hides as much as
possible the quality of sinners for whom Jesus Christ died, I mean the quality
that is intended by the Lord from eternity to be effected in those sinners to
whom the death of Jesus Christ is; and shall be applied. Commonly the notion is
so universal, they rather think Jesus Christ died for all sinners; whereas the
spirit in suggesting the death of Christ to any soul, suggests it particularly,
to be for every unlovely sinner, who shall receive and accept of the virtue and
efficacy of his death, as it is tendered to them; so that by its suggesting the
death of Christ, it begets a holy confidence in the soul, of the truth and
faithfulness of Jesus Christ according to the tender of his death, to make up
union and communion between God and his Soul, and so indeed that very act gives
the soul evidence to his faith of his admission into union.

2. The Devil presents the death of Christ brokenly, at peecemeals. It may be
he minds the Soul that Christ died for sinners, but he brings not one of the
precious heartbreaking invitations of Jesus Christ, inviting his forlorn,
despicable soul, to partake of union and communion with the Father by the
virtue of his death. Whereas the blessed spirit brings the death of Jesus
Christ to remembrance, in a most sweet, precious, orderly and distinct way; It
presents not only the death it self, but it presents the person to whom it is
offered, the sweet heartbreaking invitations to that particular soul to accept
that tender.

3. The Devil suggests the death of Christ darkly, with as much obscurity as it
is possible. The Devil studies obscurity in the presenting the death of Christ
to his deluded souls, that he might hide and vail that precious heart ravishing
love, that would shine forth by a clear view of the death of Christ to any
loveless sinner. Yea, he suggests the death of Jesus Christ to the sinful soul
so darkly, that the very end of the death of Christ shall not come to the souls
remembrance, they shall never have a thought, that the death of Jesus Christ
was on purpose to bring their cursed rebellious hearts and God into a state of
amity and love again: Should the least spark of this Heavenly light break
forth, in his suggesting the death of Christ, their own Consciences would soon
pass the sentence of condemnation upon themselves, and positively declare them
to be far from any right or possession, or interest in the death of Christ.

4. The Devil suggests the death of Christ confusedly, in a distracted
disorderly manner, so as the soul whom he intends to delude, shall have no
kind of distinct orderly knowledge of the death of Christ. He suggests
immediately the death of Jesus Christ for them, and persuades them with all his
power, that Jesus Christ died for them in the first place, without any
reference to any ground whereupon the Soul should build that persuasion: Thence
it is that the multitude of your poor deluded souls will tell you immediately
they believe, but they know not what they believe, they know no other notion of
faith, than to believe that Jesus Christ died for them.

II. The second act of power that the Devil exercises upon the minds and
understandings of souls, to delude them with vain hopes is a discerning power
into the minds and understandings of souls. It is one of the principal and
grand employments of all the spirits in the region of darkness to study men's
tempers and dispositions; and men's notions and apprehensions, that he may
observe what false reasonings, what rotten Argument is suitable to delude that
soul with, and what rotten argument is suitable to delude another soul with.

Object. But here is an objection to be answered before we proceed: But you
will say, can the Devil look into the understandings of men, the workings of
the minds of men, to know what the inward actings of their minds are?

Answ. I answer negatively, that the inward acts of the mind and understanding,
cannot certainly and infallibly be discerned by all the wisdom and policy of
all the spirits in the region of darkness, especially the inward thoughts and
workings of the mind and understanding cannot in and by themselves immediately
be discerned by all the wisdom of Hell, notwithstanding their strictest
scrutiny. It is the incommunicable property of the blessed Majesty of Heaven to
be the searcher of the heart, and the knower of the thoughts; Thence in Heb.
4.12, 13. It is attributed to the word of God only, as its peculiar property,
to divide between the joints and marrow, and search into the secrets of the
heart. So in 1 Cor 4, 5. Christ is said in the day of Judgment to bring to
light all the secrets of the heart. But though the Devil cannot discern
immediately, certainly, and infallibly, the working of the mind and
understanding, or the secret Thoughts as they are in themselves and by
themselves, yet the Devil can by other means, have near guess at the most
inward working of the mind and understanding; he can find out the very secret
workings of the understanding in a very probable way.

1. The Devil can discern much of the thoughts and different workings of the
minds and understandings of men, by their outward actions. Actions are but the
birth of thoughts, as all actions are the births of habits, they are the
original of all outward actions that are deliberate and rational. And thence
the Devil can discern very narrowly into the thoughts by the outward actions,
he can guess both by the gesture of persons, and by the very motions of the
body, what the inward thoughts of the mind are, especially when he discerns
such and such to be the constant way and manner of the conversation of a
person, then he understands well what the Principle must needs be that leads
such a person to order his conversation in that manner.

2. The Devil can immediately discern what the Images and Species of things are
in the fancies of Men. Images of things in the fancy of Man, are but like a
shadow to the Body; whatever the workings and inward motions of the mind and
understanding are, the images of the same things are in the fancy: As the
shadow accompanies the Body, so do these fancies accompany the understanding;
Now the Devil being also immediately to understand these, from thence he can
collect and gather what the notions of the understandings are.

3. The Devil can discern all the motions of the affections and passions. The
passions always working in the blood, by the motion of the animal spirits to
the heart, and from the heart, thence the Devil can immediately behold the
first rise of any passion and affection; passions of fear, or passions of love,
or joy, and grief, and hatred and displeasure: Now these passions and
affections always attending the will of the soul, and the will of the soul
always attending and following the understanding, or the practical Judgment;
thence also the Devil can collect by the practice and affections, what the
inward notions or thoughts and workings of the mind and understanding are.

4. The Devil can observe diligently what the issue and event of his own
suggestions are upon the fancies of Men. He observes whatever false reasons
that he himself propounds do produce ^n the person, and from thence also he
has a near discerning, from the ^ff^^t that he discerns, what the workings of
the understanding and mind are.

5. He has a large and long time of experience of all the several and various
acts, that various principles, and various thoughts have produced. For though
he be not able to discern the thoughts while they are locked up in the mind and
understanding, yet afterward, when they are either revealed by a passion, or
when they are brought apparently into action, he then understands them: Now he
for Five thousand years and above, treasuring up all observations, he has
observed when one has confessed these and these were his thoughts, what the
effect of those thoughts were; when another has confessed these and these were
his thoughts, he has observed what the effect of those thoughts were: Now by
his long and constant experience, he can declare the actions of one Man, with
the actions of another Man, what such and such thoughts have produced; and
thence can probably conclude, what the workings of the thoughts, and mind and
understanding of any person is: Now in all these ways he exercises his utmost
skill, his most exquisite act, to discern into the understandings and minds of
persons, whom he intends to delude by any false reasonings, concerning the
certainty of their union with Christ, so that the false reasonings that he
shall suggest to them may be suitable, that they may take at the very first
suggesting of them. There are three things in the understanding, that he
endeavors to understand by all his skill and art.

1. He endeavors to discern the depth or shallowness of the mind and
understanding of the person, whom he intends to delude by some false Argument
or other, from whence he would fallaciously persuade the soul of his union with
Christ. Now according to what he discerns in the understandings of persons, so
he suites his reasons and arguments: may be he discerns a shallowness in some
understandings, thence he suites his reasonings proportionable to their
understandings; many poor shallow souls he can persuade, that their good
meaning is enough to carry them to Heaven: Another shallow soul he can persuade
his good Prayers, his deeds of Charity, his paying every Man his own, and
dealing justly is enough. Likewise when he discerns a greater depth of
understanding in any person, he lays out more of his curious skill and art, he
covers over his false reasons more speciously, he lays his fallacy more
indiscernably and deeply; There is no low Argument that will satisfy a deep
understanding (though a natural one) that he shall be saved; yea, no lower
fallacy will be sufficient to delude such an understanding, but a false
apprehension and notion about the nature of faith, some mystical fallacy about
the mystery of believing in Jesus Christ.

2. The Devil searches into the notions and principles that are most settled
and fixed in the understandings of persons. There are various notions that
every understanding is filled with, which according to the imaginations of the
several persons are truth: some understandings are filled only with gross and
carnal, and sensual notions, they conceive of God only in a carnal and sensual
manner, and of the mystery of the Gospel carnally; Others understandings are
filled with notions that have a kind of spirituallity in them. Now the Devil
makes an exact search to find out these, that thereupon he may propound lying
arguments, of the union of Souls with Christ suitable to those notions; So that
when he perceives an understanding only to be filled with carnal notions of
God, he can propound his carnal outside appearances of worshipping of God, as a
ground to that soul of his peace, and union and reconciliation with God, he
need seek for no higher depth to delude such a Soul; But when he perceives an
understanding to be filled with higher notions of God, and of the mystery of
the Gospel, he then propounds not only bare material outward acts of divine
worship, as the lying ground to delude such a soul concerning his union with
Jesus Christ, but he propounds inward actings of transcient slightly
affections; yea, may be to such understandings, he propounds the death of
Christ, a speculative faith, and an historical faith in the death of Jesus
Christ, and from this historical and speculative faith, he insinuates into them
their peace and reconciliation with God, and certain salvation by the Lord
Jesus.

3. The Devil makes a scrutiny into the mind and understanding, to discern its
occasional notions and apprehensions upon the providence of God, that the
person meet with. He pries into the understanding to discern what Judgment it
passes upon the Lords conferring temporal blessings upon it, And he pries into
the understanding to discern what Judgment it passes upon the Lords withdrawing
temporal blessings, and inflicting sore evils, and according to ordinary and
common conceptions of the understanding, upon such providence of God, he may
also propound his lying arguments of the souls union with Christ. Thence it is
you shall observe, that the Devil takes much advantage to confirm some poor
ignorant ones, in their Soul-deluding confidence of their Peace, and Union and
Reconciliation with God, from the constant influence of all Temporal Blessings
in their Bosoms: And thence it is, that other souls he confirms in their soul
killing hopes of their Union with Christ and Peace with God, from the multitude
of Crosses and Tribulations they meet withal here below; Thence are those
Speeches that you shall hear from many Ignorant ones, I hope the Lord looks
upon me as his Child because he thus Chastises me; I hope, says another, that
I have my Punishment for my Sins here below.

III. The third Act of Power that the Devil exercises upon the Mind and
Understanding is this, He does Secretly, Inwardly, and Indiscernably
Communicate these his lying Arguments, his Rotten, False reasons, from whence
he falsely insinuates into souls their Union with Christ. As the Prince of
Darkness was a Created Angel, he has a kind of near, though mediate aceess to
the Minds and Understandings of Men, so that he can secretly Propound all his
lying Reasons, yea he can suggest them so indiscernably, that the person to
whom they are suggested shall not Understand in the least that they are from
the Devil, but shall rather conclude they are the right Reasonings of his own
faculty of reason that God has Communicated, or they are the Workings of the
Lords Blessed spirit. Thus the Devil was a lying spirit to Ahab in the Mouths
of the Prophets 2 Chronicles. 18.23. The way of this near access of the Devil to the
Understanding, to Communicate his lying Argument to them of their Union with
Christ undiscernably is by these two means.

1. By means of the Subtility of his nature by which he is able to Pierce
insensibly, and indiscernably into the very Bodies of Men, they neither Seeing,
Perceiving, nor Feeling that Penetration of Satan into their Bodies; So that by
this he enters insensibly into the very brains of Men, which is the very Organ
of the common Senses.

2. He does both discern, and stir up and Collect together, the Species and
Images of things that are in the inward Senses, that is to say the Fancy, and
by moving and stirring all those Phantasms, (those Images of things that are in
the Fancy) he does secretly Convey all his own lying Reasons into the Mind and
Understanding, so as the persons to whom those lying Reasons concerning their
Union with Christ are suggested, perceive them not to be from Satan, but either
imagine they are true Reasonings from the Word of God, or from the Spirit of
God cast in their Minds.

IV. The Fourth act of Power that the Devil exercises upon the Mind is this,
That he does through his Near and Familiar access through the Fancy to the Mind
and Understanding, Suggest and Propound Frequently and Importunately, his
Rotten Arguments, and Fallacious grounds of Souls Union with Christ. He does
renew again and again the same lying Arguments unto Souls, of their Union with
Christ, so as they shall scarce pass out of their Thoughts and Mind; And this
indeed has no small Power upon the Understanding, to settle the Mind and
Understanding in a Conceit of the truth of those his lying Arguments. The very
Frequency of Thoughts and Imaginations, have the secret force of an Argument,
to persuade the Mind that the thing is so. You shall observe it, when any
matter runs in our Mind Frequently, Familiarly, and almost Constantly, we will
then easily believe there is something in it. The frequent suggesting of those
reasonings is a kind of Importuning the mind to consent to them and embrace
them. As that unjust Judge, Luke. 18.5. condescended to the Widow, because of
her importunity; (though the justice of her cause that she propounded bore no
sway in his unjust mind) so though the reason it self at first suggested should
bear little sway; yet the importunity of the Devil in suggesting the reason
prevails much with the mind to consent to it and close with it.

5. A fifth act of the Devils power upon the mind and understanding is this,
that he does through his accute and clear knowledge of the Images of things
together in the fancy, and through his power to collect and gather them
together in the fancy, suggest a multitude for his lying arguments, his false
rotten reasonings fo the souls union with Christ, at one and the same time. He
does so multiply his deluding grounds of the Souls union; that the number of
the arguments for the union has a power upon the understanding, when the
arguments themselves have little power. The Devil deals with Souls, as he did
with Jesus Christ in his tempting of him; he presented all the glory of the
world in the twinkling of an eye, that so it might have had some persuasion in
the mind of Christ: thus the Devil does at once set almost all his rotten
reasons that are suitable to that understanding whom at present he is to delude:
thus you shall observe the Pharisee, in that 18. Luke. whom the Devil deluded
concerning his acceptance with God; he had at once in his thoughts the great
difference that was between him and others, that he was not as other men were;
and also his exactness and strictness according to the Lords Law, paying Tithes
of all things, his extraordinary frequency in solemn duties, his fasting twice
a week; and it is probable, all that ever the Devil could say concerning the
Souls acceptance with God, was propounded at once to him; so that what one
rotten lying reason want to persuade the soul of his union with Christ, another
may supply.

6. The sixth act of the Devils power upon the understanding for this purpose
is, that he holds and retains the mind and understanding, with its full
intention and strength, upon those lying arguments and rotten reasons of the
souls union with Christ that he suggests to him. This the Prince of Darkness
effects two ways.

I. By diverting or turning away the mind from all those thoughts that should
contradict those lying reasons for its union. Now in this Satan does exeecise a
threefold power.

First he does excite and secretly draw into exercise, the natural loathness,
unwillingness and indisposedness of the mind to any poor holy thoughts
suggested by the blessed sanctified Spirit.

Secondly, Satan does excite the vanity, instability and wantonness of the mind.

Thirdly, The Prince of Darkness stirs up the inward enmity in the mind against
all such thoughts.

II. He does hold and retain the mind upon its lying reasons for its union; by
a constant application of these his lying reaions to the mind. So that by these
two means he does hold the intention of the mind upon his rotten reasons, for
the souls union with the Lord Jesus, that he prevents the souls looking upon
any thing that should discover its deluded estate.

7. The seventh act of power upon the understanding, is this, Satan does
suggest his lying reasons for the Souls union with the Lord Jesus, with a
superlative insinuating power to take the deluded heart with it. Satan does not
only propound the argument and so exercise a mere moral power upon the mind,
but through his power upon the fancy, he does immediately so insinuate into the
soul, that the Soul is prevailed withal to accept of the suggestion he
propounds. Thence you shall observe in 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. that those that received
not the truth with the love of it, were given over to strong delusions; not
only delusions, but such delusions as had a prevailing strength in them, to
prevail with the mind to believe them.

8. There is an eight act of power upon the mind and understanding, that Satan
exercises for this cursed purpose. Satan does suggest his false reasons and
lying arguments for Souls union with Christ, with an imperious power, a kind of
commanding authority, adding an abstrenuous, settled and fixed affirmation that
it is so, making up what is wanting in the strength of the argument, with the
boldness and confidence of his affirmation that it is so. By this means he
bears down the spirits of his deluded ones, so as they cannot make resistance,
you shall observe it, a weak spirit is overpoured by a stronger spirit, though
it be not overpoured by any strength of reason, but by the strength of the
spirit, by the violence and confidence manifested in the reasons and arguments.

This is the first power of Satan to delude souls* a power upon their
understandings.

Satan's Power upon the Conscience
Secondly, the second power Satan exercises, is upon the Conscience in
Reference to the establishing of a poor deluded Soul,, in a strong
self-deluding confidence of his union with the Lord Jesus; that causion must be
always taken, that Satan has not any immediate power to work any impression
upon the conscience, that is one of the incommunicable royal properties of the
Majesty of Heaven; therefore all the power he exercises upon the conscience is
but in the corruption and pollution of conscience, his principal power consists
in inflaming those cursed sparks that are already kindled in the Soul; and
indeed he does make a superaddition of such a vehemence and violence in every
such pollution, as far as the Lord does suffer him to exercise his power. Now
there are five of these corruptions in the Conscience, that Satan exercises
his power upon to delude the poor soul.

I. The injudiciousness of conscience, it is weakness in judging, or its
blindess. Now this injudiciousness of conscience, is also twofold either the
injudiciousness of the conscience in respect of the rule of judgment, by which
it judges its union with the Lord Jesus. Or else secondly, the injudiciousness
of conscience in the application of the rule

First the injudiciousness of the conscience about the rule of judgment by
which it judges of its union with Christ now.

1. from this injudiciousness about the rul, proceeds those dreadful
mis-understandings of the Scripture by deluded souls. Hence such strange, blind
Interpretations of Scripture are given by them, as that in Romans 10.13. who ever
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved; they from hence have concluded,
that it was sufficient for Salvation to some kind of Prayers to the Almighty
upon some occasions, yea hence some have desperately concluded, that the crying
Lord have mercy upon them at the last, was sufficient for Salvation. Yea hence
also it is, that those deluded ones so dreadfully understood the command of
believing, conceiving it only to be meant of a speculative faith, only a kind
of notion, that Christ did come down and take flesh upon him, and did in the
nature of man die the death of the Cross, in satisfaction to the Fathers
justice for sinners, and thence it is so common among them, to profess
themselves to be Believers.

2. From this injudiciousness in the conscience about the rule of judgment,
proceeds those false apprehensions about the nature of union with Christ, or
the Souls acceptance of union tendered. Conceiving that hearing the word of
God, and forbearing to make any opposition aganist it, is the very acceptance
of the Gospel, the very embracing that union with Jesus Christ that is tendered
to them

Secondly, The injudiciousness of the conscience, consists in its
injudiciousness in the application of the rule. Sometimes such clear Beams of
the Light are darted into a Soul, that the conscience cannot pass a false
judgment upon the rule it self, yet then through the natural corruption of the
conscience, through its injudiciousness of, its prone to apply the rule
falsely; and this insudicious-doth Satan exercise all his power upon.

II. The second Corruption in the Conscience is the Laziness, or Remisness, or
Idle Negligence of the Conscience, in its restrayning Office, whereby it should
compel the Soul to fulfill the Will of God that is Revealed to him. The
Conscience is by Divine Appointment a Task-Master set over the Soul, to press
the Commands of God upon it and enforce Obedience: And through the pollution
that overspreads the Conscience, it has been Inclined strongly to a remisness
in this its Office, to which the Lord has appointed it; Now the Devil
Exercises all his Power upon this Idleness of Conscience, making it to be more
strongly disposed to Carelessness and Remisness. And from this Remisness of
Conscience in this its Office.

1. All the Contradictions in the actings of a Deluded Soul, to the proper
natural effect of receiving true Evidence of a Souls Union with Christ are
undiscerned in that Deluded Soul. Proportionable to the Negligence of
Conscience, in constraining the Soul to do the Will of God Revealed, is the
Negligence of Conscience in receiving an account from the Soul, of the
Obedience that it has yielded to the Will of God Revealed.

2. From hence also proceeds a quietness in the Mind of the Deluded Soul, under
all those Sins that are inconsistent with Union with the Lord Jesus. Were not
the Conscience Remiss and Negligent in that his Office, in constrayning Souls
to Obedience to God, there could be no Quiet or Content in the Mind, while the
Soul walks contrary to the Revealed Will of God, especially when his ways are
inconsistent with enjoying Union with God in Christ.

3. From hence the Equity and Rectitude of Satan's Application of his Lying
Arguments for the Union of their Souls, is also Maintained Unblemished. The
reason that remains even in Unbelieving Souls, will not be satisfied without
some appearing Equity and Rectitude, in Satan's Lying Arguments for yielding to
it: Now a Multitude of Sins contrary to the natural effects of the receiving
evidence of Union with the Lord Jesus, would Blemish the Equity and seeming
right Rectitude of Satan's application of such a Lying Argument of the Souls
Union with Christ, yea it would discover the false application of such a Lying
Argument of his Union.

III. The third Defilement or Corruption of Conscience, is its Insensibleness,
or Regardlesness, of Sins Committed when discerned. This the Devil Maintains,
Foments, and Increases with all his Power, in reference to the Deluding the
Soul with a foolish dream of Union with Christ.

1. In regard hereby Satan presents the Frequency and Strictness of the Souls
enquiring into the nature of his own hopes of Union with Jesus Christ.

2. Hereby the positive slightness, in the matter of hopes for Union with
Christ, is Begotten in the Soul. Now this slightness of Spirit, in the matter
of their hoping for Union with the Lord Jesus, does dispose their poor Foolish
Souls, readily to receive any suggestion from Hell that they are United,
without any fear of danger whatever.

3. Hereby the Jealousy of Satan's suggestion to the Soul that he is United, is
wholly prevented.

IV. The fourth Corruption or Defilement of Conscience, is the Unfaithfulness
of its Recording or Registring the Souls Iniquities. Now Satan exercises this
Power upon the Defilement of the Conscience also.

1. In regard hereby he does prevent the Souls whom he Deludeth, from
discerning or beholding the Contradicting reasons, to their reasons from whence
they hope that they are United to the Lord Jesus. Every Sin is a reason of
mighty weight, to persuade the Soul that he could never be United, and every
Aggravation of those Sins, but above all, the rejecting of Union with Jesus
Christ Tendered: Now Satan well understanding, that his Foolish Suggestions unto
Souls, that they are United to the Lord Jesus, and his Reasonless Reasons to
persuade them that they are United, would never be admitted of, did the Souls
to whom he Suggests that they are United, discern the Multitude of Reasons that
might persuade them, it is Impossible that ever they should be United; thence
it is he does exercise his utmost Power upon the Unfaithfulness of Conscience
in Registring the Souls Iniquities, that so it may not bring one of those
Iniquities to the Souls Remembrance of a Thousand.

2. By this Unfaithfulness of Conscience in Registring the Souls Iniquities,
the Infiniteness and Unspeakableness of the danger of the loss of Union, is
Undiscerned also by those Souls. The greater Apprehension of Guilt, the greater
Apprehension of danger, in case the Guilt should not be removed from their
Souls: Now by Satan's Fostering up Conscience in its Unfaithfulness, in
Registring up the Souls Iniquities, it Apprehends but a small, slighty,
superficial view of his own Guilt, and therefore has but slighty Thoughts
about the loss of Union, in case he be Deprived of it.

V. The fifth Corruption in the Conscience, is the Unjustness in passing
Sentence upon the Souls Estate. Conscience is so Corrupted that it will be
passing Unjust Sentences, Accusing when it should be Excusing, and Excusing
when it should be Accusing: Now this Unjustness in the Conscience in passing
Sentence upon the Soul, Satan exercises all his Power upon, to Augment and
Increase it to the utmost, that by this means Conscience may be ready to Comply
with any Suggestion of his, that the Soul is United; and according to his bare
Suggestion to pass the Sentence upon the Souls Final Estate, that it shall be
Everlastingly Saved by the Lord Jesus.

Sect. 3. Thirdly, The third Power that Satan exercises upon the Affections,
or Passions. There is a Twofold Power that he exercises upon the Affections
or Passions: There is a Moral Power, and a Physical Power.

I. There is a Moral Power he exercises upon the Affections; that is by
propounding Objects suitable to stir and move those Affections. Thus in
propounding to the Soul its certain Acceptance with God in Christ, and
Everlasting Salvation by him, he propounds an Object suitable to move false Joy
and Delight and Contentment, and so by that means heightens the Self-deluding
Joying and Rejoicing in those Deluded Souls.

II. There is a Physical Power he Excerciseth upon the Affections; and that is
an Immediate Power, that he exercises upon the humors of the Body, through
which those sensible motions of the Will work. It is the property of
Affections, to cause the blood and the Animal Spirits to move to and fro from
the Heart, and thereby to make the Body suffer: Now Satan can immediately stir
those humors in the Body, which the Affections do in their workings also stir,
and thence raise an Affection beyond its bounds. Now Satan exercises these two
Powers of his upon the Affections.

1. In regard hereby the Confidence in Deluded Souls of their Union with the
Lord Jesus, is occasioned to work with a Mighty Violence, with a kind of
Irresistableness.

2. Hence that Confidence of his Deluded ones, that they are United to the Lord
Jesus, is made Irrational. Through the Violent working of such Affections their
Judgment is blinded, their Reason darkened and obscured; and when the matter
passes to the affections, all Judgment perishes: then you shall have many
Deluded Souls, that will hold with much Confidence and Boldness the Conclusion,
that they shall be saved by Jesus Chyist, when they are driven out of all their
Reasons, whereupon they Build this hope that they are United.

There are now secondly, some Consideratios about the Trial of a Souls Evidence
of his Union received, whither it be from God, or whether it be a Diabolical
Inspiration, that are requisite to be Premised before a direct Answer to the
Question.

Pre. 1. First, that every Believing Soul to whom the Lord has vouchsafed a
clear Evidence of his Union with the Lord Jesus, is powerfully incited by the
Subtility of Hell, to a Dubious, Anxious, Solicitous Trial and Examination of
the Evidence of his Union with the Lord Jesus Received. The Subtility of Hell
works this way in three Respects.

I. In regard the Believing Souls Evidence of his Union with the Lord Jesus
Received is Enervated, made of no force by a Souls Consent to a Dubious and
Anxious Examination of his own Evidence of Union Received. By this means the
eye of the Beleiving Soul is off from his Evidence Received, and now he
Conceives that his Work and Employment that God calls for at present from his
Soul, is to find out some other clear satisfying Evidence, of the truth of that
his former Evidence, and whatever light shines from the former Evidence is of
no Validity to the Soul, unless it be backed with some other light that shines
from some other Principle, either in the Soul or without the Soul: So that
there is a Bottomless Depth of the Subtility of Hell appears in this, he does
secretly and indiscernably despoyl the Soul of that Precious Jewel the Evidence
of his Union, while he solicits him to a Dubious Trial.

II. In regard the believing soul is led in a Devious Path, to weary his
Perplexed soul in, wherein all his labor will be in Vain, by consenting to a
doubtful Trial of his own Evidence of Union with Christ received. When the soul
staggers and wavers in the confidence of the Truth, of the Evidence of his
Union which Christ received, and proceeds in that timorous trembling wavering
manner, to an Examination of that his Evidence, then the soul either seeks for
a higher Evidence than what he received formerly, Or else he seeks for
Infallible Demonstrations, from the effects of the former Evidence of his Union
with Christ received, that that Evidence that he has received is really from
God. Now in case the Evidence of the souls union with Christ that the soul has
received, were the Evidence from that precious Witness of the Blessed Spirit of
Jesus Christ, the soul seeks all in vain to seek for a higher Evidence: Or else
in case the soul seeks to prove certainly and infallibly, that that Evidence of
his union with Christ that he has received was from God, by the effect wrought
in his own heart, the soul also labors in vain, in regard there is a necessity
that the soul must be dubious and anxious about the truth of all that he
conceives to have received from Jesus Christ, while the soul is dubious whether
it be united to Jesus Christ.

III. In regard Satan indiscernably gains these advantages against the
believing soul by soliciting the soul to this doubtful trial of his own
Evidence of his union. By Satan soliciting the soul to a doubtful trial of the
Evidence of his union with Christ received, he does indeed appear in Angelical
Glory, Clothed with a Glittering Garment of Heavenly Light: He thus bespeaks
the poor believing soul; Take heed O Soul thou be not Deluded in this great
matter of Eternity, Men's hearts are naturally too ready to presume, says
Satan, take heed least thou Befool thy self with vain hopes: Thus he seems to
be the Messenger of the blessed God to the believing soul, sent on purpose to
press one of the blessed commands of God unto the Soul, that it should try,
examine, and prove it self, only he secretly mixeth a cursed principle of
darkness, with that precious beam of light; he incites the believing Soul to a
dubious, anxious trial and examination of the evidence of his union; and so
consequently, procures the Soul to reject the blessed evidence of his union,
that the Lord in the riches of his mercy has vouchsafed to the believing Soul;
whereas the Spirit intends a precious believing trial, for the Souls more
abundant establishment and consolation, that it may be filled with joy and
glory.

Pre. 2. Secondly, I shall premise, That the believing Soul to whom the Lord
has vouchsafed a clear evidence of his union with the Lord Jesus, ought not to
diminish in the least degree his confidence of the Lords will, to accept even
his Soul into union with the Lord Jesus, whilst he endeavors to try and
examine his evidence of union received, whether it be from God, or whether it
be a diabolical inspiration. Sueh is the absolute necessity of the Soul in the
trying the evidence of his union with Christ, to stand fast in this his
confidence, that in such a degree and measure as that Soul wavers in this his
confidence, in the same degree is the Soul incapable of a right examination of
the evidence of his union with Christ received: So that in case the confidence
should wholly fail, the Soul is wholly incapable of a right examination of the
evidence of his union with Christ. This will appear in two things.

1. In regard it is by the acting of this confidence, that the Soul is disposed
to receive the clear evidence unto faith of his union with the Lord Jesus. The
Soul is disposed to this two ways.

1. By the acting of this confidence the Eye of the Soul is fixed upon that
glass, through which the light that evidenceth to the Souls faith, the Lords
will to admit him into union with the Lord Jesus, shines. The glass wherein the
Lord discovers his will to admit him, is his word, wherein he declares it is
his will to admit every Rebel and Enemy that will, into union with the Lord
Jesus, and into union with himself through him. Now the Eye of the believing
Soul, is only fixed and established upon this blessed word of God, through the
lively actings of the Souls confidence, because this is the object of his
confidence, and the object is only in them when there is acting of faith upon
the object.

2. It is by the acting of this confidence that a clearness is maintained in
the Soul, whereby the Soul is suitable to discern that light that does evidence
unto the Souls faith, the Lords will to admit it into union with the Lord
Jesus. The confidence failing, a multitude of objections and reasons, this way
and that way, arise in the soul, every one of these objections scruples and
reasons, is like a Mote in the Eye of the Soul, which prevents his clear
discerning of what the light of the blessed spirit put upon it. Now by the
acting of this confidence, those objections, reasonings, and scruplings, are
silenced and suppressed, and so a precious clearness is maintained in the soul,
a readiness to discern whatever beam of Heavenly light the spirit should cause
to shine forth from that precious word, that it is the Lords will to admit it
into union with the Lord Jesus.

2. When this confidence in the Soul fails, it makes the Soul incapable for a
just trial and examination of the evidence of its union with Christ, in regard
the acting of this very confidence of the Lords will, to admit the Soul into
union with the Lord Jesus, is the very matter of evidence unto the Souls sense,
that it is united actually to the Lord Jesus. Now when the act of the Souls
confidence cease, then is the very matter from whence the Spirit does
manifest to the Souls sense* its union with the Lord Jesus, taken away. How
shall the blessed Spirit cause the believing Soul to see its self believing,
when there are not the believing actings in the Soul? It is not the habit of
any kind of holiness that the Spirit does manifest to any believing Soul, to be
in it self, but it is the acting of any holiness whatever, that the Spirit does
cause the Soul to discern in it self, from whence it discerns actually its
union with the Lord Jesus: So that then the confidence of the soul failing, or
ceasing its actings, the very original of the souls evidence unto sense, of his
union with the Lord Jesus, is taken away.

Secondly, The believing Soul ought not only to forbear the diminishing of this
his confidence in the Lords will, to admit his Soul into union with the Lord
Jesus, while he proceeds to the trial of his evidence of his union with Christ
received, But he ought also to forbear the diminishing of his confidence, that
he is actually united to the Lord Jesus already, in case the Lord through a
clear evidence has begotten such a precious confidence in the Soul. The
believing Soul ought to say concerning that his confidence, as Job said
concerning his, Job 27.5. I will not remove my integrity from me; I will not
let go this my confidence, till I have proved and examined the evidence of my
union with the Lord Jesus, from whence this confidence did arise. This also may
appear in two things.

1. In regard the diminishing of this confidence in the believing soul, before
the trial of the evidence of his union with Christ received, is an infinite
injury to the sweetest Comforter, the blessed Spirit, who through the
manifestation unto the Soul that he is united to the Lord Jesus, establishes
the Soul in that precious confidence. The rejecting of that confidence so
wrought by the blessed Spirit, is a slighting of the spirit in his most
precious Office, and a disparagement of the very witness of that blessed Spirit.

2. It is a most sinful unconstancy and fickleness, to reject any thing
received, before clear demonstration of the error of the soul in receiving. It
is contrary to the order rhat the Lord requires, should be in all the motions
of the soul; which is, that they should be subject to the power of holy,
sanctified reason: So that this confidence before trial ought to be maintained,
in its full strength, in case such a confidence was begotten by an evidence
formerly received, that he is actually united to the Lord Jesus.

Quest. But here is a question then by the way would be opened. But will the
Soul say, wherefore then are the commands given by God to prove and examine our
selves, whether we be in the says, and so consequently to examine the evidence
of our union with Christ, if we must not be dubious and anxious, whether the
evidence of our union with Christ received be true or no, before we proceed to
the trial and examination of them?

Answ. 1. For answer to this question by the way briefly. I answer first, that
these Commands of Souls examining themselves whether they be in the faith, are
given universally to all Souls, on purpose that deluded souls by the trying and
proving themselves, might discover their own delusions, and discern their lying
confidence of their acceptance into union with the Lord Jesus.

2. These commands are given on purpose to believing souls, to maintain the
life of the confidence of the Lords will, to admit them into union with Christ,
and the confidence that they are admitted into union with the Lord Jesus. These
commands are occasions to Souls truly united to the Lord Jesus, to review over
the grounds of their confidence, of the Lords will to admit them into union
with Christ, and of the Lords actual admission of them into union. Now the more
the Soul views the ground of his confidence, the more it views that blessed
word of God, that reveals the Lords will to admit even his Soul into union with
the Lord Jesus in case he accepts it, and by the Souls gazing upon that blessed
word, it discerns more of the truth and certainty, infallibility and
unchangeableness of that word, and the more frequently and fully the Soul
discerns that, the stronger is its confidence in the will of the Lord, that he
will admit even that his Soul into union with the Lord Jesus, and thence there
is more occasion for the blessed Spirit to irradiate the souls believing act,
to enable the soul to see and feel it self to believe aright, by which means
the actual confidence of the souls admission with Christ lives, and is
maintained in its strength.

3. These commands are given that there might be more preparedness against all
assaults that are made from Hell against those souls. Through this examination
believing souls have their confidence maintained in its life and strength, and
so are fortified against temptation, because it discerns clearly the foundation
upon which his own confidence stands.

4. The Lord gives these commands on purpose to draw forth into exercise, all
manner of holy dispositions in the believing soul. This is done by the renewed
view of that light, that does evidence unto the souls faith, or unto the souls
sense, its union with the Lord Jesus; Then^ is the precious subjection of the
Heart to the will of God in all things acted, then is the correspondent love of
the soul, answerable to the Lords love to the soul drawn out in its strength,
then are all the thirstings after near communion with God in Christ acted.

Pre. 3. Thirdly, a third thing to be premised is this, That there are many
sinful distempers incident to believing souls in the times when they are
doubtful of the truth of the evidences of their union with Christ, which
whenever they do prevail in any soul, during their prevalency, they do
incapacitate those souls for a just trial, and true examination of the
evidences of their union. There are especially four of those sinful distempers,
incident unto believing souls at such a time.

1. There is an impatiency and frowardness of spirit, under the obscurity of
that truth of their evidence of union with the Lord Jesus, incident to every
believing soul. Indeed our spirits are naturally impatient under every burden,
but when any Arrows from the Almighty are shot into the Conscience, or any
Arrow from Hell stick fast there; I mean any doubtfulness, any terrors and
fears of the fullness of their conceived evidence of their union with the Lord
Jesus, then are their spirits in a superlative manner prone to fret, and vex,
and fume, by the prevailing of unruly passion. Thus David under the
doubtfulness of the Lords fulfilling a promise made to him, breaks out into
most dreadful impatience, in 1 Samuel 27.1. I shall one day perish by the hand of
Saul. So in Psalm. 116.11. I said in my haste all men are liars. So Psalm. 31.22.
I said in my haste I am cut off from before thine Eyes. So the holy man Job,
Chap. 3.3. and Chap. 6.8, 9. Now during the prevalency of this distemper of
impatiency and frowardness of spirit, under doubting the truth of their
evidence, their spirits are made uncable of a just trial and examination of the
truth of the evidence of their union with the Lord Jesus. There are two ways
how this sinful distemper does incapacitate souls, for the just examination of
the evidence of their union.

1. It does prevent a serious deliberate view of the evidences of their union
with Christ that they have received, by drawing out the intentions of their
Spirits, to look upon the grounds of their fears of the falseness of the
evidence of their Union. When any passion prevails in any Spirit, it draws out
the whole strength of the Soul that way; Now the intention of the soul being
drawn out, to look upon the object of his fears, the grounds of his doubts, and
the matter of the suspicion of the falseness of his union, by this the soul is
made unsuitable to take any right deliberate view of the evidences of his union.

2. Impatiency of Spirit under the doubtfulness of the truth of the souls
evidence of his union with Christ, does occasion every seeming opposition to
the truth of the souls evidences, to appear greater than it is in its own
nature. Thence it is frequent with souls under this distemper, every suggestion
from Hell bears such weight upon the Spirit, as it is in a fume upon every such
suggestion, conceiving there is abundant argument against the truth of his
union; whereas upon the examination of the same objection by the same soul,
with a quiet calm spirit, those objections appear to be invalid, to have no
weight, nor scarce any color, whereby they should manifest the falseness of
the Souls evidence of his union.

II. The second sinful distemper is an irrationality that the Soul subjects it
self to, in all the conclusions that it draws up against it self. Now whenever
a believing Soul subjects himself to this sinful distemper, that he endeavors
not to suppress every affection of Hope, Fear, or Joy, which is not founded
upon some blessed word of God, then the Soul does make it self incapable of
examining and trying justly the truth of his own evidences of his Union.

1. In regard the Soul will of necessity be irrational in all its conclusions.
But when the Soul is irrational in its confusions, it is incapable of a just
trial of the evidences of his union, it is incapable of comparing that blessed
golden Rule of the Lord word, and his own evidences together.

2. In regard the thoughts of the Soul are all distracted, when any thing is
brought to the thoughts for the truth of his union, that Soul without
examination immediately entertains some hopes; Again, when any thing is
objected to the Soul to prove the falseness of his evidence; immediately again
the soul entertains fears, without examining the reality of what is objected
against his evidence, and those hopes and fears continuing enterchangeably
working, make such distraction in the souls thoughts, that it makes it
incapable for any deliberate view of the evidences of his union.

3. The third sinful distemper is a rashness, hastiness, or suddenness of
spirit. Thus some doubting of the truth of their former evidences of their
union with the Lord Jesus, because of some backsliding from God, that they are
conscious to themselves of, will suddenly from such a place as that, Heb. 6.4.
concludes that they have sinned presumptuously, and that there is no renewing
them again by Repentance, or unto Repentance: The words run thus, For it is
impossible for those who were once enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly
gifts, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they fall away to renew them
again unto Repentance: whereas did those Souls examine the intent of the Holy
Ghost in these words; it were easily to discern that the Holy Ghost intend
those who finally apostatize from God, not intending any slips and falls, and
backslidings that are incident to every believing Soul: were there but a just
examination of this portion of the word, by collecting it and comparing with
another word that would testify many Saints to have had their fallings and
backslidings, after their tasting of the heavenly gifts, and after their being
partakers of the Holy Ghost, ^ly in a higher way than the Spirit means here; he
mean here by partaking of the Holy Ghost, only some participation of common
gifts of the Spirit: other Scriptures testify David and Abram to have had their
falls, (yea almost every Saint after their tasting of the heavenly gift) and
yet to be renewed again by Repentance Now this distemper does make the soul
incapable of a just examination of the truth of the evidence of his union with
Christ 2 ways.

I. In regard this rashness makes the Soul incapable of discerning the depths
of Satan, whereby he endeavors to obscure the truth of every Believers
evidence of his union with Christ. This sinful rashness occasions the Soul only
to take a superficial of whatever is suggested or propounded. Now Satan's
Suggestions have some sparkling of Angelical Glory, some vernish of truth and
holiness, so that every suggestion of Hell, whilst the distemper of rashness
prevails in the soul, cannot but be judged a sufficient ground to build a doubt
and scruple upon, and then Satan being always watchful to maintain a dispute
that he once began with the Soul, to make reply against whatever can be
objected against his first suggestion; every of these objections of Satan they
will be counted sufficient ground for the rash Soul to draw another safe
conclusion, or to strengthen the Soul in the drawing its former false
conclusion.

2. This rashness also begets a confusion in the Soul, the soul drawing
conclusion upon conclusion, upon every seeming ground; and one conclusion
maintains contradicting another; a contradition of hope contradicting a
conclusion of fear, and there being no examination (through the domineering
power of rashness in the Soul) of the truth of the one and the falseness of the
other; these conclusions begin to fight in nhe Soul at once, yea multitudes of
conclusions seem contrary each to other.

4. The Fourth distemper that does incapacitate a Soul for the just trial of
the truth of his own evidence, is a prejudicial conceit against his own
evidences, even before any examination of the truth of the evidences of his
union. This is the sad distemper that prevailed in Asaph. Psalm. 77.2. my Soul
refused to be comforted; he did refuse to receive any evidence that the Lord
would be faithful. But certainly this was the distemper of the Church, Lamen.
3.17, 18. Thou have remove my Soul far off from peace, I forgot prosperity; (or
rather as it is rendered by some, I forgot God) it is most probable she refused
to entertain any of those thoughts, that the Lord would yet be gracious. Hence
it is, that many Souls under the Power of this distemper; do study to wind
themselves from under the Power of any truth that should lay hold upon their
hearts, so as to answer their objections and cavils against their acceptance
into union with the Lord Jesus. Now this Distemper does make Souls incapable
(while it prevail) of a just examination of the truth of their own exidences,
in regard it causes slighty, unworthy thoughts of their own union.

Pre. 4. Fourthly it is to be considered, that whenever any Soul is declined
from, or decayed in his former activity and operation of holiness, he is then
unsuitable to examine and to try justly the truth of his own evidence of his
union with Christ. He is unsuitable in these five respects,

1. In regard the light of manifestation from the spirit is always suspended
when the heart is in this decaying temper in holiness. When ever any heart
decay in holiness, his first original decay is in the activity and strength of
the precious believing disposition of the will, to close with and accept of the
precious tender of the Lord Jesus to the Soul; now when the Spirits light of
manifestation, whereby it does irradiate the word to the Soul is withdrawn; the
Soul must needs be incapable to examine the truth of his own evidences, for it
is only through the Spirits irradiation or manifestation of the word, that any
believing Soul does at first clearly and satisfyingly, and unquestionably
discern the Lords will to accept his Soul into union with the Lord Jesus, and
therefore when this Light of manifestation from the Spirit is withdrawn again,
it cannot be that the believing Soul should clearly discern their precious
truth; and so long as the Soul enjoy not this evidence unto his says of his
certain acceptance of union with Christ: it is impossible the Soul should have
any evidence unto sense, seeing the evidence unto sense does wholly depend upon
the evidence unto faith.

2. In regard all the opposite powers of corruption in his Soul, unto the Souls
evidence of union with Christ, do renew in some degree their Tyrranny over the
Soul. Yea, not only so, but all the powers of corruption that do oppose the
Souls union with Christ, are then furnished with renewed arguments and
objections against the poor Souls acceptance into union, yea with such
objections as nothing can answer but says it self. As for example;

1. Then carnal Reasons' mouth is filled with new matter of objection against
the Souls union. Carnal Reason, that said formerly, thou art a Rebel, an Enemy
that have continued thus many years in enmity, therefore cannot be admitted
into union with the Lord Jesus, can now say more; thou have now dealt
unfaithfully with God; thou art an Hypocrite, a Bacstslider; it is impossible
that the Lord that bore thy enmity and rebellion, should bare thy falseness and
hypocrisy.

2. Natural Distrust of God, cursed Jealousies and Suspicions of the
Faithfulness of God, do renew their Tyranny also, when Holiness decay. Now
natural Distrust, and cursed Jelousy of God can say, what do thou think it is
possible for the Majesty of Heaven, who is so just; who has said he will
avenge himself upon those that go on in their wickedness, should ever accept
the^ into reconciliation with himself?

3. The corrupt Conscience renews his Tyrannizing Power when the Soul decay in
Holiness Now Conscience is furnished with a new Bill of Indictment against the
Soul; it can now lay to the Souls charge, guile and deceitfulness of heart with
God, and willing Apostasy from God, so that now it can with a full mouth pass
the sentence of Condemnation against the Soul afresh, and is furnished with
such arguments, as nothing but Faith can answer; nothing but a renewed vision
of the Lords will declared in his blessed word, to accept of every poor, undone
perishing Soul, be he as bad as an incarnate Devil, (in case the Soul will
accept of union with him) can satisfy either carnal reason, or suspicious
argmments, or consciences accusations.

3. The Soul decaying in Holiness; is unsuitable to examine the evidence of his
union, in regard the Soul remain under an inevitable, an unavoidable necessity
to submit to the Judgment that Sense shall pass upon his Soul. Now Sense can
pass no other Judgemennt upon a Souls estate that is decayed in Holiness; but
that certainly the evidences of his union with the Lord Jesus that he conceive
he had received, were delusions. Sense can see none of those precious
inseparable effects of a Souls evidence of union with Christ, and sense can
pass no other Judgment, unless it be captivated unto the power of Faith.

4. In regard there is apparent defect in such a Soul of the proper inseparable
effects of the true manifestation to a Soul, that it is united to the Lord
Jesus. The inseparable effects of an evidence unto a Soul, that it is united to
the Lord Jesus, is an height of Holiness: now when Holiness is decayed, Satan
can say by a fallacious argument, thy evidences of thy union that thou
thoughtest thou had, are delusions indeed: do not see by the effects of the
evidences, those that have evidences of their union with Christ, have their
hearts in an adoring, admiring frame of God, they have their hearts enlarged to
the utmost toward God in Christ; but thou have a blockish, senselese,
careless, heartless, mindless, unprofitable Spirit; surely, thy evidences
therefore are delusions. Now indeed here is a fallacy in Satan's arguments, that
is hard to be discerned; here is a depth of Satan; here is one of those cunning
devices that most Souls are ignorant of; He fails of nothing in his argument,
but only in time: His arguments should have run thus; only Souls that have true
evidence of their union with Christ, whilst those evidences remain; they are in
an admiring adoring frame, and their hearts elivated and enlarged in all kind
of Holiness: If this had been Satan's major proposition, his assumption must
have been false; then he could not have said, but thou in that moment and
instant, when those evidennes were given to the during the continuance of those
evidences in their clear light, that thou were united, thy heart was not
enlarged in all kind of Holiness, and taken with a precious admiration of the
Lord Jesus.

5. In regard the Soul is under an actual provocation of the Lord, to a penal
suspension of all kind of manifestation unto the Soul, either that the Lord
would admit him into union with Christ, or that he is admitted. The Soul he can
never discern the truth of his own evidence satisfyingly and infallibly,
without the manifestation of the same light, both manifesting the word to the
believing disposition, and manifesting the believing act also to the Souls
apprehension: Now therefore the Soul must needs be unsuitable to examine the
truth of his evidence of union with Christ, while he is actually provoking the
Lord to withdraw that blessed Spirit, and to su^pend his operations unto the
Soul.

Now here is a question necessarily cast in, to be opened by the way, before we
can proceed any farther.

Que. But will the Soul say, if Souls under the dominion of impatiency,
rashness, irrational affections, prejudicial conceits against the truth of the
evidence of their union with Christ, and Souls under decays of Holiness, be
unsuitable for a right trial of their evidences; then what suitable means remain
for such Souls, under fear that the evidences of their union are delusions?

Ans. First, I answer, that the only immediate effectual, means of redemption
of such Souls, from such torturing fears, suspicions and jealousies, that the
evidences of their union with Christ are but delusions, is a renewed act of
confidence, in the truth of the Lords word to their particular Souls, wherein
the Lord does declare his will, to give the Lord Jesus freely, to every
perishing Sinner that shall accept him, to mediate a reconciliation with the
Father for him, though plunged into the most bottomless depth of Sin.

The Universal, Unlimitted Offer of the Lord Jesus, to every particular,
perishing and lost Soul, that will accept it, is the prime foundation of all
the righteous hopes, that ever dwelt in a believing Soul: all the expecttations
and hopes of believing Souls, are but the building upon that foundation; now
when the building of the Souls hope shake, the only means to establish the
building, is to add strength to the foundation.

This you shall observe was the remedy of the poor distressed Church, Lament.
3.40. after many distractions in her spirit, many tossings and tumblings, this
way and that way, when she had fed upon gaul and wormwood for a long time, at
last she was constrained to take this course, to search and try her ways, and
turn again to the Lord; she was constrained now to make a new converting work
of the matter; according as Christ tells his Disciples, except ye be converted,
(when they were already converted) that is, unless you renew the close of your
spirits with me, whereby you may have power against this particular sin: and I
conceive this also may be intended by the spirit of God, Isa. 50.10. in that
sweet council to poor distressed souls in this case, that walk in darkness, and
has no light, that is, no refreshment, no comforting hope, to trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Here is first a renewed act of Faith,
immediately commanded to such a distressed soul, let him trust in the name of
the Lord.

Secondly, here is a direct act of Faith, an act of Faith proper to the soul,
that did never put forth a believing act formerly. Here is an act of Faith
required and commanded to be done by these souls, without respect to any thing
in themselves, without respect to their former comforts, whether they (...) be
true or false, without respect to their receiving grace, whether they have
received grace, or not received grace. It is worth the clearing, that this
should be the only immediate means, to deliver such declined souls from under
the fears, that the evidences of their union with Christ are but delusions.
This will appear in three things,

1. In regard it is in this renewed act only, that the former evidences and
manifestations given to such souls of their union with Christ, do shine forth
in their perspicuity, clearness and satisfying power,

Then only when the soul does thus close afresh, with that union with the Lord
Jesus offered to it, there is both light within, and light without, whereby the
soul is able to discern the former manifestation unto the soul, of its union
with the Lord Jesus in their glory and power afresh.

2. In regard through this renewed act only, the proper effects of evidence of
union with Jesus Christ, are again stirred up and drawn forth into their
powerful operation. Now it is the souls apprehension of the want of those
precious effects, that evidences of union with Christ do naturally beget in
believing souls, that do occasion the poor distressed soul to suspect his own
evidences, and to be Jealous they are but delusions. Now the only means to
deliver these dark and doubtful souls, from under the Tyrannical Power of these
Jealousies and Suspicions, must be this renewed believing act, this renewed
confidence in that truth of the Lords word, wherein he tender Christ in general
to every sinner, in regard these blessed effects, the evidence of union with
Christ do naturally beget in souls, are only made visible to these believing
souls again by that means.

3. In regard both the incapacity of souls for the trial of their evidences,
and the unsutableness of souls for trial also, are removed by that renewed
believing act, in regard those distempers are healed. These are healed two ways.

First, By a more general influence of that believing act*

Secondly by a more particular influence.

First, By a more general inffuence of the believing act into those distempers.
The believing Soul closes with the Lord Jesus tendered, so as he accept of a
redemption from his sin, and from under the power of corruption through Christ:
the notion under which the Lord makes the proffer of Christ unto sinners, is
that he should mediate a reconciliation, between the Father and the soul* shall
so accept him that he should beget a precious amity between the Fether and the
Soul; establish the soul in a state of love, that is, the soul as well to be
filled with love toward the Lord, as the Lord to be filled with love toward
the Soul: Now in a souls acceptance of Jesus Christ thus tendered, the soul
accepts of Christ necessarily as a Redeemer, to redeem him from slavery under
those Enemies of the Majesty of Heaven, even Sin and Satan, so that there must
be a State of Amity and Love between God and the Soul.

Secondly, this particular act, has a particular influence into those
particular distempers, that made the Soul incapable for a just examination of
the evidence of his union with Christ.

1. In this renewed belieeving act formerly mentioned, there is a precious,
sweet act of submission in the will of the believing Soul, to the will of God.
Indeed the believing act is the highest submission to the Lord, that ever is
given by any Soul to him, in regard the Soul in that case captivateth all his
reason and Judgment only to the Lords authority, because the Lord has spoken
so, and so concerning his Soul. Now from hence, this renewed, believing act,
has a precious influence into the distempered Soul under impatiency, to heal
the impatiency of the spirit that domeneerd in him, for now the will is
contented to wait on God, it is contented the will of God should be fulfilled
in him.

2. This believing act has a particular influence into the Souls rashness to
heal that distemper also. In this renewed act, there is a renewed sense of the
believing Souls absolute nothingness: Now from the Souls actual sense of his
own nothingness, proceeds a holy awe, a holy reverential fear of the Majesty of
Heaven, which does hold in bounds the rash, disorderly Spirit, so that by this
the Spirit is more careful how it draw conclusions from any precious word of
God.

3. The believing act has an influence upon the disorderly affections; the
irrational affections which did also incapacitate believing Souls for a just
examination of their evidences. In the believing the Soul does captivate all
the imaginations and thoughts of sense and carnal reason, unto the truth and
authority of God, and so all the disorderly affections, jealousies, doubts and
fears, are even captivated and brought under.

4. This renewed, believing act has an influence also into the prejudicial
conceits, or opinions against the evidence of union received, to subdue those.
In the believing act there is a renewed sight of the truth of the souls former
evidence unto his Faith, of his union with Christ in some degree; so that the
soul while he was under the power of his fears, that the evidence of his union
were delusions, having lost the satisfying power of the manifesting light unto
his faith, that he should be accepted into union with Christ, does now again in
this renewed act gain a sight and manifestation of that satisfying power in a
manifesting truth that his Soul should be acepted into union with the Lord
Jesus: Now thence the Lord discerns the causelesness of his own prejudicial
thoughts, and opinions of his former evidences unto faith* and so consequently
abhor himself, in that he dishonored the blessed work of the Spirit.

5. Through the virtue and efficacy of this believing act that decay in
holiness, which did make the soul unsuitable to take a just impartial trial of
the evidences of his union with Christ are repaired, that appears in two things.

1. The mind of the believing soul is filled with all the notions, conceptions
and apprehensions from whence Holy Actings do arise; are Maintained and
Increased, and through the defect of which, Holiness Decays and Consumes in any
Soul. These Holy Notions from whence Holiness proceeds, are principally these;
That there is a fullness of all Love and Mercy, tendered freely by God to this
Poor Unlovely soul, that the Lord is so infinitely rich in his love, that he
does pass over all that can be suitable for the poor empty Soul, freely to it in
Christ. Now it is impossible there should be a Renewed Believing act, without
these Notions being brought fresh to the Remembrance of the Believing Soul.

2. All the Holy Affections are excited also to a Renewed exercise by virtue of
the Renewed Act. All the Affections are under the command of these two, Love
and Hatred: Now both these are excited to a Renewed Exercise, and that with a
Mighty strength. by virtue of the Renewed Act. Love toward God is nothing but
the very reflecting of the Lords love cast upon the soul, upon God again: The
actings of love always proceed, from the Apprehensions of the Lords love to the
Soul; Now in the Believing Act, there is an actual view, of the infinite
unspeakable Riches of Love, to the Unlovely, Forlorn Soul, and thence Love is
drawn forth in its very strength toward God again. Likewise Hatred, which
command the other part of the Affections, is nothing else but the Displicency
tha is in the Will against any object whatever, which affections do naturally
proceed from the souls love: Now therefore the hatred of the soul is properly
against Sin, and whatever is contrary to God and his Will. In the same degree
that Love acts in the soul toward God, in the same degree does hatred work
toward every thing that is contrary to God: Now by the stirring up of these
two, all the other Holy Affections also are excited into their exercise; thence
the decays of Holiness are sweetly repaired, and the soul put into a suitable
temper for the trial of his own Evidence.

Answ. 2. Secondly I answer, That all the Lords Ordinances and Appointments,
for his peoples souls to enjoy Communion with himself in, are also mediate and
second means of the delivery of those souls from the dreadful Tyranny of the
Fear and Jealousy, that the Evidences of their union are Delusions. Thus
Prayer, Conference, Meditation, hearing the Word, are all secondary means to
wait for the spirit to breath in power from the Lord Jesus; to enable the soul
in this Renewed Believing Act, and to continue the Believing Act in the soul.
So that you see a sufficient means left for these Distempred or Declined souls,
that are either Incapable or Unsuitable, for a just examination of the Evidence
of their Union, to deliver them from Fear and Terror, that the Evidences of
their Union with Christ Received are Delusions. Now in Regard the question is
about a matter so practical, I shall therefore turn the last Answer into a kind
of Advise, Beseeching and Entreating every Distempered, or Declined soul in
Holiness, to take this course, to strive for deliverance of his soul from under
the power of his Tormenting Fears, that the Evidences of his union with Christ
are Delusions: And for that end I desire you would take these four Directions.

Direct. 1. First that you forbear for a little season, the Trial and
Examination of your own Evidence with the Lord cease a little to Plead your
Title with the Lord; Spend not all your thoughts about what Evidence you have
Received, as though there were no good to be expected, except your former
Evidences were real.

Direct. 2. Secondly let me advise you to take a strict account of your own
hearts, of all your fears, and all the grounds of your suspicions, whereupon
you suspect that your evidences where delusions: gather together and sum up all
hypocrisy and falseness, the unconstancy, the looseness, the vanity, the
rashness, the blindness, that is now brought to your remembrance, to prove your
evidences received were but mere delusions; gather together all the defects, of
those precious effects of real evidence from God to any soul of its union with
Christ, that you apprehend your souls want; and further suppose them all to be
true, take all for a little season for granted; suppose that your heart was
false, and that you were wholly and altogether an Hypocrite, that all the
workings of your spirit were nothing but common workings of the blessed spirit.
But, then

Direct. 3. Thirdly search the holy records, the Lords blessed word for all the
discriptions of those to whom union with Jesus Christ is freely tendered, and
find out whether thy soul supposed to be in the estate forenamed be excluded
from the number of those to whom union with Jesus Christ is freely tendered.
Search from Scripture whether thou can find any one Hypocrite, any one
captivated soul, by the Devils deluding reasonings, any one false hearted
treacherous wretch, ever excluded from the number of those, to whom the Lord
freely offers union with the Lord Jesus; search whither any lost Soul, any
Rebel, whether any rational Creature to whom the Gospel of Jesus Christ comes,
be exclured from the number of those to whom the Lord freely offers union with
the Lord Jesus: strive beseech you now to gain that clear apprehension, that so
at last thou may baffle the Devil in all his arguments, and silence him in
one word; saying, well though I have been false to the blessed Majesty of
Heaven all this time, though I be now under thy cursed power, O Satan, though
thou holdst me fast in thy cursed Chains of Darkness, yet thou may say, the
blessed Majesty of Heaven, he that can never lie, tells me that union with the
Lord Jesus, and so Redemption from thy cursed slavery is freely offered to my
Soul still; the Lord tells me his will admits me to be still one; with Christ,
if I can be contented that he should mediate a reconciliation between the
Father and me.

Direct. 4. Fuorthly, Plead with thy opposite contrary mind, to make thy heart
consent to the blessed word of God, wherein he does offer union with Jesus
Christ, and himself through Christ, to every Soul that shall accept him. Gaze
again and again upon the blessed tender; say to thy unbelieving mind; O my
crooked and unbelieving mind. Will thou not consent to the truth of yonder
Majesty of Heaven, yonder God of truth it self that cannot lie; say O my soul
if thou will accept yonder union with the Lord Jesus, behold what transcendent
glory thy soul shall be filled with; O my Soul wilt not thou trust to the truth
and faithfulness of the Lord, when he makes such an offer, will it not be content
to subject all thy reasons, and sensual Arguments to his Authority? Still
strive again; say, O my Heart, though thou have been an Hypocrite, though the
Devil has couzened thee these many years, though thou have dealt falsely with
the Lord all this time, yet the transcendent love of yonder God ceases not to
work toward thee, O take up thy rest O my Soul, credit the Lord upon his word,
and wait O my Soul for the fulfilling of his word to thee. This is the prime,
effectual, infallible means of the deliverance of your poor perplexed tortured
Souls, by the tyranny of fear that your evidences are delusions; And this is
the never failing means of discovering to your poor dark obscure souls, the
truth and reality of these your evidences, that your Souls cannot discern.
Truly Souls of all the directions that ever I commended to you, I must set a
probatum est upon this remedy; It is a tried one Soul, it is an approved one,
an experienced one; I beseech you follow it: Let your Souls be held no longer
poring upon your former evidences, as though you had no spring of refreshment
but in those: Suppose your Heart to be as bad, as the Devil possibly can make
it, yet strive with your unbelieving Mind and Heart to accept anew of union
tendered to your poor, lost, perishing Souls in the Lord Jesus.

Pre. 5. In the fifth place I shall further premise this, That an impartial,
just, and righteous examination of the evidences that any soul has received of
his union with the Lord Jesus, can only be taken while those evidences remain
in their perspicuity, clearness, and satisfying power. The evidences of a Souls
union with Christ, being only precious, orient beams of Heavenly light, sent
forth from the blessed spirit of light into the obscure Soul, joined also with
a precious exciting power, sent forth from the same Spirit to stir up the light
inherent in the same Soul too, while the evidence is gone, it cannot be that
any Soul receiving such evidences; should justly try, weigh, examine, and prove
the reality of those evidences, no longer than those evidences do continue.
There must be light without, and light within, to enable a Soul to make an
examination of any thing: And both the light without, and the light within,
being the evidence it self to the soul of its union, thence it is there is a
necessity of the examination to be prosecuted or followed, only while the Soul
enjoys those evidences in their brightness, clearness, and satisfying power.
The evidences of the Souls union, are beams of Heavenly light, sent down from
the Father of light, on purpose to bear testimony to a Soul of union with the
Lord Jesus: And thence indeed it is necessary that these Witnesses should be
heard speak for themselves, before any trial of the truth and reality of their
testimony can be made by any Soul; Now these Witnesses never speak for
themselves, but while they are actually bearing Witness; that is, while those
precious beams of Heavenly light, do actually shine into the obscure soul; Now
when once those beams of light are withdrawn, the soul is now in question
whether the Lords will be, to admit his Soul into union with Jesus Christ or
no. Now that those righteous examinations of the evidences of union, can be
only taken while the evidences do thus continue actually in the soul, this I
conceive may be collected from John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know nf the Doctrine, whether is be of God, or whether I speak of my self. The
words are an Answer to a question that the Jews propounded to Jesus Christ, or
they are a prevention to a Question that the Jews might have propounded: Christ
had affirmed, that the Doctrine that he taught, was not his own, but his
Fathers that sent him, v. 16. Now it might be objected: But how can you prove
that your Doctrine is your Fathers, and not your own? How will you manifest it
to those that deny your Doctrine to be divine, that it is Divine? Christ
answers, If any Man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it
be of God; As if he should say, whosoevers Heart shall be in a precious
readiness, actually to obey my Fathers will, he shall actually know the
Doctrine whether it be of God. So that two Propositions are laid down in the
words; the one expressly, the other implicitly. The first is affirmed by Christ,
that the discerning of the truth and divinity of precious Gospel truths, is
only peculiar to obedient Souls.

Secondly, It is implicitly affirmed, That whatever soul is disobedient to the
Fathers blessed will, cannot (during his disobedience) discern truth, divinity,
and infallibility of Gospel Truth: Now thence may be collected, that believing
souls do enjoy the spirit of discerning, in their way of obedience, and do best
and most perspicuously and clearly understand the Lords blessed will, and see
the reality of every truth of the Gospel, and the infallibility and certainty
of its coming from God. Now mark, then only believing souls do yield obedience
to the Fathers will, and do actually obey Gospel truth, when their souls
receive through believing some evidence, at least in some degree, that the Lord
will receive their souls into union with himself in Christ, through their
believing in him. Every believing act is but the consent of the believers
heart, to the truth of what the word bears witness of; which is in effect,
nothing but a believers receiving the evidencing light of the blessed word,
that the Lord will admit his soul into union with himself in the Lord Jesus, in
his accepting of him; So that the believing soul being then only obedient to
the will of the Father (in the prime way of obedience which is Faith) when he
is receiving some evidence of his union with the Lord Jesus, thence it appears,
that a just and impartial, a righteous examination of the evidences, that the
soul has received of his union with the Lord Jesus, can only be taken, while
those evidences do actually continue in their clearness and power. For the
further clearing of this, take these two reasons.

I. In regard then only the soul is sutably disposed to take the examination.
That will appear in diverse particulars.

1. It is only then when the Evidence unto a soul of his union do actually
remain, that the understanding of the soul is enlightened by the blessed spirit,
and enabled to conceive of, and to apprehend aright, any truth from the blessed
Word of God propounded to him. Even when the understanding of the soul is
renewed, and some precious beam of Heavenly Light Communicated to the poor
soul, (so that in a Metaphorical Sense, the blind soul became a seeing soul?
yet there is a necessity also that the same spirit, that Communicated the
seeing eye to the understanding, should also Communicate the seeing of the eye;
It is necessary that the same spirit that Communicated the Habit, should
Communicate also the Act; the same spirit that gave a Principle of Divine
Knowledge to the soul, must also act the same Principle of Spiritual Knowledge,
to make the soul actually know, or understand any Spiritual, Holy Mystery
aright; Now then, when the Evidences to the soul of its union with the Lord
Jesus actually remains, then is the mind and understanding of the soul thus
actuated by the Blessed Spirit, then is the Principle of Holy Knowledge drawn
forth into exercise, so that the mind is then enabled to discern into the
Mystery of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, thence it appears, that the soul can
only then take a Righteous Examination of the Evidences of his union.

2. In regard it is then only, that the soul is Conqueror over the natural
Enmity of the Mind, that oppose the Minds, consent to the truth that does
evidence unto the soul its union. The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God; Now in
the same degree the believing soul remains unregenerate, enmity still possesses
the believing mind, and then only has the Believer conquest over those
relics of enmity that possess the mind, when he has actual evidence of his
union with the Lord Jesus; now it is only then when the enmity of the mind
against God is brought into captivity to the Law of faith, that the Soul is
suitable to take the examination of the truth of his own evidences of his union
with Christ, in regard the mind now is disposed to accept or agree unto those
truths of the Gospel, from whence the Spirit does manifest unto the soul its
union with Christ.

3. In regard it is then only, that the Soul understands and believes what the
true Celestial Star is, from whence those beams of light, that do really come
from Gods evidence unto a Soul, his union with Christ must flow and arise. The
precious word of the ever-living God to every lost sinner, declaring that his
will is to admit every of those Souls that will, to be reconciled to himself in
Christ, is that precious, bright, orient Star, from whence those beautiful
beams of light, that do or may discover unto a soul, his union with Christ must
arise: Now it is then only; when the beams of light shine from the Word
perspicuously and clearly unto a soul, declaring his will to admit of
reconciliation with them through the Lord Jesus, that they understand and
believe this to be the true Heavenly Star, from whence the light that evidences
unto them their union must flow.

4. In regard It is then only, that the irresistible power; that those precious
beams of light contain in them (that do evidence unto any soul really from God
its union with Christ) is ready to take impression upon the heart. The
irresistible power that the beams of light contain in them, is the Authority of
the blessed Majesty of Heaven. They are nothing but the discovery unto the Soul
that the Lord has spoken it, that it is his will to receive the soul into
union with Christ. Now this irresistible power of these beams of light, only
take impression upon the Heart, according to the lively actings of holiness in
the heart; And the lively actings of holiness in the heart, are only according
to the degree of light the soul enjoys, discovering unto it the Lords will, to
receive him into union with the Lord Jesus: So that when those beams of
Heavenly light shine most clearly in the most transcendent beauty, then is the
heart filled with the most lively, holy actings, then do love, and fear, and
joy, and delight, working their power and strength; And therefore it is only
that the Authority of God speaking, or declaring any thing to the soul, take
the deepest impression upon the soul.

5. In regard the believing disposition in the will of the soul, is only then
in exercise in its power and strength. The prime evidence unto a soul of his
union, has been discovered to you, to be only an evidence unto faith, and in
like manner the prime demonstration of the truth of that evidence, must be a
demonstration given to faith only: Reason must not aspire so high to be the
Judge of faiths action; Still it must be another act of faith, that must pass a
security upon the former act of faith: So that thence when the believing
disposition infused into the will of the believing soul is strongest in
exercise, then only is the soul suitable to take a righteous examination of the
evidences of his union with Christ.

2. It is only then when the evidences of the souls union with Christ are clear
and perspicuous, that it is suitable to take examination of his evidences
rightly, in regard of the evidences themselves, which then only appears in
their native self-discovering glory. It is the inseparable property of those
beams of Heavenly light, that shine from the word of God, to discover
themselves really to be from God, even by their own native luster and glory:
Those beams of light come forth with the name of God written upon their
foreheads; so that the believing soul no sooner beholds them, but he reads the
name of God written upon them; now this their native self-discovering glory,
never appears to the soul, but when these beams of light actually remain in the
soul, in their perspicuity and clearness, and therefore when the spirit
suspends its influences, then the soul cannot behold those beams of light what
they are.

Quest. There is another Question that here interposeth it self, which must of
necessity be answered.

Believing souls will now reply in this manner, If an impartial examination of
any souls evidences of his union with the Lord Jesus, can be only taken while
the splendour and brightness of his evidences remain in the soul; then what use
should souls make of the evidences they conceive they had received of their
union with Jesus Christ, when the luster and orient brightness of their
evidences be eclipsed, and their commanding power enervated or wounded, that
their evidences cease to witness unto them their union with Christ.

In order to the satisfaction of souls in this scruple, we shall lay down
diverse Propositions.

Prop. 1. First, whenever the celestial glory of those precious beams of light,
that the Lord vouchsafes to cast into any believing soul, to evidence his union
with Jesus Christ, be dark, and those invincible and impregnable
demonstrations, that the blessed spirit gives unto the souls faith, to prove
and demonstrate its union with Christ be weakened, yet it is then doleful
weakness; yea, abhorred wickedness in any soul, to cast off all confidence of
the Lords admission of his soul into union with Jesus Christ. Though the
oratory light of the blessed spirit, or the superadded light to the word, that
causes the word to give so clear and satisfying a testimony unto faith, of its
union with Jesus Christ be withdrawn and suspended yet there is a Heavenly
shining, burning Lamp of the written word of God, that stands constantly
shining to discover to the faith of the believing soul, the open bosom of the
love of the Lord Jesus, and his outstretched Arms ready to grasp the soul into
the nearest union: Therefore it must needs be dreadful horrid wickedness, for
any soul to neglect, slight, undervalue, or disregard the light of that
precious written word, because those Heavenly beams of superadded light that
the spirit sometimes gives are by the wisdom of the Lord, or through the
occasion of the souls own iniquity sometimes suspended. The Command of
believing stands as an everlasting command founded and built upon the mere
written word, making a precious discovery of the Lords will to admit every
lost, perishing soul that will, to be reconciled, 1 John 3.23. Now thence it is
most wretched disobedience in any soul, when he has lost that glorious light
of manifestation from the spirit, to disobey that precious Heavenly command
also.

Prop. 2. Secondly, Whenever any soul subjects himself to the Principle of
darkness and unbelief, that still dwells in him, upon the Lords withdrawing the
brightness and glory, of that satisfying light of the spirit, that did evidence
unto the soul his union with Christ, and cast off his confidence of the Lords
admission of his soul into union with Christ, then the soul is incapable while
he so remains of making any precious, holy use of those former evidences that
his Soul enjoyed of his union with Jesus Christ.

1. In regard while the soul so remains, there can be no holy conception of the
evidences that his Soul did formerly enjoy. First take holiness for all kind of
strictness and righteousness, and conformity to the Lords blessed will, and in
that sense there can be no righteous conception of his former evidences; The
soul cannot understand them what they are, nor discern them as they were.

Secondly, Take holiness, effectively, for these conceptions that do excite and
quicken a believing soul unto holy actings, and in that sense there can be no
holy conception of his former evidences, while the soul so remains: All such
conceptions or apprehensions of the way of God toward us, are as holy
effectively, that is, that produce or quicken a soul to holiness, are such as
do apprehend some beam of excellency shining forth from those ways of God, in
relation to that particular souls good; now while a soul casts off all his
confidence of the Lords will, to admit him into union with the Lord Jesus, he
cannot conceive of his former evidence in such a manner, as to conceive any
beam of excellency shining forth from God, in relation to his particular soul.

2. While any Heart so remains, he is incapable of making a holy use of his
former evidences, in regard the activity of all holy affections whatever depend
upon the activity of that believing disposition, they live and die together.
The moving Principles that move holy affections objectively, are the believing
conceptions and apprehensions of God; that is to say, the apprehensions of the
Lords will, to receive the poor loveless soul to be reconciled to him, through
his union with Jesus Christ: And therefore while a soul casts off all his
confidence, that the Lords will is to admit his soul to be one with Jesus
Christ, there is a defect of moving Principles, to move the affections to their
exercise; and so consequently there can be no activity of any precious, holy
affections.

3. In regard all the Ordinances, that should excite and quicken the heart, to
the holy use of his former evidences, are made useless. While the soul enslaves
himself to carnal reason through unbelief, not believing Gods will to make him
one with Jesus Christ, though the Gospel should be preached by the mouth of
Angels, and they should be sent from Heaven to be mouths to those souls in
Prayer, yet those Ordinances could have no operation upon those souls; says
the Apostle, Heb. 4.2. The word that was preached profited not, because it was
not mixed with faith in them that heard it: if there be not some degree of
confidence in that great and grand Gospel Truth to the particular soul, there
can be no mixing faith with any other Gospel Truth that should be Preached, so
as to make it have a precious efficacy upon the Heart.

4. When any Heart yields up himself captive to unbelieving reason, and so
casts off all that his precious confidence, it cannot make a believing use of
his former evidence of union with Christ, in regard there is a continual
decrease in all holiness, and increase in all the working of corruption, while
the soul so remains. The Heart is so naturally active, that it will be spending
its strength in some kind of activity or other, and therefore when the holy
actings of the forenamed precious confidence is sealed, the Heart will spend
all its strength in corrupt workings; when the Heavenly plant of faith does not
grow and flourish in the soul, the weeds that come from the Devils Garden will
be all flourishing, hardness, indisposition for God, hard thoughts of God will
all be augmenting daily.

Prop. 3. Thirdly, No Soul ought to entertain such a superlative conceit of the
use of those evidences of his union with Christ, that he formerly received,
that he should make those his evidences the sole, or the primary, or the
principal Prop or Pillar, whereupon he builds his confidence, that the Lord
will admit his soul into union with Jesus Christ. The utmost use intended by
God, that believing souls should make of former evidences received, can be but
strengthnings and encouragements, to renew the strength of their confidence in
his truth and faithfulness, to fulfill his blessed word unto their souls, It is
utterly strange from the mind of God, that souls should make any one act of God
toward or in the soul the principal Pillar, Rock and foundation whereupon to
build its hope of his union with Jesus Christ. All those actings of the spirit
of God, whether by way of light and manifestation, or by way of infusion of
holiness, they are merely arbitrary (excepting only the spirits constant
influence for the preservation of the life of a believing soul) and
consequently, changeable and various, according as the infinite wisdom of
Heaven does see suitable, for the estate of various souls: but now the Lord out
of that transcendent riches of his love in Christ, has prepared unchangeable
Rocks, where the prime Anchor of believing souls hope should be fastened,
unmoving Pillars that never shake, whereupon the foundation of their confidence
must be laid, according to Heb. 6.17. he confirms it by an Oath, that by 2.
immutable things, two things that were subject to no alteration or diminution,
that is to say, by the word of the Majesty of Heaven, and by his Oath also,
they might have strong consolation, that do flee from refuge to lay hold upon
the hope set before them; that is, that do accept of the Lord Jesus tendered to
them: So that the hanging thus the eternal estate of the soul upon the former
evidences, is too high an use to put the former evidences too: It is the truth
it self that the former evidencing beams of light manifest, that is only
destinated to that precious use, to build the confidence of the souls admission
into union with Jesus Christ upon, even that truth that the Lord does declare,
that it is his will to admit even that particular soul into union with Jesus
Christ, if he will aceept it; and whenever scruples and objections and doubts
possess the soul concerning the truth of any former evidences, the firstborn
of the souls endeavor should be taken up, in in clearing that truth that the
soul did conceive some beams of light did evidence to him.

Prop. 4. There is a strait command from the highest Majesty of Heaven and
Earth, given unto every believing soul, to make a holy use, advantage and
improvement of his former evidences of his union with Jesus Christ vouchsafed
to him. That one Scripture gives sufficient testimony, Heb. 10.32. Call to
remembrance the former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a
great fight of afflictions: This the Apostle commands them in order to the
strengthening of their confidence, ver. 35. Thus Asaph did, Psalm. 77.5, 6. When
he was under darkness, when the powers of unbelief began to rage in his soul,
and to tyranize over him, then he began to make improvement of his former
evidences of the Lords love, and favor to him, he remembered God, and was
troubled; now he recalls himself, and begins to make diligent search into the
former testimony of the Lords kindness to him, I considered the days of old,
the years of ancient times, I call to remembrance my Song in the Night, I
commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit made diligent search. I call to
remembrance my Song in the Night;] that is, the former comfortable Communion I
enjoyed in God; how God delighted himself in Communion with my soul, and my
soul delighted it self in Communion with God again, how God spoke peace to me,
and I answerably rejoiced in God again: And I Commune with mine own Heart] I
looked over the Records of my Heart, and made diligent search, to see what
experience of truth, and goodness, and loving kindness of God to my soul are
treasured up there. Yea, then to help himself further, ver. 10.11. he
endeavors to make some improvement of the manifestation of the Lords love and
kindness, truth and faithfulness even to others; I will remember the works of
the Lord, surely I will remember thy wonders of old. There is a command from
Heaven upon believing souls to make use of their former evidences, and there is
some kind of inherent power in every believing Soul to act something in order
to this holy use, or improvement of his former evidence. Now the holy use of
those former evidences, that believing souls are engaged from Heaven to make,
they are various. We shall endeavor to sum up 5. or 6.

1. Every such soul ought to gather from his former evidences of his union with
Jesus Christ, some strength to his present confidence, that the Lord will admit
his soul into union with Christ. I beseech you mistake not, I speak not of
those probable fluctuating hopes, that some souls have enjoyed of their union
with Jesus Christ, from some apprehensions of some present actings of the Holy
spirit in their Hearts, to clear to them in some degree their union with Jesus
Christ, and to foster up some hopes of it, Those I say, though they may be, and
are frequently such as really descend from the spirit of Jesus Christ; yet also
from such conceited, and supposed actings of the sanctifying spirit of Jesus
Christ, proceeds most of those soul-deluding hopes, that poor blind souls are
deluded with, by the Prince of Darkness: And therefore because the difference
between these two, is a matter of so great difficulty to discern, I durst not
persuade any soul who conceives that he has had evidences of his union with
Jesus Christ, whose evidences have been only some flashes of light, from some
conceived actings of the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, to believe firmly,
impregnably, and unmoveably, that the truth and reality of those his evidences
did descend from God, when he does not discern them: Those fluctuating
evidences unto sense, questionless if Souls adhere unto them, they must put
them upon the trial by sense again. Therefore now observe, I speak of the
precious, clear, infallible evidence given unto a believing soul, from the
blessed Spirit of light and manifestation, to clear unto the Souls faith
unquestionably, that the Lords good will is to admit his particular Soul into
union with Jesus Christ, in case his Soul will accept it; through which
evidence unto faith also, the evidence unto sense has attained a clear beam
from the Spirit of light, discerning the truth of the close of the believers
Heart with the blessed will of God; yet mark also, that which I speak has its
relation solely to those evidencing beams of light given unto the believers
faith of his union with Jesus Christ. Now I say, though such a soul be
unsuitable to take a just examination of those evidencing beams of light
formerly given to his faith, when their glory is obscured and darkened, yet the
Soul ought to believe the truth of those evidencing beams of light, though it
cannot so clearly and sensibly discern it. The matter that was evidenced to the
Soul, is no more than that there lies an Obligation upon the Soul from Heaven
continually to believe; And therefore the matter that was evidenced being true,
and the Soul engaged from God to believe it, the Soul also stands engaged to
believe the truth of that his former evidence that his Soul received,
concerning the blessed will of God toward him; and from the remembrance of
such a former mamanifestation, given unto the Soul by the blessed Spirit,
concerning that blessed good will of God toward him, the Soul ought to gather
heart and strength, and courage to renew the confidence of his poor, wavering,
rrembling, unstable Heart.

2. The believing Soul ought from the remembrance of his former evidences,
given unto his faith of his union with the Lord Jesus, to foster and nourish a
lively hope in his soul, that the same blessed light of manifestation (to
manifest unto his faith clearly his union with the Lord Jesus) may return. That
experience that such a Soul have had, that there is a time of light, and a time
of darkness that the wisdom of Heaven sees suitable for believing Souls, that
there is a Night and a Day, as well in the Spiritual life, as in the natural
life, ought to be a ground to maintain a lively hope, that when it is Night,
Day may break, and therefore it is his Duty unquestionably to nourish and
cherish such a lively hope.

3. From the remembrance of its former evidence, the Soul ought to obstruct it
self in the obscurity, darkness, and dreadful blindness of his own mind. The
believing Soul ought to say within himself; O when the Spirit of Jesus Christ
irradiated the blessed word of God; how clear, how unquestionable was it to my
Soul, that it was the Lords blessed will to receive my Soul into union with
Jesus Christ, if I will embrace him; and though I have now the same word to
testify the same thing to my Soul, yet how dark is it to my Soul for the
present, how hard is it for my poor blind Mind to receive and apprehend, that
the Lords will is to receive this my Soul into union with Jesus Christ?

4. From the remembrance of the Souls former evidence, the Soul ought to
instruct it self in the mystery of the Lords way toward believing Souls. From
hence the Soul may learn, that the Lord carries on the Soul toward full
Communion with himself through Christ, as well by sensible decays in Communion,
as by sensible increases in Communion; And from thence the Soul might instruct
it self, that joy and peace, ravishment of Spirit, triumphing acts of faith,
are not so inseparable from believing Souls, but that they may be wanting, that
they are not absolutely necessary to be constant, at least to the Souls
attaining unto perfection of Communion; so that thus the Soul may learn to
adore the Lord in apprehending the unsearchableness of his ways, even toward
believing Souls, the unsearchableness of his Wisdom, that neither Man nor Angel
can measure.

5. From the remembrance of the Souls former evidences, whose brightness and
glory is now ecclipsed, the Soul may instruct it self in the absolute necessity
of an entire, constant, uninterrupted dependence upon Jesus Christ for the
Spirit of light and manifestation: The Soul ought in remembrance of that full
satisfaction that it enjoyed when that blessed Spirit of light gave beams of
light to his dark mind, to clear up the will of God revealed in his precious
word; to say, O how infinite is the necessity of hanging upon Jesus Christ
continually, for the constant operation of the Spirit of light into this my
dark Heart.

6. From the remembrance of the Souls former evidence of his union with Jesus
Christ, the Soul ought to collect holy Pleas, and precious Arguments, to
intercede with the Majesty of Heaven for the return of the blessed Spirit of
light and manifestation unto his Soul. This was the constant practice of all
the Saints, who had enjoyed any experiences of the Lords mercy and kindness,
they did endeavor to engage the Lord to return when he seemed to be absent.

Many are the Arguments that a believing soul may collect from the former
enjoyment of evidences of union with Christ, to plead with the Majesty of
Heaven, to return with the same spirit of light and manifestation again to his
Soul.

1. From the remembrance of the Souls former evidence, the soul may remember
the precious suitable disposition, that possessed his Heart for the worshipping
of the Lord in every Ordinance. Now from thence the Soul may raise a precious
Argument, wherewith he may go boldly to the Throne of Grace, and cry to the
blessed Majesty of Heaven, when shall that blessed Spirit of light return to
this darkened Soul of mine.

2. The Soul may remember the readiness, the quickness, the activity of the
Heart in all manner of obedience to the Lords blessed will. Now from hence the
Soul may fetch a strong Argument, wherewith to come before the Throne of Grace;
O my God may the believing Soul say, When thy blessed Spirit of light had the
precious operation upon my Heart, what a blessed concurrence was there in this
my crooked opposite will, to this thy holy will; O what an union of love was
there, between this thy Majesty and my opposite Heart, how impatient then was
my Soul, of any disagreement between my will and thy will, how readily was my
heart disposed for any thing thy blessed Majesty commanded? But now alas Lord,
now the workings of the Spirit of light are suspended, what a disagreement is
there between thy Majesty's will and my will; how strait and narrow, and weak
and feeble, are the inclinations of my Heart now to obedience to thy blessed
will? Lord may the Soul say; Have respect to thine own honor, send down the
Spirit of light into this dark Heart.

3. The Soul may remember how highly the blessed Name of God was exalted and
magnified in his Heart, when that blessed Spirit of light continued its blessed
operation to evidence actually its union with the Lord Jesus. Now from thence,
the Soul from whom the luster and glory of these his former evidences of union
with Christ is now Ecclipsed, may argue with the blessed Majesty of Heaven to
send down the same Spirit of light and manifestation again to his dark Soul.

4. Even when the orient brightness, and Heavenly luster of the Souls former
evidences is Ecclipsed and darkened, yet then the Soul may remember the
capaciousness, and enlarged openness of his Heart toward communion with God,
while the orient luster of the evidences of his union with Christ did actually
remain. Now from hence the Soul may gather strength of Argument to appear
before the Lord, to Petition the return of the blessed Spirit of light and
manifestation again to his Soul: The Soul may plead that the suitableness, and
right disposition of the Heart for Communion with the Lord, depends upon the
enjoyment of the Spirit of light and manifestation.

5. Even when the orient brightness of the Souls former evidences are ecclipsed
and obscured, yet then the Soul may remember how gloriously the lovely beauty,
and Soul enamouring brightness of the way of holiness was transparent through
him, when the Heavenly luster of his former evidences did actually remain in
the Soul. Now from hence the Soul may gather a precious Argument, whereby he
may lay an engagement upon the Majesty of Heaven, to send down the Spirit of
light again: Thence the Soul may plead, that the luster and Heavenly beauty of
the ways of holiness to be manifested through him, depend upon his enjoyment of
the Spirit of light and manifestation.

6. When the cammanding power of the evidence of a Souls union with Christ is
ceased for the present, to evidence to the Soul its union, yet then the Soul
may remember that the tender compassionate bowels of God have moved within him,
and yearned toward his Soul formerly. Now from thence the feeble, almost
fainting drooping Soul, may still gather more strength, and lift up its Head
again, to claim the Spirit of light and manifestation, to be sent from Heaven
into his dark Soul.

7. When the splendour, and beauty, and satisfying power of the evidences that
the Soul have received of his union with Jesus Christ be decayed, yet then the
Soul may remember, that all his abominable wickedness, and most cursed
vileness, did not formerly prevent some movings of the Bowels of the Lords
mercy toward him. Now hence may the Soul gather strength to plead for the
returns of the^^ blessed Spirit of light into his dark Soul. Hence the Soul may
plead, that there is the same reason, the same motive to incline the Lords
blessed will, to send now the Spirit of light and manifestation to it, that
ever there was to incline his Majesty to the least thought of kindness toward
it.

8. The Soul from whose Eyes some dark Clouds has obscured the former luster
of his Evidences, yet may remember that some spark of holy confidence in the
Lords blessed will, to admit the Soul into union with Jesus Christ, was
formerly infused into his unbelieving Heart. Now from thence the Soul may again
gather some strength, whereby to lay hold upon the Lord, and to engage him, to
give as it were a new Commission to the Spirit of light to come down to his
dark Soul: Thence the Soul may plead the Lords engagement, never to recall the
gift once past, out of the hand of his precious love, he having declared his
Gifts are without Repentance; and thence the Soul may plead, that the Lord
stands engaged to nourish up that confidence, so begotten in the Heart by his
blessed Spirit.

9. When the irresistible commanding power of the evidence that any Soul has
received of his union with Christ be weak, yet then the Soul may remember the
uselesness, the inefficatiousness of all terrors and distractions upon his
Spirit, and the most blessed efficacy that the least glimpse of light,
discovering to the Soul, the Lords will to admit it into union, had upon his
Heart. Now from hence the Soul may cry to the Lord, and complain in the
bitterness of his Soul, that he understands not what his blessed will
concerning him is, in terrifying and affrighting, suffering his Spirit even to
be distracted with terror. Lord may the Soul say, Has thy Majesty its honor
from me this way? Is thy Name exalted in my Heart in this manner? Will my Heart
ever bow in obedience to thy blessed Will, through the power of those terrors
and distractions that are upon me? This holy arguing and expostulating with the
blessed Majesty of Heaven, and engaging him by Arguments, collected from what
the Soul remembers, in his former evidences of his union with Christ, is the
last holy use that the Soul may make of his former evidences of his union, when
their Heavenly luster, and commanding power and beauty cease. And I would
persuade every obscure Soul, from whose Eyes those sweet Heavenly beams of
light are now hidden (with which his Eyes were once blessed) above all the
other uses, to have a particular respect to this last use, thus to gain upon
God, to insinuate its self into the love and favor of the Lord again, to
engage the Majesty of Heaven by this kind of pleading with him, to send down
the Spirit of light and manifestation afresh. This indeed is the very principal
use of the former evidence, wherefor^ present darkness overspread it, and that
in these Two respects.

First, In regard in this kind of pleading, the poor decaying sparks of the
Souls confidence, is kept in some degree alive. Now the stronger the Souls
confidence is, the more suitable is the Soul to make a righteous examination,
or just and impartial trial, of those former evidences of his union with the
Lord Jesus.

Secondly, In those pleadings, the Spirit of light may be again expected to
return. The blessed Spirit, and all the actings of it, are reserved in the
Golden Closet of the Promises, wherein the Lord has engaged himself to
Communicate whatever mercy and love shall be suitable to the poor believing
Soul; and these holy pleadings are the Key to the Door of the Golden Closet; I
mean, the Key of the Promise, to open the Door for the Spirit of lighr to have
its free access. Questionless by such a holy improvement of former evidences as
this, believing Souls might be much furthered toward the obtaining of the
renewed operations of the spirit of light, and manifestation of renewed
discoveries from the same Spirit unto the Souls faith, of the Lords will to
receive him into union with the Lord Jesus. Thus now you have the Question also
cast in upon this occasion opened: It is apparent there is a precious holy use
that Souls may make of all former evidences when their orient brightness is
ecclipsed, and their commanding power is weakened, though the Soul cannot then
take an impartial examination of those his evidences or put them upon such a
righteous Trial whether they be really from God or no.

One consideration also I must add concerning knowledge, whether evidences of
union received be really from God, or whether they be Diabolical inspirations..
The Soul must understand that this knowledge is a collection, or gathering of
this conclusion, that his evidences received are really from God, from a
certain, necessary, infallible reason. The difference between knowledge of the
evidence to be really from God, and Opinion, and Faith, must always be kept
clear in the Souls understanding, who shall be able to receive a right answer
to that grand Question propounded. To believe the Souls evidences that he has
received of his union with Jesus Christ; to be really from God, is an act of
the Soul that has its foundation only upon the authority of him that relates,
or discovers it to the Soul. There are two things whereupon faith is founded.

First, That the thing believed is spoken or declared.

Secondly, That the Speaker or Declarer is true and faithful. Now to have an
Opinion that the evidences of the Souls union with Christ received, are really
from God, is to collect or gather the conclusion of it from some probable
reason, as from the adjunct, or the consequence that follow in his Soul upon
his receiving the evidences of his union with Christ: But the knowledge that
the evidences of a Souls union with Christ received, is really from God, is the
collection of this conclusion to the Soul, from a certain, necessary, and
infallible reason. Therefore your Philosophers in distinguishing between
knowledge and opinion, define knowledge to be a certain true habit of the mind:
And they define Opinion to be an uncertain habit in the mind. So that he that
propounds the Question; How a Soul that conceives he has received sufficient
and satisfying evidence of his union with the Lord Jesus, may know certainly
and infallibly, that the evidence of his union received is really from God, he
must understand that he asks, How a Soul may demonstrate to himself from
certain necessary reasons, that the evidences of his union with Christ received
are really from God. Now I beseech you every Soul, believing or unbelieving,
remember as far as possible, all the considerations that have been premised
about this Question; and withal these fixed and established in your minds,
proceed with me to make a righteous trial of the evidences that you conceive
your Souls have received of your union with the Lord Jesus.

So then all these considerations premised, our Question propounded must be
thus sta^ed.

Quest. How shall any Soul that conceives he has received, and does actually
enjoy, certain and sufficient evidences of his union with the Lord Jesus,
demonstrate from certain necessary and evident reasons, that those his
evidences are really from God?

Answ. For Answer then directly to the Question. There are but two kind of
Demonstrations, whereby a Soul can demonstrate to its self the reality of his
evidence received proceeding from God.

You must understand we are now speaking of knowledge; and what was spoken
before of faith, must not come into our remembrance in this thing: For you must
remember we gave you a distinction between knowledge, faith, and opinion, we
look not for opinion now; That is, some probable ground of our union with Jesus
Christ: nor we do not look to faith which is the declaration of Gods will to
admit it into union with Jesus Christ: But we look to knowledge, and there are
but Two Demonstrations, a Demonstration Priori, and a Demonstration a
Posteriori; A Demonstration taken from the Causes, and a Demonstration taken
from the Effects.

The first and most certain ground, whereupon the Soul may prove its union from
God, is taken from the causes; now the Causes are various: But the Two
Principal Reasons must be taken from the Two Principal Causes. Now there are
but Two Principal Causes of the Souls union with the Lord Jesus, both which
concur together, and are never separated one from another. The Two efficient
Causes instrumental, is the Lords blessed written Word, and that precious
Spirit of Jesus Christ. The written Word is the more remote cause, and the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus is the more immediate efficient cause.

Now because the reason whereby we may draw any conclusion is most strong, that
it is taken from the most immediate cause of any thing* And in respect that the
Spirit of Jesus Christ is the most immediate efficient cause (though but still
instrumental) because the Spirit does more immediately send down those beams of
light, that do most clearly reveal to faith the Lords will, to take the Soul
into union with Christ, and also those beams of light that discover to the Soul
the integrity of his Heart in believing; Thence we shall first speak of that
reason which is taken from the blessed Spirit of Jesus Christ; and so I answer
thus, That the first primary and principal reason from whence a Soul may
conclude, that the evidences of his union received are really from God is, that
those evidencing beams of light does proceed from the blessed Spirit of Jesus
Christ. And it is the knowledge of this, that they are those beams of light
proceeding from the Spirit of Christ, by which a Soul attains the most certain
and infallible knowledge, that his evidences were from God; by this he attains
that which is most properly called knowledge; according as the Philosophers
say, to know a thing, is to discern the nature or being of it by its most
proper immediate cause. But now least the Soul should say, you here answer one
doubt by another, which is as great a doubt, and leads the Soul but on into
further darkness; the Soul is as doubtful of this you will say, whether those
beams of light proceed from the Spirit of Jesus Christ, as it is whether they
were from God? Therefore for your satisfaction here must be Two things opened.

First, That the light that does proceed from the blessed Spirit of Christ, to
evidence unto any Soul its union with Jesus Christ, does evidence, that it does
proceed from the blessed Spirit.

Secondly, It must be opened, that the light that so proceeds from the Spirit
to evidence to the Soul its union with Christ, is the most potent, and powerful
demonstration, that begets the most certain knowledge of the Souls union with
Christ, even the most proper and highest kind of knowledge.

First, It must be manifested that the light that proceeds from the Spirit, to
evidence to any Soul its union with Christ, does evidence it self to proceed
from the Spirit. There are such sparklings of Divinity in those precious Beams
of Light, that the spirit sends down into any Believing soul to discover its
union, that the eye that beholds those Beams of Light, see the very Divinity of
them, he sees that they come out from God: There is such Coruscations; or
Bright shinings of Heavenly Glory upon those Beams of Divine Light, as gives a
satisfying discovery that they are from the Spirit of God; Those beams of light
they bear the Image of God upon them, they have in a manner the name of the
blessed spirit of Jesus Christ Engraven upon them, that the soul that beholds
them even reads the name of the blessed spirit Engraven there: So that those
Beams of light (by an inseparable property that the Lord has annexed to them)
do so discover their Original to be from the spirit of God, as they do satisfy
every soul to whom they are sent down, and make it unquestionable that they are
from the Spirit of God: Yea the name of the spirit of God is so palinly
Engraven upon those beams of Light, that the soul so easily discerns it, that
all Fears, Doubts, and Suspicions, all workings of Jealousy, that those
evidencing beams of light are not from the spirit, are Banished by their Mighty
Power: I mean, the soul enjoying those, at that instant while their luster,
their Hevenly bright shining Coruscations and Glory continue, the soul fears
not that they are Delusions, he does not so much as question that they are
Delusions: According to that in 1 John 2.27. But the Anointing which ye have
Received of him abides in you: That is, the spirit of Jesus Christ
Communicated to you abides in you, which is here called the Anointing, because
according to that in Isa. 61.1, 2. The pouring out of the spirit of Grace and
Holiness upon Christ as Mediator, is called the Anointing of Christ for his
Mediatorial Office, and so the participating of the spirit by Believers, is
called the Anointing of Believers to partake of their head: Now says he, the
Anointing abides in you, that is, the spirit abides in you, and ye need not
that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you all things, and
is truth and is no lie: The spirit teaches you all things; He does not mean of
all truth, and the whole Counsel of God, for that no believing soul yet
understood while he dwelt in Houses of Clay, ( Paul himself understanding but
in part) but he speaks of the truths forenamed, the grand Gospel Truths, the
spirit it self teaches you all things, that is, of these things mentioned;
Teach ye that you shall have eternal Life in Jesus Christ: And mark, and is
truth and is no lie; That is to say, it teaches you so that you know it is
truth, and you know ye are not deceived while that so teaches, or in its
teaching: And therefore he says in the former words, that they need not that
any man should teach them; Not that there is no necessity of the Precious
Ordinances of Jesus Christ still for their souls, whereby the truth of Jesus
Christ should be brought to their Remembrance, and the Precious Actings of the
Believing Disposition in all these drawn forth, for that is necessary for every
believing soul; But thus, you need not that any man teach you, that is, you
need no other Confirmation of the truth of these things, then what the Spirit
of Jesus Christ gave you; you need not that any man should come to give a
clearer discovery of the certainty and truth of those. And thence also in 1
Cor. 2.12. The Apostle affirms, that they had received the Spirit of God, that
did teach them to know the things given to them of God, v. 10. That God had
revealed his truth to them by the Spirit. Now this must be further confirmed by
diverse reasons, that the light that proceeds from the Spirit of Christ,
revealing to the Soul its union with Christ, does evidence to the Soul that it
does proceed from Christ.

1. In regard it is the testimony of God unto the Soul concerning its union.
Now that witness or testimony of God to the soul concerning its union, if it
did not evidence even by its own light, that it did proceed from the Spirit of
God, it were no witness of God at all unto the Soul concerning its union. It is
of greater concernment to the Soul in this case, to understand who it is that
speaks, than to understand what it is that is spoken; unless the Soul
understands clearly, that the light that now came into his Soul does proceed
from the Spirit of God, he understands not that it is Gods witness: It is not
so much the thing that is testified, as the consideration of him who it is that
testifies, that satisfies the soul, or makes it to be the Witness of God to the
soul.

2. In regard the evidence is the testimony from God, on purpose to give the
soul satisfaction concerning his union, to revive, refresh, and comfort the
soul, by the discovery of his union with Christ. Thence it is, that Christ in
his promising to the Disciples to send his blessed spirit to dwell in their
hearts, while he was absent from them, John 14.16. He names the spirit the
Comforter, revealing what the Office of the spirit is by his Name. Now should
not the light from the spirit, that does evidence to the soul his union with
Christ, evidence it self also to be from the spirit of Christ, that testimony
of God that is from that light to the soul, could give no satisfaction to the
doubtful scrupulous soul: Therefore doubtless the light from the spirit does
always carry sufficient evidence for it self, to evidence from it self whence
it is; seeing God intends those beams of light to give satisfaction to the soul.

3. In regard that light from the spirit of Jesus Christ is the highest
witness, or testimony unto a soul concerning his union. Now seeing that those
beams of light are the highest witness, there is a necessicity that those beams
of light should evidence themselves what they are, by an inseparable property
of their own, otherwise their witness must be subject to be tried by the
testimony of something else; so that the highest witness of the spirit must
come to be subject to this holy quality and that precious disposition.

4. Should not the light that proceeds from the spirit to discover to a souls
faith and sense his union with Christ, evidence it self to be from the spirit
of Christ, then the blessed testimony of the spirit of Jesus Christ should be
altogether vain and useless. Those sweetest beams of heavenly light are the
spirits voice; and should it speak in an unknown tongue, that is, should not
its voice be distinguished from all other voices, the spirit should but beat
the air, that is, all the light that it discovers to the soul of its union with
Christ should be frustrated, void and of none effect.

5. In regard the spirit of Christ necssarily fulfills the office to which
Jesus Christ has appointed it.

The Lord has destinated that Spirit of his to Seal up Believers, to Seal up
their Inheritance, Ephesians. 13. Chap. 4.30: Now a Seal is destinated on purpose to
give a peculiar Confirmation of the thing Sealed. Yea likewise the spirit of
Jesus Christ is destinated to be the Earnest in the Believers soul whom it is
sent to Seal, to be the Earnest of his Inheritance, according to that in Ephesians.
1.13.

Says the Original, it is Translated [which,] but it is rather [who] is the
earnest of our Inheritance, or who is the Pledge: The word signifies some part
of a price paid beforehand, to assure the Payment of a full Price, for some
Commodity bought: So that the meaning is, who is given you as a part
beforehand, of that full Inheritance that you may expect, and may be the better
assured that you shall enjoy the full Inheritance. Now did not the spirit of
Jesus Christ make those Beams of Light (sent down into any soul to discover to
them their union with Christ) to discover themselves to be from the spirit, the
soul should remain dubious after the clearest Testimony of the spirit, whether
he had received the spirit of Christ or no, and so the spirit of Christ in his
Sealing Office should be no earnest, seeing the spirit must be an earnest as it
discovers it self to be in the soul.

6. In regard it is the Light of the spirit of Jesus Christ, that is the only
Discoverer of all Divine things, that makes all things manifest. It is light
that makes all things manifest; Now the Spirit of Christ is the only spirit of
Light and Wisdom, and Revelation: So that there can nothing be made manifest to
the soul, but what some Beam of Light from the spirit of Light must manifest:
And then observe it, whatever reason any soul should study to prove the Beams
of Light, that were sent down into his soul (to discover to him his union with
Christ) were from the spirit, even that reason must be discovered in the Truth
and Reality of it, by some Beam of Light from the spirit, and then unless the
Beam of Light from the spirit does carry sufficient Evidence in it, to discover
it self to be from the spirit, the soul should be deceived in the reality of
that very reason, that he studied up to prove, that the former Beams of Light
that were sent down into his soul came down from the spirit. To speak more
plainly thus, seeing the spirit of Jesus Christ is only the spirit of light,
whatever Holy Dispositions, whatever Precious Heavenly Quality any Believing
soul shall discern in it self, it must be discerned by a Beam of light from the
Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The second thing to be opened is, That the light that proceeds from
the spirit to discover to the soul its union with Christ, is the most Potent,
Invincible Demonstration of its own proceeding from God, which begets the most
Certain and Infallible knowledge in the soul of his union with Christ. That
precious light of the spirit of Jesus Christ, does so clearly discover it self
to be from the spirit of Christ, that there can be no reason that can make any
Addition or Increase of that precious clearness: It shines so brightly with the
very Image of the spirit of Jesus Christ upon it, as nothing can make it more
manifest to be from the spirit than its own light. This will appear in diverse
particulars.

I. In regard that Beam of light that proceeds from the spirit, to discover to
the soul its union with Christ, discovers nothing but what is infallibly true.
Not only what is infallibly true in it self, but it discovers nothing but what
is infallibly true to the souls Apprehension to whom it does discover it. Now
when the Principles of a Demonstration are infallibly true, then has it the
first property of the highest and most Potent Demonstration.

II. In regard that light which discovers the first light of the spirit, to be
the light of the spirit, does also again Evidence it self to be the light of
the spirit also. Now that is the highest demonstrative Reason, to prove that any
thing proceeds from God, that is to say, that it is discovered by the spirit of
God: Now that light of the spirits first light, does plainly demonstrate that
to the soul that it comes from the spirit of God: So that there is no other
Medium, no other reason that can be imagined higher, to prove that the first
light from the spirit, that discovers to the soul its union with Christ was
from God.

III. In regard it is the most evident perspicuous discovery of those beams of
light to be from God, that can possibly be given. Every reason from whence any
Conclusion is Collected, must be clearer and more evident than the Conclusion
it self. Now it is only the light of the spirit of Jesus Christ, which is more
evident and clear than the Conclusion it self drawn that the Evidences are
really from God: So that if it were possible for a higher proof to be made, of
the certainty of the beams of light, that discovers to a soul its union with
Christ, of the certainty of their being from God, then this very light that
these Beams of light contain in themselves, then there must be some light
clearer than the very first light, that proceeds from the spirit of light and
manifestation, whose office it is to discover all things to the soul.

IV. In regard it is that light only that can truly enforce, or cause the
Conclusion to be drawn, that the Beams of light that did discover to the soul
its union with Christ were from God. Now that is the highest kind of
demonstrative Reason, to show the truth or reality of any thing, when the
principles, (that is the reasons from whence the Conclusion is Collected) are
the cause of the Conclusion: Now thus the light of the spirit was those Beams
of light, that discovered to my soul, its union with the Lord Jesus was really
from God: why? because they came from the spirit of God. Such Premises as
these, to say what the spirit of God reveals and discovers, that must of
necessity proceed from God, does even force the Conclusion to be drawn: Whereas
nothing else has so much power in it to cause the Conclusion to be drawn, as
that light that proceeds from the spirit. Now from these things opened, you may
hence take notice, that every soul to whole Faith and Sense, the spirit of
Christ has truly Revealed their union with Christ, have full satisfaction,
clear undoubted satisfaction, concerning his union with the Lord Jesus, in all
its most Serious, Deliberate Meditations and Contemplations: So that so long as
those Precious Beams of light from the spirit, do remain actually shining into
the soul, there is no kind of Doubt, Scruple, or Darkness in the soul about its
union with the Lord Jesus; So that any soul that has received this tru^
discovery from the spirit of light, both unto Faith and Sense, of his union
with the Lord Jesus, need not inquire for any more proofs, than his own soul
possesses at that instant, that God and his soul are one through Christ.

. Secondly, The second Instrumental cause, that shines into any heart really
from God, to discover to that heart his union with Jesus Christ, is the Lords
Precious Word. That Heavenly light that shines into any dark and doubtful
heart, to reveal its union with the Lord Jesus to it clearly, is only a
precious spark that sparkles forth from the Precious Burning Lamp of the Lords
Written Word; And it is the Blessed Spirit of Jesus Christ that does as it were
Incense and Inflame that burning lamp of the Lords Blessed Word, and cause it
to send forth those Blessed sparks into dark hearts; And it is that same
Blessed spirit also that enlightens those dark hearts, to see, discern, and
behold those sparks, that that burning lamp of the Lords Word send forth: So
that the spirit of Jesus Christ and the Written Word, are but Concauses that
jointly and sweetly join together, to enlighten the Doubtful soul, and clearly
reveal its union with the Lord Jesus. So that the soul has for his assurance,
the hand of the ever Blessed God, and the Testimony of God that it is his own
hand: He has that secret light that discovers it self to be of God, which
discovers to the souls faith his union with Christ, and to his sense the truth
of his own believing act; And has the Written Word, which is a Letter Written
from the Almighty to loveless souls, that bears Witness also to the same thing.
So that then the second reason, next to the prime reason (that the light that
the soul receives proceeds from the spirit of God) is this, that the soul
beholds it clearly shine forth from the Lords Written Word. But to clear this
there must be two things opened.

First, That a believing soul ought to receive the light that discovers to him
his union with the Lord Jesus, from the Written Word of God, and ought to
receive that light as certain and infallible, because it shines from the
Written Word.

Secondly, That the Lords Precious Written Word, does discover to particular
believing souls, their particular union with the Lord Jesus, both unto their
Faith, and unto their Sense.

First, It must be cleared, That a believing soul ought to receive the light,
that discovers to his soul his union with the Lord Jesus, from the written
Word; and ought to receive it as certain and infallible, because it proceeds
from the Written Word. This appears.

I. In regard it is the direct Command of Heaven, that believing souls should
stick and cleave only, to that truth that is discovered in the Lords Written
Word; And that believing souls should be confirmed in the truth of that
Precious Gospel of Jesus Christ, because it is contained in the Lords Written
Word, in the book of the Old and New Testament. This you shall find in that 2 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and
have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them; And that from a
Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee Wise
unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.

First it is necessary here to observe the occasion: you shall find in the
beginning of the Chapter, the Apostle had foretold of perilous times
approaching, wherein there should be many false Doctors in the World, in whose
Snares many souls should be taken Captives; Therefore least Timothy also should
be Ensnared, the Apostle Writes these Verses on purpose, to endeavor to
Establish Tymothy's soul in the truth; Says he, Continue thou in the things
which thou have Learned, knowing of whom thou have Received them: Now the
Arguments he uses to settle Timothy in the truth are two;

First from his Apostolical Call; knowing from whom thou have learned them;
From an Apostle of Jesus Christ that had received it from Jesus Christ.

The second Argument is in those next Verses, That from a Child thou have known
the Holy Scriptures; The Writings of the Prophets, and those Holy Men of God,
that spoke as they were moved by the Spirit of God, that the Lord caused to be
Written as a Rule: Now this being his Argument, to continue in the truth of the
Gospel Received, the Apostle does illustrate it by three or four things.

First, He discovers to him that those Writings of the Holy Men of God that he
had been acquainted with; were able to make him Wise unto Salvation, through
Faith in Christ Jesus, that is, if his soul did receive those discoveries in
those Scriptures by Faith; So that the Apostle intimates thus much; That it
were infinite Folly in Timothy to receive any other Doctrine, than what he had
taught, and what he had learned to be written in the holy Scriptures, seeing
the Wisdom of God to Salvation was contained in them.

Secondly, He illustrates this Argument by a second reason, and that is taken
from the Authority of those Holy Scriptures. The matter contained in them,
says the Apostle is such, as was given by Inspiration of God: The matter
contained in them was but the Breathing of God, into the souls of those men
that Wrote it, It is Gods Voice to thy soul, says he, therefore take heed thou
continue in the Doctrine there discovered.

Thirdly he illustrates this Argument by a reason taken from the use of those
Holy Scriptures, and that is in these Words; It is Profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. It is Profitable for
Doctrine, that is, for all matters of Faith; It will instruct thee, says he,
in every thing that the Lord commands thy soul to believe. Yea it is profitable
for reproof also, for overthrowing all false Opinions, that are contrary to the
Faith of Jesus Christ. Yea for Correction, that is, for the Reproving all Evil
Manners whatever, for Correcting all Vicious ways whatever they are. Yea for
Instruction in Righteousness, that is, they are profitable to discover what the
Will of God is to thee (...) full, so far as is needful for thee to know. Yea
the Apostle seems to add a fourth reason to illustrate this Argument, and that
is in those next Words, which he takes for the end of Writing these Holy
Scriptures, and that is the Perfecting the Man of God; That the Man of God
might be Perfect, thoroughly Furnished, Furnished unto all Perfection.

II. It appears that the soul ought to receive the light that shines from the
written word, in regard the written word of the Lord is given by God himself,
as an everlasting, unchangeable rule for the trial of truth and falsehood.
Hence it is that Jesus Christ himself, when he was to make it manifest to the
unbelieving Jews, that he himself was the Son of God, he fetches his highest
testimony from the written word, as you may observe, John 5. in comparing ver.
31 and so on, and ver. 39 together: He tells them he would not bear witness of
himself, least his witness should not have evidenced demonstration enough to
bear witness to him, because it is from himself; but he tells them John the
Baptist bears witness to him, ver. 33. He gives them a second argument from his
work, ver. 36. and ver, 37. The Father that sent him bare witness of him: but
ver. 39. to give that that should be an undeniable testimony, even unto the
apprehensions of the Jews themselves, he tells them that the Scriptures, (the
holy writings of those holy men of God) they testify of him, says he, search
the Scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal Life, and they are they
which testify of me. Hence when Paul began to preach Jesus Christ, and to
prove that Jesus of Nazereth whom he preached, was the Mediator between God and
man, he persuaded them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out
of the Prophets, Acts. 28.23. and thence it is that in Acts 17.11. That those
Men of Berea preached, by searching the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so.

Secondly it must be cleared, that the written word of God does particularly
reveal unto believing souls their union with Christ, both unto their faith and
unto their sense.

First, It does reveal particularly unto their faith, their infallible
admission into union with the Lord Jesus. This appears in regard the Lords
testimony that he will admit every soul that will, into union with Jesus
Christ, is absolutely universal, without the least acceptance or limitation;
so that it comprehends every particular soul whatever to whom the Gospel is
preached; according to that in John 3.15. That whosoever believed on him should
not perish, but have everlasting Life. So in John 6.37, He that comes to Jesus
Christ he will in no wise cast out. And in Acts 10.43. That whosover believe in
him should have Remission of Sins, and that known place Rev. 22.17. Whoever
will, let him take the water of Life freely, wherein it is apparent that every
particular soul is included, that the Lords testimony to every particular soul
is as certain as if the particular soul were named, that the soul shall be
admitted into union with the Lord Jesus: if the soul will accept it, if the
soul will consent to his truth, and trust to his truth and faithfulness for the
fulfilling that his word. Now whereas it is objected, that no particular word
speaks to a particular soul; and says thou Thomas, and thou John, or thou
Elisabeth, or thou Mary, shall be accepted into union with the Lord Jesus, if
thou will accept him.

1. I answer that either every particular is perfectly comprehended in the
universal offer, and universal command of believing, as if the Lord should name
every person to whom he speaks; or else there can be no faith of assurance
concerning any Gospel Truth whatever. Else there can be no assurance that our
Bodies shall rise again from the dust, and appear before the judgment seat of
Christ. It is no where said, thou Thomas, or thou John, or thou Mary shall
arise out of the dust again and come to judgment; yet I suppose every one that
has the least beam of spiritual light shining down into his soul will
acknwledge that the written word of God does reveal particularly, that this
soul and that soul, even his own soul shall arise from the dust and come to
judgment. Now it is apparent, that there is as clear a discovery in the written
word to any particular souls faith of his certain resurrection from the dead
and coming to judgment.

2. Either all those particulars are to be fully comprehended in that universal
offer, and universal unlimited command of believing, or else there were no
obedience to the will of God commanded to any particular soul whatever, nor no
disobedience to the will of God reproved. It is no where said, thou Thomas, or
thou John shall worship the Lord in Prayer; It is no where said, thou Thomas,
or thou Mary shall receive me as thy only God, and worship me only. Likewise no
disobedience to the will of God were reproved: It is no where said, thou Thomas
shall not steal, thou John shall not lie, thou Mary shall not commit adultery:
yet I conceive, thou whose believing disposition is most out of exercise at
present, dare not say, God has not said to thy soul do not steal, do not
lie, that God has not commanded thee to worship him in his ordinances
appointed. So that it is clear the word of God does reveal to particular souls
undoubtedly, their certain admission into union with Jesus Christ in case they
accept him.

Secondly, The precious written word of God, reveals unto particular souls
sense, their particular union with the Lord Jesus. That is to say, whenever the
spirit of light and manifestation sent from the Lord Jesus shall irradiate the
precious written word of God, so as to make its own heavenly light shine into a
dark heart, and also irradiate at the same time or cast beams of light upon the
precious believing act, that the same spirit of Jesus Christ has begotten in
that soul, then that light that the written word of God holds forth
particularly, declares to such a particular soul its certain actual union with
the Lord Jesus. Now the written word of God speaks to the sense of a believing
soul, his union with the Lord Jesus in these two ways.

1. In its general description of the nature of that believing act that the
Lord requires from the soul. Now the written word describing the nature of that
believing act that the Lord requires in general, and declaring that believing
act to be required in the same manner from every soul; that written word of God
does particularly reveal unto such a particular souls sense, his actual union
with the Lord Jesus: as thus, the written word of the Lord describes the nature
of the believing act to be a coming to Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.28. to be
receiving the testimony of God that he gave concerning his Son, selling to its
seal that God is true John. 3.33. A receiving the Record that God has given of
his Son, 1, John. 5.7, 8, 9. To be a receiving of Christ himself, John 1.12 To
be a will in the soul concurring with what the Lord tenders, Rev. 22.17. Now I
say in the spirits describing the general nature of that believing act the Lord
requires, it does speak particularly to the believing soul, when the spirit is
so evidencing to him his union with the Lord Jesus, and declares the souls
certain and infallible union with Jesus Christ. As thus, the spirit having
first revealed to the souls faith, the Lords will to admit having sweetly
encouraged the soul, yea powerfully, irresistibly, effectually commanded the
soul, to set to his seal that the Lord is true; and to say Lord be it unto thy
Servant as thou have spoken; then the same spirit irradiates that written word
that describes the general nature of the believing act, letting the soul
discern, that the believing act is a sweet consent of the mind and heart to the
truths of the Lord in the tender of the Lord Jesus to him, to reconcile the
Father and him; and then the spirit irradiates also the precious consent of the
mind and heart, that holy trust and confidence that is then in the soul, and
then the written word says particularly, that thou do consent, to accept of
what the Lord thus tenders in Christ to thee, thou art certainly and
everlastingly united to the Lord Jesus; thou art he who do receive what the
Lord has propounded in Christ so thee, and therefore thou art certainly lodged
in the everlasting arms of the Lord Jesus.

2. The second way that the written word dclares unto the particular souls
sense, his particular union with the Lord Jesus is by its description of the
constant certain and inseparable operation of the believing disposition,
describing the manner of the working of the believing disposition, or
describing the various effects of faith.

1. By the written word declaring that the proper operation of faith, is by
love to Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.6.

2. By declaring that the proper operation of faith is to abase the soul in it
self, and make it altogether nothing, Romans 3.27.

3. The Scripture does declare that the proper operation of faith is by
purifying the heart, cleansing it from all unholy dispositions, Acts. 15 9.

4. In declaring that the proper operation of faith is an high and unspeakable
estimation of Jesus Christ himself, Phil. 3., 8* 9. Now thus the written word,
declaring the proper manner of the operation of faith, does declare
particularly unto any particular soul, his union with Jesus Christ: and so
consequently the same written word declares, that in whatever heart the
believing disposition thus particularly works; there is that precious believing
act the Lord requires, there is that precious faith unfeigned that Jesus Christ
commands in his precious Gospel; and so it speaks particularly to a particular
soul, thou do believe with that precious faith unfeigned that Jesus Christ
requires; and thus the spirit does but make this written word of God speak to
the souls understanding, what it does always speak in it self, which is, that
that particular soul does now believe according to the will of God: So that
thence it appears the word of God does speak, and declare as particularly to a
believing soul, his union with the Lord Jesus as if it did speak to any soul by
name, for that light that discovers to the souls sense and feeling, or
knowledge his union with Christ, is but the discovery of the truth of his own
heart in believing the written worb speaks as plainly to a particular souls
sense and Knowledge; his union with the Lord Jesus, (that is, declares to him
that he does particularly believe) as it does declare to any particular
rebellious obstinate sinner that he particularly does sin; the word says,
whosoever walks thus or thus transgresses the will of God; now this speaks to
every particular soul so sinning.

Que. But the soul may say, how can a soul know that those Books of the Old and
New Testament are the Lords own word? May there not be some mixture of men?

That the Scriptures are the written word of God.
Answ. For answer to the question, first negatively, secondly affirmatively.

I. Negatively, I answer that the soul cannot be assured by all the powers and
possibilities of men, no not by any created power, that the Books of the Old
and New Testament are the written word of God. Though I deny not, that the
testimony of men may give some kind of ground to the soul to believe it; and I
fear the greatest number among us have no other ground, yet no testimony of man
can assure the soul sufficiently, that these are the Lords written word: the
matter contained in the written word of God is altogether spiritual, and
therefore it must be a beam of spiritual light that must satisfyingly, and
sufficiently discover to a soul, that the spiritual matter is the truth of God,
and did proceed from God.

2. All the most exquisite reasoning, that the most elevated wits of man can
extract, are not sufficient to demonstrate satisfyingly unto a soul, that the
Books of the Old and New Testament are the written word of God himself indeed.
If it were so, then the wisest of men should have been ready to receive the
word of God as the word of God; whereas the Scripture testifies, the most wise
have been most oppsite to receive it 1. Cor. 1.26. Scribes and Pharisees, the
wisest of the People, were the greatest opposers to our dearest Redeemer.

3. The written word of God barely and simply taken, without the Mighty Power
of the spirit conrurring with the Word, is not able to demonstrate it self to
be the Word of God. Questionless if it were, then whoever had been partaker of
the Written Word, or had heard the Word Preached that is Written, must in like
manner have given credit to it; whereas the Scripture Testify, that when Jesus
Christ himself spoke of those things he had wrought, some Opposed and
Blasphemed.

But then I answer affirmatively.

I. That the Blessed Spirit of God only, is able to demonstrate Clearly,
Evidently, Satisfyingly, and Infallibly unto a soul, that the Written Word of
God is the Written Word of God. This the Apostle affirms directly 1 Cor. 2.9,
to 12, that the spirit had Revealed those things to them, which they by the
Power of Reason could never comprehend; And that all the things given to them
of God, are Revealed by the spirit to be so given: And the Written Word of God
is none of the smallest gifts of God to his people; Therefore consequently it
reveals that also to be given to them: So likewise he affirms, that it is the
Spiritual Man that Judges all things (that is of truths) that is, it is only
the Man Begotten by the Spirit of Jesus Christ unto God, and led by the light
of that Blessed spirit of Jesus Christ, that is able to Judge of Truths, to
Judge what Truths have their Original from God, and to Judge what have not
their Original thence: It is the spirit also, says he, that searches the deep
things of God, that discovers the very Mystery of God to them, so as to make
the Divinity shine forth in them: Whereas the most heightened reason, of the
Accutest Sons of Adam, can discern nothing but Foolishness in the deep
Mysteries of Godliness, v. 14. And indeed were it not the Testimony of that
Blessed Spirit to a Believers Heart, that the Books of the Old and New
Testament are the Lords Written Word, that they have their Original from the
Lord himself, then the Foundation of Believers Faith were not a Divine
Authority, neither could a Believer say, in believing any truth contained in
those Books, that he knew whom he has Believed, with a Relation to God himself.

II. When that ever Blessed Spirit does reveal to any Believing soul, the
Written Word to be the Written Word of God, then the proper light of the
Written Word it self, shines forth so gloriously; as it discovers it self also
to be the Lords Word. That is to say, the matter of the Lords Written Word,
appears to be so Transcendent, so far surpassing the Capacities of weak men;
yea the quality of the Word appears to be so Holy, so Pure and Undefiled, so
contrary to the Powers of Hell, and the Kingdom of the Devil, and so contrary
to the Tyranny and Dominion that man's Corrupt Affections naturally desire to
bear over him; yea the quality of the Word appears to be so Unspeakably,
Unconceivably excellent, that the soul sees infinite reason even in the Word it
self, to persuade it that it is the Lords Word: Yea the manner of the Written
Word, speaking the very Language it speaks, favors so much of Heaven, that it
appears to the Believing soul to be so Clothed with Power, and Irresistible
Authority, it appears to have such properties of God himself, peculiar unto
God, Soul-Searching, Heart-Dividing, Properties finding out the Secrets of the
Heart, that then the Believing soul is Compassed about with Reason, Clothed in
with Reason, that appears shineing from the Word it self, that satisfys the
Believing Soul, that it is the Word of the Almighty Majesty of Heaven: Divinity
is then every way Engraven upon the Written Word in the Believer: So that as
the spirit in its casting the Precious Heavenly Light into the Beliving soul,
did Write his own name upon those Beams of light, and made them appear to the
soul to be from the spirit; So likewise in the souls discerning the light also
to proceed from the Lords Written Word, there is the name of God Written upon
those Beams of light also, that the soul knows as well as believes them to
proceed from God himself, seeing they shine forth from that Word of his that
the soul believes with Confidence, yea so Satisfyingly, and so knowingly to his
full contentment, it is the Word of the Blessed Majesty of Heaven. Would you
know you that are Confident this day, that a light did shine into your souls to
satisfy you concerning your union with Jesus Christ, whether this union be from
God or no? Would you be assured as well to knowledge as to faith, that you are
not deluded? Then see whether that light that shined into your Souls have
shined from the Lords written word. Yet let me add a caution in this, least I
might possibly shake some Soul, into whose heart some beams of light from the
Spirit has really descended, to discover to the Soul his union with Christ;
though the light that does shine into every Soul which truly proceeds from God,
to discover to the Soul its union with Christ, does and ought to shine forth
from the Lords written word; yet I dare not affirm, that whenever the spirit of
light does discover to a Soul its union with Jesus Christ clearly, both to
faith and sense, that then the spirit fastens some particular portions of the
Lords word by name, from such a Chapter and verse, from whence the spirit does
make that light shine forth into that believing Soul; certainly the spirit of
Jesus Christ may send down precious beams of divine light into a dark Soul, to
discover to the Soul satisfyingly its union with the Lord Jesus, both to faith
and sense, when such a particular sentence that is written in such a Book, in
such a Chapter, in such a Verse, is not brought to the Souls memory: But there
may be an extract of the quintessence, that is, of the prime light, the most
glorious light of many places of Scripture that concur together in one, to
testify the fame truth to the Soul: there may be an extract made by the Spirit
of Christ, of the grand truth that the Gospel reveals to faith, and of the
truth of the Souls believing act that the spirit reveals unto the Souls sense
from many places of Scripture, so as the light that the spirit causes to shine
into the Soul, is still from the written word, and the soul discerns it to his
own satisfaction, while the glory of the light actually remains, that it does
shine from the precious written word, though it may be the soul could not at
that time be able to produce such and such particular sentences, from such a
Chapter and such a Verse: though I dare not but say also, but as the soul
receiving that certain evidence, does discern that that sweet light that shines
into his soul, shines from the written word; so likewise upon recollecting of
himself, and upon serious deliberation with himself, he might be able to
produce such portions of the Lords word, as would sufficiently testify to the
truth of what the spirit of Jesus Christ had so revealed to his soul from the
word: yet observe this, that the soul must then so deliberate, and so consult
with his heart about the matter, while the heavenly luster, and commanding
power of those evidencing beams of light remain shining into his soul: for in
case the soul be bereaved again upon any occasion of the luster and glory of
those precious beams of light, the soul may so far forget the very sentences
that the spirit of Jesus Christ did then dictate to it, that the soul through
the darkness and obscurity that passes upon him immediately again, may for the
present be incapable of discerning in the written word of God what his soul
clearly discerned in the same word formerly, that the soul may (in case the
spirit of light should absent it self long) perchance begin to draw some sad
conclusion, that the evidence that the Soul received was not a light shining
from the Lords word, but some delusion from the Devil, transforming himself
into Angelical Glory. This is the second reason whence a soul may prove, that
the beam of light received is from God when the soul discerns it to shine from
the written word.

The second sort of demonstrations whereby a soul may prove to himself his
union with Jesus Christ, must be a demonstration a posteriori: A Demonstration
taken from the effects, that those beams of light that shine into the soul,
discovering to a soul its union with Jesus Christ, do beget in the Soul. Now
all the effects that any thing that proceeds from God begets in believing
Souls, are but the accomplishment of the Lords eternal intent: they are but the
production of the Lords precious thoughts of love toward those believing
Souls, from before the foundations of the world were laid. So that whatever is
communicated to any believing Soul, if it does demonstrate it self to proceed
from God, by its effects that it begets in him, it must then conduce in some
degree to the effecting of the Lords precious eternal will toward that
believing Soul, Now those eternal intents of God toward believing Souls; they
may be reduced to three Heads according as the Spirit of truth sums them in, 1
Cor. 3.22, 23. All are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World,
or Life or Death, or things present, or things to come. That is Heaven and
Earth; all are yours, that is destinated unto your good, to accomplish your
Salvation. And ye are Christ's, that is, ye believing Souls are destinated to
accomplish the glory of Jesus Christ. And Christ is Gods, that is Christ
himself considered mystically as the Mediator, is appointed for the
manifestation of the Fathers glory, for the exaltation of him in the hearts of
Saints and Angels, and before the eyes of all the world, so as all may admire
him and adore him,

There are three intents and precious ends of the Lord from Eternity toward
those believing Souls.

First There is the accomplshment of the glory of those believing Souls

Secondly, The perfecting of Christ's supernatural glory as he is Mediator.

And Thirdly, The perfect manifestation of the Fathers glory through both
these. And therefore seeing these three are those prime and principal ends, the
very ultimate end of God, the very sum and compendium of all those precious
thoughts that wrought in the blessed Majesty of Heaven, before the foundations
of the world were laid; thence whatsoever proceeds from God into a believing
soul must in some degree or other tend toward the accomplishment of one of
those ends. So that it must demonstrate it self to proceed from God by one of
those three effects, if it any way can be proved by its effects to proceed from
God himself. Only by the way you must take this distinction for prevention of
mistakes: the dealings of God toward the Saints, do either immediately to the
exaltation of the Saints, and the exaltation of Christ, and the manifestation
of the Fathers glory, or else they tend immediately. The Lords promissive will,
or the Lords sufferance of a Believer to sin, does not immediately manifest any
of these, yet mediately it does perfect all: that when the Lord does suffer the
soul to slide and fall, yet then through the mighty Power of his love to the
believing soul in Christ, he does send down the spirit of Jesus Christ, so to
work in that believing soul, that those very falls and slips, and backslidings
of that believing soul, shall produce more watchfulness over his own ways, more
charity toward others, more abominations of those cursed dispositions in his
own heart, more abased thoughts of himself, as he is in himself, more
distrustful of himself and his own heart being less confident in himself, and
in the strength of the power of holiness as yet communicated to him. And thus
those very falls or slips of that believing soul, shall tend to their last end,
to make the soul partaker of more holiness, causing the soul to hang more
entire, with a more precious constant dependence upon the Lord Jesus, for the
constant influences of the sanctified spirit, and so shall exalt the name of
God more in that heart, and so shall cause the soul to grow more into a
conformity to that mystical Head of his the Lord Jesus; and so through that
conformity to his Head, and that mystical glory of Christ, the glory of the
Father shall be exalted. Thus likewise you must consider again, that the
communication of God himself unto believing souls are secret, invisible and
insensible; and also they are visible and sensible: Now those communicarions of
God himself unto the believing soul that are visible and sensible: those do
commonly immediately tend to the accomplishment of the believing souls glory,
that is, to the perfection of the likeness of Jesus Christ in the soul, and so
consequently it tends also to the perfecting of Christ's mystical glory, and to
the manifestation of the Fathers glory. But those communications of God unto a
believing soul that are invisible, secret and insensible, those commonly do
tend only mediately to the accomplishment of those fore named blessed ends. So
that hence also you may collect, that whenever any communication of God unto a
believing soul, does demonstrate it self to come from God, when it is sensible
communication, then it does immediately tend to the accomplishment of these
three ends. This then being considered, and it being apparent, that all the
dealings of God with believing souls are for the accomplishment of those his
three blessed intendments from before the foundation of the world was laid,
then it must be through discerning of one of those three intendments of God
effected in the soul, that the believing soul must prove, that such a beam of
light as discovers to him his union with Christ, did proceed from God himself.

Now we shall begin with the highest, and so proceed to the lowest. All are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, that is for God. And from thence
we may conclude, that the prime and principal reason taken from the effects of
a souls union with Christ, (where by it may be proved, that souls evidence
proceeds from God) is this, that the beam of heavenly light that shines into
the soul, to discover its union with the Lord Jesus, does exalt and magnify
the name of God in the hearts. Gods exaltation of himself in the Believers
heart, was the great design of God from all eternity: it was as it were the
Alpha and Omega, (as I may so speak) the very beginning and end of the Lords
intention; only his intention reached further, to exalt himself through
believing souls before all other. Therefore then may the soul prove infallibly
the light that discovered to his soul his union with Christ to proceed from God
himself when it effects the prime intendment of God from eternity to the
believing Soul; when it erects a higher Throne from the Majesty of Heaven in
its heart, when it fills the heart with higher, louder, more zealous
acclamations of praise, and honor, and glory, and worship to be given for ever
to yonder God; that the light carries the stamp and impression of Heaven upon
it, when it begins the work of Heaven in a believing way here: then it is an
earnest of Heaven, when it implys the Soul in the work that it is destinated to
from Eternity, Pro. 19.6 God has made all things for himself, that is, for the
manifestation of his own transcendent glory, so for the magnifying of his ever
blessed name. Now when the light that discovers to the soul its union, do thus
effect Gods general, his ultimate end in the believing Soul, the Soul may
certainly conclude, this beam of light did descend down from the Father of
Lights. Now there are four or five acts in the believing Soul, wherein it
exalts the name of God.

1. Then the Soul exalts the name of God when it is filled with such sensible
apprehensions of such transcendent brightness of glory shining sorth from God,
as the Soul is utterly unable to conceive of, or apprehend. Now this first act
of that believing Soul, to exalt God in his heart, is the certain and
infallible effect of every beam of light that proceeds from God, to discover to
his Soul his union with the Lord Jesus: Indeed every act of the Lords mercy and
goodness toward believing Souls, is a Precious, Crystal Glass, wherein
believing Souls do see an incomprehensibleness of the beauty, glory, and
unspeakable perfection of God; and therefore much more unconceivable glory do
the believing Soul apprehend, in such an high act of the Lords mercy and love,
as is the discovery of his precious eternal love to the believing Soul through
Christ. This you shall see apparent in David, upon the Lords discovering of his
promises made unto his Soul in Christ, and made unto his House also, in 2 Samuel
7.18, 19, 20, 21. Then went King David in and sat before the Lord: (then) that
is after the Prophet had declared the precious promise to his Soul in Christ;
and he said, who am I O Lord God, and what is my House, that thou have brought
me hitherto? Thou art Great O Lord God, there is none like thee, neither is
there any God besides thee, ver. 22. Mark what sensible, high apprehensions of
a transcendent glory in God dwelt in David's heart, upon the discovery of such
precious promises made to him and his House; likewise upon a smaller mercy
comparatively (though indeed typifying the same mercy) upon the deliverance of
the Israelites from the hands of Pharaoh, and drowning their cruel Taskmasters
in the Red Sea; the hearts of the Saints were filled with high apprehensions of
the glory of God, Exodus 15.11, Who is like unto thee O Lord, (yea, they repeat
their admiration twice, as if they could not admire him enough ( who is like
unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? you may
behold the same workings of the believing heart, 1. John. 3.1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that me should be called the
Sons of God. There are three or four special beams of the glory of Heaven, that
a Believer apprehends as unspeakable, unconceivable, incomprehensible, when a
beam of light shines from God to discover to the Soul its union with Christ

1. There is then such a glorious brightness of the presence of God appears to
the believing Soul, as it stands amazed to behold it. When the Lord lets such a
beam of light shine into the dark Soul, that it sees the Lords will is indeed
to be one with him in Christ; yea, that his Soul is already lodged in that
precious bosom of the love of the Lord Jesus, then the Soul beholds such an
unspeakeable preciousness in the Majesty of Heaven, that he waited upon such an
unbeliever, such a crooked opposite wretch so long, that the Soul sets down
silently to admire, and is swallowed to the depth in admiration.

2. There is a Soul amazing brightness appears in the Souls eye in the
independance of the Lords love. When that bright Beam of light shines from
Heaven, to discover to the Soul its union with the Lord Jesus, the Soul sees
that there was nothing that moved the heart of God to have thoughts of love
toward him, nothing that inclined his blessed will to admit him into union
with Jesus Christ, but only his precious disposition, only his eternal thoughts
of kindness, that old loving kindness of his from Eternity; then the Soul says
as David, in 1 Samuel 7.21. for thy words sake, and according to thy own heart
have thou done all these great things, to make thy Servant know them; then the
believing Soul says, though my wretched unbelieving heart could not trust thee,
yet for thy words sake thou have fulfilled it, according to thine own heart
thou have done it: O Lord, what could thy purest eye behold in this forlorn
Soul of mine? What could have moved the Lord thinks the Soul but his own
blessed will, to choose such an useless, such an unserviceable, such an
unprofitable, such a barren such a foolish; yea, such a cross hearted wretch as
I?

3. The glorious irresistible power of the Lords eternal love in Christ to the
loveless Soul shines gloriously. When once the light shines from Heaven, that
discovered to the believing Soul his union with Christ; how many cursed
contradictions thinks a believing Soul, did the love of Christ suffer from my
Soul? How often did my vile believing heart give the Majesty of Heaven the lie?
How many years did I slight this? I stopped my Ears, I hearkened to none of his
blessed tenders, yet then he bored mine Ear, and constrained me to hear: O
think the Soul what a froward, perverse hearted Wretch have I been to this dear
God of mine. Certainly thinks the Soul, if rebellion, if enmity, if the working
of a Devils heart could have opposed it, it had been turned away from me.

Fourthly, The orient brightness of the Lords infallible truth shines before
the Soul. These Beams of the Lords glory shines in a peculiar manner before the
Souls Eye; but there are multitudes of the (...) of the Majesty of Heaven, that
also with these, shine in the same moment into the same Soul, when a light
proceeds from God to discever to a Soul its union; then the wisdom of the Lord
in contriving the design of Redemption by Christ appears, then do the very
beauty of justice it self appear, in the Lords contriving the Redemption of
loveless Souls in such a way, wherein justice and mercy might meet together and
kiss each other; so that indeed a light shines from Heaven that incompasseth
the Soul round about, that the Soul stands amazed and astonished, gazing upon
those beams of glory, that appear shining forth from the Majesty of Heaven into
his Soul.

II. A second act of a believing Soul wherein the name of God is exalted in the
Soul, is a sensible apprehension, and estimation of the Lord to be infinitely
worthy to receive all prefection of glory, and honor, and praise for ever. Now
this precious God sanctifying act, is also the infallible necessary effect of
such a precious beam of light, as does truly shine from the Father of Lights
into any Soul, to discover his union with the Lord Jesus. This was effected in
David's heart upon the Prophets discovering of the Promises made in Jesus to him
in 2. Sam. 7.26 Let thy name be magnified for ever, saying the Lord of Hosts is
the God over Israel; yea this act is infallibly produced in a believing Soul by
every visible motion of the Lords mercy or love toward the Soul. So you may
observe in Exodus 15.20. Miriam cried to the rest of the Daughters of Judah;
sing ye to the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously. So Rev. 4.10 11. The four
and twenty Elders fell down that sat before him upon the Throne; saying thou
art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power.

Now there are two things that follow upon the Souls vision of his union with
the Lord Jesus, by the light of the Spirit of Christ that do necessarily
produce this apprehension, or estimation in the believing Soul.

1. Upon the Souls discovery its union with the Lord Jesus; there are lively
enlarged actings of love produced in the Soul. Every renewed vision of love
inflames the Believers heart with love again correspondently: Now from those
quickened and enlarged actings of love, do arise necessarily high estimations,
and glorious conceptions of the Majesty God, that thence the Soul apprehends
him infinitely to receive honor and glory for ever.

2. Upon the Souls discerning his union with the Lord Jesus, there follows an
apprehension of the souls union with the Lord Jesus; there follows an
apprehension of the Souls owing all that he is and enjoys unto God by way of
retribution. Now from a Souls apprehension that he ows more then he is or have
unto God, he conceives him infinitely worthy to receive honor and glory, for
ever and ever from all the creation: he himself can never render glory
sufficient, therefore he esteems it to be but equal, that the whole Creation
should join together to exalt this blessed Majesty.

III. The third act in a believing Soul wherein the name of God is exalted, is
a sensible apprehension of the dispicableness, worthlesness and nothingness of
the Soul it self, and all that the circumference of the earth affords, without
God and in comparison of God. Now this God-exalting act in the believing Soul,
is also the necessary effect of such a precious beam of light shining from the
Father of Lights to discover to a Soul its union with Christ: then indeed is
the Soul a worm and no man, then is he empty and poor, yea absolutely nothing
without communion with that his God; yea then is all the Creation but mere
shadows, flying vanities without that God in Christ, then do the quintessence
of all the beauty of the whole Creation (if it could be abstracted) appear but
as the drop of the bucket, as the dust of the balance, yea as vanity without
that God in Christ. Thus in Psalm. 8.4. upon the Psalmists apprehension of the
infinite glory of God, he immediately cries out into admiration of the
nothingness of man, Lord what is man?

IV. The fourth act of the believing Soul wherein the name of God is exalted,
is the Souls actual prostration or subjections of all its powers and
possibilities at the foot of the Lords glorious Majesty. Now this precious God
sanctifying act in the believing Soul is the necessary infallible effect of a
true beam of light shining from the father of lights into the believing soul to
discover its union with the Lord Jesus. Indeed there is a necessity of such a
discovery to a believing Soul of its union with Jesus Christ preceding the
sweetest act of subjection of himself wholly at the foot of God.

1. In regard then when such a light shines into the soul to discover its union
with Christ, the soul apprehends an infinite disproportion between that which
he ows to God and his ability and capacity to pay to him, He apprehends Men and
Angels are never sufficient to render to the Lord according to his benefits
bestowed upon his loveless soul.

2 It appears to that soul (while there is such a discovery of that his union
with Christ) to be an infinite injury to the Majesty of Heaven, that a thought
of his heart should not be subject to his blessed will. The heart says within
it self, so sweetly has the Lord passed over himself and all his fullness, to
this empty loveless soul of mine, that it were such an accursed requital as
might incense the Lord to be incomplacable should my heart be withheld from
giving one subjection to him, that thence the soul is constrained by an
irresistble power, by ineffable bands of love, to yield all precious subjection
to the blessed will of God.

V. The fifth and last act, that must concur together with all the Four former
to the exaltation of the Name of God, is the souls taking up a full
acquiescense, or rest and contentment in God alone. It is an infinite
unspeakable injury to the Majesty of Heaven, that one desire, one inclination
in the heart, should be a Vagrant to wander hither and thither to seek for its
satisfaction out of God. Now this precious God-exalting act in the believing
soul, is necessarily, certainly, and infallibly produced, by a true beam of
light shining from Heaven into any believing soul, to discover its union with
the Lord Jesus. Thus you shall observe it was in David, Psalm. 63.3, 4, 5. Thy
loving kindness is better than life; My Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness. It should be contentment enough for him to enjoy his love only.
Thus these Five acts which concur together to the exalting of the Lords blessed
Name, are all the necessary and certain effects of a true beam of light shining
from Heaven into the believing soul, to discover to it its union with the Lord
Jesus. So that whatever Soul is partaker of such a blessed beam of the light of
Heaven, as do truly discover from God to him his union with the Lord Jesus, he
has these precious God-exalting acts necessarily produced in his soul, whereby
that light that shines into his Soul discovers it self to have its original
from God.

There is a second branch of this great end of God from eternity, from whence a
Soul that conceives he has received satisfying evidences of his union with
Christ, may gather another evidence of his union, and that is the exaltation of
God through those believing souls. This is that you read of, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. He
has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy, having predestined us unto the adoption of Children, through Jesus
Christ to himself, to the praise of the glory of his grace: That is, to the end
that his glorious love in Jesus Christ, might be made manifest through us, to
give praise to the Lord, to declare the excellency of God, to publish and tell
abroad the glory of God. Now the very end unto which God predestined
believing Souls, was to the glory of his love, to the end they should be like
Silver Trumpets, to sound aloud and proclaim his glory. So that then this being
the great end of God from eternity, in his love to believing souls, that they
might be like so many Golden Pillars, whereupon the Lord might write the
glorious excellency of his love in great Characters, that others might read it;
thence of necessity, this must be the effect and consequence in some degree, of
the Lords Communications of love unto believing souls, all the workings of his
love necessarily tending in order to their ultimate end. So that then a second
reason, from whence the Soul may demonstrate to himself, that the light that
himself has received, to discover to him his union with Jesus Christ is really
from God is this, that the precious light that shined into his dark soul to
reveal to him his union with Christ, did necessarily and certainly effect the
exaltation of God through him. Now that exaltation of God consists only in
this, in the Souls declaring or manifesting, the brightness and perfection of
those excellencies to be in God, that God has revealed to be in him, in his
precious word. But herein we must descend down into particulars.

First, God is exalted through the Soul when the brightness, the luster, the
perfection that the Lord discovers in that his love in Christ to unlovely
sinners is manifested through the believing soul, and made conspicuous before
others by the believing soul. Thence it is you shall observe in Psalm. 50.23.
says God, who so offers praise glorifieth me: Now the offering praise is
nothing else taken strictly, but a sincere, humble declaration of the glorious
workings of the Lords love and mercy to poor despicable worms; it is but a
publishing the glorious works of God, and speaking of the excellency and
perfection of God. Thence in Isa. 43.7. The Sons and Daughters of God are said
to be Created for the Lords glory, which they accomplish by showing forth his
praise, v. 21. It is by making manifest what the excellencies of God in himself
are. Now then God is exalted in a believing soul, when the excellency and glory
of the Lords love in Christ revealed to Sinners, is made manifest through the
Soul. This is done Three ways.

1. When the Soul does give a real practical testimony to the fullness and
perfection of that love of God in Christ to an unlovely Sinner. Now this the
believing soul does practically declare in Four or Five things.

First, By rejoicing fully and gloriously in that love. When the Heart can
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, in that love of God that is in
Christ, then is the blessed Name of God exalted through the soul, in regard the
soul then declares practically, and gives a real testimony to other believing
souls, and to the World too, that the blessed God of Heaven is true, that his
love is according to what he declared in his blessed word, that his love to
unlovely sinners contains all kind of happiness, contentment, glory and
excellency that is desirable by a believing soul, so far as is suitable for him.

Secondly, When the Soul can despise and disregard all kind of difficulty
whatsoever, for the enjoyment of the sweet fruit and working of that love of
God that is in Christ. Thence it is that Martyrdom for the Name of Christ is
accounted such an high honoring of Jesus Christ, and that the Lord testifies
such respect to those that do suffer for his Name, in regard by those their
sufferings wherein they seem to slight their Estates, their outward Liberty,
their Lives for the sake of Christ; they declare there is all fullness of
contentment in him, that there is happiness enough for them, that all outward
contentments, the confluence of all the happiness that the Earth does afford,
is not to be compared to the enjoyment of the love of God in Christ, and to the
precious manifestation, and sweetest operation of it.

Thirdly, When the Soul sends forth the whole strength of his soul in his
pursuit of the enjoyment of the sweetest discovery of that love, and the most
precious operations of it into, and upon his soul.

Fourthly, When there is a deadness in the Heart toward all things else, in
comparison of the love of God that is in Christ.

Fifthly, When the soul can take its fullness of contentment in that love, in
the absence of all things else. When a soul can actually drink such full drafts
of the love of God that is in Christ; that is to say, promise himself such
happiness contentment, unspeakable perfection of glory, in the enjoyment of
that love, that the Heart says practically it is enough; though the Heavens
should withdraw their light, and the Earth all her advantages that ever she can
afford, seeing there is the love of my God in Christ that I shall actually
enjoy.

Now further we are to show you, that this manifestation, or declaration
practically by the believer, that all perfection and glory is eminently
contained in God in Christ to unlovely sinners, is the necessary, certain,
infallible effect of a beam of light shining from God to a believing soul, to
discover its union with the Lord Jesus. So that whenever any beam of light is
cast down from Heaven into the dark soul of any believer, to manifest certainly
its union with the Lord Jesus, then certainly also that ever blessed Name of
God is exalted through the believing in that that precious beam of light does
necessarily cause that believer to manifest and declare practically, the
fullness of the Lords love in Christ, that there is all perfection, excellency,
and glory, that can possibly be suitable for the believing soul, contained in
that love; eminently, transcendently, infallibly: as will appear further by
opening every particular way and means, how the believing soul does practically
manifest that there is fullness in the Lords love in Christ, to such unlovely
sinners as the Lord declares. As,

I. The kind of fullness of joy and rejoicing, which is a prime and principal
means how the name of God is exalted by a believing soul, is the necessary and
infallible effect of a beam of light shining from Heaven into a soul to
discover its union with the Lord Jesus. That you may observe from 1 Pet. 1.8.
whom having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. [With joy unspeakable.]
Joy, that cannot be uttered either by the Tongue of men or Angels; Joy it is
full of glory; that is, full of excellency and sweetness, delight and
contentment: Their believing produced this effect, an unspeakable joy in their
Hearts; Then much more a beam of light from the spirit of light, discovering
unto faith the Lords blessed will to admit the soul into union with Christ, and
thereby powerfully enabling the believing soul to believe afresh, and also a
beam of light from the blessed spirit, manifesting the souls believing act unto
the soul it self (and so discovering both unto faith and sense such unspeakable
matter of joy and rejoicing) much more must this fill the believing soul with
joy unspeakable and full of glory. According to that in Ephesians. 5.22, The fruit of
the Spirit is peace and joy. Mark it, the proper effect of the spirit of Jesus
Christ dwelling in the believing soul is joy; then certainly that joy that
possesses a believing soul, must needs be exceedingly eminently raised to a
high strain, to a superlative degree, when the spirit of Jesus Christ shall
dwell so plentifully as it does, when it thus bears testimony to faith, and
testimony to sense, of the Souls union with Jesus Christ. Yea, such is the
nature, and power, and virtue of a beam of light sent down from God, to
discover to a soul his union with Christ, that it cannot but infallibly produce
such a superlative degree of joy and rejoicing in that love of God that is in
Christ.

I. In regard through that beam of light from the spirit, and discovering to
the Soul its union the enlarged, longing, restless breathings of that believing
soul, are in some measure accomplished. Now Solomon tells us, Prove. 13.12. that
the accomplishment of the desire is a tree of life: There is such infinite
sweetness, contentment and satisfaction in the souls attaining his desires,
that from thence the soul seems to gather Apples of life from a Tree of life.

II. In regard that light gives the believing soul a precious taste of his
mutual Communion with his God through Christ. Every believing act does occasion
some Communion to be between God and the believing soul, but much more in that
believing act, that is heightened by the power of the spirit of Christ to a
certainty: Then there are large degrees of life and holiness, communicated from
God to the believing soul, and a kind of full communication of all the powers
and possibilities of the believing soul to God again: then God delights himself
in the believing soul sweetly, and the soul reciprocally delights himself in
God. Now the very taste of the communion, which is the earnest of the souls
full inheritance (which is eternal communion with God in Christ) that cannot
but fill the believing soul with joy and peace.

III. In regard that light occasions the believing soul to enjoy all that
Heaven it self can afford through hope. It causes the soul to sit together with
Christ by hope, Ephesians. 2.6. It causes the soul to discern certainly through
believing the Lord Jesus as his blessed head, to be gone before as an Harbinger
to prepare a place for him, that the soul by hope sits there already, and is
saved already.

4. That light draws out the actings of faith in such certainty, that all the
glory of Heaven it self is presented also to the believing soul. Faith, says
the Apostle in Heb. 11.1. Is the evidence of things not seen; That is, it is
such a disposition as by its precious working, gives things not seen an evident
certainty unto the believing soul: yea, it is the substance of things hoped
for: The word in the original is very emphatical, it is (...), It is that which
gives a substantial being to things hoped for; a being already, that the soul
not only enjoys all that Heaven affords by hope, but through the certainty of
the actings of faith (raised by the power of the Spirits working to discover to
the soul its union with Christ) the soul enjoys all that Heaven affords at
present: So that needs must a superlative degree of joy possess the believing
soul, when he in a manner sits in Heaven, as enjoying the sweetest communion of
the Lords love, as gazing upon that precious face of God in Christ, and
blessing himself also in the contemplation of it to all eternity.

II. The second means by which the believing soul practically declares, that
there is all perfection and glory contained in the love of the Lord in Christ
to unlovely sinners, whereby the name of God is exalted through him, is the
souls despising and disregarding all difficulties for the enjoyment of that
love of God in Christ. That is also the necessary, the infallible effect of a
beam of light proceeding from the spirit of light, to discover to a soul his
union with Christ. This you may observe, Romans 8.34, 35. There you find the
assuring act of faith concerning the souls union with Christ; who is he that
condemns, it is Christ that died? and ver. 37. You shall find the Apostle
triumphing over all kind of difficulties, trampling under foot persecution,
necessity, famine, nakedness, piril and sword; and professing, we are more than
Conquerors over all, to overcome them, so as they are no impediment or
hindrance to us, but we are able to be [more than Conquerors] to make advantage
even of those difficulties, whereby we shall the more closely pursue after
Jesus Christ. Yea, such is the power of that light that discovers to the soul
its union with Christ, that it does necessarily cause the soul thus to despise
all difficulties for the enjoyment of the love of God in Christ.

1. In regard that light enobles and raises the spirit, of every one to whom
the spirit of light communicates it. Heirs views of their great Possessions,
greatens their Spirits: likewise do the believing souls vision of those
glorious things prepared for them, heighten and elevate their Spirits above all
things below.

2. In regard the precious light from the fpirit of light, does present such
unparalled, such incomprehensible glory to the believing souls view, that all
things appear as nothing in comparison of that glory that is revealed. Now
thence it cannot be but difficulties must appear as nothing upon the sight of
such glory; hence Moses, Heb. 11.26. disregarded Pharoahs wrath, because he saw
God that was invisible; and the Apostle calls the afflictions they met with
light afflictions, because they looked at things that were not seen, 2 Cor.
4.17, 18.

3. In regard it does necessarily produce enlarged, enlivening actings of love.
Every believing act produces a proportionable act of love; Therefore certainly
that high noble act of faith, that act of certainty that is drawn forth by the
spirit of light at such a time, does produce enlarged acts of love, it
proportionably does send out the strength of the soul in love toward God in
Christ, as well as the strength of the soul goes out in believing.

3. A third means whereby the soul practically declares that there is a fullness
of the Lords love whereby the Lord is exalted in the soul, is the souls
pursuance with his utmost strength, the enjoyment of the clearest visions of
that love, and the sweetest freedom of the actings and workings of that love
into, and toward the soul. Now this also is the necessary effest of a beam of
light coming down from Heaven, to evidence or reveal to a soul his union with
Christ. You shall observe in 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 4. That Souls certainty of their
union with Christ, which was the effect of the spirit of light shining into
their hearts, it did produce such groaning and longing with the strength of
their Souls, (...) the sweetest and clearest enjoyment of the fullness of that
love: We know says he (there is the act of certainty) that if our earthly
House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens: Mark, for this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven: So ver. 4. we
groan, being burdened; and so ver. 1. they were willing to absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord: The strength of their Souls so pursued
after the fullest, the clearest enjoyment of that love, that they desired to
breath out their lives, to be dissolved, that they might have the clearest
vision of that love of God in Christ, and the sweetest enjoyment of it. Neither
can it possibly be otherwise, considering,

1. In that things appear in their despicable nothingness, by such a beam of
light shining from the blessed Spirit into a believing Soul, to discover its
union. Thence it is that the strength of the soul pursues after the enjoyment
of the love of God in Christ only, seeing no other object appears worthy to be
desired in comparison to the enjoyment of the love of God in Christ.

2. In regard the love of God in Christ, discovered by that light, appears in
such a manner as takes up the whole intention of the believing Soul, and
implies every faculty of it. Such a mystery appears in that fullness of the love
of God in Christ to unlovely sinners, as takes up all the strength of the Souls
capacity to view and meditate upon; yea, it at last appears to be a depth never
to be fathomed, and so drowns the understanding in a depth of admiration; yea,
that fullness of the Lords love appears so to comprehend all beauties, and
glories, and all things desirable, as it is the object of every desire, of
every motion, or reaching forth of the Spirit: So that thence it takes up all
the intentions of all the faculties of the Soul.

IV. A Fourth means whereby believing Souls do declare the Lords love to be
according as the Lord reveals, whereby the Name of God is exalted in the Soul,
is the deadness of the Heart to every thing in comparison to that love of the
Lord in Christ. Now even this crucifying of the Heart to all things else in
comparison of that love, is the infallible effect also of such a beam of light
from the Spirit of God to reveal to the Soul its union. That 2 Cor. 5.8. is
enough to manifest it. Their certainty of their acceptance with God, produced a
willingness in them even to be absent from the body it self, a readiness in
their Hearts to part with every thing for the enjoyment of that love, it
choked and quenched all desires of earthly objects of beauty or excellency, so
as their Spirits were so dead, so void of desire, so empty of all thirstings
and endeavors after earthly objects, as they rather deny to be dissolved, to
be dead indeed that they might have the full benefit of their union, even the
full presence of God in Christ. And certainly it cannot be, but such a light
from the Lord to discover to the Soul its union with Christ, must necessarily
thus Crucify the Heart to all things, so as to be alive to God in Christ only,
both in regard the Soul apprehends the doleful, sinful miscarriages of his
Heart about every of those things (what sad snares they are to his Spirit) and
also he beholds the emptiness and nothingness, by comparing things temporal,
with things eternal; and he beholds a full object of all contentment, wherein
all the desires of his Soul may be concerned together in one, wherein is all
happiness that his Spirit can breath after, and he may bless himself in the
full enjoyment of it.

V. The Fifth means whereby the Soul experimentally manifests the fullness of
the Lords love, so as the name of God is exalted through him, is the fullness of
contentment that the Soul takes in the enjoyment of the love of God in Christ
only, in the absence of all things else. Now even this also is produced by such
a light evidencing to the Soul his union with the Lord Jesus; yea, so powerful
is this contentment of the Heart in the love of God in Christ in the absence of
all things else, effected by such a light of Heaven, discovering to the Soul
his union with Christ, that the Soul while the beauty and luster of that light
remains, takes not only its full contentment, but even more than contentment,
even glorying in his God in Christ, in the want of all things. That you may
see, Romans 5.1, 2. Being justified hy faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ; and not only so, but we glory in tribulation also: We glory,
that is, we make our boast of God, we bless our selves in him, we are able to
set the love of God in opposition to all things else, and even in tribulations
themselves to triumph and glory, to conceive our selves so filled with
excellence, that we even boast our selves of him. So that thus all those
precious acts of a believing soul, whereby he declares and manifests the
fullness of the Lords love in Christ to unlovely sinners (so as the Name of God
is exalted through the Soul by that means) all those acts are necessarily and
infallibly produced by the power of that light from Heaven, that does discover
to any Soul his union with the Lord Jesus. And so it appears, that this may be
a second reason from whence a believing Soul may prove, that the evidence of
his union with the Lord Jesus received, is really from God, because it causes
the Name of God to be exalted through him. Thus we have opened the first way of
the Souls manifestation of that glorious love to be in God, that God has
revealed to be in himself, that is, by the Souls manifesting that unspeakable
fullness to be in the love of God in Christ to despicable sinners, that all
perfections and glorious excellencies whatever that could be suitable to a Soul
is completely contained in it.

2. Secondly, A Soul does manifest that glorious love to be in God, which God
has revealed to be in himself unto despicable Sinners; By discovering or
manifesting such an absolute perfection to be in that love of God in Christ, to
unlovely Sinners, as nothing can prevent and hinder, or turn away that love.
When a Soul shall declare, that the infinite multitudes of wickedness, that his
Soul heaped up before his knowledge of God in Christ, and all the infirmities
and imperfections that abound in his Soul now, yet are no hindrance to the
working of the Lords love in Christ to his unlovely Soul; yea, when the Soul
shall triumph against imperfections as Paul did against tribulation, and say
apparently, who shall separate this loathsome Soul of mine, from that precious
love of God that is in Christ Jesus? Shall my deadness, hardness, vanity,
looseness? Shall my stubborn, opposite, backsliding disposition, my
hopocritical, false, treacherous disposition, separate this loveless Soul of
mine, from the love of God that is in Christ; Nay, in all these infirmities,
and imperfections, the love of the Lord in Jesus Christ never ceases its
working: Nay, so glorious is the freedom of that love of God in Christ, that it
breaks through all such oppositions, as my vilest Heart makes against it; Then
is the Name of God exalted in the glory of his love through the Soul. Thus did
Paul exalt God, when he had been acknowledging, that in him; that is, in his
flesh dwelt no good thing, Romans 7.8. That not a spark, not a disposition, not
an inclination to comply with the Lords blessed will dwelt in him, and declares
the mighty operation of the Law of his members (which were the cursed
dispositions of his Heart) against the Law of his mind (which was the blessed
disposition in his Heart to comply with God) when thus I say he declared that
the Law that was in his members was so full of power and might, that it
maintained a strong battle against Jesus Christ; yea, that it wounded him, and
made him a Slave and Vassal to that cursed disposition, yet then he exalts God
by this occasion, breaking out thus, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus: Mark that word now: Now seeing
the vile, rebellious disposition of my vilest Heart, cannot turn away the
workings of the Lords free love; now seeing though my Heart maintain War
against the Spirit of Jesus Christ; yea, such War as leads my Soul Captive
also, and even enslaves and enthrals, and vassalageth me under the power of
sin; though it be thus, yet the love of God in Jesus Christ can never cease it
workings. He thus declares to the whole World in a kind of triumphing way, that
the freedom of Gods love is so absolute and perfect; that even now, though
there be such opposition made against the workings of it, by the vilest crooked
Heart, yet there can never be a turning away of that love, never a Sentence of
Condemnation drawn out by God against any Soul that accepts that his love in
Christ. This manifestation, that there is such an absolute perfection of
freedom in the love of God in Christ, that nothing can prevent and turn away
that love from any soul that embraces it, this is manifested three ways,
through which the name of God is exalted through the Soul.

1. This is manifested by the souls sensible free acknowledgement of its
abhorred vileness and loathsomness, when the Lord tenders his love in Christ to
it; yea when the Lord receives his unlovely Soul into the dearest, sweetest
embrace of his love. When the soul shall readily and freely declare, nothing
but enmity, opposition, contradiction to the blessed God of Heaven, to have
been in his vilest heart, when that blessed news came down from Heaven to his
hopeless Soul, that the Lord was ready and willing to admit of reconciliation,
peace and agreement and love, to be between his soul and himself. This indeed
is a high exaltation of the name of God in respect of the glory of that his
love that he reveals to be in himself to such unlovely sinners; when thus the
soul shall declare to the everlasting honor of God, that true and faithful is
his word; he loves upon his own will only, and shows mercy to whom he will, and
because he will. And thence you may observe, that it is a high dishonor to the
name of the blessed God, for any soul to make any claim to that love of God
that is in Jesus Christ, by virtue of any quality or disposition whatever, that
is in their own souls, whereby they are differenced as they conceive from other
souls, and they have right to claim that love of God in Christ when other souls
may not claim it; this is a pollution of the name of God, by its vilifying the
absolute perfection of freedom in the love of God in Christ to unlovely sinners.

2. The manifestation of the glory of the Lords love to the exaltation of God
through the soul, is by the souls unwavering, unshaken confidence in the truth
and faithfulness of the Lord according to his word, to admit the soul into the
sweetest Bosom of his love in Christ, notwithstanding all the loathsomness and
forlornness of the worthless soul. When the soul manifests his confidence in
that faithfulness of God in the highest degree, then is the name of God exalted
through the soul, when the soul says with Paul. 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom I
have trusted; notwithstanding all this, the wretched and most accursed
wickedness of my vilest heart, I know he is true and faithful, he will let his
love that is, in Jesus, work according as he has discovered it freely from the
disposition of his own will only, notwithstanding all my wickedness. And mark
it i^, this one of the prime reasons, why Jesus Christ in that pattern of all
prayer that he has freely given us (commonly called the Lords Prayer) has
commanded all souls and so believing souls, to pray constantly for forgiveness
of their Trespasses, for pardon of sin, because through that act performed
according to the will of Jesus Christ, the name of God is constantly exalted
through the believing soul. I do believe that pleading for pardon of sin by
believing souls is much mistaken; some souls darkly and blindly (I had like to
have said superstitiously) plead for the use of those very words, forgive us
our trespasses, as though no believinng soul could perform his duty without the
repetition of those words and other souls from an abhorrency of the blindness
and darkness of those that thus plead for the use of the bare words, utterly
reject that Petittion that Jesus Christ has given us, as a pattern whereby to
frame our Petitions, determining it utterly unlawful to make such a Petition,
or such a Request; but certainly were the reason of making the request rightly
considered, it might give light both to the one and to the other, to give them
to conceive aright, how and why a believing soul may pray and beseech the Lord
to pardon his Transgressions, though understanding through believing that they
are already pardoned. There are two things that must concur together for the
making of that request.

The first is a remembering the Lord of his precious promise wherein he offers
reconciliation, peace and love in Christ to the sinful despicable soul. There
must be in the thoughts of the believing soul making the request aright, an
actual apprehension that God has offered unto his soul reconcliation by
Christ, and so remission of all his sins freely by Christ; and questionless
there ought to be some declaring of that promise also before the Lord, though
sometimes more briefly, sometimes more largely, sometimes in one manner,
sometimes in another; yet a remembering of the Lord of that his precious word.

Secondly, there must be a sincere desire in the believing soul, that his heart
and mind might consent to the truth of the Lords word, as spoken to his
particular soul; and consequently a desire to trust to the truth and
faithfulness of the Lord to fulfill that his precious word even to his
particular soul fully, So that the soul that presents the request a right, must
upon the apprehension of his own most accursed vileness, turn his eye to that
sweetest tender of reconciliation and peace to his soul in Christ, saying
secretly at least, O Lord thou have spoken it, that thy will is to remit the
sins, to pass by the enmity of every rebellious soul that will accept the
reconciliation thou do tender in Christ, and then the heart must proceed
farther, saying O Lord seeing thou have spoken it, fulfill that thy word to
this rebellious sinful soul of mine, my soul desires to trust to thy truth to
fulfill it, O let it be fulfilled, let that enmity be removed, and that
reconciliation be established between thee and my soul.

3. The third way of the souls manifestation of the perfection of freedom that
is in the love of God in Christ to despicable sinners, by which the name of God
is exalted through the soul, is by the souls maintaining the same confidence of
his in the Lords truth to vouchsafe to be in love with his unlovely soul
through Christ, notwithstanding all infirmities, weakness, imperfections and
perverse crookedness that his heart shall discern a fresh to be in himself. Now
when the soul after humble acknowledgement of those cursed dispositions in his
corrupt heart, shall still act and manifest that precious confidence, then does
the soul give glory to the Lord in respect of the freedom that is in his love,
then does the soul declare that nothing can turn away, or cause to cease the
workings o^ that infinite free love of God in Christ, then the soul declares
that the love of God in Christ was built upon no other foundation but his
precious will, and that it was nothing in the soul that was lovely and amiable
in the eyes of God, that ever inclined the heart of God to six his love upon
the soul. And on the contrary, thence it is that those souls pollute the name
of God in their hearts, and before others also, whose confidence shake and
waver upon the sight of every new infirmity and imperfection, whose confidence
is cast away upon the sight of every new crooked disposition working in their
hearts, upon every disposition to deadness, vanity, looseness: by this they vail
the absolute perfection of the riches of the freedom of love that is in God
through Christ to unlovely sinners, and declare in effect the love of the Lord
in Christ to be built upon the holy actings of the foul toward God; yea the
soul declares in effect (vertually at least) that the riches of the Lords love
that is in Christ, increase and diminish, according to the holiness or
unholiness that he discerns in his own heart. Hence the Apostle exhorts
believing fouls upon the account of Christ's intercession, to come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.15.16 That the name of God might be exalted through
believing souls, by holding forth the glorious freedom of that riches of love
that is in Christ Jesus. Now we shall show you that this exaltation of God in
this manifestation of the perfection of freedom of his love in Christ to
unlovely sinners, is the necessary inseparable, infallible effect of a true
beam of light shining from Heaven into any dark heart, to reveal to that soul
his union with the Lord Jesus. This must be opened by showing you those three
acts of believing souls, whereby they do thus manifest the glorious freedom of
the Lords love to the exaltation of God through them; that these three acts are
necessarily and certainly produced in souls by discerning a beam of light from
Heaven to discover to them their union with Jesus Christ

First, That sensible and free acknowledgement of the souls abhorred vileness,
even when the tender of the Lords love in Jesus Christ is made to it; yea when
the Lord grasps it in the everlasting arm of his love that was in Christ, even
this sensible and free acknowledgement of the souls most cursed wickedness, is
the necessary effect of a souls receiving a light from Heaven, to evidence its
union with the Lord Jesus Christ, this you may see, 1 Timothy 1.14. Paul tells us
that he was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and injurious, yet to me the
grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, not only abundant, having more than a
fullness of love, but exceeding abundant, abounding in the most superlative
degree, in the most inconceivable manner. So the third and fourth Chapters to
the Romans, seem to be written for that very purpose in a great measure, to
prove nothing but vileness to have been in those souls whom the Lord accepted
into the Bosom of his love in Christ. Thus the Apostle endeavors to draw forth
free acknowledgments of their abhorred vileness, while he is remembering them of
the riches of the Lords love in Christ to them. We shall make it appear in some
particulars, that the free sensible acknowledgement of the souls abhorred
wickedness, when the Lord tenders his love in Christ, is the necessary effect
of receiving a beam of light from Heaven to discover to the soul his union.

1. In regard there is an actual view of the most accursed wretchedness of the
soul, by the power of a beam of light that shines from Heaven to discover to a
soul his union with Christ. Any beam of true light that shines into a soul, is
but a discovery of the Gospel message in its clearness, extent and latitude; it
is but an opening and expounding clearly and satisfyingly to the souls capacity
the message of glad tidings that Christ sent to poor despicable sinners: now
that glad tidings, is nothing else but the message of reconciliation to every
soul that will accept it, and thence it cannot be but the same light must
present to the souls view the sight of his enmity and opposition of heart; it
can not be but at the same moment when the soul apprehends his own
reconciliation to God in Christ, he must apprehend his own enmity formerly to
God in Christ. Thence it is that in Ezekiel. 36.31. In the Prophets foretelling
the blessed Covenant of Grace, that should be established between God and
Souls, he does also prophecy that those with whom the Covenant of Grace should
be established; they shall remember their own evil ways and doings that were
not good, and shall loath themselves in their own sight for their iniquities
and abominations. Now any beam of precious light from Heaven, thus necessarily
presenting to the soul an actual view of its own abhorred vileness, thence it
cannot but dispose that believing soul for sensible and free acknowledgement of
that unspeakable vileness of his, when the tender of that love came to him.

2. In regard every beam of light enables the soul to comprehend his sinfulness
and most accursed wickedness more largely and fully, it causes him to behold
the height and depth, and length and breath of his own wickedness according to
the glory of God apprehended against whom the soul have sinned; so are the
souls apprehensions or comprehensions of the height of his own vileness; now
the glory of the light never shines so clearly and transparently upon any soul,
as it does when such a beam of light comes from the spirit of light and
manifestation, to discover the glorious riches of love in Christ to the
dispicable unlovely soul, admitting the loveless, worthless soul into the
nearest union; so that thence there can never be such full comprehensions of
his own sinfulness, as there is in the very moment when such a beam of light
shines from Heaven upon the soul.

3. In regard the affections are all drawn forth to work in their strength
against the souls sinfulness, by such a beam of light shining forth. That
manifestation of the riches of the Lords love, begets answerable correspondent
workings of love in the soul toward God again: now those workings of love in
the soul toward God, draws forth the workings of all the other affections
against the souls sinfulness. Love and Hatred works toward their contrary
objects in like degree: In the very same measure that the actings of love are
drawn out toward God, in the same measure is the hatred of the soul, the
loathing and abhorring of the sinful disposition drawn out. This David
declares, Psalm. 119.103. That upon his tasting the sweetness of the Lords words
which were the actings of love in the soul of David to the word of God, he
hates every false way, ver. 104. and vain thoughts ver. 13. His love and hatred
wrought equally alike toward their object, his love to the Law of God made him
hate whatever was contrary to it. Now the love of the soul toward God, is
drawn out in its superlative degree of acting by that clear discovery from
Heaven that Jesus Christ and the Soul are one: and thence likewise all the
affections cannnot but work in their highest degree against all the sinfulness
of the Soul, both hatred of the sinful disposition, sorrow and melting and
breaking of heart in remembrance of it, anger, displeasure and indignation
against it, fear and dread of those iniquities having power over it. Now thence
it cannot be but the same beam of light discovering to the Soul his union with
Christ, should necessarily produce sensible and free acknowledgement of the
Souls abhorred vileness, seeing it fills the heart with the working of strong
affection against his own sinfulness apprehended.

4. In regard, there are constant actings of faith in the believing Soul, while
the glory of such a beam of light from Heaven shines into the Soul. There are
such renewed operations of says continues, while that light shines into a Soul
that discovers his union with Christ, that there seems (during the continuation
of that light into the Soul) to be but one extended drawn forth act of faith.
Now seeing there are those constant actings of says, there cannot also but be
constant veiws of the Souls most abhorred wickedness: the Soul by an act of
faith veiwing the reconciliation wrought by Christ for him, it cannot also but
veiw the enmity of his Soul against God in Christ; so that from the constant
veiw of the Souls vileness, there cannot but be sensible abhorrence of that
vileness.

5. In regard the admiration of the glory of the Lords love in Christ, fills
the Soul with a constant sense of its own baseness. The Soul cannot be ravished
in the admiration of that love, but it must sit down and admire and wonder: now
the Soul can never wonder at that love as it is manifested, but it must take in
it self as the object of that love, whereby it is that the glory of that love
shines forth so infinitely; the Soul cannot but say who am I, what could the
Lord discern in me, that such riches of love should work toward me? So that
thence the heart (during the continuance of that light that shined from Heaven
to discover its union) is kept constantly working against his own vileness, and
from the consideration of his vileness, the Soul proceeds to a sensible
acknowledgement thereof.

6. In regard such a precious beam of light does necessarily produce a dear
tenderness in the heart toward the honor of God; yea it produces an infinite
contentment and delight in the Soul to be exalting God. Now the Soul cannot be
exalting the name of God in that way of his mercy toward him, but he must
begin with the sense of his own abhorred wretchedness, toward whom such mercy
has been discovered: he can never speak of the glory of the Lords love in
Christ, but he must also speak of the wretchedness and wickedness of himself
toward whom that love works, otherwise the Soul vails the glory of the love of
God in Christ. So that hence also necessarily proceed sensible acknowledgements
of the Souls accursed wretchedness, whenever a a beam of light shines from
Heaven to discover to a Soul his union with Christ.

Secondly, The second way of manifestation of the perfection of the freedom of
the Lords love, which is by the Souls manifesting an unwavering confidence in
the faithfulness of the Lord to vouchsafe the sweetest embraces of love to the
loveless Soul, notwithstanding all its wretchedness. Even this is the constant,
certain and infallible effect of a beam of light shining from Heaven to
discover to the Soul its union with Christ. This you may observe, in 2. Cor. 5,
6, 7, 8. The Apostle declares, they had received the earnest of the
Inheritance, they had received a pawn from Heaven, a pledge of everlasting
communion with God in Christ, says he, we are always confident, willing rather
to be absent from the Body and present with the Lord. So likewise, in Romans
8.23. Those that had received the first fruits of the spirit, did groan after
the full redemption of their Bodies; in the mean time being filled with holy
confidence, as you may observe, ver. 33.34. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? (speaking in the Persons of those that had received the
first fruits of the spirit) who is he that condemns? It is Christ thas died?
who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? And indeed this cannot but be
the necessary effect of the spirit of light revealing to the Soul its union
with Jesus Christ; seeing the rock of everlasting certainty, whereupon the Soul
may build the hopes of the riches of the Lords love in Christ toward him, is
revealed by the spirit of light revealing to the Soul its union. For you know
the prime way of the spirt of light revealing to the Soul its union, is by
revealing to the Souls faith, that it is the will of the Lord to admit that
particular Soul into union with Jesus Christ; yea the spirit of Jesus Christ
should not execute its office in revealing to the Soul its union, should it not
establish the Soul in an unwavering confidence (while that light remains) of
enjoying the sweetest embraces of the Lords love, notwithstanding all its
vileness.

Thirdly, The third act of the Soul, whereby it manifests the perfection of the
love of God to unlovely sinners, which is by the souls manifesting its
stedfastness in the same confidence, of the fullness of the Lords love in Christ
working toward it, under the sense of new infirmity, imperfection,
crookedness; even that is also the certain, necessary effect of the spirit of
light discovering to the Soul its union with Jesus Christ. This you may observe
in that 2. Cor. 5. They were sensible of their imperfection while they were in
the Body; yet they were nevertheless confident, having received the earnest of
the spirit, So Romans 7.23 compared with Romans 8.1. Paul though he fought new
Combats, though he were never led captive by the law of his members yet
notwithstanding he was confident that there was no condemnation, no sentence of
vengeance, or dictate of justice, that could pass out against his Soul, that
was now admitted into union with the Lord Jesus And this indeed cannot but be
the necessary effect of a beam of light shining from God to manifest unto the
Soul its union with Jesus Christ, seeing that beam of light first discovers the
Lords blessed unchangeable will, to be the only foundation of that love of God
in Christ. Thus when the glory and luster of the light continues, the sense of
the Souls weakness, sinful disposition, imperfection, cannot shake the Souls
confidence, in regard of that clear apprehension that then possesses the Soul,
that there is nothing in that Soul that is the foundation of that love of God
in Jesus Christ that he hopes for: and in regard also a dear apprehension
possesses the Soul; that there are the same motives and arguments in the bosom
of that ever blessed God of love, yet to love that unlovely Soul
notwithstanding his new infirmities, his new backsliding disposition or
proneness to backsliding. Now such a manifestation of the stedfastness in the
confidence of the Soul under the sense of new infirmities, cannot but be the
effect of such a beam of light, in regard the unchangeableness of the will of
God that is revealed, to admit the Soul into union with God in Christ, is
clearly revealed by the power of that light; so that while the beauty and glory
of that light continues, though new corrupt dispositions arise in the believing
Soul, yet the confidence of the Soul shakes not, because it is built upon the
faithfulness of God, in fulfilling his blessed will to the Soul, which will of
his is unchangeable. So that then it is apparent, that the name of God is
exalted through every believing Soul in the glorious freedom of his love that
is in Jesus Christ to unlovely sinners, by and through the spirits discovery to
the Soul certainly his union with Jesus Christ.

III. A Soul does manifest the glorious perfection of the Lords love in Christ
to worthless, unlovely sinners, by manifesting such an absolute perfection of
the love of God in Christ to sinful Souls, as that love is subject to no
variation, alteration or shadow change. When the Soul so walks, as he declares
practically, that the rich love of God in Christ to his unworthy Soul, is the
same yesterday and to day and the same for ever; the foundation thereof
standing firm and unmovable, like Mount Sion that cannot be moved: then does
the brightness of the Lords glorious love shine through the Soul, so as the
name of God is exalted through it. Thus God glorified himself before the eyes
of Balak through the mouth of the false Prophet Balaam, to give testimony to
the unchangeableness of the love of God in Christ to his People Israel, by
sending that message to Balaam, Numb. 23.19. God is not a man that he should
lie, neither the son of man that he should repent (that is, not like the sons
of men that his thoughts should change) what he has spoken shall it not come
to pass? His words concerning his People shall certainly be fulfilled. So
likewise when the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Malachie, intended to lift
up his name in his Peoples hearts, Mal. 3.6. he discovers to them his precious
thoughts of love concerning them, in declaring the coming of Jesus Christ with
the blessed effect of it, and says he, I am the Lord, I change not, therefore
the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. So the Church exalts the name of God, by
bearing witness to the unchangeableness of his love to her, Lament 3.22.22. It
is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassion fail
not. Now a Soul manifests the unchangeableness of the Lords love in Christ to
his unworthy Soul by its constancy and unmoveableness in that precious
confidence of his union with the Lord Jesus, that was once raised in his heart
by the power of that evidence of his union. And doubtless it is for that end,
that believing Souls might thus exalt the name of God, in the unchangeableness
of his love toward them, that the Lord has prepared unchangeable Grounds,
unmovable Rocks for the feet of their Faith to stand upon, he has added his
oath to his word, Heb. 6.17, 18. That by two immutable things by which it is
impossible that God should lie, they might have strong consolation that receive
Jesus Christ tendered. It is for this end that he has given those unchangeable
grounds for faith to build upon.

1. That those Ecclipses of the glory of Gods love in Christ in its
unchangeableness, by the constancy of the actings of Faith might be prevented.
Surely it was the bowels of the compassions of our tender God in Christ that
wrought toward the unlovely Soul, that caused him to stoop down so low, as to
add an oath to his word, which gives no security in it self to a Soul more but
only a fuller security to our unbelieving hearts, in our low apprehensions of
God, that thereby the precious consolations of his People might not change; and
it was the ultimate end of God in the workings of those compassions, that the
glory of his own love might not be veiled by the unconstancy and fickleness of
the actings of faith, so as Souls should declare by believing, when their
hearts are filled with holy actings, that there was a glorious love in God
through Christ to unlovely sinners, and when the apprehension of the liveliness
of those holy actings in their hearts should cease, that then they should again
declare that the love of God in Christ is withdrawn again from them.

2. That the glory of his love in its unchangeableness, might shine forth in
its brightness with transparent glory, so as the Soul under the saddest defect
of holy actings and workings in his own heart, might still declare the precious
love of God in Christ to his unlovely to be the same, sounded upon his own will
only, which can never be moved. The constancy and unmoveableness of the Soul in
his confidence of his union with Christ, (that the evidence of union with
Christ begets) is always the effect of such a beam of light from Heaven to
reveal to a Soul his union, so long as the light continues shining into the
Soul in its luster and glory. This you may observe of Paul, in 2 Cor. 5.5, 6.
Having received the earnest of the spirit, what then? we are always confident
of everlasting communion with God: that is we are confident at all times,
constantly our confidence is unmovable. Yea doubtless seeing the spirit of
light from the spirit of light shining into any Soul, is but an act of the
conforming office of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, it cannot be but that light
shining from the Spirit of light to evidence to the Soul its union, must
necessarily establish the heart in that confidence of his union with Jesus
Christ, that so long as that light remains the confidence must remain also, and
that in its power and strength.

Thus you have the first way opened, how the name of God is exalted through a
Soul, which is by the Souls bearing testimony to the truth of the record that
the Lord has given to his love in Jesus Christ by the souls manifesting the
same glory of the love of God in Christ to sinful souls, that God himself has
revealed to be in him.

Secondly, God is exalted through the Soul by the souls manifestation, that an
incomprehensible perfection of purity and holiness dwells in God, God has
revealed himself in his word not only to be holy, but holiness it self, Amos
4.2. The Lord has sworn by his holeness, that is, he has sworn by himself. He
has discovered such absolute perfection of holiness to be in him, that he has
an absolute unspeakable abhorrency of all that is cross and contrary unto
holiness in its perfection, Hab. 1.13. yea the brightness of the perfection of
holiness dwell in him, Exodus 15.11. Now then is the name of God exalted through
a Soul, when the Soul conceives of God, as thus excellent and wonderful in
holiness, when the Soul declares before the world, that his God in Christ is
purity and holiness it self. Hence it is that the holy Angels are said to cry
to the Lord, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.3. and also the office of
the dispencers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is described, Rev. 4.8, 9. by
their crying Night and Day without ceasing, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty;
it is for this reason, because the name of God is exalted, when there are such
manifestations and declarations of an absolute perfection of holiness to dwell
in God. Now a Soul may manifest this absolute perfection of holiness to dwell
in God these three or four several ways.

I. By a precious sensible acknowledgement of an infinite disproportion and
disagreement in his most holy, exact, exquisite actions (when the Soul is most
mightily assisted by the spirit of God) to the Lords blessed holy will. When a
Soul freely declares his righteousness, and all the actings of holiness in his
heart to be but unholiness, compared with the exact, perfect, holy will of God,
when it acknowledges with the Church, Isa. 64.16. That its righteousness is but
as filthy rags, as a menstruous Cloth, all pollution and defilement it self,
in comparison of that most blessed, holy will of God, then does the Soul exalt
the Lord, by declaring an absolute perfection of holiness to dwell in him. And
thence it is, that confession of sin is necessary for believing Souls, though
sin be pardoned, and though there be large manifestations also of the pardon of
sin renewed, because those confessions of sin and the large acknowledgements of
the vile cursed workings of the corrupt heart, (and the vast disproportion
between the Lords blessed, holy will, and his unholy will) the Soul exalts the
name of God by bearing testimony to the perfection of holiness that dwells in
God.

II. By declaring the least aberration or deviation from the Lords blessed
will, to be just matter of infinite wrath to be executed upon the Soul, and
just matter of endless perplexity, trouble and vexation unto the Soul. When a
Soul manifests the least straggling wandering thought from God, the least
indisposedness of the heart to comply with the Lords blessed will, to be just
occasion for the Lord to let his fiery indignation burn for ever against the
Soul; then does the Soul bear testimony to that unspeakable perfection of
holiness that dwells in God: Then does the Soul say virtually Thy will O Lord is
so perfectly holy, that it is infinitely equal that thy will should be obeyed
in all things, in that thou command nothing but is so absolutely and
perfectly good; that he that neglects obedience to that thy blessed will in the
least, is worthy to have exact vengeance executed upon him, for a cross,
crooked, rebellious-hearted wretch. Thus the Church, Lam. 3.22. acknowledges it
is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail
not. Likewise the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.3. O Lord if thou should mark iniquity
who shall stand; that is to say, Lord the least iniquity if thou do execute
the just desert of it upon any Soul, none then should ever stand before thee;
every Soul should perish to eternity. Thus God is exalted through the Soul; and
mark it, this is the use of all those self-judgings that believing Souls are so
frequent in the true holy use of, it is for this reason that you shall hear
believing Souls both public and private passing the sentence of condemnation
against themselves, though they know the sentence of condemnation shall not
pass against them, though their pardon is shared in the Court of their
consciences; yea when the pardon is most evidently sealed to them, then you
shall hear them most full of those judgments past against themselves, saying
we are worthy O Lord to be confounded, it were but righteous in our God
considered in our selves, to make us an everlasting abhorrence to his purest
eyes. Thus by these self judgings they bear public testimony to the most
exact, exquisite perfection of holiness that dwells in God.

III. By manifesting that the least communion with God in Christ, does
necessarily sanctify any Soul in some degree; When a Soul declares
practically, that it is impossible for any Soul to have communion with God in
Christ, but he shall participate in some degree of the holiness of God, the
disposition of his corrupt will shall be changed, then does a Soul manifest a
perfection of holiness to dwell in God.

IV. By declaring that a perfection of conformity to the Lords blessed will,
ought to be the only satisfying object of the desires of any soul. When a Soul
manifests practically and apparently, that no Soul ought to take up any rest in
any degree of holiness less then a perfect conformity to the Lords blessed
will. Now this perfect conformity to the Lords will consists in three or four
particulars.

1. When he declares that every Soul ought to will every thing that the Lord
himself wills.

2. When he declares that every object that the will of the Soul ought to close
with, ought to be closed with, only because God wills it.

3. when the Soul wills only that which the blessed Majesty of God wills.

4. When the Soul wills every thing in the same manner that God himself wills
it. Now there are four things to be considered in the manner of the Lords
willing any thing.

1. Whatever the Lord wills, he wills with infinite freedom. So that then the
perfect conformity of the Souls will consists in the freedom of the Souls
compliance with the will of God, when he wills what God himself wills, and
wills it freely according as God wills it.

2. Whatever the Lord wills, he wills purely, he wills it because he wills it.

3. Whatever the Lord wills, he wills with facilility and easiness.

4. In the Lords willing that which is holy, his will moves necessarily, though
yet with infinite freedom. It is with infinite freedom that the Lord wills
holiness; but yet there is such a necessity from the essence and being of God,
that his will wills holiness only, and that he can will nothing else but what
is holy. Thus when the Soul shall practically manifest, that the groanings and
thirstings, and pantings and breathings of every Soul should never cease till
there be this blessed union of wills between God and them, that their wills
should even move as it were in a circle of holiness, as the blessed will of God
moves; then does a Soul declare that an infinite perfection of holiness dwells
in God, and then is God exalted through the Soul.

Now it remains to be opened, that the name of God is exalted through every
believing Soul, in this transcendent glory of his holiness, to whom the spirit
does reveal certainly his union with the Lord Jesus: This must appear by the
manifesting that the spirit of Jesus Christ in revealing to any Soul his union
with Christ, does certainly cause the Soul to walk in those ways, through which
the name of God is exalted in the brightness and perfection of the glory of his
holiness through the Soul

I. The Spirit of Christ in evidencing to the Soul his union with Christ, does
necessarily draw forth those sensible free acknowledgements from the Soul, of
an infinite disproportion and disagreement in the most exact, exquisite action
that ever the Soul performed to the Lords infinite, holy will. This you may
observe in, Isa. 64. comparing ver. 4. and ver. 6. says the Church, From the
beginning of the world men have not heard nor perceived by the ear, neither
has the eye seen, O God, besides thee what he has prepared for them that wait
for him, that is for the believing Soul, (for waiting is but an extended act of
faith) And then under those apprehensions of the unspeakeableness of the Lords
Love in Christ to every believing Soul, she breaks out, but we are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousness (all our duties and performances, our
most holy actings) they are but as filthy rags. Likewise it is observable in
the holy man Job, who stood much upon his own uprightness and integrity, Chap.
23.11, 12. and Chap. 27.5, 6. Till I die I will not remove my integrity from
me; that is, I will not deny my innocence and righteousness; I have walked
before God with a perfect heart, I will never reproach my self till I die, so
Chap. 31.6. Let me be weighed in an even Balance that God may know my
integrity; yet in Chap. 4.3, 4. this Job that could declare so many righteous
acts of his own, begins freely to acknowledge, that all his righteousness was
as vileness; though those actions of righteousness had been performed by him
with much integrity, yet there was an infinite disproportion between the holy
actings of the Lords blessed will: then says Job, behold I am vile, what shall
I answer thee? I have laid my hand upon my mouth; once have I spoken, but I
will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no further: I will not call to
God to weigh me in a Balance any more that he may know my integrity; so Chap.
42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees
thee; wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes; repent, that is,
the thoughts of my self now change, I am so ashamed I loath and abhor my self
in the sight of all my integrity and righteousness that I so much stood upon.
And certainly there is an infallible necessity of a Souls exalting the name of
God through those sensible free acknowledgements of the infinite disproportion
between the holy actings of his will, and the holy actings of the Lords will,
whenever the spirit of Christ do reveal to any Soul his union.

1. In regard the faculty of the Souls spiritual sight was then lively, active
and ready for exercise. The eye of the Soul is as it were open, and in every
duty that he performs to God, he can behold the least inward sluggishness and
indisposedness, so as the least of those infirmities is burdensome; and mark,
that is the reason that believing Souls once decaying in the life of holiness,
lose the sense of the evidence to their Souls of their union with Christ,
because every day their own formality, hardness, blockishness, insensibleness,
is less burdensome to them, because the faculty of spiritual sight is out of
exercise. And that is the reason also that under the clearest sight of the Souls
union with Christ, there is the largest confession of the Souls own vileness,
the spiritual faculty of sight in the believing Soul, is then drawn up in its
strength: that's one of the great reasons why those Souls that enjoy the
clearest revelations of the Lords love in Christ are the most abased Souls.

2. When the spirit reveals to the Soul its union with Christ, then the
precious heavenly light that discovers all the unsutableness of the Souls will
to Gods will, shines clearly and actually. The transparent light of the Lords
love in Christ to so unlovely a Soul, is like a blessed, heavenly Lamp lighted
up within the Believers heart, through the light of which the Soul may see
every unsutableness in his will to the Lords blessed will; and that in its
vileness, in its most odious native colors: yea, that light of the Lords Love
in Christ to the loveless Soul, causes the infinite right that the Lord has to
claim all the powers and possibilities of the Soul to be subject to him, to
shine clearly in the Soul; it makes the heart say within it self, O how
infinitely due is every acting of my Soul to God, to be employed only for his
blessed pleasure: so that now there is light without to enable the Soul to see
the unsutableness of its will to Gods will; as well as there is light within,
that the Soul sees not only like a man having a perfect sight, but as a man
with a perfect sight in a clear Sunshine day, that shall discern every more in
the Sun Beams, that a man with a clear sight in a dark day cannot behold: and
thence it is, that the evidence unto the Soul of its union with Christ cannot
but draw sorth an acknowledgement of the infinite disproportion of the Souls
actings to the Lords holy will, in regard the Soul is then enabled to discern
the smallest unsutableness that is in his will to the Lords will.

3. In regard that light that shines into the Soul at that time, discovers
those unholinesses in the holy actings of the Soul, whereof a believing Soul is
most peculiarly guilty in all his holy actings. There are four wants of
holiness in all the actings of believing Souls in some measure and degree.

First, The want of pure Love in all the holy actings of the Soul. The want of
the Souls aiming merely at the exaltation and glory of his dearest Father in
the Lord Jesus, and so acting in obedience to the Fathers blessed will, from a
pure Child-like disposition working in the heart, that disposes him to comply
with the Fathers will only, only because his Fathers will. This is pure Love,
when the Soul out of Love to God himself, without relation to any benefit or
advantage that the Soul enjoys without relation to any fear of any loss or
damage that the Soul should suffer through disobedience, to aim at and intend
only the fulfilling of his blessed Fathers will; now this in every holy duty
the Soul performs, is in some degree of its perfection wanting.

Secondly, There is the want of freedom of Spirit or liberty, in their holy
actings in their wills, agreeing with the Lords blessed will. When the Spirit
of Jesus Christ breaths upon the holy disposition and inclination, infused into
Believers wills most sweetly and powerfully, and assist them strongly in their
exercise, yet then while they dwell in these Bodies of Clay, (while the old man
remains not wholly crucified) there wants some perfection of Liberty in their
Spirits in these holy actings the soul is not wholly void of some inclination
and disposition acting secretly, that bends the soul from those holy actings
that yet the Soul is exercised in.

Thirdly, In the holy actings of believing Souls, there is a want of fullness of
complacency, delight and contentment in those holy actings. The flesh mutters
and murmurs against the actings of the Spirit; this made Paul say, with my mind
I serve the Law of God, and with my flesh the Law of Sin, and I delight in the
Law of God according to the inward man: still there is an opposite party that
is not satisfied in those holy actings; the Spirit is willing, says Christ
concerning his Apostles, but the flesh is weak; the flesh will never answer the
spirits readiness perfectly, so as all the whole powers and possibilities of
Soul and Body should run parallel with one another in their holy actings, till
this mortal shall have put on immortality.

Fourthly, There is a want of an absolute nothingness in the Soul, in the
precious, holy actings of the Soul. That vile principle of Self-confidence is
so firmly rooted in our natures, that when the sanctifying Spirit of Jesus
Christ has had a blessed work upon the unholy heart; yet then the bitter root
of Self-confidence will be sending forth some cursed sprigs, be will sprouting
forth in some unholy actings, even in the midst of the Souls actings, the Soul
being never perfectly and absolutely nothing in himself in his holy actings.
Thence you may observe from your experience, an infinite difficulty that you
find after great enlargements of heart in a holy duty, then to think no better
of your selves for the duty; It must be a mighty power of the spirit that must
draw forth from a Soul at such a time that voice in sincerity, saying, not I,
but the grace of God that was in me. Now that Light that discovers unto a
believing Soul those unholinesses of his, (whereof the believing Soul is
constantly guilty in some degree in all his holy actings) is an unseparable
attendant upon the Spirit of Light, evidencing to the Soul its union with the
Lord Jesus.

There is only the light of the Lords Love in Christ to the worthless
nothing-like Soul, that discovers the want of pure Love in the Souls actings of
holiness. It is the vision of the Lords Love unto. the Soul, that excites and
stirs up actings of Love in the Soul unto God: So likewise the vision of the
Lords Love in Christ unto the Soul, enables the Soul to discern the want of
pure, perfect Love in his Soul unto God. It is then when a Soul sees that Love
of God in Christ unto his unlovely unspeakable soul, that he apprehends deeply,
that the most superlative actings of his Love are due from him unto God again;
and then does the Soul discern the great evil of the imperfection of the
actings of his own Love, so as to answer the actings of the Lords will out of
pure Love only. Thence it is, when the Spirit of Jesus Christ does evidence
unto it his union with Christ; then any slavish workings of fear are tedious
and burdensome unto the Soul; whereas before the Soul thought those actings of
fear (if they brought sorth but some Tears) to be precious actings, but now it
loathes them. So likewise it is only the Light of the Lords Love in Jesus Christ
to the worthless soul, that discovers clearly the want of freedom and liberty
in the heart in its holy actings. Then indeed the soul groans not only for the
want of his heart answering the Lords will in obedience, (and so for want of
holy actings) but he groans under the want of freedom of spirit in those holy
actings also. So likewise the want of perfect rest and complacency of the Soul
in his holy actings, is made manifest, only through the light of the glorious
Love of the Lord in Jesus Christ to the loveless Soul. No Soul can discern
matter wherein he may take up a fullness of rest only in obedience to the Lords
will, till he discerns God as he is in Jesus Christ to his unlovely Soul; and
therefore the want of the Souls fullness of contentment in the actings of
holiness, can never be made clearly manifest, till the light of the Lords love
in Jesus Christ shines upon it; yea the lively beauty, excellency and glory
that is in the bare fulfilling of the Lords holy will, only shines clearly to
the Soul through the light of the Lords love in Jesus Christ. Yea the want of
an absolute nothingness in himself in his holy actings, is made apparent to the
Soul through the light of the Lords Love in Jesus Christ shining upon him.
Never can a Soul apprehend that all that he is, and all that the powers and
possibilities of his Soul can perform, and infinitely more, is due from his
Soul unto God, till the glorious light of the Lords love in Christ shine upon
him: It is only when the light of that love shines, that the heart says in
sincerity to it self, what think thou, O my heart, is due to thee, though
now thou have been enlarged by the assistance of the Spirit of Christ in this
holy duty? Art not an unprofitable Servant, not having given to the Lord the
hundred thousandth part what thou do owe to him.

IV. When the Spirit evidenceth unto any Soul his union with the Lord Jesus,
sensible, free acknowledgements of an infinite disproportion in the most holy
actings of the Soul to the Lords holy, blessed will, are necessarily drawn
forth, in regard the unholiness that constantly attends in some degree the
actings of holiness in Souls, are at the same time most cross and opposite to
the Souls desires. The desires of the soul being but the reachings forth of
love, and the highest actings of love being the necessary effect of those
highest discoveries of the Lords love to the soul: thence necessarily the
highest desires of the soul are raised to a superlative height after fullness of
unity, and perfect communion with God in Christ, when the spirit evidenceth to
the soul his union with Jesus Christ.

V. When the spirit evidenceth to the soul its union with Christ, the spiritual
sense of the soul is then most lively. The spirit of Jesus Christ being
constantly a quickening spirit, where he is a comforting spirit, the soul being
filled with comfort, cannot but be filled with life; and when the soul is
filled with life, sense is also lively; so that thence the soul at that time is
most sensible of his own unholiness, and thence necessarily is constrained to
acknowledge sensibly the disagreement of his will in his most holy actings to
the Lords most holy blessed will.

2. The spirit evidencing to any soul its union with the Lord Jesus, does
certainly draw forth free declarations from the soul, that the least
transgression of the Lords blessed will is just occasion of incensing the wrath
of God infinitely and eternally against the soul, and just occasion of
unspeakable perplexipy and grief to the soul. So that through this a soul
declares that blessed will of God to be so absolutely, so perfectly holy, that
the least opposing of that blessed will, might justly deprive him of
acceptance. Thus you may observe when the spirit of Jesus Christ stirred up the
heart of the Church to precious believing Acts, Lament. 3.22 23, 24. then did
the same spirit draw from their mouths sensible declarations, that the least of
their transgressions did justly expose them to the everlasting burning, to be
consumed in the fire of the Lords Indignation; then she cries out It is of the
Lords mercies that we are not consumed because his compassions fails not. So
likewise, in Psalm. 130.3. when the heart of the Psalmist was up in believing
actings, then says he, If thou should mark, iniquity who shall stand? The
least iniquity that remains in the most sanctified souls, were enough to cast
them down into the everlasting Lake of burning, if the Lord should act in
justice with them. Hence it is, that when Jesus Christ draws forth the sweetest
believing actings in the hearts of Believers, then they are most ready to
accept of any chastisement that the Lord inflicts upon them, in respect of
their transgressions, Lament. 3.39. So that thence souls enjoying the clearest
beams of light from the spirit of light, revealing unto them their union with
the Lord Jesus, are commonly most filled with acclamations against themselves,
and all their prayers filled with self-judgings and abhorrings. Yea likewise
hence it is also, that believing souls enjoying the evidences of their union
with Jesus Christ, are filled with those high admirations, and that their souls
conceive of the love of God in Jesus Christ to them as a mystery unsearchable,
past finding out either by Men or Angels, because then they apprehend the
infinite worthiness of those thousands and ten thousands, and Millions of
iniquity that they have committed, to incense the anger of the Lord against
their Souls. Yea likewise hence also proceed those enlarged desires after the
sweetest meltings of heart for sin, from those Souls to whom the spirit of
Jesus Christ has certainly evidenced their union with him. But as the
Scripture testifies to the truth of this; so reason testifies that there cannot
but be a connection between the spirits evidencing to the soul its union with
Jesus Christ, and the souls sense of worthiness for the least transgression, to
be punished with everlasting indignation.

1. In regard the spirits evidencing unto the soul that it is united to Jesus
Christ, does declare and manifest to the soul the equity of a perfect
subjection of every soul, to the Lords blessed holy will. When the spirit bears
witness to the soul, that the blessed Majesty of Heaven is willing to be
reconciled and united to poor despicable, rebellious wretches, to those whose
hearts swell with enmity against the Crown of his glory, yea when the spirit
testifies that the Lord even seeks and sues for the reconciliation with the
soul, thence it cannot but be clearly manifested to the Soul that is but
infinitely equal that a poor rebellious wretch, yea such a desperate enemy to
his blessed Majesty, should consent to what the Lord propounds: Now from this
manifestation of the infinite equity of a perfect subjection to be given by
every soul to the Lords blessed will, from thence there is necessarily such
deep apprehensions of the infinite injustice and unsearchable depth of
unrighteousness and wickedness that is in the least contradicting that blessed
will, that the Soul conceives every such transgression or disobedience to that
blessed will, to be infinitely worthy to be punished with infinite and
everlasting indignation.

2. The Spirits evidencing unto the Soul, that it is united unto Jesus Christ,
does declare the absolute perfection of goodness in the Lords blessed will, so
as it manifests every motion of that will to be absolutely transcendently good.
When the spirit bears witness unto any soul of its union with Jesus Christ, it
represents God only as a mass of love in Jesus Christ; It represents God
willing all kinds and degrees of good unto every Soul that will accept it; and
thence every act of the Lords blessed will is represented to the Soul as
absolutely good: now by that means every transgression of the Lords will is
represented as in opposition to infinite goodness, and thence every
transgression cannot but be apprehended as a just occasion for infinite wrath
and indignation to burn in its fierceness and extremity against the Soul.

3. The Spirits evidencing unto a Soul his union with Christ, does necessarily
occasion the soul to declare to the honor of God, that the least degree of
communion with God, causes any Soul to participate in some degree of his
holiness. This the Apostle testifies, in 2. Cor. 3.18. That while they did with
open-face behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, they were changed into
the same in age from glory to glory; that is, they are conformed into the
likeness of God while they see the beams of his excellency glitter upon them,
through the great truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; yea, that gradually
according as they behold the glory, so they are changed also by degrees from
glory unto glory, from one degree of likeness unto God to another degree. Thus
likewise the Apostle testifies, 1 John 1.5, 6. That God is light, that is to
say, that he is holiness itself, purely holy, nothing but holy, and then bears
witness that it is impossible for any soul to have the least fellowship with
him, but we must be partakers of that holiness; if we say that we have
fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth: as if
the Apostle had spoken in these words; The Lord is so infinitely transcendently
holy, such an infinite perfection of holiness dwells in him, and an infinite
averseness to any thing that is unholy, that it is impossible any soul should
dwell with him but he must participate of his holiness. So in 1 John 2.6. He
that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked. So
likewise he testifies the same thing again, in 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever abides
in him (that is united to Jesus Christ, has union and communion with him)
sins not; that is, he sins not according to the manner that he sinned before
his union with Jesus Christ; there are other disposition infused into his
heart, there are some drops of the holiness of Jesus Christ communicated to his
Soul through his union with Jesus Christ; whosoever sins has, not seen him
neither knows him; that is, whoever sins in the same manner that he did when he
was void of the knowledge of Christ, void of union and communion with him,
whatever he professes, he had not the experimental knowledge of the love of
God that joined his heart to Christ: he never had the true vision of the glory
of Jesus Christ, he has not so seen him whereby his Soul was transformed into
the likeness of Christ. And in regard of this, that the spirits evidencing unto
the Soul that he is united unto Jesus Christ, does necessarily cause such a
declaration, that the least degree of communion with God cause the Soul to
participate of the holiness of God. Thence it is,

First, That the sin and transgression of a Soul enjoying the evidence of his
union with Christ, is so intollerably burdensome. This is the reason why souls
enjoying the evidence of their union with Christ, melt and break so sweetly
under the remembrance of any sin, that they are confounded in themselves, that
they loath and abhor themselves in regard the glory of God is so ecclipsed; and
thence the remembrance of his own sin wounds so deeply, because in effect he by
sensual, formal, unworthy walking does declare that communion with God, does
not make him partaker of his holiness.

Secondly, This is the reason why the sins of those that are united to Jesus
Christ, do stir up the displeasure of God in a superlative manner; (though his
displeasure works but in a fatherly manner against their Persons) because by
their sins the glory of his holiness is ecclipsed; they profess God not to be
so absolutely holy but a Soul may have fellowship with God, and yet be unholy,
and this casts a black cloud upon the Lords perfect holiness. Hence it is that
the Lord complained so bitterly against the chosen Nation of the Jews, when
they walked unholy and unsutably, because they caused his name to be polluted
among the Heathen, Ezekiel. 36.21, 22, 23. Thence the displeasure of God was
incensed so high against the holy man David because of his unworthy walking, 2.
Sam. 12.14. Thou have caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, that is, to speak
against God, to have unworthy thoughts of God; and thence it is that the Lord
testifies an higher degree of abhorrence of his Peoples sins, than he does of
the sins of those that are not joined to him, and remitted into union with him
in Christ: thence the Lord commands the Apostle to profess more displeasure
against the sins of them that profess themselves to be one with God, then
against the sins of any other, 1. Cor. 5.9, 10 11. If any man that is called a
Brother be a Fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat; It is not meant
eating at the Lords Table, but to sit down in a civil way of eating at the
Table with him; he vails Gods glory and professes^^ God is not so absolutely
pure but he can behold iniquity, or not so absolutely holy but there may be
communion with him, and yet be unholy.

Thirdly, This is the reason, that Souls enjoying the evidence of their union
with Christ, declares such ardent desires after, and such a constant necessity
of attending upon the Lords appointments for communion, because hereby they
declare, that converse and communion with God does necessarily make a Soul
partaker of his holiness. And it is from hence that Souls are always longing
and breathing after communion with God through his ordinances that they might
be partakers of his holiness: so it is through the manifestation of those
breathings after communion with him, that their Souls declare practically, that
still further every degree of communion with God, does make the Soul further
partaker of his holiness; seeing they declare it is for that end they attend
upon the Lord in ordinances, and long after ordinances that they might go on to
perfect holiness,

Fourthly, This is the reason that the spirit of God does so vehemently press
and urge believing Souls to manifest holiness, to walk worthy of God, and
worthy of their high calling that is in Christ, because hereby they declare
that communion and converse with God does necessarily make a Soul partaker of
the holiness of God. And thence it is, that walking holily, is called a
walking, holy of their high calling, Ephesians. 4.1. And it is called a walking
worthy of God, Col. 1.10. Thus the Scripture evidenceth, that (...) spirits
revealing his union with Christ, does necessarily occasion the Soul to declare
that the least degree of communion and converse with God, does make a Soul
partaker of the holiness of God. And likewise even reason it self testifies it.

1. In regard the spirits evidencing unto the Soul its union with Jesus Christ,
gives the Soul such large and sweet experience, that communion with God does
make the Soul participate of the holiness of God; that thence the Soul cannot
but declare what he sees and knows by his own experience. When once the spirit
of light reveals to the Soul his union with Christ, both to faith and sense, a
Soul is made to discern so clearly, such precious dispositions of holiness, to
be infused from the spirit of Jesus Christ into his heart; that thence he has
such undeniable experience that the least vision of the glory of God in Christ,
the least communion of wills between God and the Soul in Christ, does make the
Soul so partake of the holiness of God, that the Soul cannot but manifest it
upon all occasions practically, he cannot but declare it proverbally upon every
call he has to give such a testimony according to that in Acts 4.20. We cannot
but speak the things we have seen and heard.

2. The spirits evidencing unto a Soul his union with Christ, gives the Soul
such affecting experiences of the sanctifying virtue of communion with God,
that the heart is even fired with affection, and thence it cannot but declare
the glorious sanctifying-vertue in communion with God in Christ. The soul
receiving light from the spirit of light to declare to his union with Christ;
does not only enjoy the experience of the virtue of communion, but at that
time, that experience so takes and ravishes the heart, stirs up such rapture of
love and delight in those acts of holiness, that thence fire may as soon keep
in the Bosom and the Clothes not smell (as Solomon speaks) a^ the experience
that the soul enjoys be kept close unrevealed.

3. The spirits evidencing unto any soul his union with Christ, begets such
ardent, such superlative actings of love toward the honor of God, and such an
high degree of abhorrence of all dishonor unto God, that thence the
manifestation of the absolute perfection of holiness that dwells in God, (by
declaring that the least communion with him makes a soul holy) does necessarily
grow in that soul. It is the great Maxim of the Covenant, that the vision of
the Lords love to the soul, begets love in the soul to God again: so that then
the glorious testimony of the Lords Love in Christ, in admission of the soul
into union with Christ, cannot but raise the highest actings of love to God in
the soul, and those actings of love toward God, do and will take the honor
and glory of God for their object as well as any other attribute that can be
conceived in God.

4. The spirits evidence unto any soul of his union with Christ does, cause all
the engagements that are laid by God upon a believing soul, to exalt the name
of God in his holiness, to return upon the Soul with power and irresistible
strength. There is indeed constantly some degree of sense in every believing
soul of infinite engagements laid by God upon him, to oblige and engage him to
exalt God in his holiness, but those engagements are weaker or stronger,
according to the clearness or darkness of the spirits evidence to the Soul of
its union with Christ: And those engagements that the Soul apprehends to be
laid upon him to exalt God in his holiness, are also actually brought to the
souls remembrance and pressed upon the Soul, according to the frequency of the
spirits giving actual evidence unto the Soul of his union with Christ. So that
then only when the Spirit does actually evidence unto the Soul with most
clearness and perspecuity its union with Christ, then do all the engagements
that believing Souls apprehend that God have said upon them, to bind them to
exalt God in his holiness, come upon them with power and force so as a
constraint comes upon the spirit, the Soul being drawn as it were by cords, to
study and exalt the name of God in his holiness.

As for instance,

First, when the spirit evidenceth to the Soul his union with Christ, the Soul
is actually at that time sensible that he was chosen from eternity to be a
vessel of honor, into whom the holiness of God should be poured, that the
glory of the Lords holiness might appear. So that then the Soul stands strongly
bent, through the strength of this engagement God has laid upon him to lift up
the name of God in his holiness, and to make the holiness of the name of God
appear.

Secondly, When the spirit evidenceth to the Soul his union with Christ; the
Soul is actually sensibl^ that the Lord has created him anew, for that ver end
that he might glorify the Lord in his holiness. According to that in Ephesians.
2.10. We are all his workmanship created unto good works; that is, created unto
holiness, to fruits of holiness, and so consequently to the manifestation of
the glory of the Lords holiness.

Thirdly, When the spirit manifests unto the soul his union with Christ; it is
actually sensible that the very end of God in the communication of any of his
holiness unto him is the manifestation of the glory of his holiness through the
Soul. Thus then in regard the spirits evidence of a souls union with Christ
does occasion a being actually sensible of deep engagements laid upon him by
God to be exalting him in his holiness: thence the spirits evidence does
necessarily occasion the Soul to declare, that the least degree of communion
with God does make it to participate in some degree of the Lords holiness. So
that it is evident both from Scripture and Reason, that this third Testimony
concerning the absolute perfection of the Lords holiness, whereby he is exalted
through any Soul is the necessary, certain, infallible effect of the spirits
evidencing to any soul his union with the Lord Jesus.

4. The fourth way whereby God is exalted through the Soul, by bearing witness
to the perfection of his holiness, is this, when a Soul does declare that a
perfection of conformity to the Lords blessed will in every thing, ought to be
the only satisfying object of the desires of any Soul. Now even this precious
God magnyfying act of a believing Soul, is also the necessary effect of the
spirits evidencing to any soul its union with Christ. Thus you shall observe
that the spirit of Jesus Christ produced this blessed effect in Paul's heart,
to whom the spirit did vouchsafe the clearest revelation, and most
Soul-ravishing Testimony of his union with Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.
Brethren I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things that are before, I press toward the mark of the price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Here are four or five things the
Apostle testifies to be the practice of his own Soul, for the exalting of the
Lord in his holiness, and so consequently testifies it to be the effect of the
spirit of Jesus Christ in any believing Soul, to whom he reveals his union with
Christ

First, He testifies his estimation of himself, that he does account himself as
yet to be altogether imperfect, unholy; I count not my self to have
apprehended: he testifies that the power and virtue of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ was not yet fully made manifest in his Soul; that
is, the sin mortifying virtue of the death of Jesus Christ; the quickening and
enlivening virtue of the resurrection of Christ is not yet fully attained to in
his Soul.

Secondly, He testifies that the only end upon which the eye of his Soul was
fixed, was' a perfect conformity unto Christ. The fullness of an experimental
knowledge of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, as he tells you, ver.
12. he follows after that he may apprehend that for which also he was
apprehended of Jesus Christ, and also he tells us, ver. 14. he pressed forward
toward the mark and ver. 10 that the only end of his was to know Christ, that
is, to know him experimentally, in the virtue of his death, and the power of
his resurrection, having the sense of the glory, virtue and power of his death
and resurrection in his own spirit: so that herein he testifies that his Soul
stands resolved to be satisfied with no degree of holiness, and therein by
consequence testifies that nothing but the fullness of likeness to Jesus Christ
shall ever satisfy.

Thirdly he testifies that all his labors and endeavors after this experience
of all the virtue of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, are acounted
by him as nothing, I forget says he those things that are behind, ver. 13. not
that his Soul was forgetful of those precious experiences that the Lord has
given him of the death of Christ in killing his sin and the power of Christ in
enlivening his Soul, but he minded not all the degree of the (...) of the death
and resurrection of Christ that his Soul was partaker of; so as to please
himself with thoughts that he had attained to what he was commanded, he minded
them not so as to satisfy himself with that measure; though questionless the
measure was very large, seeing he testifies often, that he was more than a
Conqueror over all the powers of sin, and that he was able to do all things
through Christ strengthening of him, and that he was ready to abound and ready
to want, his heart being disposed in a holy temper in all condition, ready to
sanctify God in all his providence; yet says he I forget all those, that is,
I do not so remember them as to satisfy my self that I had attained so much.
The whole form of the expression is but an allusion to Runners in a Race, that
never look how many paces of ground they have passed, over, so as to hinder
them from running to the mark, but they keep their eye singly fixed upon the
mark that they are to attain to, so says he forget the things that are behind.

Fourthly, He testifies, that the strenght of all his affections, the whole
intention of his soul is bent toward the attaining the fullness of the
experience, of the virtue and power of the death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, this he testifies ver. 13. reaching sorth unto those things that are
before; (breathing forth) still in a metaphorical way he alludes to Runin a
Race, that run without stretched arms, reaching forth toward the mark, the
word in the Original is (...) which Beza renders, contending with the strength
of my Soul after the things before, after the height of the virtue of the death
and resurrection of Jesus Christ; that is, the experimental knowledge of the
virtue of his death and resurrection, that is to say the full communion with
Christ in his holiness.

Fifthly, He testifies that he passes over, or leaps over all difficulties,
all impediments and hindrances, in his striving after this perfect conformity
to Jesus Christ in his Death and Resurrection, which is also contained in that
he does profess toward the mark, he does thrust through all troops of
impediments that stand to oppose him in his way, and with all the powers and
possibilities of his soul extended, makes the persuit after the full experience
of the virtue of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Yea likewise he
hears witness, that every sincere believing soul ought to walk according to
this rule, to be thus minded ver. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be
thus minded; That is, let us thus count of our selves to be infinitely short of
that which ought only to satisfy our souls, whatever degree of holiness we
have apprehended, and let us fix our eyes singly, and constantly upon the
perfect holiness that souls attain to, through Communion with Christ in his
Death and Resurrection, and let us forget all our labors and endeavors, and
all the degrees of holiness that we have attainted to, so as not to satisfy our
selves in that measure and degree, and let us stretch out our Arms after full
Communion with Jesus Christ, and let us pass over all difficulties pressing
toward the mark, the fullness of Conformity to the Lords will, which the Lord
has determined to bring beleivers to through Communion with Jesus Christ their
Mediator, in his Death and Resurrection. Likewise the Apostle John testifies
as much in 1 John 3.3. Every one that has this hope in him purifieth himself
even as he is pure: Mark what hope he speaks of; The second verse tells you,
says he we are the Sons of God, and we know that when Christ appears we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is; So that the hope that he speaks of
is the hope of Adoption, the hope of their union with Christ the firstborn of
all the Elect ones and the hope of their perfect Union and Communion with Jesus
Christ in the highest Heavens: Now mark what the effect of this hope is; Those
that have received this hope infused from the spirit of Jesus Christ, it
occasions the souls to purify themselves as Jesus Christ is pure, that is all
one as God the Father is pure, (Christ being but the express image of his
Father) The Apostle means not that actually any soul having such an evidence of
his union with Christ from the spirit, as produces that blessed hope in him,
is actually purified according to purification of purity that is in Christ; But
he means, that the soul into whom this hope of his union with Christ is
infused, does desire, breath after, long for endeavor with all the intentions
of his soul, the same purity that is in Jesus Christ, satisfying his soul with
no degree, no measure, less then the fullness of likeness unto Jesus Christ
himself. Likewise it is evident that the spirit revealing unto any soul his
union with Christ, does occasion the soul to declare, that a conformity to the
will of God is the only satisfying object of the desires of any soul, in regard
the spirit of Christ makes the promises of union and Communion with God in
Christ to be the motive unto perfection of holiness. 2 Cor. 7.1. Now if the
very propounding of the promise be that which excites an heart unto perfect
holiness, (perfect Conformity to the Lords will) then much more must the sense
of the souls interest of Union and Communion with God in Christ, necessarily
constrain a soul to pursue with all his strength after perfection of conformity
to the Lords will, and to declare that no less then Conformity to the Lords
will perfectly ought to satisfy the desires of any soul. And likewise it might
be evident from the very prayer of the Apostle that he always made for
believing souls, which was for their perfect Conformity to the Lords will, 1
These. 5.23. Now the very God of Peaee sanctify you wholly in Spirit Soul and
Body: And he prays that they might be filled with the fullness of God Ephesians. 4.19.
And as Scripture thus Testifies, that God is thus exalted in his holiness in
any soul to whom the spirit does reveal its union with Jesus Christ, by that
souls declaring that a Conformity to the Lords will perfectly, ought only to
satisfy the desires of any soul; So likewise the experience of souls receiving
the evidence from the spirit of their union with Christ bears Witness of the
same.

I. Hence it is that those souls that enjoy the Evidences of there union with
Christ, are unsatisfyed with their most holy duties, and acts of purest
Obedience to the Lords blessed will. So that souls enjoying their union with
Christ are always complaining of Imperfections and wants in their most holy
actings. And

1. Hence it is that we shall hear constantly those precious souls complain
with much Bitterness, of the narrowness and straitness of the working of their
wills in Conformity to the Lords Will.

2. You shall hear them always complaining (when Assisted most mightily by the
spirit of Christ) of their want of singleness of Simplicity of heart in their
wills conforming to the Lords will.

3. They are constantly complaining of the want of liberty of spirit in the
compliance of their wills with the Lords blessed will. This David Intimates
when cries out 51.12. Restore to me the Joy of thy Salvation, and Establish me
with thy free Spirit: He Apprehended his spirit to be much under Bondage and
Thraldom, and with much earnestness he desires Communion with God again.

4. Hence those souls are always sadly complaining in their acts of purest
obedience, of their want of fixedness and stability of the workings of the
disposition of their wills to comply with Gods will.

5. You shall hear them complain of the Weakness, and Imperfection of the
inward acts of the most pure Obedience that their souls render, of the
Imperfection of their desires in prayer, even when they are drawn out by a
mighty power from the spirit of Christ.

II. It is from hence also, that souls enjoying the evidence of their union
with the Lord Jesus, are perpetually groaning after a fuller measure of the
sanctifying spirit of Jesus Christ, in what measure soever the sanctifying
spirit is poured out upon them. Thus David often in the 119. Psalm begs for
quickening; which in a word is but this, Lord send down more of the spirit of
Life and Holiness from the Lord Jesus. Yea this you may observe from the
workings of the spirit of the great Apostle Paul, Rom 7. how his soul groans
after a larger portion of the sanctifying spirit of Christ, complaining to will
is present with him, but to do is not yet present, that when the law of the
spirit begins to work, the law of the flesh opposes it, by which complaint he
does in effect but breath after a more mighty power of the sanctifying spirit
of Christ, which might not only beget a compliance in his will to the Lords
holy will, but might also carry it forth to perfection, that might cause his
soul not only to bring forth the bud of holiness, but the ripe fruit of it, and
his complaints are but the desiring of a power of the spirit, that the Law of
the spirit, (that is the disposition infused by the spirit) might overcome the
Law of the members, (that is, the corrupt dispositions that were naturally in
him) so that his soul might be more then conqueror over Sin.

III. Hence also it is, that souls injoyning the evidence of their union with
Jesus Christ from the spirit of Christ, are constantly enquiring into, and
searching to find out the secret Iniquities of their own hearts. That principle
being firmly rooted in them by the spirit of Revelation (that discovers to them
their union with Christ) that a perfect conformity to the Lords will ought only
to satisfy the desires o^ any soul, Thence they being always conscious to
themselves of a depth of wickedness that secretly possesses their hearts, they
are searching after the secret wickedness, those veiled and enclosed
iniquities, that their hearts would even lock up as it were in dark Dungeons
that the soul might never discern.

IV. Hence souls injoyning their evidence of their union with Christ, are
calling in the assistance of the heart searching God to find out their
Iniquities for them. According as you shall find David, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
Search me O God and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts (the holy man's
meaning is, that the Lord should so search him as to make him understand his
own heart and to know his own thoughts) see if there be any wicked way in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting. Thus he cries that the eye of the blessed
Majesty of heaven might pierce through his heart, to discover all his
wickedness and contrary walkings to the will of God, that then God might send
down a conquering power to deliver him from those corruptions, and lead him
into the path of holiness, that is, into a full conformity of the Lords blessed
will.

V. Hence it is that souls enjoying the evidence of their union with the Lord
Jesus, are so delighted with the precious heavenly light of the Lords word in
its discovery of the Souls unholiness, and in its discovery of the Lords
blessed will concerning the Soul. Surely it was from hence that David (in Psalm.
19.10.) was so delighted with the Lords word, that he professed it was sweeter
than the honey and the honey comb to him, because it revealed the precious will
of God to him, and discovered his own heart to him, and thence was a help to
conform his will to the Lords blessed will, that was the only satisfying object
of his Souls desires.

VI. Hence it is also, that Souls enjoying the evidence of their union with
Christ, are so frequently breathing after the time of their dissolution. It is
in regard their Souls never attain the fullness of rest, that satisfying object
of their desires, till the time of their dissolution: Hence they groan being
burdened with iniquity, and secretly cry out, O when shall I be worshipping of
God purely? When shall I be free from this body of sin and death, that there
may be a blessed union of Wills between thee and me, that this my vilest
corrupt will shall never oppose and contradict thy will more? So that it is
evident from experience, that the spirits revealing unto any soul its union
with the Lord Jesus, does occasion the soul necessarily to declare, that a
perfect conformity to the Lords will, ought only to satisfy the desires of any
soul.

Yea likewise it is evident also from reason, that the spirits discovery of a
souls union with Jesus Christ, does necessarily cause the soul it self to be
satisfied with no portion of holiness but a full conformity to the Lords will.

I. In regard the spirits evidence of any souls union with Christ, does cause
the Soul to discern clearly, that a perfect conformity and subjection to the
Lords will, is infinitely due from every creature. Whenever that precious light
shines from the spirit of revelation into the soul, then the soul is filled
with such high thoughts of the transcendency of the Lords glory, that thence
the soul is convinced, that every creature in heaven and earth, owes absolute,
perfect subjection to the Lords blessed will: Now hence the soul cannot be
satisfied with any degree of conformity to the Lords will, less than an
absolute perfection of conformity: and likewise hence the soul is constrained
to declare, that absolute conformity to the Lords will, ought only to be the
center whereon the soul should rest.

II. The spirits revealing unto any soul its union with Christ, does cause the
soul to apprehend so clearly the ravishing beauty, and unspeakable luster of
the holiness of the Lords will, that thence a full subjection and conformity to
the blessed holy will, appears as the highest thing that can be desirable by
any soul. That sweetest discovery from the spirit of Christ unto a soul of its
union with Christ, makes the soul apprehend the Majesty of Heaven to be so
clothed with a garment of love, and makes the soul apprehend such a height,
and depth, and length and breadth of love to be in God toward forlorn unlovely
sinners, that thence the will of God appears in all things to be so good
toward poor sinners, as the very beauty of it makes a full conformity in that
will in a manner infinitely desired by the soul. Yea the soul is then so
strongly convinced of the absolute goodness of the blessed will of God in all
its motions, that thence the soul can take no rest nor contentment, while his
will disagreeth from that purest holy will that is so absolutely good in all
its motions.

III. The spirits revealing to any soul his union with Christ, does establish
that blessed principle in the soul, that the most superlative happiness of
every soul consists in perfect union and communion with God in Christ, the
unity and community of wills between God and the soul. Through the spirits
light cast into the dark soul, to discover the souls union with Christ, the
heavenly brightness, and glittering resplendent Glory of the Lords goodness so
shines round about the soul, that thence the soul discerns clearly that that
the highest and most supreme degree of the happiness of any soul, must
necessarily consist in the conjunction and communion of the soul with that
infinite goodness, in the souls nearest and largest participation of it. Thence
that blessed principle is rooted in the soul, that the union and communion of
wills between God and a Soul, is that top-stair of happiness that any soul can
possibly ascend to. Now thence, seeing happiness is the object of the desires
of every soul naturally, the soul cannot be satisfied in it self without a
perfect union of wills with that God in Christ, and perfect communion with him.

So that thus it is evident, both from Scripture, from the experience of the
manner of the workings and motions of the souls enjoying the evidence of their
union with Christ, and from reason it self, that the spirits evidence given
unto any soul of its union with Christ, does necessarily cause the soul to
declare, that a perfect conformity to the Lords will, ought to be the only
satisfying object of the Desires of any soul. So that it is apparent that the
blessed Name of God is exalted in every soul, in the glory and brightness of
its transcendent holiness to whom the spirit of Jesus Christ does revael its
union with Christ.

Now I beseech ye, you that are suitable, (according as has been opened, to
take a righteous and just examination of your evidence of union with Christ
received) to try whether you can prove to your own souls, or demonstrate from
this precious reason, that your evidence of your union with Christ received,
had God for its Father, and came down from Heaven only. But as I said formerly,
so I say again, that I am confident that those souls whom the spirit has
blessed with the spirit of wisdom to discover to them their union with Christ,
and with whom the spirit of light remains, those souls have a testimony to
their hearts and spirits of the real descention of the evidence of their union
with Christ, from heaven, from this reason now opened. Certainly there is not a
soul among us, to whom at present the spirit of Christ does witness his union;
but his own heart does witness, that that very testimony of the spirit of
Christ did cause the blessed Name of God thus to be exalted through his soul;
there is not such a soul certainly but his heart testifies that ever since he
enjoyed that precious witness of the spirit, he has born record and testimony
to the world, he has professed apparently, verbally and practically, that a
perfect conformity to the Lords purest holy will, ought only to satisfy the
desires of any soul: And questionless the soul also understands in some degree,
that from thence has proceeded the dissatisfaction of his soul in all the
purest acts of obedience to the Lords blessed will. Questionless the soul
understands, that thence it has been that he could not, but in his most holy
duties (when most assisted by the spirit of Christ) be still groaning under the
sense of his own unholiness, under the sense of his want of that largeness and
fullness of the concurrence of his will with the Lords blessed will, and under
the sense of his want of freedom and liberty of spirit in his compliance with
the Lords will, that he was convinced ought to have been in his soul: and
questionless also that soul understands, that even from thence has proceeded
those precious desires that have ever since possessed his soul, after a larger
portion of the sanctifying spirit of Christ; and that ever since he has always
been searching after the secret iniquities of his own heart, and has been
appealing to the heart-searching God, to find them out for him; and has been
delighted with the discovery of the Lords will, and his disagreement to that
will. And questionless that soul understands sensibly, that since the spirit
gave that testimony of his union with the Lord Jesus, he has had many
struglings with his spirit to be content to live, that he might be redeemed
from the power of his contradicting will. Thus I doubt not but the spirit of
Jesus Christ also does irradiate the precious Gospel Truth, that the soul is
able to prove to it self the descent of its own evidence to be from heaven,
that God was the Father of that his evidence. But yet here I must take in every
confident soul without exception, that thereby the power of the Truth of Jesus
Christ might seize upon hearts. And,

1. I must desire all souls that think they shall be everlastingly saved by
Christ, to search into their hearts, to know whether their apprehension of
salvation by Christ did produce these blessed effects in their hearts or no. I
must appeal to your own Consciences; Did your apprehensions of salvation by
Christ infuse that principle into your minds and hearts, that a perfect
conformity to the Lords blessed holy will ought only to satisfy the desires of
any soul? Let Conscience answer, Was this blessed principle so rooted in your
hearts by those apprehensions of salvation by Christ, that thence your hearts
have been unsatisfied ever since, in your most holy actings, in those acts of
the purest obedience that ever you rendered to the Majesty of heaven, that
thence ever since you could not but be complaining (when your hearts were most
enabled to any act of obedience) of the narrowness of your wills in compliance
to God's will? And that you could not but be complaining of the want of
singleness and uprightness, and simplicity of heart in every act of Obedience;
yea, that you could not but be complaining of the want of freedom in your wills
to comply with the Lords will, that you have ever since been groaning for want
of the liberty of your wills in that compliance, the want of facility and
easiness in your wills answering to the Lords blessed will. Souls, I can only
call for Conscience to answer; I beseech you stop not its mouth, but let it
give an Answer in the presence of God, whether your hopes of salvation by
Christ, did so root that principle in your hearts, that nothing could satisfy
your souls, but a full conformity to the Lords will, so as you have been
unsatisfied in the fullest acts of Obedience you have performed, that thence
you have caused the Name of God to be exalted through you, that you have born
witness to the world that the perfection of holiness dwells in God only, and
all ought to bow down in subjection to that absolute holy will of his.

2. I beseech you try whether your apprehension of salvation by Christ did so
sweetly build your souls up in the belief of that great Truth, that no less
than a perfect conformity to the Lords will ought to satisfy the desires of
any soul, that thence you have been perpetually groaning after a larger portion
of the sanctifying spirit of Chrit. What do your hearts answer? Have you not
satisfied your selves with freedom from gross sins, and thought your condition
should be safe enough, because free from the gross pollutions of the world? And
others of you, have you not satisfied your selves with holy duties, and thought
you gained a sufficient degree of holiness, that your hearts never groaned
after a larger portion?

3. Examine whether your apprehensions of your salvation by Christ, did ever
engrave that great Maxim in your hearts, that nothing ought to satisfy your
souls but a full conformity to the Lords will, that thence you have ever since
been enquiring and making diligent search to find out the hidden iniquities of
your own hearts? Do not many of your Consciences attest this before the Lord,
that it was never made your work one moment to search what iniquity was in your
hearts undiscovered?

4. Was ever your spirit so caused to apprehend, that nothing ought to satsfie
your souls but a perfect conformity to the Lords will, by your apprehension of
your being saved by Christ, that thence you have appealed to the Lord to be the
trier and examiner of your rotten deceitful hearts, to find out your Iniquities
for you; that your wills might be brought into a more precious conformity to
his blessed will? Did ever your souls breath forth one such request before the
Lord to this day? Nay, let me ask you, whether you durst now in the presence of
the heart-searching God, come to say, Lord, search me, try me, see if there be
any way of wickedness in me? If so, then how far are you from receiving the
true evidence, whose descent is from heaven, whose Father is God, that evidence
that proceeds from the spirit of Christ, of our union with Christ, and
salvation by him?

5. Did ever your apprehensions of your salvation by Christ, so confirm in your
Souls that great Gospel Truth, that the Lords blessed will ought to have the
most absolute, perfect subjection from the will of any soul, that thence your
Souls have delighted and taken contentment in the light of the Lords precious
Truth revealing the Lords will to you, and revealing the disagreement of your
own wills to the Lords will? Are not your souls to this day so far from
delighting in the discovery of the Lords will to your souls, as your spirits
loath and hate those blessed discoveries of the Lords will to you, and your
hearts inwardly bulk and swell against the discoveries of the Lords will, that
you have hard thoughts, and think if God require such holiness, such praying,
such watching over the heart, words and thoughts, this is a hard Master indeed,
to require such strictness as no holy heart can observe and answer: How then
can you say confidently that you shall be saved by Christ, when your
apprehensions of salvation by Christ, cannot testify in the least degree from
this effect, of the causing the Name of God to be exalted through you, that the
descent is from God?

6. Lastly, Examine whether your apprehension of being saved by Christ, begat
such a principle in you, that nothing could satisfy you but a perfect
conformity of your wills to the will of Christ? that your hearts have groaned
after a dissolution, after the time of breaking the corrupt union between Body
and Soul, that you might no longer be detained under corruption, and a
necessity of sinning, that you might no longer have your wills opposite to the
Lords will? Alas, do not your souls answer, that such a time of dissolution is
rather a time of horror to your souls? Do not your hearts answer, that want of
unity to the Lords will, is so little burdensome to you, that could you dwell in
your corrupt bodies, it would be accounted happiness to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for ever, rather than that perfect union and communion with God in Christ?
If your hearts answer any of these things, I beseech you see how far you are
from being able to prove to your own souls, that the apprehension of your
salvation by Christ, did descend from God? Questionless did they proceed from
God, they would cause the Name of God and his Holiness to be exalted through
you, they would cause your souls to bear record to the glory of the Lords
holiness, do testify that such a perfection of holiness dwells in God, that
his will ought to be the Rule for the conforming of the will of every Soul.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 29. read dependence. p. 38. l. 1. for in r. of. p. 44. l. 12. r.
knowledge. p. 83. l. 21. r. but promises. p. 87. l. 3. for it r. them. p. 93.
l. 17. for of r. to. p. 94. l. 26. for proceeding. r. preceding. p. 121. l. 17.
for Union to. r. Evidences to. p. 174. l. 2. for into. r. upon. p. 188 l. 31.
r. receive him. p. 189. l. 19. r. make them. p. 115. l. 30. r. have one. p.
121. l. 32. r. or joint. p. 129. l. 33. r. to recieve. p. 132. l. 26. r. in
every. p. 146. l. 27. dele to. p. 160. l. 22. r. of that. l. 25. for af. r.
after. p. 193. l. 26. for Lord. r. old. p. 205. l. 16. for to. r. in. p. 213.
l. 33. r. fruitfulness. p. 241. l. 12. r. glorious subject. p. 244. l. 12. 14.
16. for imputed. r. reputed. p. 259. l. 6. r. Hebr. 4 15. p. 263. l. 32. for
perection. r. perfection. p. 265. l. 28. r. to discern. p. 268. l. 12. for to
any r. by any. p. 284. l. 33. r. superabundance p. 292. l. 17. r. name. p. 311.
l. 9. r. Rev. 1.6, p. 330. l. 15. r. (...) l. 20. r. he nearer. p. 331. l. 18.
19. for Ministers. r. miseries. p. 350. l. 15. for into r. in. p. 352. l. 13.
dele of. p. 354. l. 1. r. discovered. p. 381. for be. r. believer to. p. 393.
l. 7. for there are. r. three or. p 394. l. 12. r. chiefly jealous. p. 395. l.
24. for less. r. left. p. 39^. l. 5. r. inextricable. l. 27. for Lord. r. Soul.
p. 399. l. 8. for edify r. excite p. 401. l. 27. for to r. that. p. 407. l.
33. r. a believing soul. p. 410. l. 12. for fahen. r. fallen. p. 415. l. 7. r.
compass. l. 31. for fafly. r. falsely. p. 417. l. 22. for charge. r. chang. p
422. l. 12. for also. r. able. l. 32. dele that. p. 423. l. 16. for declare. r.
compare. l. 22. for act. r. art. dele into. p. 428. l. 17. for for. r. of l.
18. for so. r. for. p. 4^9. l. 22. for poor. r. pure. p. 430. l. 21. for
abstrenuous. r. obstreperous. p. 441. l. 20. for them. r. view. p. 432. l. 2.
after to add make. p. 445. l. 10. after admission add [into Union.] p. 448. l.
7. for Confusions. r. Conclusions. p. 449. l. 7. r. easy. l. 31. r. view of. p.
450. l. 8. for safe. r. false. l. 13. for Contradiction. r. conclusion. l. 27.
for but. r* and. l. 26. for shall. r. have. l. 30. for God. r. good. p. 451. l.
35. for of* r. into. p. 452. l. 30. for dust. r. do. l. 34. for them. r. the.
p. 454. l. 26* r. evidences. p. 455 l. 12. 13. r. suspend. p. 456. l. 31. for
has. r. have* p. 460. l. 25. for Lord. r. soul. p. 464. l. 5. r. excluded. l.
7. r. I beseech* l. 28. r. blessed. p. 170. l. 16. r. really from God. l. 17.
for slow. r. flow* p. 471. l. 15. for then. r. when. l. 19. r. work in. l. 20.
r. only then. p* 476. l. 20. for sealed r. are ceased. p. 477. l. 29. for from.
r. for. p. 482* l. 9. for will. r. would. p. 486. l. 20. for their. r. the. p.
488. l. 15. for is r. are. so. p. 400. l. 10. p. 492. l. 10. p. 494. l. 5. p,
462. l. 16. dele in l. 32. for does. r. do. p 496. l. 15. r. union. l. 32. r.
necessarily. p. 50^ l. 15. for was. r. i as l. 28. for his. r their.


