A Compendious HISTORY Of all the POPISH and FANATICAL Plots and Conspiracies
AGAINST The Established Government IN CHURCH and STATE, In England, Scotland,
and Ireland: From the first year of Qu. Eliz. Reign, to this present year 1684.

With Seasonable Remarks.

By Tho. Long, one of the Prebendaries of Exon.

Isai. 9.19, etc. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened,
and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
brother. -- They eat every man the flesh of his own arm: Manasseh, Ephraim; and
Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah.

Tunc inter se concordant mali, cum in perniciem justi conspirant; non quia se
amant, sed quia eum qui amandus erat simul oderint.

S. Aug. in Psalm. 36. Conc. 2. London: Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan
and Bible without Temple Bar, and T. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstans Church. 1684.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM By Divine Providence Ld Archbishop
of Canterbury HIS GRACE, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of
his Majesty's most Honble Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace.
I Have learned long since not to appear empty before the Lord, nor without an
Offering before so immediate a Minister of God. This therefore (such as it is)
I humbly devote to the service of the Church of God as it is established among
us: which contains a Vindication as well of the Heal as Chief Members of Church
and State from the scandalous imputation of Popery, and charge of the sane upon
their Accusers, in an impartial relation of matters of fact.

It is I confess one of the meanest, yet a very necessary Work, to remove those
Stumbling Blocks and heaps of Uncleanness which men of perverse minds have laid
to obstruct the Peoples entrance to our Church: among which, none has given
greater offense than the clamor of Popery and Idolatry. Come to the
Presbyterian Clergy (says the L. C. J. Hales in a Pamphlet lately published by
R. B. p. 28.) and they will tell you that Episcopal Government is Romish and
Superstitious, and their Ceremonies and Vsages Antichristian. Yea they will
come to the People, and tell them, (without asking) that the Royal Martyr was
the Head of the Grotian Religion, (i. e.) of Popery: That your Renowned and
Religious Predecessor Archbishop Laud labored to introduce Popery (though he
were in truth the greatest Scourge and Horror to that Party.) The Great Earl
of Strafford, and the Learned Dr. Cousin, were proclaimed and persecuted as
Papists, though living and dying they gave Demonstrations to the contrary.

And evident it is, that these false Suggestions were really and purposely
intended and fomented, to animate the people, and actually engage them in one
of the most horrid Rebellions that ever was acted by any barbarous people. Yet
is this Outcry renewed, and to the same mischievous intent, as is acknowledged
by Holloway; That the general design in which he engaged, was to get off the
King from his evil Counsel who had advised him to put a stop to the proceedings
against the Popish Plotters: That it was reported in all parts that Arbitrary
Government and Popery were coming in apace; which incensed the common people in
all parts, and made such a grumbling, that we feared longer delays would make
them mutiny. (This in his Paper to the King.) And in that to the Sheriffs, He
was fully persuaded that not only Popery, but Arbitrary Government was
intended, and that he believed many thousands in the Nation would have appeared
on these reasons. And in this he persisted at his Execution, telling the
Sheriffs, That it was feared that Arbitrary Government and Popery was designed;
and truly I think at this present, by what I can understand, that there is
little better designed. Thus the present Government is newly dressed up in the
old Rags of Popery, as the Primitive Christians were in Beast skins, to expose
them to the rage of the people.

W. J. in his Celeusma accuses many of the Conforming Clergy to be specie
duntaxat Protestants, and that they do supparisitare Pelagio-Socino, sed
imprimis Papae and Papismo; though it be no less than a contradiction, that
they should be at the same time, Socinians and Papists. And still the Cry is
carried on, That our Hierarchy is Antichristian, and that we have scarce two or
three Protestant Bishops in our Communion: That the Clergy is Popishly
affected, and are Proctors for Rome: That our Church has made many steps to
Popery: That our Liturgy is the Mass in English, and the Litany a Popish
Conjuration.

From these malevolent Suggestions it is, that the credulous people are not
only affrighted from our Communion, as if our Temples (like those of the
Egyptians) were filled with Serpents and Crocodiles; but are driven into
Sedition, Conspiracies, and Rebellion, and into many inextricate Errors, and
hurried from one Sect and Heresy to another, till they fall into that common
Sink of Quakerism, which is a compound of the dregs of Popery and Fanaticism.

There seems to be (and God be thanked for it) a general abhorrence of Idolatry
and Popery in the hearts of the people; but that the established Church is
guilty of these Abominations, is the mischievous insinuation of unreasonable
and malicious men, who seek to raise themselves upon its ruin. And with such
invincible prejudices are the minds of too many possessed, that they are deaf to
all Arguments and Demonstrations to the contrary; they are as secure, as if
they had been taught by an Oracle: since Mr. Calvin (as Grotius, p. 115. of his
Votum pro Pace) observed, Illam mutationem quae Buceri consilio in Anglia erat
instituta Papismi accusavit: and T. C. taught, That they ought rather to
conform themselves in Orders and Ceremonies to the fashion of the Turks than
the Papists. (See p. 27. of the Confer. at Hampton Court.) And the Popery which
is now so vehemently opposed, is that which our Dissenters conceive to be
practiced in the established Church.

But the inconsiderate Multitude will not perceive, that while they are
affrighted by such Shades and Apparitions from the Communion of our Church,
they do really embrace the most dangerous and distinguishing Articles and
Principles of the Romanists. They do as verily believe that the Presbytery or
the People have a Supreme Power over the Chief Magistrate, as the Papists
affirm the Pope to have. And as he challenges the Keys and Sword of St. Peter,
so do they the Crown and Scepter of Christ, (for so they stick not to call
their Discipline) to which all Powers on Earth must bow or be broken. And their
Practice has been agreeable to these Principles: for from hence that damnable
Doctrine (as St. Paul calls it) of resisting the lawful Powers, and the
practices of open Rebellion and secret Conspiracies, have been of late days as
frequent among Fanatics as among the Papists. And they presume to Canonize
those that perish in Rebellion as Saints and Martyrs, as the Pope himself has
done by Thomas Becket and Father Garnet. Nor has any General or Provincial of
the Jesuits exacted a more blind obedience, or usurped a more uncontrollable
power over the Consciences of their Proselytes and Emissaries, than some of
these have done. So that indeed, many of their Principles and Practices are but
old Popery in the new dress of Presbytery, as they have been formerly
paralleled by some of their Independent Brethren, out of their own Books of
Discipline.

Nor yet will their Leaders seem sensible of the pestilent effects of
scandalizing the established Government with the growth of Popery; when their
own Disciples, having plucked their Spectacles from their noses, can as plainly
discern Popery not only in their Ministry, and Discipline, and in every thing
that they retained for Order and Decency, but in their Sabbaths and Sacraments,
in their very Doctrines of Repentance and good works, and in that of the
blessed Trinity it self: all which have been ridiculed as Popish by some that
pass for true Protestants. But in all their Calumnies our Adversaries meet with
the same fate and infatuation as other false Accusers of innocent persons
commonly do; their very Charge carries a Confutation with it; being laid
against those who have given the plainest demonstrations of their detestation
of Popery, and have acted most rationally successfully against it; while the
Informers are notoriously known to agree in the same Principles, and to
conspire in the same Practices as the Papists do, for the destruction of that
Church which has been acknowledged by all sober Protestants, and dreaded by
the Papists as their most formidable Enemy.

The Jesuits and Dissenters have so long contrived and communicated politic
Maxims and Counsels for the subversion of our Establishment, and confederated
in practices tending to that end, that it is hard to determine whether there be
now more Fanaticism among the Jesuits, or more Jesuitism among the Fanatics:
As in the story of two famous Brothers, the one a Jesuit, the other a
Calvinist; who disputed so plausibly and successfully for their Opinions, that
the Calvinist was persuaded to embrace Popery, and the Papist to espouse
Calvinism: and yet they were Brethren still. And if such persons as act to the
same end, and use the same means, are equally criminal, I know not how to make
a distinction where I see no real difference. Certain it is, that as Fanaticism
could never have grown to so great a bulk among us, if it had not been
nourished by Popery; so Popery would have been extremely weak and languishing,
if it had not been encouraged and animated by Fanaticism. No other Artifice
could have made the Popish Plot to be suspected of a Sham (as some have called
it) but that Conspiracy of some which call themselves true Protestants, but
have served the Roman Cause and Interest more advantageously than all their own
Consults and Confederacies have done.

I should not have presumed to dedicate this Treatise to your Grace, had it
been a Novel or Private Opinion, and not the deliberate Sense and constant
Judgment of the Government, as well as the Practice of the Factions ever since
the first conception of the Reformation. King Henry the Eighth observed, that
the new Sumpsimus was as busy to stifle it before it came to its birth, as the
old Mumpsimus was. And in succeeding times, the Government had as watchful and
jealous an eye, and carried as strict a hand over the one Faction as over the
other; restraining them by the same Laws, and executing the same Penalties on
both; as appears by those wholesome Statutes made in Q. Eliz. to retain her
Majesty's Subjects in due Obedience; which have been ever interpreted by the
wise Judges and common Practice of the Nation, equally to concern Dissenters of
all sorts. It therefore seems an unaccountable Error in them who profess a
detestation of Popery, to attempt the abrogation of those Laws (especially if
(as the Dissenters affirm) they were intended chiefly against the Papists) as
being a Grievance to his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and an encouragement to
Popery: when in all probability, the Popish Conventicles would have been as
frequent as those of the Dissenters, had those Laws and Sanctions been anulled:
and in such a juncture of time and circumstances, the wisest consult of the
Jesuits could not have contrived a more probable means to gratify their Party,
and advance their Interest, than by such a design. Nor has this been the
first joint attempt of the two Factions to procure a Toleration for each other;
it being the readiest way to destroy the established Church, as the Letters of
Mr. Coleman and his endeavors did intimate.

I fear I have transgressed the bounds of Modesty, as well as of an Epistle
Dedicatory to a Person on whom the management of so many great and public
affairs is incumbent. But I held it my bounden duty to make a public
acknowledgment of your Graces unparalled favor to a person of such an
inferior Rank, of so mean capacities, and at such a remote distance from your
Grace. And for this and my former rudenesses, I most humbly importune your
Graces Pardon, as I do also for the mistakes of the following Treatise; which
being intended to stop the mouths of such as maliciously accuse their Fathers
and Brethren, and to open the eyes of such as are ignorantly seduced by them,
that by plucking out (if it be possible) the beam that is in their own eyes,
they may clearly perceive that there is not a mote of what they falsely forged
or fondly fancied to be in their Brothers eye. And I hope I have not hereby
forfeited the reputation or privilege of subscribing my self,

Your Graces most humble and most obliged Servant, THO. LONG.
Exon, May 16. 1684.
THE INTRODUCTION.
THE Church of England may justly complain in the like words as Erasmus, Ad
Episc. Roffensem: (Triplex sustineo certamen; cum Paganis illis Romanensibus,
qui me misere invident; cum Theologis quibusdam and Monachis, qui nullum non
movent lapidem ut me perdant; cum rabiosis quibusdam Lutheranis, qui in me
fremunt quod unus (ut aiunt) remoror ipsorum triumphos. -- Sic erat in fatis,
ut hoc aetatis ex musico fierem gladiator.) I labor under a threefold
conflict: 1. Against those Pagan-Romanists, who miserably envy me: 2. With some
Jesuits, Priests, and Monks, who move every stone to destroy me: 3. With those
implacable Sectaries that think they can never rise but by my ruin. By these
means, my Harmony is turned into Discord and Contention.

What good Protestant will not passionately condole with so indulgent a Mother,
under such cruel and preternatural Agonies! That she, who first redeemed us
from POPERY, resisting even to Blood, and for a whole Age together (not without
the immediate assistance of Heaven in time of necessity) defeated all the
powerful and politic attemps of our implacable Enemies, should now be branded
as Popish, and under that notion be betrayed to those Romish Wolves that watch
to make a Prey of her, is a sad consideration: but that some of her own Fold,
who wear the Sheeps clothing, should be made the Instruments of such Cruelty,
is that which adds to the Affliction! We were told indeed long since, That
England is a great Beast, that cannot die but of her self: our own Divisions
are the chief Stratagem by which our Adversaries promise themselves success;
and we are become so brutish, as to be acted by them (to bite and devour one
another) who are ready to swallow us up all. It is to be wished, that as we
deservedly abhor their Practices, so we would renounce their Principles; lest
by espousing these, we grow big with the like designs, and give birth to that
Icabod, which may shortly tell us, That the Ark of God is taken, and the glory
departed from our Israel.

This Confederacy against the Church, is not from any love that the Enemies
thereof bear to each other, but from an inveterate hatred of her, whom they
ought to love. Thus Herod and Pontius Pilate, though Enemies to each other,
acted both to the crucifying of our Savior; though Pilate (when it was too
late) would have washed his hands from that innocent Blood.

Though we did wantonly contend with one another about trifles, while our
common Mother had some authority and power to prevent the mischief of such
contentions; yet now, when our all is at stake, and one Party insolently claims
her Authority for the Pope, for the other to withdraw their obedience, and
expose her to the tyranny of them, who would destroy both, is such an
infatuation, as presageth no less than our common ruin. The Curse of Meroz
cannot be forgotten, nor could it be ever more innocently applied than now.
Deuteronomy. 25.17. Obadiah, v. 10, etc.
And if Amalek and the Edomites (professed Enemies to Israel) were accursed for
their cruelty to the people of God in their low estate; much more do they
deserve a Curse, that under a profession of kindness, watch opportunities to do
mischief.

God makes man's extremity, his opportunity to show mercy: it is the Devil that
takes advantage of our age and distempers, to plunge us in despair and
confusion. Say I this without a cause? or do not the present actings of too
many, from whom we might justly expect better things, extort it from me? I
appeal to the impartial Reader to judge between us. For when all our united
strength (as we may justly fear) is too little to withstand our common Enemy;
instead of uniting, I find too many endeavor to make the Breach wider,
defaming that Church as Popish, whose ruin was chiefly designed by the
Papists, as the most formidable Enemy they have in the world: many Conformists
are condemned as Socinians, Pelagians, and Popishly affected; and now at
length, there are so many heinous sins pretended to be in our Conformity, that
the Dissenters can by no means conform, because they fear God. And now also all
those methods which prepared us for Confusion in 1642, are revived; our
Governors in Church and State defamed as Papists, Fears and Jealousies
increased, seditious Petitions framed, Parties engaged, factious and rebellious
Libels scattered through the Nation, Money and Arms provided: They tell us in
print, That there wants only some Chieftain to head the Party, and then hands
to work: And as it was in the beginning of the last War, so it will be now and
ever.

The Preface to the Covenant expressly said, That after other means of
Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestation, etc. now at last they enter into a
League and Covenant.

The rude people (says the Royal Martyr, in his Chap. of Tumults) are taught
first to petition, then to protest, then to dictate, then to command. Having
made their Conspiracy strong, by pretending to sacrifice in Conventicles at
Hebron; reviving the old Covenant, and entering into new Associations, they were
ready to execute secret Conspiracies, by a horrid Assassination of a most
Religious and Gracious Prince, his Royal Brother, and chief Ministers in Church
and State, and to overflow the Land with a second Deluge of Blood, by open
Rebellion. And because (as the Royal Martyr observed) the Devil of Rebellion
cannot succeed in his temptations, unless he be transformed into an Angel of
light; all this must be carried on under a pretense of zeal against Popery; the
Standard that is set up, bears this Motto, NO POPERY, NO TYRANNY; as if the
Marian days were already returned, and the number of Protestant Martyrs had far
exceeded that in the Reign of Q. Mary. Whereas the cry of No Popery, no
Tyranny, is in plain English, No Bishop, no King. They are now grown more
politic, or more confident, than to declare that they fight against those
Shadows which were raised by their own Reflections on the Liturgy and
Ceremonies; they contend for a more substantial Prize, the Crown and Mitre,
Monarchy and Episcopacy root and branch; that their Brambles may be planted in
that rich Soil, where the Royal Oak and the fruitful Vine have flourished, and
spread their Branches to the neighboring Nations, and foreign Plantations. For
since the time of the Reformation, from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, there has not been such a succession of Governors and religious
Princes in all Christendom. Yet are the Subjects still amused with the clamor
of Popery and Tyranny: which is improved by an opposite, but as dangerous a
Faction, for a more successful management of their own mischievous designs;
not unlike to some Beasts and Birds of Prey, who to prevent the discovery and
destruction of their noxious brood, lead men into distant parts from the place
where they have laid their young.

What else is intended by the great noise of Tyranny and Oppression in the
State, and Popery and Superstition in the Church, but to persuade the People of
approaching danger, whence really there is no present fear, that they may with
less suspicion bring their most dreadful Machinations to maturity? Hence it is,
that all our Worthy men have been accouted men Worthy of Death; all our
Bishops, two or three (...), to be Popishly affected: the (...) Clergy, a
Popish Clergy; and instead of uniting our forces against Popish Conspirators,
as if that were indeed but a Sham-plot, those that call themselves true
Protestants, have even exceeded and justified them in more unnatural
Associations and vile Confederacies.

To stop the mouths of such loud Calumniators, or at least the ears of the
People against their loud Obloquies, I have collected the ensuing History;
which, if well considered, will abundantly evidence the Sincerity and Constancy
of our Princes and Governors in the Protestant Religion as by Law established,
ever since the Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days; their great care not
only to preserve it at home, but to defend and propagate it abroad; and to be
a Refuge and Sanctuary to such as have been persecuted for it in foreign parts:
As also, the Integrity and Ability of the Conforming Clergy to maintain it
against all the Arguments of Papists and Fanatics; whereby it will also
appear, how impotent and malicious their Accusations have been, in that they
have declaimed most vehemently against those as Papists, that have most
learnedly and successfully defended the established Church against Popery and
Fanaticism, which have been equally pernicious to it. Insomuch that if any
loyal Clergie-man or other, has in a time of need written for Loyalty or
Conformity, they have been marked out for Papists: which is a plain Argument
that the Popery and Tyranny which they decry, is Christian Loyalty and
Conformity.

And to manifest to all sober men, how little of good nature, as well as of
Christian Piety and Charity these men have, I have given many undeniable
instances of their acting on the same Principles, and in the like Practices as
the most dangerous Papists, sometimes in actual confederacy with them, for the
ruin of the Government: For however they seem opposite to each other, they are
agreed to do the Government a mischief; and Duo quum faciunt idem, non sunt
Duo: They that agree in Treason, are all Traitors. Facinus quos inquinat,
aequat. And of this, take the following instance.

On October 3. 1643. there was a Letter sent from Dublin to a Member of the
House of Commons, which shows by what example they acted, as follows.

There was a Friar taken the last Expedition into Conaught, about whom was
found a Collection of all your Votes, Ordinances, and Declarations, carefully
marked with short marginal Notes out of which he composed a large Manuscript
entitled, An Apology of the Catholics of Ireland, or a Justification of their
defensive Arms for the preservation of their Religion, the maintenance of his
Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives, the natural and just defense of their Lives
and Estates, and the Liberty of their Country, by the practice of the State of
England, and the Judgment and Authority of both Houses of Parliament. It was
penned with so little variation of Language, that the name of Ireland being
changed for England, and the chief Actors there, for those under the
Parliament, your own Clerk would scarce know it from one of your own
Declarations. All that they do, is for the good of the King and Kingdom; he is
entrusted with all for the good of the People; if he discharges not his trust,
but is advised by evil Counselors, and persons they cannot confide in, it is
their duty to see this Trust discharged according to the condition and true
intent thereof: That they saw their Religion and Liberty in danger of
extirpation, and therefore had reason to put themselves in a posture of
Defense; but are ready to lay down their Arms, as soon as the great Offices of
the Kingdom are put into such hands as they can confide in, etc. Mutato nomine,
de te Anglia narratur.

There is lately printed an excellent Treatise, vindicating the Church of
England from the imputation of Popery in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline; to
which I refer my Reader as to those points. That which I design, is to
vindicate our Governors in Church and State, principally those who have been
most accused, from the like Aspersions; and to retort the calumny of their
Accusers, by showing their Harmony and Intrigues with the Papists both in
Principles and Practices; that the mouth of such Slanderers may be stopped.

The following Collections may serve to convince all well-affected persons,
that both the Papists and Fanatics (how contrary soever to each other) are
well agreed to attempt the Ruin of our Church as it is now established; the
Papists, under the pretense that we are Heretics; and the Fanatics, that we
are Papists: but the true reason is, that the Papists may regain those Profits
and Dignities which for a long time they usurped in this Nation, which was the
most fruitful Garden that ever the Pope claimed as belonging to his Palace; and
the Fanatics, that they may retrieve their former sacrilegious Purchases of
Crown and Church Lands, and divide them among themselves. Of the first we have
this evidence, That the Pope fills up the places of our Bishops, Deans, and
other Dignitaries, to encourage his Emissaries: of which we have this Specimen
in print.

BISHOPS.
CANTERBURY: Cardinal Howard. YORK: Perrot, Superior of Secular Priests.
LONDON: Corker, President of Benedictine Monks. WINCHESTER: White, alias
Whitebread. DURHAM: Strange, late Provincial of Jesuits. SALISBURY: Dr. Godden.
NORWICH: Nappier, a Franciscan. ELI: Vincent, Provincial of Dominican Monks.
EXETER: Wolf, one of the Sorbone. PETERBOROUGH: Gifford, a Dominican Friar.
LINCOLN: Sir Jo. Warner, Baronet, a Jesuit. CHICHESTER: Morgan, a Jesuit. BATH
and WELLS: Dr. Armstrong, a Franciscan. CARLISLE: Wilmot, alias Quarterman.
CHESTER: Thimbleby, a Secular Priest. HEREFORD: Sir Tho. Preston, a Jesuit.
BRISTOL: Mundson, a Dominican. OXFORD: Williams, Rector of Watton in Flanders.
St. DAVID'S: Belson, a Secular Priest. St. ASAPH: Jones, a Secular Priest.
BANGOR: Joseph David Kemash, a Dominican.
ABBOTS.
WESTMINSTER: Dr. Seldon, a Benedictine Monk. SION-HOUSE: Skinner, a
Benedictine Monk.
DEANS.
CANTERBURY: Belton, a Sorbonist. St. PAUL'S: Libourne, a Secular, Secretary to
Cardinal Howard. WINDSOR: Howard, with twelve Benedictine Canons. CHICHESTER:
Morgan, a Secular. WINTON: Dr. Watkinson, President of the English College at
Lisbone.
Many other Dignities are by the Popes Bull disposed of to Foreigners: but
these, being of our Kings Dominions, have been many of them diligent Promoters
of our Wars, that they might kill and take possession. Judge now what
temptation our present Bishops have to bring in Popery, when the coming in of
that, will turn them out of their Dignities and Livelihoods; if not out of the
World too, as in the Marian days.

And that the Fanatics aim at the same end, is demonstrable not only from the
unlimited power which some of their Ministers exercised over their Brethren,
far beyond any of the Bishops; but their dividing the most profitable Benefices
among themselves, sequestring those loyal Clergymen that were legally
possessed of them: As also from a late Proposal of Baxter, Humfrys, and Lob, in
the name of other Nonconformists; who would still retain the name of Bishops,
so they might have the power and profit: for they would have some chosen out of
the several Parties of Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists; only they
desire that the Bishops should be declared Ecclesiastical Officers under the
King, acting Circa Sacra only by virtue of his Commission and Authority: upon
which account, if any of the eminent among the Nonconformists were chosen
Bishops, they could not refuse it (as they say.) And indeed, at the time of
making this Proposal, these wise men, like the wise Ladies of Sisera's Mother,
had divided the Spoil, to every man a prey of two or three Dignities, besides
the Garments of diverse colors, Judge. 5.30. Now I desire all rational men to
consider, that as it is a great folly and mere fascination in some, to serve
the lusts of those that are the Slaves of him that styles himself the Servum
Servorum Domini: so it is no less, to serve the lusts of such as are the Servi
Servorum Diaboli, under what pretense soever.

It is well known how impetuously both these Factions have attempted to ruin
the established Church; and despairing to do it by Reason and Argument, they
endeavor to do it by wicked Arts and Arms, or bloody Assassinations. One
Engine that has had a perpetual motion to this end, has been the great
Clamor against our Governors in Church and State, as being Antichristian and
Popishly affected. Thus our martyred King and Archbishop, and generally all the
Bishops in those days, with other chief Ministers of State, were condemned as
Papists; though the Lie were so gross, as to carry its confutation with it,
they all dying in that Faith and Profession, both for Doctrine, Discipline, and
worship, in which the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days died: which holy Faith also
died with them.

And now again, the Church is accused as having made many steps toward Popery;
the King is accused as a Favourer of it; and all, except three or four Bishops,
are declared to be Popishly affected: the Clergy are Popish Clergymen; and
Dr. Stilling fleet, among others, a Projector for Rome. Whereas those very men
that have set this Engine on work, do improve the same methods as the Papists
have prescribed to ruin us; that is, by dividing us, and seeking to raise Wars
and Confusions among us. In which how mutually and brotherly they have assisted
each other, is the design of this Collection to show, and thereby to silence
this Obloquy. And, 1. I shall show their Harmony and Agreement in such
Principles as tend to War and Confusion. And, 2. Their joint practices to
effect the same. For unless the Popes Bull do plow with the Geneva Heifers,
they can never turn up the foundations of Sion.


Now to evince this, I shall not rake together the unclean and poisonous
Maxims of Mariana, Sayer, Bellarmine, Scribanius, Gretserus, Becanus, Suarez,
etc. nor compare them with the dangerous Positions of Knox, Bucanan, Goodman,
and others mentioned by Bishop Bancroft, the congratulatory Epistle of
Lisymachus Nicanor to his Covenanting Brethren in Scotland; but content my
self, and I hope satisfy my Reader with the two following Instances: The first
is one Thomas White a Romish Emissary, who by many Books written in the time of
the Usurpation, sought to debauch the Nation; especially by one printed in the
year 1652, called The Grounds of Obedience and Government, with this abused
Maxim in the Title Page, Salus Populi Suprema lex esto; which was applied in a
mistaken sense, to very ill purposes, by the Fanatics. In this Book, like a
Priest of Mars, he scatters these Firebrarnds, enough to set any Kingdom on
fire; and composed it in a small Tract, like so many hand-Granado's fitted for
every man's fingers. These are his Positions: First, That the Magistrate by his
miscarriages abdicates himself from being a Magistrate, and proves a Robber
instead of a Defender; which last word he writes with a great D, to show whom
he meant. Secondly, That by the evil management or insufficiency of Governors,
it is remitted to the force of nature to provide for our selves; and that we
are not bound by any promise made to our Governors, p. 123, 124. Thirdly, if
the Magistrate have truly deserved to be dispossessed, or if it be rationally
doubted that he has deserved it, and be actually out of possession, a Subject
has no obligation to hazard for his restitution, but rather to hinder it: for
since it is the common good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim
at, it is the common harm to admit again of such a Magistrate; and every one is
bound to his power to resist him, p. 133. if he be innocent, and wrong-fully
deposed, nay let us add, one that has governed well, and deserved much of the
Commonwealth, yet is he totally dispossessed; and in these circumstances, it
were better for the common good to stay as they are, than to venture the
restoring of him, because of the public hazard. -- And the dispossessed Prince
is obliged absolutely to renounce all right and claim to Government; and if he
does not, he is worse than an Infidel, p. 135, 136. If the People by any
circumstance be devolved to the state of Anarchy, their Promise made to their
expelled Governor binds no more, p. 122. Fourthly, That when the Peoples Good
stands on the Possessors side, then clearly he begins, and then the People
think themselves well, and they manifestly consent to the present Government:
for who can assure they shall be better by return of the dispossessed Party?
Surely by the common presumption, the Gainer is like to defend them better than
the Loser.


You may see by this leading man, how industrious the Papists were to hinder
the Restoration of Charles the Second, as well as to procure the Destruction
of Charles the First. Now that the Fanatics ran parallel with the Papists in
these Traitorous Positions, I shall show, from a Book printed Anno 1658, by Mr.
Richard Baxter, called The Holy Commonwealth; in which he sets down the three
Qualifications, as of necessity to the being of Sovereign power. First, so much
understanding; secondly, so much strength, or executive power, by his interest
in the people or others, as are necessary to the ends of Government.

P. 130. From whence he deduceth three Corollaries: 1. When Providence
depriveth a man of his understanding and intellectual capacity, and that
statedly to his ordinary temper, it makes him incapable of Government, though
not of the name, These. 135. 2. If God permits Princes to turn so wicked, as to
be incapable of governing so as is consistent with the ends of Government, it
makes him an incapable Subject of the power, and so deposes him. 3. If
Providence statedly disable him that was a Sovereign from the executing of the
Law, it makes him an incapable Subject of the power, and so deposes him, These.
137.

To which he adds: Though it is possible and likely that the guilt is or may be
theirs who have disabled the Ruler by deserting him, yet he is dismissed from
the charge of Government, and particular innocent Members are disobliged from
being governed by him, if the Governor be justly dispossessed, as by a lawful
War (which Mr. Baxter declares the War against King Charles the First was) in
which he loses his right; especially if he violate the Constitution, and enter
into a Military state against the People, and by them be conquered, they are
not obliged to restore him, unless there be some special obligation upon them
besides their Allegiance, These. 145. If the person dispossessed, though it were
unjustly, do afterward become incapable of Government, it is not the duty of
his Subjects to seek his Restitution. These. 146. If an Army of Neighbors,
Inhabitants (or whoever) do, though injuriously, expel the Sovereign, and
resolve to ruin the Commonwealth, rather than he shall be restored; and if the
Commonwealth may prosper without his restoration, it is the duty of such an
injured Prince, for the common good, to resign his Government; and if he will
not, the People ought to judge him as made incapable by Providence, and not to
seek his restitution, to the apparent ruin of the Commonwealth, These. 147. If
therefore the rightful Governor be so long dispossessed, that the Commonwealth
can be no longer without, but to the apparent hazard of its ruin, we (i. e.)
the people that dispossessed him, are to judge that Providence has
dispossessed the former, and presently consent to another, These. 149. If a
People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall sinfully
dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants choose and covenant with
another, they may be obliged by their later Covenant, notwithstanding their
former, These. 181. If a Nation injuriously deprive themselves of a worthy
Prince, the hurt will be their own, and they punish themselves; but if it ^
necessary to their welfare, it is no injury to him but a King that by War will
seek Reparation from the Body of the People, does put himself into a Hostile
state, and tells them actually that he looks to his own good more than theirs
and bids them take him for their Enemy, and defend themselves if they can, p.
424. Though a Nation wrong their King and so quoad men tum Cauiae, they are on
the worse side, yet ma^^ he not lawfully war against the common good o^^ that
account; nor any help him in such a War because, propter finem, he has the
worse Cause, These. 352. And p. 476. we were to believe the Parliaments
Declarations and Professions, that the War which they raised was n^^ against
the King either in respect of his Authority or his Person, but only against
Delinquent Subjects. (And yet they actually fought against the King's Person
and Authority. And, We are to believe (says Mr. Baxter p. 422.) That men would
kill them whom the fight against. Quam been convenient!

Mr. Baxter never followed any Text that he preached on, so closely as he has
done the Text of this Jesuit in the Commentary of his Holy Commonwealth.

John Milton printed a Book very well like this of Mr. White, called The Tenure
of King and Magistrates; driving on this Maxim That it is lawful for any that
have power, to call to account, depose, and put to death wicked Kings and
Tyrants, after due conviction, if the ordinary Magistrate neglect it.

We have lately had a Fanatical Lawyer following the Divine Mr. Baxter,
transcribing out of the same Book of Mr. White, to the same end. I shall
observe only this Note among others in Mr. White, p. 158. where he answers
some Objections of Divines concerning the Authority of Princes and
Non-resistance. Up steps the Divine (says he) to preach us out of Scripture
the Duty we owe to Kings, no less than Death and Damnation being the Guerdons
of Disobedience and Rebellion. And p. 159. They will speak reason too, telling
us that God by nature is high Lord and Master of all: That whoever is in power,
receives his right from him: That Obedience consists in doing the Will of him
that commands; and concludes that his Will ought to be obeyed till God takes
away the obligation. (i. e.) till he who is to be obeyed himself releaseth the
right. And p. 160. They allege that God by his special command transferred
the Kingdom from Saul to David, from Rehoboam to Jeroboam: so that, in fine,
all that is brought out of Scripture falls short of proving that no time can
make void the right of a King, once given him by the hand of God. Now mark what
Mr. White says to overthrow the sense of Scripture: The reason (says he) (...)
this weak way of alleging Scripture is, that when they read that God
commands or does this, they look not into Nature to know what this commanding
or doing is, but presently imagine God commands it by express and direct words
and does it by an immediate Position of the things said to be done: whereas in
Nature the commands are nothing but the natural light God has bestowed on
mankind, and which is therefore frequently called the Law of Nature Likewise
Gods doing a thing is many times only the course of natural second causes, to
which because God gives the direction and motion, he both does, and is said to
do all that is done by them.

These things are transcribed by Mr. Hunt to the same ends that Mr. White urged
them. p. 144. of his Postscript. The nature of Government, and its Original
(says he) has been prejudiced by men, that understanding nothing but words,
and Grammar-Divines, without contemplating Gods Attributes, or the nature of
man, or the reasonableness of moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the
sense of Scripture, and infer that Sovereign power is not of humane
institution, but of divine appointment, because they find it there written,
that by him Kings reign; imagining that when the Scripture says God commands
or does this, that God commanded it by express words, or does it by an
immediate position of the thing done: whereas in Nature his commands are
nothing but the natural light God has bestowed on mankind; likewise Gods doing
a thing is only the course of natural and second causes, to which because God
gives direction and motion, he does both, and is said to do all that is done.

After this, Mr. Hunt rails against our Divines in the Jesuits (Mr. White's)
Language also. White calls them Grammar-Divines, verbal and wind-blown Divines,
p. 162. and Mr. Hunt calls them men that understand nothing but words, and
Grammar-Divines: who (says Mr. White) without Logic, Philosophy or Morality,
undertake to be Interpreters of the sacred Bible. Who (says Mr. Hunt) without
contemplating Gods Attributes, or the nature of man, or the reasonableness of
moral Precepts, have undertaken to declare the sense of Scripture.

From the Premises we may draw this Conclusion, That the Papists and Fanatics
do agree, and mutually lend and borrow Arguments to resist Kings, elude the
Scriptures, defame the English Clergy, and overthrow the Government in Church
and State. As, 1. That to conclude from the sense of Scripture, is a weak way
of arguing. 2. That Non obstante what the Scripture says of Divine right of
Sovereign power, it is not of Divine, but Humane institution. 3. That
Providence and the effects of second causes being influenced by God, are of
equal authority with the Precepts enjoined by the Word of God. 4. That the
Sovereign power being but of humane institution, may be resisted, and is
alterable. 5. That having cast off their Loyalty to the King and his Laws, they
are in a fair way to cast off God and his Laws. 6. That the worst of Papists,
and their Atheistical Arguments, are made use of by some that call themselves
true Protestants, against the express commands of God for Obedience to the
Higher Powers.


There was printed, 1650, an Answer to Dr. Ferne's Exercitation concerning
usurped Powers; in which the Answerer endeavored to prove, 1. That the present
was no Usurpation: 2. That former Oaths obliged not against Obedience to
present Powers: 3. That Obedience is due to Powers in possession, though
unlawfully entered. And for his Authority, he is not ashamed to quote these
words of the Jesuit Moline de Justitia, Tract. 3. Disput. 6. to this purpose:
Two ways one may be a Tyrant: 1. Because though he be the true Sovereign of the
Commonwealth, he does unjustly govern it; in this case it is a sin for private
men to kill him; but for his own defense it is lawful, and the Commonwealth
assembled by their Chieftains may depose him, and being deposed, kill him,
unless greater mischief would accrue to the Commonwealth by his murder, for
then he should offend against the love of the Commonwealth in killing of him.
Shortly after he quotes Sayr's Case Consc. l. 7. c. 10. n. 4. Id curare debet
Occisor, ita caute and consulto facere, ut non pejores exitus and scandala ex
tali Occisione sperentur: which I forbear to English. You see how firmly the
Jesuit and Presbyter are yoked, to plow up the Field of the English Church and
Government. They must needs be their Disciples, whose Principles and Practices
they so zealously follow. I go on to show in the second place their agreement
in practice: for by their fruits also you may know them.

THE INTRIGUES OF THE Papists and Fanatics Against the Government and Religion
Established Historically related.
WHen the Church of England was established under Queen Elizabeth, there was no
considerable Separation from it by Papists or Fanatics, until some of the new
Society of Jesus invented a method to divide and destroy the Church of Christ
among us. Which they endeavored, first, by opposing those who were
Parish Priests in the days of Queen Mary, but allowed of our Church Communion;
and having prevail against them, they rested not there, but endeavored by new
Artifices to draw off some zealous Protestants into separate Congregations,
under a pretense of greater purity of Ordinances and Worship than were
practiced in our Church. And to this end, they employ some subtle and Eloquent
men, in the disguise of zealous Protestant-Ministers, to exercise their gifts
of Extemporary prayer, which they reported to be by an extraordinary assistance
and gift of the Spirit. Their preaching also was designed to bring the Order of
Bishops into contempt, to which they were known enemies; to lay aside the
Liturgy, as a stinting of their gifts of the Spirit; and run down those few
Ceremonies that were retained, that we might not have the face of a Church, or
any decency among us. They opposed also the Supremacy of the Queen over things
and persons in Religious Administrations; which they contended to belong to
Ministers of their rank and order.

And although some of the Popish Priests at that time and afterward, (such as
Widdrington, Preston, Watson, and the Authors of the Jesuits Catechism)
opposed them in these things, as tending to provoke her Majesty to greater
severity against them, and wrote very learnedly against those Jesuits,
discovering their designs to be not only against the Protestants, but the more
moderate Papists; yet were there some troublesome Ministers, (Goodman, Gilby,
Whittingham, etc.) and others, that had been at Geneva and other Presbyterian
Towns, and submitted to that Discipline, which took all those hints from the
Jesuits, and made such improvements, that the Disciples in a short time
exceeded their Masters.

Doctor Cox, Horn, and others, who adhered to the Church of England, and had
known their turbulent behavior at Geneva, Frankfort, and other places, opposed
their admission to the public Ministry; and so they and the Jesuits creep
first into houses, and lead captive silly women, and beguile the hearts of
simple men; and afterward gather distinct and separate Congregations, under
pretense of purer Worship, and a more holy Discipline. Of which practice, we
have these undeniable instances.

In the Ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, one Faithful Commin, of the Order of St.
Dominick, got the reputation of a zealous Protestant Minister, by railing
against Pius Quintus the Pope, and defaming the Liturgy, as being the Mass in
English; in opposition to which, the first set up the use of Extempore prayers,
as a gift of the Spirit, which ought not to be stinted by Forms and Liturgies:
but one Mr. Clerkson, Chaplain to the Archbishop, discovered him to be a Popish
Priest; which was evidently proved before the Queen and Archbishop. So that he
being dismissed upon Bail to appear at a certain day, and it happening that on
that day the Spanish Ambassador having public Audience of the Queen, he could
not be admitted, though he attended with his Bail; he boasted to his followers,
that the Queen and Council had dismissed him. But finding how uneasy it would
be for him in England, he told his Proselytes, he was resolved to go beyond the
Seas, to preach the Gospel there: and having acquainted his Disciples how poor
he was, and commended to them the Cause of God, he got 130 l. which was
collected among the Brotherhood, besides what his compassionate Sisters
bestowed on him: and there was no farther news of this godly man, until one
John Baker, Master of a Ship, gave this account of him to the Queen, That he
had seen this Faithful Commin in the Low Countries, and that one Martin van
Duval, a Merchant of:Amsterdam, told him that Commin had been lately at Rome,
and there imprisoned by the Pope; but upon his Letter to the Pope, he was sent
for the next day, and being accused for reviling the Pope, and railing against
his Church among the Heretics of England, he confessed that his lips had
uttered what his heart never thought, and pleaded what considerable service he
had done the Pope, by preaching against set Forms of prayer, and calling the
English prayer, English Mass, persuading the people to pray Spiritually and
Extempore: by which means the Church of England was become as odious to them to
whom he preached, as the Mass was to the Church of England; which would prove a
stumbling block to that Church, while it was a Church. Upon which the Pope
commended him, and dismissed him with a gratuity of 2000 Ducats for his good
service.

The next Instance is of one Thomas Heath a Jesuit, in the Eleventh year of
Queen Elizabeth, whose Brother Nic. Heath had been Bishop of Rochester in H. 8.
days. He comes to the Dean of Rochester, desiring him to present him to the
Bishop for some Preferment. In order to which, he pretending himself to be a
poor Minister, the Dean orders him to preach in the Cathedral; which he did on
that Text, Acts 12.6. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayers were made
without ceasing in the Church to God for him; on which he told the people, that
it was not those of the Church of England, but Spiritual prayers, that brought
Peter out of prison: and where (said he) have we Scripture for any set form in
the Church? But it so happened, that drawing out his Handkerchief in the Pulpit,
he let fall a Letter, which the Sexton found, and brought to the Dean; which
was as follows:

Brother,
THe Council of our Fraternity have thought fit to send you David George,
Theodorns Sartor, and John Huts, their Collections, which you may distribute as
you see fit for your purpose, according to the peoples inclinations. These
mixtures with your own, will not only a little puzzle the Understandings of the
Auditors, but make your self famous. We suppose your wants are not considerable
at present, by what we have heard, how your flock do admire you every day more
and more. Be not overzealous in your proceedings in the beginning, but
gradually win on them as you visit them; and according as you find their
inclinations to your design, let us hear how you have proceeded; for it will
satisfy your Brethren much, and enable them the better to instruct you for the
future. Hallinghan, Benson, and Coleman, have set a Faction among the German
Heretics, so that several who have turned from us, have now denied their
Baptism: which we hope will soon turn the scale, and bring them back to their
old principles. This we have certified to the Council and Cardinals, That there
is no other way to prevent people from turning Heretics, and for recalling of
others back again to the Mother Church, than by the diversities of Doctrines.
We all wish you to prosper.

Sam. Malt.
Madrid, Oct. 26. 1568.

This Letter was directed under the name of Thomas Finne; and Malt was known to
be an English Jesuit at Madrid in Spain; and Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson,
with one Button, and some others that went under the notion of zealous
Preachers, are noted by our Historians as active instruments of Separation
among us; whom the Letter calls German Heretics, (i. e.) Lutherans: which Dr.
Stillingfleet notes out of Mr. Cambden, A. D. 1568. agreeing with the date of
this Letter; who says, that while Harding, Sanders, and others, attacked our
Church on one side, Coleman, Button, Hillingham, Benson, and others, were busy
on the other; who under a pretense of purer Reformation, opposed the
Discipline, Liturgy, and Calling of our Bishops, as approaching too near to
the Church of Rome. And these he notes to be the beginners of those
Controversies, which after broke out with so great violence. Nec dum finitus
Orestes.

So that while the Pope held the hot-Iron of Dissension on the Anvil, the open
Jesuit and the Masquerade Presbyter on each side, beat with their Sledges to
form the Project after his mind.

But upon the receipt of the Letter, the Dean carried it to Edmond Gest then
Bishop of Rochester, who instantly caused the said Heath to be apprehended and
examined; and urging against him what he had said in his Sermon against the
Liturgy, and for Spiritual Prayers, he confessed that he was not wholly of the
Episcopal party of England, but that he had labored to refine the Protestants,
and to take off all Smacks of Ceremonies, that in the least do tend to the
Romish Faith. He confessed also, that he knew the said Sam. Malt, but objected,
that the Letter was not directed to him, but to one Thomas Finne; which (as the
Bishop observed) was usual among the Jesuits. And to put the matter out of
controversy, the Bishop sent to Heaths Lodgings, where in one of his Boots
were found his Beads, and a License from the Fraternity of the Jesuits, and a
Bull dated the first of Pius Quintus, to preach what Doctrine that Society
pleased, for dividing of Protestants, particularly naming the English as
Heretics. In his Trunk were also several Books for denying Baptism to Infants,
and containing several blasphemies.

Heath being Convicted of these things in open Court, the Bishop offered him,
that if he would discover for what causes he ran into those Schisms, and reform
his course of life, he and the whole Court would intercede for his pardon, and
provide for his future maintenance. To which he answered, My Lord, I know not
what I might have done had I not been so publicly examined; but seeing my
vocation is so publicly known, I shall not acknowledge my self to be guilty of
any Misdemeanour: for I have fought a good fight for Christ, whose cause I have
taken in hand. This Experiment I tried among my Countrymen, that the world may
see, that all those who term themselves Protestants are not of the Church of
England, though they speak against Rome.

The Bishop hearing him speak so obstinately, said, Behold, my Brethren a
Jesuits Confession, how he has declared he had set up a certain Form of
Religion, purposely to withdraw you from the Church of England: but woe be to
those deluders, and to those that will be deluded by them: we have a good Law,
and the light of the Holy Gospel now flourishing among us, which has for many
years past been absconded: therefore, my Brethren, consider the condition of
your Souls; if you start aside once from your Principles, having the right way
so plainly set before you, you will not only run into Popish slavery again, but
be in peril of a total confusion of Soul and body. And if Rome get once her
foot on these dominions again, not only your selves and your Children, but your
Princes and Nobles shall become slaves to her Idolatry.

Then was he remanded to prison, and for three days brought to the Marketplace
at Rochester, where he stood by the High-cross with a paper before his breast,
in which was written his Crimes: then he was Pillored; and on the last day his
Ears cut off, his Nose slit, and his Forehead branded with the Letter R, and
was condemned to endure perpetual imprisonment. But it lasted not long; for a
few Months after he dyed suddenly, not without the suspicion of having poisoned
himself.

How many other Romish Emissaries did act after this manner, is not known; but
certain it is, that they had prevailed with too many to walk in their steps,
and to carry on the work in the same method that they had begun, to make a
Separation among us: for the Authors of the Admonition, in the 14 of Queen
Elizabeth, declared they would have neither Papists nor others constrained to
Communicate: which although (as A.B. Whitgift says) they intended as a plea
for their own Separation from the Church, yet (says he) the Papists could not
have met with better Proctors: and elsewhere he tells them, that they did the
Pope very good service; and that he would not miss them for any thing: for what
is his desire, but to have the Church of England, which he has accused,
utterly defaced and discredited, by any means overthrown, if not by Foreign
Enemies, yet by domestical Dissentions? and what fitter and apter instruments
could he have had for that purpose, than you, who under pretense of zeal,
overthrow that which other men have builded; under color of purity seeking to
bring in deformity; and under the cloak of equality and humility, would usurp
as great tyranny and lofty Lordliness over your Parishes, as ever the Pope did
over the whole Church? And in another place, he says, they were made the
Engines of the Popish Conclave, whereby they intended to overthrow this Church
by our own folly, which they cannot compass by all their policy. And Archbishop
Grindal in a Letter of his, called Fair warning, part the second, expressed his
great fear of two things, Atheism and Popery, and both arising out of our
needless Divisions and Dissentions, fomented by Satan the enemy of Mankind, and
the Pope the enemy of Christendom. By these differences the enemies of our
Religion gain this, that nothing can be established by Law in the Protestant
Religion, whose every part is not opposed by one or other of our own
Professors. So that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have
their opportunity to urge their Way, which is attended with Order and
Government, and our Religion continuing thus distracted and divided, some vile
wretches lay hold of the Arguments on one side, to confute the other, and so
hope at last to destroy all.

In these practices our Dissenters have for many years followed the directions
of the Jesuit Contzen, for inducing Popery into a Country; as 1. That it be
done under a pretense of ease to tender Consciences. 2. That when liberty is
granted, then the parties be forbid to contend with each other. 3. That those
who suspect the design, and preach against it, be traduced as men that preach
very unseasonable Doctrine; that they are proud, and self-opiniators, and
enemies to peace and union. 4. That the Prince make as much use of the
divisions of his enemies, as of the agreement of his friends. All which Rules
have been observed by the Enemies of our Church, as well Dissenters as Romish
Recusants.

In the year 1588. the King of Spain, being thereto encouraged by an
information of the great divisions and animosities among us, by reason whereof
he expected either a greater Party to join with him, or the less opposition,
sent his Invincible Armado upon our Coasts; at which time, the Protestant
Dissenters, instead of Arming in defense of the Queen and themselves, did with
greater importunity and confidence assault her with Petions and Libels; taking
advantage of the times, as if they were more ready to assist the Spaniards than
her Majesty, in case their unreasonable requests were not granted. Of which see
Mr. Cambden in his Annals, Anno 1588.

Notwithstanding all the service that Bishop Jewel had done against the
Papists, upon his preaching a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross in defense of the
Orders of this Church, and obedience to them; he was so ungratefully and
spitefully used by the then Dissenters, that for his own vindication, he made a
solemn Protestation on his deathbed, that what he then said, was neither to
please some, nor to displease others, but to promote peace and unity among
Brethren. Of which Archbishop Whitgift in his Defense, p. 423. says: It is the
manner, except you please their humor in all things. though you otherwise
deserve never so well, all is nothing with them, but they will deprave you,
rail on you, back-bite you, invent lies of you, and spread false rumors; as
though you were the vilest persons on earth. This humor Mr. Baxter observes in
those that came from Geneva, etc. No sooner were they called home. says he, (
p. 150. of his Gildas) but some of them were so intemperate, impatient, and
unpeaceable, that some turned to flat Separation, and flew in the faces of the
Prelates with revilings, ( Quere, Whether Mr. B. does not do what he condemned
in them) and some of them (says he) fled to New England, and other Countries
in America. Thither went Hooker, Davenport, Shephard, Allen, Cobber Noyes,
Parker, etc. p. 157. And some were so hot at home, that they were put to death;
a^ Hacket, Coppinger, etc. who fell to Blasphemy and Treason. And that
Ainsworth, Robinson, and Johnson fled beyond Sea, and there gathered Churches,
and broke by divisions among themselves.

The Queen also is reported by these Sectaries, to be a greater friend to the
Papists than to her Protestant Subjects, though her design was only to keep up
the Church in some decency and splendor, the better to retain the Papists in
due obedience. For by her Instructions to Secretary Walsingham, Aug. 11. 1570.
she affirms, That the heads of the Romish party did ordinarily resort from the
beginning of her Reign to Divine Service in the Church, without show of
mis-liking. And Sir Ed. Cook in his Charge at Norwich 1605. says, they did so
during the ten first years of her Reign: and it is acknowledged by some late
Dissenters, p. 64. of their Reply to Doctor Stillingfleet, That the great
propension in the Queen to gain the Popish party to her Communion by the
alterations made in the Liturgy, making the Sacramental bread round like the
wafers, placing the Table where the Altar stood, etc. was attended with the
Conformity of many who were cordially addicted to the Church of Rome. So that
the Papists seemed to have a better opinion of the Reformation, than some
Protestants then or now have; and though the present Church has laid aside
many of those things, which were then enjoined and practiced, retaining only
three Ceremonies for decency, yet the implacable malice of their Successors,
still reviles the Church, as making nearer approches to Popery.

By these insolent proceedings, both of Popish and other Separatists, the Queen
was necessitated to pass both those Acts, of the 23 and 35 of her Reign, to
retain her Subjects in due Obedience, which equally respect all the dissenting
Parties; and by a just execution of those and other good Laws upon some
principal Offenders of all sides, the storms which they had raised were
prevented: which is well observed by Dr Burnet, in his Preface to his Second
Volume, That her strict enjoining Uniformity, making some turbulent persons
examples, countenancing the Clergy, especially the Archbishop Whitgift, and
the sincerity and watchfulness of the Council and inferior Officers, preserved
the Nation in peace all her days. (And he adds) If her Successors had held the
reins of Government with like steadiness of hand, the Nation, how headstrong
soever, could never have run into those desperate confusions, from which
nothing but the hand of God could have redeemed us. N. B.

But to bring home my discourse to our times, and to the intended design, which
is to show, that the Rise of those Wars which have been lately among us, was
from a confederacy between the Papists and other Dissenters; I shall only
mention what dstast was taken by several Scottish Lords, upon the Kings
revocation of those Crown Lands, which during the minority of his Father King
James they had seized; and upon the Act for Surrendries of the Tithes, etc.
whereupon they suggested, that their Religion was in danger, and that these
things were done in favor of Episcopacy: And so they enter into a Covenant for
defense of their Religion. And doubting of their own strength, they consult of
engaging the King of France against their own King; to which end they agreed on
the following Letter, directed, Au Roy; which Title is not wont to be given to
any but their Liege Lord from his Subjects: of which his Majesty in his lesser
Declaration 1640. took special notice, and complained that they courted a
Foreign power against him.

SIR,
YOur Majesty being the Sanctuary of afflicted Princes and States, we have
found it necessary to send this Gentleman Mr. Colvil to represent to your
Majesty the candor and ingenuity as well of our actions and intentions, which
we desire to be written with the beam of the Sun, as well as to your Majesty.
We therefore humbly beseech you, Sir, to give faith and credit to him to what
he shall say on our part touching us and our affairs; being assured of an
assistance equal to your wonted Clemency heretofare, and so often shown to our
Nation, which will not yield the glory to any other whatsoever, to be eternally,

SIR, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate
Servants, Rothes, Montross, Lesly, Mar, Montgomery, Loudon, Forester.


This Letter was discovered, and brought to the King, and was proved to be the
handwriting of Loudon, who, being in London, was committed to the Tower; and on
examination confessed it to be his hand: but excused the matter, because it was
written before the Pacification. However, they had really engaged Cardinal
Richlien, who governed the affairs of France. He sent one Chamberline his
Chaplain, a Scot by birth, to assist the Covenanters, and to attempt all ways
for exasperating the first heats; with order not to depart till he might return
with good news. He appointed one of his Secretaries also to reside in Scotland,
and to march with them into England, to be present at the Council of War, and
direct their business. Hamilton's Chaplain also had free access unto Con the
Popes Nuncio, and a Scotch-man, then in England on the same design.

And if Mr. Rushworth the Parliaments Historian may be credited, there were
also at that time some Applications made to the King of Spain, who was then the
most potent Monarch. For, p. 970, and 971. he says. That in the year 1639, when
the Spanish Armado came on the Coasts of England, Scotland being then in a
great ferment by the Covenanters, some of them thus argued: That there could be
no Fleet strong enough to attempt them by Sea, except all the Kingdom did
contribute to it; which, say they, cannot be done, except all the States join;
of which we of the Confederacy shall be the greater part: and so the Enemy
shall be forthwith forced to give liberty of Conscience to the Catholics, or
put themselves in danger of losing all. From whence it is collected, 1. That
the Scots thought no Enemies so great, as the King and his Party. 2. That
liberty of Conscience was desired for the Papists as well as themselves. 3.
That the Covenanters thought themselves the greater part of the States. And 4.
That there was a secret Confederacy between them and the Papists; and this
Armado was designed for their assistance. And as for the King of Great Britain,
the Relator says, If he will not give liberty of Conscience, he shall be
reduced to it with no little damage.

As for Argyle, whose Father was a known Papist, I suppose he was as much of
that as of any Religion, though he were the Head of the Covenanters: his
interest was his Religion, as this Action of his does demonstrate. His Father
left a second Wife, by whose last Will there was given to the Daughters 12000
l. sterling; and Argyle prevailed to be admitted Administrator, he giving
security to perform the Will: but shortly after he caused the eldest, whose
Portion was 5000 l. to marry a Gentleman who accepted only 1000 l. with her;
which was paid by Argyle's Surety, and not repayed to this day, says my
Author. As to the other Daughters, there was a clause in the Will, That if any
of them should enter into Nunneries, (for it seems they were inclinable to the
Popish Religion) they should have only 300 l. And being defrauded of their due
Maintenance, two of them did enter into Nunneries; and the third, through his
neglect, was ready to do the like. But the Covenanter cared for none of these
things. See the History of Independency, Appendix, p. 7. Nor was Hamilton, whom
the King entrusted as his Commissioner in that Kingdom, free from a shrewd
suspicion of corresponding with the Papists his Chaplain making frequent
Applications to Con the Popes Nuntio, by whom he was commended as a man fit for
his purpose; as shall appear in the discovery made by Sir Will. Boswell; of
which hereafter.

The King, during the interval of Parliaments, which was for thirteen years,
resolved on a Journey to Scotland, to be there crowned He had requested that the
Crown might be sent into England, to save that Journey; but the Covenanters and
Papists sent word they durst not do it. Marquess Huntly, who obtained a
Toleration of Popery there, told the Council there, When his Majesty shall come
and be crowned here, he will no doubt be sworn to our Laws: mean while, seeing
he has entrusted us with them, we will look they shall be observed. And both
Papist and Covenanter agreed to tell the King, that should he long defer that
duty, they might perhaps be inclined to make choice of another King. The King
therefore goes into Scotland, and is crowned with great solemnity. But being
there, he makes a revocation of such Lands as had been taken from the Crown in
his Fathers minority.

And by the foresaid Commission of Surrendries (upon a Petition of many of the
Gentry, Ministry, and Commons) he frees the Ministers and People from the
Vassalage of some great men that had engrossed the Tithes of the Nation,
allowing the Ministers only an inconsiderable Pension, keeping the generality
of the People in dependence on them, and so oppressing them, that no one durst
carry home his nine parts until the Lay-Impropriator had housed his Tenth. For
this the King received great Honor and Thanks from the greatest part of the
Nation; but the Lords that were concerned, caused it to be reported abroad,
that this was done to the prejudice of their Religion, and to make greater
provision for the power and splendor of Bishops: and from this time they
confederate against the King, and provide for a Rebellion: Et hinc illoe
Lachrymoe. But to look back a little into England.

In the last Parliament called by King James, Feb. 19. there was, as the King
called it, a stinging Petition presented against the Papists; on which the King
spoke thus: It has been talked of my remisness in Religion, and a suspicion of
a Toleration; but as God shall judge me, I never thought, or in word expressed
any thing that savoured of it. It is true, that for reasons best known to my
self, I did at times forbear the execution of the Laws, which might have
hindered more weighty affairs, etc. The King therefore consented, 1. That all
Jesuits and Seminary Priests, having taken Orders from the Sea of Rome, be
forthwith commanded to depart out of his Majesty's Dominions. and not to return
under the penalty of the Laws now in force; and that none harbor or conceal
them. 2. That all Armor and Ammunition be taken from them. 3. That all Papists
be confined within five miles of their Dwelling-houses, and come not within ten
miles of London, or the Kings or Princes Court. 4. That all Subjects be
restrained from hearing Mass, or other Exercises of Romish Religion, in the
houses of foreign Ambassadors. 5. That none be entrusted as Justices of the
Peace, Lord-Lieutenants, Deputies, Captains, etc. who resort not to
Divine-Service. 6. That the Laws made against Recusants be put in execution,
and not slacken them on any Treaty of Marriage, or otherwise with any foreign
Princes.

To these the King answered, I cannot but commend your Zeal in offering this
Petition; yet I hold my self unfortunate, that I am thought to need a Spur to
do that which my Conscience and Duty bind me to. What Religion I am of, my
Books, my Profession and Behavior declare: and I wish it may be written in
Marble, and remain as a Mark on me to posterity, when I shall swerve from my
Religion: for he that does dissemble with God, is not to be trusted by men. The
increase of Popery has been my grief; and my endeavor has been to prevent
it: and if I have not been a Martyr, I have been a Confessor, though I have
been far from prosecution -- I therefore grant your Petition, That all Priests
and Jesuits depart at a day; and will command my Judges to put the Laws in
execution against them; I will restrain the resort to Ambassadors houses, and
provide for the education of Popish Children: for it is a shame they should be
brought up here, as if they were at Rome. And assure your selves, I shall never
hearken to the intercession of foreign Princes against the Laws. Hereupon many
Noblemen and others that were in places of trust, were put out. So that King
James could not be suspected of Popery.

In the first year of King Charles, a Parliament being called, June 18. a
Petition of the like nature is presented; to which the King answered, That he
was glad of their forwardness in Religion, and assures them of his readiness to
comply with them. The particulars being like those in the former, and the
Answer^ agreeable, I here omit: but the King granting all, added, That he would
have done the same things, had he not been desired; and wh^^ he now did, was
from his Conscience, and hi^ Duty to his Father, who in his last Spee^
commended to him the person, but not the Religion of the Queen. Accordingly the
King by Proclamation recals the Children of PAPISTS from beyond the Seas,
commands (...) JESUITS, etc. to depart his Dominion^ to disarm all Recusants,
and forbid the meeting of Papists; injoyns the Judges to put the La^ in
execution against them. And many Lord and others suspected of Popery, were put
o^ of Commission.

But King Charles being left entangled (...) many expensive affairs by his
Father Kin^ James, for the discharge of which his Revenues were insufficient;
was resolved to ca^ to the Parliament for a Supply; which takin^ advantage of
his necessities, would not gran^ him any thing considerable, unless he would
part with what was of greater value than the Crown. And the Privilege of
Parliame^^ was made a Rival to the Kings Prerogative for several years
together. The particula^^ are too large to be here repeated: but, Si^ Edward
Cook told the Parliament, That the French Ambassador told his Master what had
done during this last Parliament in sowing Divisions between the King and his
People; and he was well rewarded for it. And at a Conference with the Lords,
Sir Edward told them, That the Jesuits did vaunt at home, and sent Letters
abroad, that all would be well, and doubted not to win ground upon us by our
Divisions. Which Divisions were then visibly made by some leading men in the
Parliament, such as Sir John Elliot, Mr. Pym, and others: but by whom they were
acted, it does not appear, though the mischievous effects of them brought the
three Nations into Confusion.

What sport the Jesuits made of these transactions, appears by a Letter taken
among some other Papers at Clerkenwel.

Father Rector,
LEt not a damp of Astonishment seize on your ardent soul, in apprehending the
sudden and unexpected calling of a Parliament: we have not opposed, but rather
further it; so that we hope as much in this Parliament, as ever we feared any
in Queen Elizabeth's days. You must know, the Council is engaged to assist the
King by way of Prerogative, in case the Parliamentary way should fail. You
shall see this Parliament will resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to
dig out with its beak her own Bowels. The elections of Knights and Burgesses
have been in such confusion of apparent Faction, as that which we were wont to
procure heretofore with much Art and Industry, when the Spanish Match was in
treaty. Now it breaks out as naturally as a Botch or Boil, and spits and spews
out its own rancour and venom. You remember how that famous and immortal
Statesman Count Gundamor fed King James's fancy, and rocked him asleep with the
soft and sweet sound of Peace, to keep up the Spanish Treaty: he had but one
principal means to further the great design, which was, to set on King James
that none but the Puritan Faction, which plotted Anarchy and his Confusion,
were averse to this most happy Union. We steered on the same course, and have
made great use of this Anarchical Election, and have prejudicated and
anticipated the Great One, that none but the Kings Enemies and his are chosen
of this Parliament, etc. We have now many Strings to our Bow, and have strongly
fortified our Faction, and have added two Bulworks more. For when King James
lived, you know he was very violent against Arminianism, and interrupted with
his pestilent Wit and deep Learning our strong designs in Holland, and was a
great friend to that old Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange. Now we have
planted the Sovereign Drug Arminianism, which we hope will purge the
Protestants from their Heresy; and it flourishes, and bears fruit in due
season. The Materials which build up our Bulwork, are the Projectors and
Beggars of all ranks and qualities; to destroy the Parliament, and to introduce
a new species and form of Government, which is Oligarchy: These serve as direct
Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is the universal Catholic Monarchy.
Our foundation must be Mutation, and Mutation will cause a Relaxation; which
will serve as so many violent Diseases (as the Stone, Gout, etc.) to the speedy
destruction of our perpetual and insufferable anguish of body, which is worse
than death it self. We proceed now with counsel, and mature deliberation, how
and when to work on the Dukes jealousy and revenge; and in this we give the
honor to those which merit it, which are the Church-Catholicks. There is
another matter of consequence which we take much into our consideration and
tender care, which is, to stave off the Puritans, that they hang not on the
Dukes ears: they are impudent subtle people, and it is to be feared lest they
should negotiate a Reconciliation between the Duke and the Parliament. It is
certain the Duke would gladly have reconciled himself to the Parliament at
Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our selves we have so handled the
matter, that both Duke and Parliament are irreconcilable. For the better
prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already locked up the Dukes
ears; and we have those of our own Religion, which stand continually at the
Dukes Chamber Door, to see who goes in and out. We cannot be too careful and
circumspect in this regard. I cannot choose but laugh, to see how some of our
Coat have accoutred themselves; you would scarce know them, if you saw them;
and it is admirable how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The
Cambridge-Scholars, to their woeful experience, shall see we can act the
Puritans a little better than they have done the Jesuits. They have abused our
sacred Patron Ignatius in jest; but we will make them smart in earnest. I hope
you will excuse my merry digression: for I confess to you, I am at this time
transported with joy, to see how happily all instruments and means, as well
great as less, cooperate to our purposes, etc.


After the dissolution of the Parliament, Anno 1628, some refractory Members
were sent for to the Council Table; Mr. Hollis, Sir John Elliot, Sir Miles
Hobart, Sir Peter Hayman, Sir Jo. Barrington, Mr Seldom, Mr. Stroud another of
the five Members, Mr. Correton, Mr. Valentine, Mr. Long, Mr. Kirton. Hollis was
questioned, Why on the day the Parliament was dissolved, he placed himself next
the Speakers Chair. He answered, That he had seated himself there formerly, and
took it his due to be there, as in any place whatsoever, (unless at the
Council Table, to sit above those Privy-Counsellors): That he came into the
House with as good intention to serve his Majesty as any other; yet finding his
Majesty offended, he humbly desired to be the Subject rather of his Majesty's
mercy than his power. The Lord Treasurer replied, You mean, rather of his
Majesty's mercy than his justice. I say (answered Hollis) of his Majesty's
power, my Lord. Hobart's offense was for locking the Parliaments doors, and
putting the Key in his pocket. Which (he said) was the command of the House.
The rest were questioned for reproving the Speaker when he came to do the Kings
command. To which they pleaded Privilege of Parliament. But they were all
imprisoned, and fined at the Kings-bench-bar, and gave 2000 l. security for
good behavior. But this was the first Seed which took root in Parliament, and
brought forth bitter Fruits. And these things manent alta mente reposta. For,

Before the calling of the long Parliament in 41, the factious Party, who were
disappointed in the former Parliament, and had been questioned for their
insolences, kept together in a secret Committee in London; foreseeing that the
necessity of his Majesty's affairs would require another Parliament. For they
had animated the Scots to an Insurrection, with whom they had constant
correspondence; for which his Majesty charged the five Members at the beginning
of that Parliament, having sufficient evidence against them, if the iniquity
(...) the times had not obstructed the course o^ Justice. This Committee made
it their business, not only by Letters and Correspondents but by riding into
several Counties, to promote the Election of such persons as were disaffected
both to the Church and Government and upon promises of reforming the Church and
redressing Grievances in the State, they prevailed in most places to choose such
Members as were of their own Persuasion. That which added both fuel and fire to
that flame which in time caused a general Conflagration of the three Nations,
was the zeal of some popular and factious Preachers, whose Pulpit^ were as so
many Trumpets sounding an Alar^ to War: the pretenses were then, as they are
now, the fears of Popery, and Arbitrary Government. By these means they
obtained a prevalent Party in that Parliament, who were no sooner met, but they
made it their business to purge the Houses of disaffected and malignant Lords
and Commons. Mr. Holli^ was sent to the House of Lords to demand the names of
the dissenting Lords; whom they posted up, to expose them to the fury of the
Rabble, which in great tumults they drew from the City to the Kings Palace and
the Parliament-doors, to hinder the access of the Loyal Party: and when any
such came, the Rabble cried, Make Rome, Rome for such or such a person: and in
a short time they had driven the King from his Palace, and all the Loyal Party
from both Houses.

And now the Pulpits sound with Prayers for their mortal Gods and Saviors, and
for the Parliament of their prayers. The Religious and Loyal Clergy were
ejected; about forty Doctors of Divinity, and many hundreds of learned and
grave Divines, for no other crime but their Loyalty and good Benefices; of
which a Treatise called Persecutio Vndecima, gives a particular account:
against whom the chief Articles were, for preaching Obedience to the King,
against Sacrilege and Rebellion, and for keeping their Parish-Churches; for
reading the Liturgy, and bowing at the Name of Jesus; for having Popish Books,
or being seen in the company of Papists. Insomuch as Mr. Seldom, one of their
Members, said to a Person of Honor, That Learning and Honesty were sins enough
in a Clergie-man, to undo him. The reputation of being Popish Priests, or but
Caesar's Friends, was crime enough. One Mr. White published his Centuries of
sequestered and ejected Ministers, laying to their charge such things as were
never attempted to be proved against them. And it was observed at that time,
that he was greatly troubled in Conscience for abusing and ruining so many
Clergymen, and died in a distracted condition: which hitherto I have not seen
or heard to be contradicted. Certain it is, that none of them had any one point
of Popery proved against them. The Lord Fairfax accused Dr. Cosens, then
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, that he had perverted a young man to Popery: but
upon examination, it was found that he had expelled the person that perverted
him from the University; and some who were then Members of the Parliament,
testified as much in behalf of the Doctor. Whereupon, after some weeks
imprisonment, he was set free; and no man gave better proof of his aversion to
Popery, both in the time of his exile, and after his return, than that eminent
Doctor did. So unhappy have the Fanatic Party always been, to impeach them
most as being Popishly inclined, who have given the greatest demonstration of
their opposition to it. But to return:

If they wanted any numbers to petition for what they had in design, or any
money to begin the Wars; Mr. Pym and some other of the five Members, were sent
into the City; who in conjunction with some eminent Preachers, such as Mr.
Marshal, Calamy, etc. by their long Speeches and fair pretenses, deceived the
hearts, and opened the purses of the deluded people. From hence came those
Tumults that petitioned against the Bishops and Popish Lords, and for the
bringing the Earl of Strafford and the Archbishop to their Trials. The good
Lord of Essex said, He never knew but one Bishop, (viz. Bishop Williams, who
betrayed his Lord and Master) that stood for the good of the Commonwealth. As
for the rest, Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes made a large Speech, to show that
Episcopacy was an Enemy to Monarchy: whereas his Father spoke and printed to
the contrary, That the Bishops were too much devoted to the King. And the young
Gentleman was (not long after) condemed by Martial Law.

Now that the Papists had a great hand in our Troubles at home (as well as in
Scotland) does clearly appear from the Testimony of Sir Edward Cook, and other
Transactions already mentioned. But it will yet more evidently appear, that the
Popish Party were chief Agents in animating the English Rebels, with whom they
held correspondence to that end, by the discovery made to Sir W. Boswel by one
Andreas ab Habernfield, and communicated to the Archbishop, September 6. 1640.
Which Relation Mr. Prynne found among the Archbishops Papers, and caused it to
be printed by Order of a Committee of the House of Commons. Mr. Prynne urges
many Arguments to evince the truth of that Plot, and says, That not only he,
but the Parliament, as well as the King and Archbishop, did believe it; and
that he must be a Monster of incredulity that does not believe it.

The particulars of the discovery that are most to our purpose, are as follow:
1. That the Discoverer was bred a Papist, and an Ecclesiastic, and judged a
fit person to be Coadjutor to Con the Popes Nuntio, by Cardinal Barbarino, who
under the Pope was made President of the Congregation of Jesuits in England,
for propagation of Religion. But the horror of this Plot, which was to destroy
the King and the Archbishop, and involve three Nations in Blood, so troubled
his Conscience, that he not only discovered the Plot, but forsook the Religion
that allowed of such bloody practices. 2. That from Con he received and
dispatched all the intelligence concerning the Plot, which was communicated to
Con from a Consult of political Jesuits which met privately in the Province of
Wales. 3. That there were at least fifty Scottish Jesuits at that time in and
about London. That one Maxwell a Scottish Earl and Papist, was sent into
Scotland by the Popish Party, with whom two other Scottish Earls were
Correspondents; whose business it was to excite the Scots to a Rebellion, by
aggravating the Actions of the English Court, particularly the punishment of
Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick, and the imposing of the English Liturgy on them.
4. That a Chaplain of Hamiltons (the Kings Commissioner) had often secret
conference with Con: concerning whom, the Informer asking merrily whether the
Jews also agreed with the Samaritans, Con replied, I would to God all Ministers
were like him. 5. That Cardinal Richlieu sent Mr. Tho. Chamberlain his Chaplain
and Almoner, to whom a Bishopric was promised, into Scotland; who tarried
there four months, and was not to return till he brought good news. 6. That Sir
Toby Matthews a politic Jesuit, did diligently enquire, and transmit
Intelligence to Rome. 7. That in the house of one Capt. Read was a constant
meeting of the Jesuits every Post-day, where they received Letters from Rome,
and made returns in feigned names. 8. That Mr. Porter and Windebank, the Lord
Arundel and his Countess, the Countess of Buckingham, and others, were privy to
the Plot, and betrayed the Kings Counsels.


Upon the whole, Mr. Prynne makes these remarks: That the Conspirators have
almost brought their design to maturity. to our shame and grief, by new-raised
Civil Wars, both in England and Ireland, (but he adds not a word of Scotland):
That Secretary Windebank, and Captain Read, with some others, went secretly
into Ireland to raise a Rebellion there; who assured them that there would be
such Broils in England, that no Force could be sent thence. But not a word yet
of what was done in Scotland, where they were in actual Arms against the King,
and ceased not till they had effected the death of the Archbishop and the King,
as this discovery had foretold.

I shall add an Observation of Hammond L'Estrange. The Presbyterian Party
(says he) were not the only men in the Conspiracy ^ for in case of general
disturbances, nothing i^ more familiar than for several Factions of contrary
inclinations and interests to unite, aiming at their own several ends. And a
foul blemish it would have been to the Society of Jesus, should they have sat
still in a work so proper to their Employment, as these Scottish Broils: Though
they did not reach at the external glory of the Enterprise, which they rendered
to the Presbyterians; yet were they as diligent in their Machinations as
possibly they could be, hoping to be greatest gainers at last. But the Jesuits
had done their business, having set their Journey-men at work both in England
and Scotland; and they were ready as Auxiliaries to assist them: to which end
they mix themselves with the Councils and Armies both of England and Scotland,
obstructing all Overtures and Treaties of Peace. It was not for any love to the
King or his Cause, that some few of them engaged with his Party, but to help on
the public Calamity of the two Nations, and to keep on the Wars, that they
might raise themselves on the ruins of both Parties. For, that there were more
Papists engaged with the Parliament-Armies than the King's, appears by his
Majesty's Declaration after the Fight at Edghill, Oct. 1643. All men know the
great number of Papists Commanders and others that serve in their Armies, the
great industry they used to corrupt the Loyalty and affection of Our loving
Subjests of that Religion, the private promises and undertakings that they made
if they would assist them against Us; all the Laws made in their prejudice
should be repealed; when nothing could prevail with Us to invite them to Our
Succor, or recall Our Proclamation which forbad them so to do. We know that a
far greater number of Papists are in their Army than Our own. And one Robert de
Salmonet a Popish Priest and Scottish man, who wrote a History of our Wars in
French, says of this Fight, That which most surprised every one, was, that
they found among the dead at Edgehill several Popish Priests: For although in
their Declarations they called the Kings Army a Popish Army, to render it
odious; yet they had in their Army two Companies of Walloons, and other Roman
Catholics. And they omitted no endeavors to engage Sir Arthur Ashton, an
eminent Roman Catholic, to their party.

In Mr. Prynnes Relation of the Trial of the Archbishop, one Mr. Chaloner was
produced, who deposed, that he being at Bruxels, and discoursing with an
English Traveller, heard him to affirm, that Popery would be brought into
England, and the Introducers should be the Protestants themselves: whereat when
he wondered, the Gentleman told him, that the War should be so disguised under
false notions and pretenses, as that the Protestants should ignorantly become
the Jesuits servants, and by the effusion of their own blood set up Popery, p.
415. And because Mr. Prynne mentioned some persons sent into Ireland, to stir
up the Rebellion there, I shall mention also that which the King says of it in
his Chapter of that Rebellion: I believe (says he) it will at last appear,
that they who first began to embroil my other Kingdoms, are in great part
guilty if not of the first letting out, yet of the not timely stopping those
horrid effusions of blood in Ireland. And it was observed, that when the Design
against the Earl of Strafford, as also against the King, was managing, there
was a great correspondence between the Leaders of both parties in Ireland; of
which the Author of the History of Independencie gives so large an account,
that I shall only select some passages, and refer the Reader to see the whole
Transaction at his leisure, in the History of Independency, p. 150, 198, p.
230. etc. 245.

But I shall first insert that which the Royal Martyr has said in his own
vindication concerning the Irish Rebellion.

That Sea of Blood, which has there been cruelly and barbarously shed, is
enough to drown any man in eternal both infamy and misery whom God shall find
the malicious Author or instigator of its effusion. Some men take it very ill
not to be believed, when they affirmed that what the Irish Rebels did, was done
with my privity, at least, if not by my Commission. But these knew too well,
that it is no news for some of my Subjects to fight not only without my
Commission; but against my Command and Person too; ye^ all the while to pretend
they fight by my authority, and for my safety. I would to God the Irish had
nothing to allege for their imitation against those whose blame must needs be
the greater, by how much Protestant principles ar^ more against all Rebellion
than those of Papists Nor will the goodness of men's intentions excus^ the
scaudal and contagion of their example^ It is thought by many wise men, that
the preposterous rigor and unreasonable severity, which some men carried
before them in England, w^^ not the least incentive that kindled and blew ^^
into those horrid flames, which wanted not predisposed fuel for Rebellion in
Ireland, when despair being added to their former discontent^ and their fears
of utter extirpation to the^^ wonted oppressions, it was easy to provoke to
(...) open Rebellion, a people prone enough to brea^ out to all exorbitant
violence, both by some principles of their Religion, and the nature desires of
liberty. I would to God no man h^^ been less affected with Irelands sad estate
th^^ my self. I offered to go in person on that expedition: but some men were
afraid I should ha^^ any one Kingdom quieted; or loath they were to shoot at
any mark here less than my self, (...) that any should have the glory of my
destruct^^ on but themselves. Had my many offers been accepted, I am confident
neither the ruin had been so great, nor the calamity so long, nor the remedy
so desperate. So that next to the sin of those that began that Rebellion,
theirs must needs be, who either hindered the speedy suppression of it by
domestic Dissentions, or diverted the Aids, Sir William Parsons said at a
public meeting, That within 12 months, no Catholic should be seen in Ireland.
or exasperated the Rebels to the most desperate resolutions and actions, by
threatening extremities not only to the known Heads and chief Incendiaries, but
to the whole Community of that Nation. When at the earnest entreaty of the
chief of the Protestant party there, I effected a Cessation in the best sort
that the necessary difficulty of affairs would permit, I was then to suffer
again in my reputation and honor, because I suffered not the Rebels utterly to
devour the remaining handfuls of the Protestants there. I believe it will at
last appear, that they who first began to embroil my other Kingdoms, are in
great part guilty, if not of the first letting out, yet of the not timely
stopping those horrid effusions of blood in Ireland. Thus far the Royal Martyr.

And whether the examples of England and Scotland imbroyling those two
Kingdoms, and proceeding successfully in the Wars against the King, did not
animate the Irish to those horrid proceedings, as in the Irish Letter mentioned
in the Introduction, is sub Judice. The following transactions, under the
Parliament and Cromwell, are a more clear evidence of an actual conjunction with
the Irish Rebels against the King.

Sir John Temple was of the Privy Council in Ireland, at the Insurrection and
after; a person that thought himself disobliged by the King, a Parliament Man
here in England, and one that too much adhered to the Faction. He is confident
that the chief aim of the Irish was to shake off the English yoke, and settle
the power in the Natives. One Cook deposed, that Tirlogh Brady said, That the
Irish would within a fortnight have a King of their own, p. 83. and 66. p. 50,
51. The same was deposed by others. As was also, That they took the Scots for a
president: they would have the Kingdom in their own hands, Laws of their own, a
Deputy of their own, without molestation from another Nation, p. 19. That they
cared not for King Charles, having a King of their own. In the Remonstrance, p.
54. they called Tyrone their King; and his Commission, the Kings Commission.
They affirmed the Scots to be of their side, p. 37. That they had the Earl of
Argyles hand, and most of the Nobility of Scotland.

Macguire, a chief contriver of the Rebellion, falling into the Parliaments
power, was much importuned by promises and threats to discover whether the King
were privy to the Rebellion: but he did still acquit the King and all other
English from being guilty as much as of knowing it. And it is very remarkable,
that he did this not only while he was under a sentence of Condemnation; but
when he had been turned off the Cart, and recovered again after a most
barbarous manner, yet still he acquitted the King to his death, and denied that
ever he saw any Commission from him.

And whereas the King was accused of granting them a Toleration: it is true,
that he was necessitated to offer that, which they had forced from him before;
but it was with such restrictions, that they liked it not, but took it on their
own terms. And indeed the King told them by one of his Secretaries; You insist
on something in Religion more than formerly you were contented with: I am
therefore commanded to let you know, that were His Majesty's condition much
lower, you shall never force him to any further Concessions, to the prejudice
of his Conscience, and of the Protestant Religion, in which he is resolved to
live, and for which he is ready to dye: and that he will join with any
Protestant Prince; nay, with his Rebels at home, rather than yield the least to
you in this particular. And this was the joint opinion of the Papists in
England and Ireland, that the King would give them all up as a Sacrifice, to
compass a Peace with his Parliament, though they had been Loyal to him in his
extremity.

The Marquess of Ormond, and those that acted for the King under his
Lieutenancy in Ireland, was so prosperous in his endeavors to reduce that
Kingdom to the obedience of the Crown, that a Peace was made with the most
considerable of the Confederate Irish. But they being otherwise tampered with
by the Parliament-party, contrary to their Faith and promise, the Popes Nuntio,
and some Irish Clergy prevailed with the Vlster-Irish under Owen Roe Oneale, to
refuse to come under the Kings Authority.

Of which the Author of the History of Independency, p. 150. of the Second
part, tells us in the Margent, that the Council of Officers endeavor to join
interests with the Papists in England and Ireland: And then says, The King had
offended the Papists in the last Treaty, in granting so much to the Parliament
for their suppression. The Independents perceiving it, and willing to join with
any interest to make good their design, it was proposed at the Council of
Officers, that the Papists should raise and pay Ten thousand additional Forces
for the Army; in recompense whereof, all penal Laws concerning them should be
repealed, all Taxes and Contributions taken off, and they to have the
protection of the Parliament and Army. Under the same notion they endeavored
to join interests with Owen Roe Oneale, who commanded that bloody party of
Massacring Irish, with which they had formerly taxed the King. They supplied
him with Ammunition, and admitted O Rely the Popes Irish Nuntio to a Treaty
here in England. Sir John Winter was taken into employment, and the arrears of
his Rent gathered for him by Soldiers, to the regret of the Country; Sir
Kenelme Digby had a Pass to come into England, and came, as he was foretold by
a Letter, by an Independent Agent for the Army from Paris, to an Independent
Member of the House of Commons, a creature of the Army, dated 28 November, 1648
and printed at the later end of The true and full relation of the Officers and
Armies forcible seizing of diverse eminent Members. Walter Mountague was let
forth on bail.

What becomes of this Negotiation, and whether those that played fast and loose
with all interests in the Kingdom, have not done the like with the Papists,
this Author shows in the following relation: for p. 198. he says, the
underhand combination between the Independent party and Owen Roe Oncale, is
now openly declared and avowed by their own licensed News books: Owen Roe, and
Colonel M. are joined, says the modest Narrative. Our party have permitted
Three hundred of Oneal^ own Regiment to quarter in our parts among the Creats,
within two miles of Dundalk, says the Scout. Owen Roe and Berne are come
toward Colonel Jones and Colonel M. 's quarters^ he is so fair as to pay
Contribution: his quarters are to the Scots side of Dublin, to prevent their
giving aid to Ormond in his attempt up on Dublin. Who can blame necessity? Nor
d^ our Grandees now deny this Confederacy with the bloody Popish Massacring
Rebels, although they had the impudence to make the only supposition thereof,
one of the principal charges against the late King, and to raise a great outcry
against the Marquess of Ormond, and Lord Inchiquine, for their cessation with
Preston; which was to prevent the Cromwellists, who offered to associate with
him on conditions much more prejudicial to the Protestant Religion and English
interest, than the Marquess gave them: they offered Oneale all the Lands in
Ulster forfeited by his Grandfather Tyrone, Shan Oneale, and others attainted,
thereby destroying the British Planters there, etc. P. 2^^. He refers to a
paper called The Association between Oneale, etc. And another called The true
state of the Transactions with Owen Roe Oneale, as it was reported to the
Parliament by the Council of State; printed by Edw. Husbands, 15 Aug. 1649.
This was so abhorred by the English Soldiery, that many there took occasion to
forsake the English Parliament, and many here disbanded rather than they would
accompany Cromwell in so wicked an Expedition; and I doubt not but the imposing
on some of the Independent Officers such a vile drudgery, did so much
dissatisfie them, as to make them, after they had extricated themselves from
their toyls, to bethink themselves how they might serve a better Master. I
shall therefore beg pardon for transcribing the progress of this affair,
referring the Reader to the former Quotations.

Cromwell writes Letters to his Creatures of the Council of State, complaining
how much the miscarriage of that agreement had retarded his voyage; desiring
them, for satisfaction of the Soldiery and people, to treat with some body to
take the whole business on himself, and to clear the Council of State, the
Parliament, and Cromwell himself, from having any hand in it. And to carry on
the Scene, this Agreement was with much heat of zeal complained of in the House
of Commons by a Brother, who had his Cue beforehand, and by the Juncto was
referred to the Council of State, as was forelaid; where after some private
conference with him whom they had entrusted to accommodate the business, they
publicly voted their dislike of it; Bradshaw reprehending him for it; and at
last they ordered that the whole business, with the reasons for his
justification, should be reported by Tho Scot to the House of Commons: which
was done on Friday Aug. 10. whereupon their Commissioner was called to the Bar,
where the Speaker asked him What persons he meant in his Letter to the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, wherein he says, he made the agreement with Oneale with
the advice of some others. He answered, That he did it on his own score, (for
so he was instructed and cautioned before; and his life had been in danger, if
he had done otherwise without advice of any; only having discourse with Colonel
Jones, he told him if he could keep Owen Roe and Ormond from joining, i^ would
be a good Service. This Answer was taken for satisfactory. The next demand was,
Whether he had any advice or directions from the Parliament, Council of State,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other person (...) do the same; which he
expressly denied, saying, He did it on his own score. Whereupon the House Voted,
Resolved, etc. That the House does utterly disapprove of the proceedings of
Colonel M. in the Treaty and Cessation (as they called it) made between him and
Owen Roe Oneale; and that this House does detest thoughts of any closing with
any Party of Popish Rebels there, who have had their hands in shedding English
Blood. Nevertheless, the House being satisfied that what the said Colonel did
therein was in his apprehension necessary for the preservation of the
Parliaments interest, the House is content that the farther consideration
thereof, as to him, be laid aside, and shall not at any time hereafter be
called in question.

Upon these proceedings the Author notes, 1. The Armies Doctrine and Use of
apprehended necessity and good intentions, to justify evil actions, approved
of by this Parliament. 2. This Agreement, though it were twelve weeks before
publicly known in England, and divulged in licensed News-books, was never
scrupled, until that first the said Agreement was expired. And, 3. That Oneale
was so beaten by the Lord Inchiquine, that (as their News-books said) he was
inconsiderable, and must suddenly join with Ormond, or be destroyed. 4. That
these Votes call this Agreement but a Treaty and Cessation, which was a League
offensive and defensive against Ormond, Inchiquine, and all that upheld
Monarchy.

For which the Author gives these Reasons: Because the second Article says,
That on all occasions both Parties be ready to assist one another, till a more
absolute Agreement be made by the Parliament of England. And the third Article
says, That the Creats of Ulster residing in the Quarters of the Parliaments
Army, shall pay Contribution to General Owen Oneale, (which is a granting of
Taxes against Law) and it seems Oneale became a Mercenary, being taken into
pay. Article the fourth says, That if Oneale shall happen to fight against the
Forces under Ormond, Inchiquine, or other Enemies of the Parliament, and
thereby spend his Ammunition; if he be near to their Quarters, and want
Ammunition, they shall then furnish him. This was actually performed, when
Inchiquine besieged Dundalk. The fifth Article allowed Oneale the use of any
Harbors within their liberty.

By which Premises we may rationally conclude, that the Factions are not so
averse from the most bloody Papists, but if occasion require, they are ready to
join interest with them, to maintain their Good Old Cause against the Crown and
Church of England; which will farther appear, by the Correspondency and Agents
which the successive Parties that were uppermost maintained in foreign parts,
to betray the present Kings Counsels while he was in banishment; for which
Manning a Papist was executed: for whom many Dirgies were sung in several
Churches.

And when his Majesty was invited into Scotland, the Marquess of Huntly, and
other Lords and Heads of the Popish Faction, made a great Party to oppose his
Reception, unless he would grant a Toleration of their Religion. But the
Presbyterian Party having then the greatest power, admitted him on such terms
as they thought fit; and served him no longer than they could serve their own
designs.

For the clearer manifestation of the ASSOCIATION between Oneale and the
Parliament, there are lately come to the Council of State (says the Author of
the Hist. of Independ. p. 245.) two Letters out of Conaught from Sir Charles
Coote, dated the 14th and 15th of August (49) informing them with how much zeal
to the Parliaments interest Owen Oneale had freely raised the Siege of
Londonderry. On which Letters, and the Votes and Proceedings of Pride 's
Parliament, I commend to the Readers observation these particulars: First, the
15th of August the Letters inform them that Oneale freely offered his
assistance to Coote, professing much affection to the Parliament of England,
and an earnest desire to maintain their interest. He had formerly styled the
Parliament, Monstrosum Parliamentum; but now the case is altered, (...) calls
them the Honorable Parliament, as driving his interest against Monarchy and
Protestancy. In the Letter of the 14th, he informs the Parliament that he has
found Oneale and his Army very punctual and faithful in all their promises and
engagements, and make^ no doubt but they will continue so to the end The 16th
of August, he says that Oneale i^ his Express to Coote enclosed some Letters
received from Col. M. and among the rest (...) Copy of a Letter in answer to a
Letter of the Lord Inchiquine, charging the Colonel for joining with Oneale and
his party; wherein the Colonel insinuated as if Oneale 's submission to use the
Parliaments power, were already accepted by them. In that of the 15th, Coote
has this expression in his Letter: -- Calling to mind that it is no new thing
for the most wise God to make use of wicked Instruments to bring about a good
design. Aug. 15. the Letter says that Coote called a Council of War, and
resolved it was better to accept of the Assistance of those who proclaimed
themselves Friends to us, and our interest we fight for. The same Letter says,
that we added to the Article this proviso, Not use their Assistance longer than
the approbation of the State of England should go along with us therein. In
that of the 14th, Coote says Oneale was pleased to communicate to him certain
proposals, which were long since transmitted to the Parliament; and though for
his part, and the prime Officers with him, they do not doubt but the proposals
are already yielded to by the State; yet in regard their Army and party in all
other parts of the Kingdom cannot be satisfied therewith till the Parliament
declare more publicly therein, he has therefore desired me humbly to entreat
your Lordships to declare your Resolutions therein with as much speed as may
be. And in a Vote of Parliament, it is said, The House is well satisfied of the
diligence, faithfulness, and integrity of Sir Charles Coote, in preserving the
Garrison of Londonderry. Which (says my Author) was preserved by the
conjunction of Oneale, who raised the Siege.

But to return to England, where, though the Jesuits and Priests did not appear
so visibly as in the Wars of Ireland, yet that they had great influence on the
Councils and Armies of the Fanatics, from the beginning to the end of the War,
is industriously proved by Mr. Prynne in several books, especially in his
Introduction to the Archbishop's Trial, and in Romes Masterpiece; Works of
Darkness brought to light; The Royal Favorite, etc.

The first War begun with the clamor of Popery: That it was admitted not only
at the Court, but into the Church; particularly that the King was a great
favourer of Papists; and the House of Commons instance in one Goodman a Romish
Priest, who was condemned at the Sessions in the Old Bailey. Whereupon the House
remonstrates, That it was more necessary to put the Laws in execution at that
time, than in any before: That at that time diverse Petitions from several parts
of the Kingdom, complained of the great increase of Popery and Superstition;
and the people call earnestly to have the Laws put in execution. (When these
Petitions were promoted by their own Members; and that Decency which was used
in the Church, the Superstition and Popery which they remonstrated against: but
not one word of putting the Laws in execution against the Separatists.) 2. That
Priests and Jesuits swarmed in great numbers: That of late years about the City
of London, Priests and Jesuits have been discharged out of prison: That the
Pope had then a Nuntio in the City: The great resort to Mass at Demark-house:
That on the reprieve of Goodman, the City of London refused the advance of
Money for supply of his Majesty's Army, for that reason. Therefore they desire
that Goodman may be left to Justice.

To this the King answered: Concerning Goodman, that he being found guilty
only as being a Priest, on which account neither King James nor Queen
Elizabeth put any to death, be did reprieve him; desiring them to consider the
inconvenience that may fall on his Subjects and other Protestants abroad, by
executing of such severity. That he will put the Laws in execution against
Popery and Superstition, the increase whereof was much against his mind: That
he would speedily issue out a Proclamation for all Priests and Jesuits to
depart the Kingdom within one month, or to be proceeded against according to
Law. As for Rosetti the Popes Nuntio, that he had no commission, but was only
to correspond between the Queen and the Pope; which was warranted by Articles
of Marriage: yet he had persuaded her to dismiss him within a time, to take
away the offense. That he would restrain the resort of Papists to
Denmark-house, and the Chapels of Ambassadors.

But instead of being satisfied with these Answers, four Members of Parliament
acquaint the Lords of a monstrous design of the Papists; an Army of fifteen
thousand in Lancashire, eight thousand Irish Papists under the Earl of
Strafford, and many thousands in diverse other places, well armed, and paid by
the Earl of Worcester. Of which, Sanderson in the Life of King Charles, says,
p. 360. After-Ages will think these Hyperboles; there being no such Armies
possible by them, nor no such fears in others. Yet this Message was carried
from the Lower to the Upper House and gave occasion to a multitude of people to
frame Petitions suitable to Plots, Fears, and Jealousies, for the Parliaments
purpose. And Alderman Pennington, with some hundred^ of the Rabble, presents a
Petition in the name of fifteen thousand Citizens, against Bishops and their
Jurisdiction.

How little they cared for Religion, though their actions sufficiently
declared, yet their expressions were not wanting. A Great Creature of theirs
said modestly, That they ha^ power enough to take the Crown from the King if
the Gospel did not hinder them: but the^ did it with a Non Obstante. Mr.
Hambde^ being asked by a Minister in the beginning of the War, Why Religion was
made a cause (...) it: answered, Because the people would not st^^ else. But H.
Martyn told them in the House They need not lie for a good Cause; it was n^^
Religion, but Liberty they fought for. And so little did some of them value
their Religion, that as Col. Morley and others with hi^ said, They would cast
themselves upon any Nation, even the Turk, rather than let the King subdue them.

Mr. B.'s Key for Catholics mentions several of the Popish designs; which
(says he are grounded on this Maxim, That their foundation must be Mutation,
which will cause a Relaxation, and serve as so many violent Diseases, as Stone
or Gout, to a speedy Destruction, p. 318. Upon which he adds this Consultation
of the Jesuits: We shall necessitate the Puritan Protestants to keep the King
as Prisoner, or else to put him to death. If they keep him as a Prisoner, his
diligence and friends, and their own divisions, will either work his
deliverance, and give him the day again by our help, or at least will keep the
State in a perpetual unsetledness, and will bring an odium on them: or if they
cut him off, which we will rather promote, lest they should make use of his
extremities to any advantage; then first we shall procure the odium of King
killing to fall on them, which they are wont to cast upon us, and so shall be
able to disburthen our selves. Secondly, And we shall have them all to pieces
in Distractions: for they will either set up a new King, or the Parliament will
keep the power, changing the Government into a Democracy. The first cannot be
done without great Concussions, and new Wars; and we shall have an opportunity
to have a hand in all: and if it be done, it may be much to our advantage. The
second will apparently, by Factions and Distractions, give us footing for
continual attempts. But to make all sure, we will have our footing among the
Puritans too, that we may be sure to maintain our interest, which way soever
the world goes. This was the Frame of the Papists Plot.

In the next page, he tells us of the Letters of the Agents of the Agitators in
France, published in the weekly News-books, commending the Jesuits for good
men, and how agreeable they were to them in their Principles for a Democracy;
and what meet Materials for such a Commonwealth the Jesuits would be. The
Agencies of particular men with Jesuits (he says) I purposely omit, p. 321. Mr.
Baxter doubtless knew more than (...) mentions; he had an Idea of all their
Plots and Principles in's own brain. And, p. 329 says, It is opened by many in
print, how far the Jesuits crept into all Societies under the name of
Independents. He tells us a story of on^ that came from Scotland, pretending
himself a Jew, who gave the Anabaptists the glory o^ his Conversion, and was
rebaptized at He^ham; but was discovered at Newcastle to be ^ Jesuit. The whole
story is in print. And p. 321. he acquaints us that Sexby and other^ of the
Army, did confederate with Spain t^ murder Cromwell, when they found that h^
attempted to make himself a King. And hereupon it was that Cromwell took
distaste a^ the Papists, and prevailed to make an Ac^ with this Preamble, Anno
1656. Forasmu^^ as there is a great increase of Popish Recusants within this
Commonwealth, by reason whereof great danger may follow to the Commonwealth,
they being persons very active in mischievous Plots and Conspiracies, etc. This
doubtless was well known by Cromwell, who had made great use of them to effect
his mischievous designs.

Peter du Moulin in his Answer to Philanax Anglicus, p. 59. observes, that a
year before the Kings death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from
their Party in England, first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbone,
who were then wholly Jesuited, about this Question: Whether seeing the State of
England was in a likely posture to change Government, it was lawful for the
Catholics to work that change, for the advancing and securing the Catholic
Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no hope to turn from
his Heresy. This was answered affirmatively; after which, the same persons
went to Rome, where the same Question being propounded and debated, it was
concluded by the Pope, That it was both lawful and expedient for the Catholics
to promote that alteration of State, etc. When that horrid Parricide had taken
effect, the Pope commanded all the Papers about that Question to be gathered,
and burnt: In obedience to which Order, a Roman Catholic in Paris was demanded
a Copy which he had of these Papers: but the Gentleman, who had time to
consider and detest the wickedness of that Project, refused to give it, and
showed it to a Protestant friend of his, relating to him the whole carriage of
this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of the Practices of the Jesuits. And
when these Jesuits returned from Rome, they brought many more after them, to
help on the same Work; which at last they effected, to their great joy.

The Roman Priest and Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke
given to our holy King and Martyr, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the
greatest Enemy that we had in the world is gone. A Protestant Lady living in
Paris, was persuaded by a Jesuit to turn Catholic: when the dismal news of the
King's Murder came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good Subjects, was deeply
afflicted with it; and when this Jesuit came to see her, and found her melted
in Tears for that Disaster, he told her with a smiling countenance, That she
had no reason to lament, but rejoice rather, seeing the Catholics were rid of
their greatest Enemy, and that Cause was much furthered by his death. Upon
which the Lady in great anger put him down the stairs, saying, If that be your
Religion, I have done with you for ever: and God has given her grace to make
her words good hitherto. Many intelligent Travelers can tell of the great joy
among the English Convents and Seminaries about the Kings death, as having
overcome their Enemy, and done their main work for their settlement in England:
of which they made themselves so sure, that the Benedictines were in great
care, that the Jesuits should not get their Land: and the English Nuns were
contending who should be Abbasses in England. An understanding Gentleman
visiting the Friars in Dunkirk, put them on the discourse of the King's death;
and to pump out their sense about it, said, That the Jesuits had labored very
much to compass that work. To which they answered, That the Jesuits would
ingross to themselves the glory of all great and good works, and of this among
others; whereas they had labored as diligently and effectually for it as they.
So that both the Jesuits and Seculars had labored to bring the King to death:
and the Army of Fanatics were their Instruments to put it in execution.

Monsieur de Bourdeaux the French Ambassador, being resident in London when
General Monk had gotten the power of the City, and the affections of the
People, earnestly desired to interest the King of France and Cardinal Mazarine
in the Revolution of Government; and made way for an Address to the General, by
his Brother-in-law Clergis; to whom he imparted, that Cardinal Mazarine would
be glad to have the honor of his friendship, and assist him faithfully in all
his Enterprises: and that the General might be more confident of the Cardinal,
he assured him that Oliver Cromwell kept so strict a League with him, that he
did not assume the Government without his privity, and was directed step by
step by him in the progress of that action: and therefore if he resolved on
that course, he should not only have the Cardinals friendship and counsel in
the attempt, but a safe Retreat and honorable Support in France, if he sailed
in it. But Mr. Clergis assured him, that the General did not intend to take the
Government upon him, but to submit all to the determination of the next
Parliament.

The King being in the Territories of the King of Spain, when the General was
minded to declare for him, Sir Jo. Greenvil was dispatched by the General to
his Majesty, to desire him to depart out of the King of Spain's Dominions, to
Breda, or some other place under the Government of the States of the United
Provinces; for that he had certain intelligence he would be detained by the
King of Spain's Ministers, if he stayed in his Dominions. Upon which Advice,
within two or three days he went to Breda, where he continued till he was
invited to his Kingdoms.

There was found in the Study of Francis Young, after his death, a Paper
containing Advices given to him by Seignior Bellarini concerning the best way
of managing the Popish interest in England upon the Kings Restoration. The
first Advice is, to make the obstruction of Settlement their great design,
especially upon the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom; whereunto if
things should fall, they would be more firm than ever. Secondly, To remove the
Jealousies raised by Prynne, Baxter, etc. of their design upon the late
Factions, and to set up the prosperous way of fears and jealousies of the King
and Bishops. Thirdly, To make it appear underhand, how near the Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline of the Church of England comes to us; at how little
distance their Common Prayer is from our Mass; and that the wisest and ablest
men of that Way, are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to us, or
at least meet us half way: hereby the most stayed men will become more odious,
and others will run out of all Religion, for fear of Popery. Fourthly, That
there be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by You. Fifthly,
That the Trade and Treasure of the Nation may be engrossed between themselves
and other discontented Parties. Sixthly, That the Bishops and Ministers of the
Church of England be aspersed, as either worldly and careless on one hand; or
so factious; that it were well they were removed. All these Directions will
appear to have been followed precisely by both Parties.

The Grandees of the Committee at Derby-house, and the Army, solicit the
detaining of the Prince in France, and delaying his Journey for England, lest he
should trouble the yet-unsetled Kingdom of the Saints. To negotiate which, they
have an Agent lying Lieger with Cardinal Mazarine, who is so well supplied with
Money, and so open-handed, that it has been heard from Mazarine's own mouth,
that all the Money the Queen and Prince had cost the Crown of France, came out
of the Parliaments Purse, with a good advantage. It is likewise said, Mazarine
had an Agent here, to drive on the interest of France in England, Hist. of
Independ. 2 part, p. 112. And it is known that Cromwell's interest with France,
when the present King fled thither, after Worcester-fight, was so great, that
he prevailed to have the King driven thence, to seek his safety in other
Countries.

And it is credibly reported, that Cromwell maintained or encouraged a company
of Benedictine Monks to betray the Kings Counsels: That Manning, who was
executed beyong the Seas for disclosing the Kings Counsels, was a Papist, and
had Masses sung for him after his death: That Lambert, who had been suspected
as a Papist thirty years, with the help of a Popish Priest, contrived Cromwels
new Government. And the Jesuits perceiving, that if the Scottish and English
Presbyterians should clearly and entirely grasp the power of the Nation, it
would be a difficult task to take it out of their hands; they abetted the
Independent party, and other growing Sects; they mixed themselves with their
Counsels and Armies; as Mr. Prynne affirmed. And a good Author says, that a
Protestant Gentleman met with about thirty of them at one time, between Roan
and Diep; who enquiring their design, and they taking him for one of their
party, was informed by them, that they were going into England, and would take
Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be Agitators: and what work
those creatures made, is too well known!

Nor is it less notorious, who they were that pleaded so strenuously for
Liberty of Conscience. Such Tracts as directly urged the Toleration of Popery,
as well as of other Sects, were penned and dispersed by the Jesuits: and the
Indulgence granted to them by Cromwell, who was never known to punish any of
them for their Recusancy, as long as they served his interest, argues his
connivance, if not his approbation of them. By these was that Treatise of
Father Parsons concerning the Succession, under the Title of Doleman,
Reprinted, and dispersed, to keep us in confusion. Then it was that White wrote
his Jesuitical books, and Milton seconded him. And the Pamphlets written to
justify the Proceedings of the Army, were dictated or written by the Jesuits.

In the year 1652. William Birchly published a Treatise, called The Moderator:
or, Persecution for Religion condemned. In a Postscript to which, he says, that
he subscribed his name according to an Order of Parliament; yet is not ashamed
to say, that he had his Arguments from some of the Romish Priests; for a
Toleration of whom he pleads as passionately, as if a whole Consult of them had
penned the Pamphlet.

And a good Author says, he has been credibly informed, that a Jesuit of St.
Omers declared, that they were Twenty years in hammering out the Sect of the
Quakers. And whoever considers the Tenets of that Sect, will easily see whose
offspring they are. They refuse all Oaths; which serves the Jesuits to evade
the Tests of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: they despite the
Scriptures, as the Jesuits do: they contemn our Sacraments, especially the
Eucharist, as the Papists do; vilify the Ministers; and in matters of Doctrine
have a great analogy with the Papists. Dr. Oats his Narrative and
Depositions, Paragraph 34. speaks of the Jesuits and one Green, with eight
other Fifth Monarchy-men, who clubbed together for firing the City of London.

I have told you what White the Jesuit did, and that wretched Milton, Cromwell's
Secretary, who had been at Rome, and in his writings speaks of great kindness
received there; and holding correspondence with some Italians, could have no
other design in printing those books of Divorce, against Tithes and Clergymen,
and to justify the Regicides, but to bring us to Atheism first, and then to
Confusion. He was by very many suspected to be a Papist; and if Dr. Oats may
be believed, was a known frequenter of the Popish Club, though he were
Cromwell's Latin Secretary. The same Dr. tells us, that a Party of the Jesuits
at Putney, were the Projectors of our troubles, and the Kings ruin: That they
broke up the Treaty at Vxbridge: That a Popish Lord brought a Petition to the
Regicides, signed by above 500 Papists, promising, That on condition of a
Toleration, they would exclude the Family of the Stuarts from the Crown.

Having said so much to prove the agreement of Papists and Fanatics for the
destruction of the Government of Church and State, I shall add a few lines, to
vindicate the Chief Governors from those accusations of Popery which were
charged on them.

In the year 1658. ten years after the death of the Royal Martyr, Mr. Baxter
prints his Grotian Religion, and through Grotius's sides strikes at the heads
and members of the Church of England with the same blow. One reason of
condemning Grotius as a Papist, may be, the Character which he gives of such
men in his Book de Antichristo: Circumferamus oculos per omnem Historiam, quod
unquam seculum vidit tot subditorum in Principes bella sub religionis titulo?
and horum concitatores ubique reperiuntur Ministri Evangelici, ut quidam se
vocant: Quod genus hominum, in quae pericula etiam nunc optimos Civitatis
Amstelodamensis Magisiratus conjicerit, videat si cui libet, de Presbyterorum
in Reges audacia, librum Jacobi Britanniarum Regis cui nomen Donum Regium:
videbit eum ut erat magni judicii ea praedixisse, quae nunc cum dolor and
horrore conspicimus.
For the Grotian design, i. e. Popery, (says he) was carrying on in the Church
of England: and this was the cause of all our Wars and changes, p. 105. where
he thus talks of the Royal Martyr, beyond any thing that his barbarous Judges
could accuse him of.

How far the King was inclined to a reconciliation with the Church of Rome
(says Mr. Baxter) I only desire you to judge, First, by the Articles of the
Spanish and French Match sworn to. Secondly, by his Letter to the Pope written
in Spain. Thirdly, by his choice of Agents in Church and State. Fourthly, by
the residence of the Popes Nuntio here, and the College of the Jesuits, etc.
Fifthly, by the illegal Innovations in Worship so resolvedly gradatim
introduced. All which I speak, not with the least desire to persuade men that
he was a Papist, but only to show, that while he as a moderate Protestant, (i.
e. a Papist in Masquerade, as they are now termed) took hands with the Queen a
moderate Papist, the Grotian Design had great advantage in England, which he
himself boasted of, p. 106.

Of this indignity to that Religious Prince, the learned Bishop Bramhal, p.
617. of his Works, took notice, and vindicated him. Of which Mr. B. being
informed, he says. p. 100. of his Defense, that he printed the contrary in
times of Usurpation, and that the Informer could not prove it, and that Bishop
Bramhal was a Calumniator. The Book he refers to, was, (I suppose) dedicated to
Richard Cromwell, whom he did not call an Usurper, but one who piously,
prudently, and faithfully, to his immortal honor, exercised the Government,
1659. Where, p. 327. having accused the Now Episcopal party for following
Grotius, he says: As for the King himself, that was their Head, if any
conjecture that he was a flat Papist, I believe him not: but he was the head of
the Grotian Papists, and he himself boasted of it, (ubi supra.) Now if any
would know how far Grotius, and consequently the King was a Papist, he says, He
(i. e. Grotius) was a more arrant Papist than Cassander, (who dyed in that
Communion, and was one that owned the Council of Trent) and such I think are
flat Papists.

But if Mr. B. did not believe the King to be a flat Papist, then his iniquity
was the greater, to give so many (though frivolous) instances by way of proof,
that others might believe what Mr. B. did not. Did not Mr. B. know, that the
fear of introducing Popery was made a chief ground of the War against the King?
And may he not as well make it a ground of another War against the present
King, because he adheres to his Bishops, whom Mr. B. calls Popish Clergymen?
And he says, that the Parliament, whom they were bound to believe, made it
their great argument and advantage against the King, that he favored the
Papists: and on this supposition (says he) thousands came in to fight for
their Cause.

And they made one Article against the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he
endeavored to introduce Popery: whose life on that account they took away;
though he were indeed one of their greatest adversaries: which, as it appears
by the discovery of the Plot of the Jesuits to take away his life, mentioned in
the relation of Andreas ab Habernfield, and printed by Mr. Prynne; wherein,
because of his constancy to the Established Religion, from which he could not
be tempted by the offer of a Cardinals Cap made to him from the then Pope, by
Con his Nuncio, they plotted his death: so it will appear to be a gross
slander, by that which follows. And first, it shall not be denied, that his
promoting of decent Ceremonies, and some Executions on Seditious persons,
procured him that ill report among the Fanatics. But he refuted it
sufficiently, by declaring openly at the Council Table against the great resort
of Papists to Denmark-house; of which also he complained to the King with
passion, as a thing of dangerous consequence; and particularly against Sir Toby
Matthews and Walter Mountague, two active Papists mentioned in Habernfields
Discovery. And before that time, he published his Conference with Fisher the
Jesuit; one of the best discourses yet extant against them. After which time,
though he could not wipe off the aspersion among the Fanatics, yet he was
looked on by the Papists as their greatest enemy. He prevailed to banish both
Matthews and Mountague from the Court whereat the Queen showed some displeasure
against him: but knowing how able and faithful a Minister he was for the Kings
service, He reconciled the Queen to him again.

His Conference with Fisher was for the satisfaction of some persons of
Quality, on whom the Jesuits had practiced. Sir Edward Dee^ing, his professed
Adversary, says, That by ^ the Bishop had muzled the Jesuit, and struck the
Papist under the fifth Rib. In his Preface (...) King Charles, he says, God
forbid your Majesty should let the Laws and Discipline sleep, for fe^^ of the
name of Persecution, and suffer Mr. Fisher and his fellows to angle in all
parts of your Dominions for your Subjects. Let us have (...) dissolving of
Oaths of Allegiance, no depos^^^ of Kings, and blowing up of States: for (...)
their Religion were as good as they pretend, they cannot compass it by good
means, I am (...) they ought not to attempt it by bad: for if the^ will do evil
that good may come of it, the^ damnation is just. He complains there, tha^ the
Church was between two Factions as between two Milstones; wherefore he thought
it his du^^ to deliver her from both: for he tells the King, that no one thing
did make conscientious men to waver more in their minds, and to be drawn from
the sincerity of Religion professed in the Church of England, than the want of
uniform and decent Order; the Romanist being apt to say, the Houses of God
could not be suffered to lie so nastily, were the true Worship of God observed
in them; the external worship of God in his Church, being the great witness to
the world that our hearts stand right in that Service. And to deal clearly with
your Majesty, these thoughts, and no other, made me labor so much for decency,
and an orderly settlement of the external Worship of God. To this I add, that
the Archbishop did no other than what was practiced with good success upon the
Papists in Queen Elizabeth's days; of which I have taken notice before, to be
acknowledged by our present Dissenters.

This most Reverend Archbishop was not more averse from the Doctrine of the
Papists, than from any acquaintance or correspondence with them. Panzani and
Con, two of the Popes Nuncio's often endeavored some Conference with him; but
he still put them off, though some persons of Quality solicited it. He
suppressed Socinian and Popish Books especially that called An Introduction to
a devout life, written by Francis Sales Bishop of Geneva. And to omit many
other arguments, his Protestation at his death (of which hereafter) is enough
to satisfy all but Infidels.

Bishop Beadle, Anno 1633. certifyed Bishop Laud (then of London) of the
dangerous condition of Ireland, by the growth of Popery; and informed the Earl
of Strafford, who was newly made Lord Deputy, that the Pope had a greater power
in that Kingdom than the King; governing there by a Congregation de propaganda
fide, established not long before at Rome: That the Popes Clergy there, was
double in number to the Kings; and they were bound by Oath to maintain the
Popes power and greatness against all persons: That the Pope had erected a
College in Dublin, to affront the Kings College. One Harris, Dean of the New
College, printed a Treatise against Bishop Vshers Sermon at Wansteed: and
after the dissolving of the new Frieries in Dublin, they erected others in the
Country, where the people flocked in great multitudes to hear Mass, forgetting
the Principles of Religion: That a Synodical meeting of their Clergy had been
held in Drogheda, in which they decreed, That it was not lawful to take the
Oath of Allegiance; and therefore it was thought necessary to restrain them by
a standing Army. Whereupon the Lord Deputy was advised to summon a Parliament;
and so ordered his affairs, as to raise an Army of Twenty thousand men, which
was maintained mostly out of the Estates of the Papists; by which means he kept
the Irish in awe; and had he been continued there, that Hellish Massacre on the
English Protestants, which followed on the withdrawing of that Great man, might
in all probability have been prevented.

But these two Great men, the one of which made it his business to prevent
Rebellion in the State, the other to suppress Faction and Confusion in the
Church, were made the chief marks at which all the Plots and Darts, both of
Jesuits and Fanatics, were aimed; that by their fall, they might more easily
destroy the King, as it afterward happened: and notwithstanding their serious and
succesful endeavors to suppress Popery in Ireland, they are reputed and
accused for Papists in England; but the true reason was, the Earl of Strafford
and the Archbishop being two of the most faithful Ministers of State that the
King had, the Scots endeavor in the first place to take them out of the way.
For,

A Parliament being called on November. 3. 1640. the Scots, under pretense of
Religion, got a considerable Party in both Houses, to help on their design. To
which end, at their entrance into England, they made a Remonstrance, That their
just desires so necessary for the good of both Kingdoms, could find no access
to the ears of their gracious King, by reason of the powerful diversion of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Deputy of Ireland; who being strengthened
with a mighty Faction of Papists near the King, did rule in all matters both
Temporal and Ecclesiastical, making the necessity of their service to his
Majesty to appear, in being the only fit Instruments, under a pretext of
vindicating his Majesty's Honor, is oppress the Liberties of his free
Subjects, and the true reformed Religion. And this Remonstrance they seconded
with another Libel, called, The Intention of the Army: signifying to the People
of England, That they had no design to waste their Goods, or spoil their
Country, but only to petition his Majesty to call a Parliament, and to bring
the Archbishop and Deputy to condign punishment. At this time they set forth a
Book against the Archbishop, called Laudensium Autocatacrisis, endeavoring to
prove out of the Archbishop's Writings, that he designed to bring in
Superstition, Popery, and Arminianism. There comes also a Petition from some
Lords, complaining of the great increase of Popery, and of many inconveniences
drawn on the Kingdom by engaging against the Scots. This was signed by the
Earls of Essex, Hartford, Rutland, Bedford, Exeter, Warwick, Mulgrave, and
Bullingbrooke; the Lords Say, Mandevil, Brook, and Howard. And this was
seconded by another from London.

The day for the sitting of the Parliament being appointed on the third of
November, the Archbishop was advised that the Parliament in the 20 of Hen. 8.
which began in the fall of Cardinal Wolsey and the diminution of the power and
privileges of the Clergy, and ended in the dissolution of Religious houses,
was begun on the same day; and therefore he should move the King to respite
their sitting for a day or two. The event proved too sadly ominous: for this
begun with the fall of the Archbishop, the Rites and Privileges of the English
Clergy, Bishops, Deans and Chapters; and the Cathedrals left without any means
to repair them.

But there were other strange accidents observed by Dr. Heylen, in the Life of
the Archshop, p. 450. On Friday-night, Jan. 24. 1639. he dreamt that his Father
came to him, and asked him what he did there: and he asked his Father how long
he would stay there: who replied, He would stay till he had him along with him.
This Dream he noted in his Breviate. In December that year, the Boats that were
drawn on land near Lambeth, were by a violent tempest dashed against one another
and broken in pieces. And the tops of two Chimneys were blown down, and beat
through the Lead and Rafters on the Bed in which he was wont to lie; but the
roughness of the water kept him that night at his Chamber in White Hall. The
same night, at Croyden, one of the Pinacles fell from the Steeple, and beat
down the Lead and Roof of the Church twenty foot square. The same night, at the
Metropolitical Church in Canterbury, one of the Pinacles which carried a Vane
with the Archbishop's Arms upon it, was blown down, and carried a good distance
off; falling on the Roof of a Cloister, where the Arms of the Sea of Canterbury
were engraven in Stone, which by the fall of the Pinnacle were broken in pieces:
whereat some did conjecture, that he should not only fall himself, but the
Archiepiscopal Dignity should fall with him. But the Archbishop took most
notice of anotheer Accident on St. Simon and Jude's Eve, a week before the
sitting of the Parliament; when going into his upper Study where his Picture in
full length was wont to hang, he found it fallen on the ground, and lying flat
on its face.

On Saturday, May 9. 1640. a Paper was posted on the Exchange, animating the
Apprentices to sack his House at Lambeth: the Monday following, he therefore so
fortified his Palace, that though five hundred persons attempted it, they could
do nothing: but they broke open the Prisons in Southwark, and freed their
Comrades; for which actions one Bensteed a Leader of the Rabble was condemned
and executed.

The great cry was, That he endeavored to bring in Popery. Mr. Prynne says, he
was at least a Cassandrian Papist, and endeavored a reconciliation between us
and Rome. A Book written against him, called The English Pope, printed 1643.
tells us how far the King and Pope had agreed. The King (says he) required a
Dispensation from the Pope that the English Catholics might resort to the
Protestant Churches, and take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and that
the Popes Supremacy was to be changed into a Priority; and that marriage should
be permitted to the Priests, the Communion administered under both kinds, and
the Liturgy in the English Tongue. But though these Concessions were more than
the Pope would grant, yet another Libel says, There were general Propositions
made for this agreement; and that the Archbishop had made some Innovations in
order thereto, Popes Nuncio, p. 11. But what the Archbishop did, was not with a
respect to peace with Rome, but to the settling of the Church of England on the
first Principles of Reformation, and to make it more amiable even to the
Papists, whom he aimed to win over first by Conferences, and then by an
external Decency in the public Service; the Catholics being much offended at
the slovenly keeping of our Churches, and the irreverence of the People at
their Devotion. And though some accounted the Archbishop's actions in renewing
ancient Rites to give advantage to Popery, yet others more knowing said, that
it would tend to the honor and advantage of the Church of England: for Dr.
Heylin reports, that he heard from a person of known Nobility, that being with
a Father of the English College at Rome, one of the Novices told him with
great joy, that the English were about to set up Altars, and officiate in
Copes, to adorn their Churches, and paint their Windows; and were returning to
the Church of Rome. To whom the Father replied with some indignation, That he
talked like an ignorant Novice, and that these proceedings rather tended to the
ruin than advancement of the Catholic Cause, because the Church of England
coming nearer to the ancient Vsages, the Catholics there would be sooner drawn
off from them, than any of that Nation would fall off to Rome.

Some things are objected against him in relation to the Doctrine and Devotion
of the Church: as, That the Church of Rome was held to be a true Church: That
the Pope has a primacy over other Bishops: That it appertains to him to call
General Councils: That Altars might be erected: That he was not willing the
Pope should be called Antichrist; or that every raw Preacher should trouble his
people with Popish Controversies. Some of which were false Insinuations, and
others vain and frivolous. In the Liturgies of Henry the 8th, and Edward the
6th, was this Expression: From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable Enormities, Good Lord, etc. Which words were expunged in the first
of Queen Elizabeth, lest they should affright the Catholics from coming to our
Churches: on which ground the Archbishop finding in a Book of Prayer for the
fifth of November (not confirmed by Law) these passages: Root out the
Babylonish and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, etc.
And again, Cut off those workers of iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion, and
whose Faith is Faction: He made these small alterations. In the first, thus:
Root out the Babylonish and Antichristian Sect [of them] which say, etc. In the
second, thus: Cut off those workers of iniquity who turn Religion into
Rebellion, etc. Against which, some being conscious it was intended against
them, made Objections. Which the Archbishop did, only to avoid the giving of
causeless offenses to the Romish Party. Which doubtless he endeavored with all
his skill to suppress. And besides his learned Disputations against them, he
procured a Canon to be passed in the Convocation, For suppressing the further
growth of Popery, and reducing Papists to Church: and issued very strict and
effectual Orders for the execution thereof. But it was the method, whether of
the Jesuits, or Puritans, or both, to defame them most for Papists, who acted
most successfully against them; as did this Bishop, and Bishop Bramhall.

A passage or two in the Archbishop's Speech at his death, may satisfy all
sober Readers. I pray God (says he) the clamours of venient Romani (of which I
have given no cause) help not to bring them in. Concerning the King. I shall be
bold to say, He has been much traduced for bringing in of Popery: but on my
Conscience (of which I shall give God a very present account) I know him to be
as free from this charge as any man living: and I hold him to be as sound a
Protestant (according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this
Kingdom; and that he will venture his life as far and as freely for it: And I
think I do or should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for
it, as fully as any man in England. For my self, I was born and baptized in the
Church of England, and the Religion by Law established: in that I have ever
since lived, and in that I come now to die. This is no time to dissemble with
God, least of all in matters of Religion; and therefore I desire it may be
remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant Religion established in
England, and in that I come now to die. What clamours and slanders I have
endured for laboring a Uniformity in the external Service of God, according to
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, all men know, and I have abundantly
felt.

We have observed the Principles of Jesuits and Fanatics, wherein they agree,
and have jointly acted against the Government in Church and State, for the
ruin of both; and how, like Janus his head, they did not only look backward,
to the Justification of the Murder of the old King, but forward, to prevent
the Restoration of his present Majesty. And hitherto their Practices have been
according. It remains now that we consider, what these Factions have practiced
to hinder that happy Restoration, by Gods miraculous providence, and the wise
conduct of the noble General Monk, now established. What the Popish Party did
to hinder him from coming to his Fathers Throne, has been partly discovered
already; I shall now show what the Fanatics did. And will begin with the
Scots, who called him home first, to vex and torment him with their unrighteous
dealings, and temptations between hopes and fears, and affronted him with
unsufferable Reproaches for the sins of his Father and Grandfather, as well as
his own: insomuch that he often attempted to leave them, fearing, as it came to
pass, that they would at last betray him.

What provocations he met with in private, may be guessed at by their public
actions The Thursday before the Coronation, was se^ apart as a Solemn day of
Humiliation for the sins of the Royal Family; and Robert Douglas in the
Coronation-Sermon told the King, That his Grandfather King James remembered not
the kindness of them who had held the Crown upon his head; yea, he persecuted
faithful Ministers; he never rested till he had undone Presbyterial Government
and Kirk-Assemblies, setting up Bishops, and bringing in Ceremonies, and laid
the foundation whereon his Son our late King di^ build much mischief in
Religion all the days of his life, p. 73. And p. 52. he tells our Sovereign to
his face, That a King abusing his power to the overthrow of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, which are the Fundamentals of that Covenant, may be controuled and
opposed: and if he set himself to overthrow all these by Arms, they who have
the power, as the Estates of the Land, may and ought to resist by Arms; because
he does by that opposition break the very Bonds, and overthrow the Essentials
of this Contract and Covenant. This may serve (says he) to justify the
proceedings of this Kingdom against the late King, who in a hostile way set
himself to overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties. Thus was the
Scottish Crown lined with Thorns; and the King had Gall and Vinegar given him to
drink, instead of the Royal Unction; of which he says, p. 34. The Bishops
behoved to perform this Right, and the King behoved to be sworn to them: but
now, by the blessing of God, Popery and Prelacy are removed, let the anointing
of Kings with Oil go to the door with them, and let them never come in again.
So that although the Scots Army were overthrown at Worcester, yet his Majesty
escaping with safety and liberty (by a wonderful Providence) he was (as the
event now shows) a very great Gainer by that Loss.

And as to his Majesty's return into England, it is very evident that they had
not forgotten their old Doctrine of binding their Kings in Chains; and
therefore they endeavored to lay such Conditions and Fetters on the King, as
neither his Father could, nor He would be able to bear. As soon as ever the
General's intent to bring home the King was known, there were frequent and
zealous Applications made, That the godly Ministers of the Land might be
provided for, and the King might be a Covenanting King. And he was dehorted
from calling him home, by one Mr. Baxter, Because (as he said) Profaneness was
so inseparable from the Royal Party, that if ever the King returned, the power
of Godliness would be lost.

The same person being admitted to preach before that remainder of the House of
Commons when they were consulting to call home the King, he delivered not one
word that might promote that Noble Design, but many things that might hinder,
or clog it with very dishonorable terms. He intimates the Supreme Power to be
still in the two Houses, according to his Holy Commonwealth's Maxims. He says
indeed, That Romans 13. is part of the Rule of his Religion; but adds, There has
unhappily been a difference amongst us which is the Higher Power: but he was
fully of the mind as he had formerly declared, That it was in the two Houses:
and therefore he adds, It was not the intent of St. Peter or St. Paul to
determine whether the Emperor or the Senate were Supreme.

In the same Humiliation-Sermon, he magnifies the Loyalty of the Presbyterians;
adjures the Commons to oppose Episcopacy (though the King in his Message
commended it to be as ancient as the Monarchy in this Island) and under the
titles of sound Doctrine and Church Government, pleads for Presbytery; and that
the Church-Revenues might be settled on them. p. 46. saying, Give first to God
the things that are Gods. For them he pleads, as being the godly, peaceable,
and prudent people of the Land, in opposition to Profaness. And to insinuate
new fears and jealousies, cries out, O what happy times did we once see! He did
not mean the peaceable time of King Charles the First; those were, in his
account, days of Profaness and Persecution: He must mean either under the Long
Parliament, or some other of the Revolutions of Government, when he was a
Soldier, or enjoyed a Sequestration, and Plunder, etc. And yet this man
boasts that the King was voted home the next day after that Sermon of his; as
if that had not been done, if he had not preached: whereas he seems to me to be
of the same mind that he was of a year before, when he declared, p. 486. of
Holy Com. That having often searched into his heart whether he did lawfully
engage in the (first) War or not, and encouraged so many thousands, he could
not see that he was mistaken in the main Cause; nor dares he repent of it, nor
forbear doing the same, if it were to do again, in the same state of things.

There is one mysterious transaction of the Fanatic Party, whereby they
endeavored to impose upon the King before his return: they had (it seems)
drawn up some Heads in favor of Presbytery, and to the prejudice of the
Episcopal Government; which they desired the King to publish in a Declaration:
and the King, in compliance with the exigency of the times, and the necessity
of his own affairs, did publish in a Declaration from Breda; but with a
Reservation expressed therein, That he would leave the particulars therein
mentioned to be considered and established by a free Parliament. To this
Declaration (says Mr. Baxter, p. 87. of part 2. of his third Plea) they would
have conformed, on this Supposition, that the Species of Prelacy was altered by
it. And Mr. B. foreseeing that the Episcopal Party would be grieved by it,
makes this Objection (against those that extorted that Declaration) in the name
of the Bishops.

Object. You did but obtrude on us your own Opinions: for when you had drawn up
most of those words, his Majesty was forced to seem for the present to grant
them to you.

To this Mr. B. answers: If we did offer such things (which is a confession)
let the world judge what we sought by them (viz. by your own confession, to
change the Species of Episcopal Government).

2. He says, There is most of that about rural Deans put in, I suppose by the
Bishops consent, after it went FROM US.

So that it is evident, that they did what they could to bring the King under
their Chains, before he came to his Crown; and had not a superior power, by
the conduct of the ever-renowned General, otherwise determined, he should have
been a King and no King to this day. But in a free and full Parliament, the
Ancient Government was established in its full splendor, to the great regret
of these unpeaceable men.

And whereas his Majesty desired them to read so much of the Common Prayer as
they had no just exceptions against, we heard not of any compliance to that
just desire, though they confessed they could use the greatest part of it. But
instead thereof, they clamor for a Reformation of Doctrie, Discipline, and
Worship; and petition his Majesty that some Divines of both Parties might be
employed to compile such a new Form as they there described; or at least to
revise and reform the old, etc. The King denies the first part (viz.) of making
a new Liturgy, having in his Declaration of October. 5. expressed his esteem of
the Old; but grants the second, and issues out his Commission to that end,
impowering them to compare it with the most ancient Liturgies, and to make such
reasonable and necessary alterations and amendments as should be thought fit,
avoiding all unnecessary abbreviations of the Forms wherewith the people were
acquainted.

But instead of this, they draw up another Liturgy, or rather Directory, which
was penned by Mr. Baxter (as he says) in eight days; and against the consent of
the greatest part, offers that, in opposition to the established Liturgy. And
in a threatening Petition for Peace, p. 5. he thus speaks: Take heed how you
drive men by penalties on that which they judge does tend to their damnation.
And p 14. The denial of their desires would renew all our troubles. And they
also desire the King to leave out of his Declaration these words: We do not in
our judgments believe the practice of those particular Ceremonies we except
against to be in it self unlawful, ( i. e. we do account them sinful.) And in
the close of the second Paper, they tell the King, if he grant those favors,
It would revive their hearts to pray for his prosperity: but (p. 12.) should we
lose the opportunity of our desired Reconciliation, it astonisheth us to
foresee what doleful effects our Divisions would produce; which we will not
mention in particular, lest our words should be misunderstood.

Mr. Baxter made a Prognostication, dated 1661. When by the Kings Commission
(says he) we in vain treated for Concord, to tell the Bishops what they are,
and what they must expect: That they are worldly, proud, covetous, domineering,
malignant, and lazy; the plague of the world, troublers of Princes, and
dividers of Churches, p. 32. and p. 9. 12, 13. and animates the people to
revile, p. 14. 20. 22. and, which is notorious, p. 28. n. 105. That where
PAPISTS OR HERETICS are shut out by Law, they will secretly contribute the
utmost of their endeavors to make the sufferings of dissenting Protestants as
grievous as possibly they can; that in despite of them, their own necessities
may compel them to cry out for Liberty, till they procured a common Toleration
for all, and opened the door for Papists and Heretics, as well as for
themselves. And he has lived to make good his Prognostic, like Nostredamus
his Son, who having prophesied that on such a day the City should be burnt, he
set it on fire himself.

As to the Toleration, by which Papists were indulged as well as other
Dissenters, it is evident that it was obtained by the mutual endeavors of both
Parties. Coleman confesses it in behalf of the Papists, who thereby intended
the ruin of our Church, to which they thought it a most probable means. And
for the other Dissenters, Mr. Humfrys in his peaceable Design, p. 71. speaks,
in the name of his Brethren, to this effect: What shall we say then to the
Papist? Answ. The Papist in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and the
conscientious and peaceable among them must be held in the same predicament
with those among our selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer.
And, p. 72. As for the common Papist who lives innocently in his way, he is to
us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration. And I (says
Mr. Baxter) so little fear the noise of the censorious, that even now while the
Plot does render them most odious, say freely, 1. That I would have Papists
used like men. 2. I would have no man put to death for being a Priest. 3. I
would have no Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, or any Law compel them to our
Communion and Sacraments, p. 19. of second Defense. And p. 235. of his first
Plea, he says, It is but reasonable, if on such necessity ( i. e. the Penalties
for Nonconformity) they should accept of favor from any Papist that should
save them, etc. So that they are resolved to live in compliance with the
Papists, rather than in conformity with the established Church. And here it
appears, whether the Conformist or Nonconformist is the greater Friend to
Popery.

Dr. Stillingfleet's Defense, penned by an ingenious person, says, p. 68. I
will tell Mr. B. a Secret which I have heard, but hope he will not put me to
prove it: That the Parliament made good Laws; the Papist out of a pretended
reverence to tender Consciences, hindered the execution of them; and some
leading Fanatics had a private encouragement (to say no more) to set up a
mighty cry of Persecution, to cast all the odium on a persecuting Church, and
Diocesan Canoneers.

Dr. Owen takes this hint. Some have reported (says he) that some of the
Nonconformists do or have received money from the Papists to act their affairs,
and promote their interests; which he calls a putrid Calumny, etc. and avows,
That never any person in Authority, Dignity, or Power in the Nation, or that
had any relation to pullick affairs, nor any from them, Papist or Protestant,
did once speak one word to him, or advise with him about any Indulgence or
Toleration to be granted to the Papists. He says not, That he never received
any Moneys or Message to promote a general Toleration; which, he thinking
himself particularly reflected on, might have done in few words. And my Author
desires Dr. O. to resolve him why a Fast was appointed by a certain Independent
Pastor at that time, on the fifth of November, which (as he notes) is no Popish
Festival. Mr. Hunt (one of their Confederates) says, It is well known several
of them ( i. e. the Nonconformists) were in Pension to the D. And no men have
been better received of the D. than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. etc.
Ringleaders of the Separation. And p. 98. Consider how the Church of England is
used, which is truly the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion.

If one Party, says Mr. Baxter, (viz. the Authority of the Nation) would bring
them to such a pass, that they must be hanged, imprisoned, ruined, or worse,
(as if they were in the hands of Canibals) unless the favor of the Papists
deliver them; and the other Party ( viz. the Nonconformists) had rather be
saved by the Papists, than be hanged or ruined by Protestants; they ought not
to be suspected of Popery. This is not only to open a door to let the Papists
in, but upon mere Fears and Jealousies to flee out to them.

Now judge who is a greater friend to Popery; the old Protestants, who have
made Law to keep it out; or the Dissenters, who would destroy those Laws to let
it in. And that their obstinate separation from the Church Communion is an
effectual means thereunto, I shall give the judgment of Mr. Phil. Nigh, a great
Covenanter, who, not long before his death, foreseeing the mischievous
consequence of those extravagant heats the people were running into, wrote a
Discourse on purpose to prove it lawful to hear the conforming Ministers; and
answers all the common Objections against it; and wonders how the different
Parties came to be so agreed, in thinking it unlawful to hear us preach. But he
says he is persuaded, it is one constant design of Satan, in the variety of
ways of Religion he has set on foot by Jesuits among us: Let us therefore be
more aware of whatsoever tends that way. So that Mr. Nigh plainly acknowledges
that the Jesuits were very busy among them; and that they and the Devil joined
together in setting them at the greatest distance possible from the Church of
England; and that those who would countermine the Devil and the Jesuits, must
avoid whatever tends to that height of Separation.

Mr. Baxter seemed to be of the same judgment, p. 17. of his Preface to the
Defense of the Cure of Church-divisions, where he says, Our Divisions gratify
the Papists, and greatly hazard the Protestant Religion more than most of you
seem to believe or regard. And had Mr. B. regarded as he ought, he would not
have hardened the People in that Separation, as he has since done. For he says
again, That among the many inconveniences of Separation, this is one, that
Popery will get by it so great advantage, as may hazard us all; and we may lose
that which the several Parties do contend about. Yet, as you have heard, these
men joined interest with the Papists to procure this mischievous Toleration.
Coleman at his Trial owned that he was of opinion, That Popery might come in,
if liberty of Conscience had been granted. And the Author of the two
Conferences between Le Chese and the four Jesuits, owns that the Declaration of
Indulgence was procured by help of the Papists, who were included in it; but
says, The Presbyterians presently suspected the kindness, and like wise men
closed with the Conformists; when on the contrary, they wrote in defense of it,
and so increased the Schism, that we feel the effects of it to this day. And I
my self have observed, how much a Popish Lord of these Western parts, was
caressed by the Dissenters in these parts, upon the Indulgence; and how kind he
was to them.

One thing more I cannot o^^^t in Mr. B's Prognostic, p. 200. speaking to the
Bishops and Clergy, he says, It may be your great Patrons may die, or FALL, or
forsake you; and then your hearts are broken: it may be death may enter into
your Families, and make you think what bloud-thirstiness does tend to. Now what
manner of Fall and Death he means, he explains, p. 204. One Felton may end the
great Duke of Buckingham, p. 205. Or they may meet with such Executioners as
Cardinal Beton. Nor was Mr. Baxter a false Prophet, though perhaps a bloody one
in this Prognostic; witness that horrid Assassination of the Archbishop of St.
Andrews, one of his Majesty's Privy Counselors, May 3. 1679; who coming from
Edinburg in his Coach with one Daughter, was assaulted by twelve men well
armed. The Coachman perceiving it, drove as fast as six good horses could run.
But they pursued, shooting into the Coach. And one Balfour rid up to the
Postilion, wounded him with a Sword on his face, shot one of the forehorses,
hamstring'd another, and so stopped the Coach; and the rest of the Murderers
being come up, one of them fired a Pistol so near his breast, that his Daughter
rubbed off the burning from his Gown. Then calling him Dog, Villain, Apostate,
and Persecutor of the Godly, Decrier of Jesus Christ and his Church, bid him
come out of his Coach to receive what he deserved for his wickedness against
the Kirk of Scotland. Upon which his Daughter got out of the Coach, and fell on
her knees, begging her Fathers life: but they regarding not her Prayers or
Tears, threw her on the ground, trampling on her, and wounding her: which her
tenderhearted Father seeing, after many threatenings came meekly out of the
Coach, and calmly said to them, I know not that I ever injured any of you; or
if I did, I am ready to make you reparation; and therefore I beseech you to
spare my life, and I promise I will never pursue you for this violence. And I
pray you consider, before you bring the guilt of innocent blood upon your
selves. This made them stand a while, and one of them relenting, cried, Spare
these gray hairs; but the rest replied, He must die, he must die: and then
repeating their reproachful words, said, Thou shall now receive the reward of
thy Apostasy, and Enmity to the people of God. At which the Archbishop begged a
little time to pray, telling them he would pray for them: but they scornfully
told him, They cared not for his Prayers, being sure that God would not hear so
base a Dog as he was. Then looking steadfastly on one of the Assassines whom he
seemed to know, he kneeled before him, saying, Sir, you are a Gentleman, and I
must beg my last favor from you: Since you are resolved that I must die, have
pity on my poor Child, and spare her life; and for this, Sir, give me your
hand. And stretching out his hand, he had for a return a very great blow with a
Shable, which almost cut off his hand. And the Villain redoubling his stroke,
gave him another violent wound on the lest eye, which cut him two inches above
it, and one below it. This stroke knocked him down: but getting on his knees
again, he said, Gentlemen, it is now enough, you have done your work: and
holding up his hands to Heaven as well as he could, he fervently cried out,
Lord Jesus, have mercy on my Soul, and receive my Spirit. While he was in this
posture of Devotion, they wounded him in his hands which he held up to Heaven,
and in other parts of his body, till in a kind of composure he laid down his
head on his arm, saying, God forgive you, and I forgive you all. These were his
last words: after which, they gave him about sixteen wounds in his head, so
that it seemed to be but one wound; and pieces of his Skull and Brains were
found on the ground. And having left him, some fancied that they heard him
groan; which made them go back, and to make sure work, stirred his Brains with
the points of their Swords. Then they made his Servants swear not to discover
them; and bad them in derision take up their Priest; and rode back to Magus.
And one of them, John Balfour of Kinlock, passing by that Town, was heard to
say, that Now Judas was killed.

These things were testified before the Privy Council by the Oaths of his
Daughter and Servants; and the Wounds given him were particularly mentioned in
a Certificate of a Doctor of Physic and three Surgeons, who by Order of the
Council did view and embalm his body. The Assassines were notorious Fanatics,
Frequenters of Field-Conventicles, and Followers of Mr. Welsh and other
traitorous and rebellious Preachers. Nine of the Actors were discovered by
their names. The Depositions of the Witnesses against them lie on record, to
satisfy all men particularly. One James Anderson, Farmour, says, that George
Balfour came to his Brothers house after the Murder, at Gilston, and told him
it was done; and that the rest of the Murderers waited for him on Tace's
Moore; and that he returning to them, they possessed themselves of a Barn at
Toukits about three in the afternoon, and parted thence about seven; when all
of them spoke with the said Anderson, who knew them all particularly, and thus
named them; John Balfour of Kinlock, David Hacston of Rathillet, George Balfour
of Gilston, James Russel of Kingscattle, Robert Dingwall a Farmer's Son in
Cadham, Andrew Guillan a Weaver in Balmerinock, Alexander Henderson, and Andrew
Henderson Son of Sir John Henderson in Kilbrackmont, George Flemming Son to
George Flemming in Balbathy.

This discovery being made, the late Rebellion on the 29th of May broke out;
which forced the Privy Council to desist from the pursuit of the Murderers,
that they might suppress that Insurrection; which would have shaken the
Government, if the Rebels had got the first Victory, or kept their ground. In
which Army the Murderers sheltred themselves with the Conventiclers, who
called themselves the Covenanting Army: which being beaten, the Murderers fled
the Kingdom: but while the Army lay at Glascow, one of the Balfours openly
boasted of the Murder as a glorious fact; and said, holding up his Arm, This
hand helped to kill the Fox. And five of their Confederates chose to die and
hang in Chains on the place, rather than to confess the sinfulness of the
Action, or acknowledge it to be a Murder or a Sin.

One Mitchel, who attempted the Murder of this Archbishop eleven years before,
was applauded for it by some Covenanters. My Author quotes the Principles on
which these Murderers acted. Goodman, p. 27. of Popery and Tyranny, says, That
all men are bound to see the Laws of God kept, and to suppress and resist
Idolatry by force: nor is it sufficient for Subjects not to obey the wicked
commands of Princes, but they must resist them, and deliver the children of God
out of the hands of their enemies, as we would deliver a Sheep in danger to be
devoured by a Wolf: and if the Magistrate shall refuse to put Mass-mongers and
false Preachers to death, the people in seeing it performed show that zeal of
God which was commended in Phinees.

Gilby says, That Kings, Princes, and Governors have their Authority from the
People, and on occasion the People may take it away again, as men may revoke
their Proxies. It is lawful (says he) to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants. The
Subjects did kill the Queens Highness Athaliah; John killed the Queens Majesty
Jezabel; Elias, being no Magistrate, killed the Queens Majesty's Chaplains,
Baal 's Priests.

Knox in his Debate with Lithinton, ( Hist. of Reformat. p. 390.) justifies the
killing of Tyrannical Princes, and men in public places, by private persons,
from the Example of Phinees, who, he says, was a private person, whose fact was
approved and rewarded; and affirms that it ought to be imitated by those who
prefer the true Worship and Glory of God, to the affection of fleshly and
wicked Princes: and says, that this Example approved by God, stands instead of
a Command: for as God is immutable, so he cannot condemn that which he has
approved in his Servants before us.

The Book called Naphtali, justifies the Rebellion at Pentland-Hills, Anno
1666, from the same Example, ascribing it to the Holy Spirit of God; asserting,
that the Rebels were no more Traitors, than Phinees was a Murderer; being led
by the same Spirit, and had as good warrant, p. 21, etc. The same Doctrine as
defended by a Book called Jus populi vindicatum, chapter 20. p. 409, etc. On this
Principle Mr. Mitchel attempted to murder the Archbishop, Anno 1668. and did
mortally wound the Bishop of Orkney; for which he was executed: (See Ravilliack
Redivivus:) but died impenitently, believing he was led to this heroical act by
the Spirit of God.

These and such Books, are used by the Field-Conventiclers more than the
Practice of Piety. One of them being taken and searched, had Naphtali in one
Pocket, and a Pistol charged with two Bullets in the other; i. e. (as a
Gentleman said) The Doctrine for one hand, and the Application for the other.
Many other Pamphlets, such as was the Apology, and Apologetical Narration, The
poor man's Cup, The History of the Indulgence, were printed in Scotland; and
many to the like purpose in England, under the Titles of Pleas for Peace, the
Celeusma, etc. defaming the Bishops, as Apostate perjured Prelates, Traitors to
Christ, Enemies to his People, Thorns and Thistles, bloody Persecutors, Popish
Clergymen, etc. to prepare the people to another Rebellion, and
Assassinations.

It would be too large to repeat the Tumults, Wars, and malicious Murders
committed in Scotland by the Conventiclers upon such as according to the Laws
sought to suppress them; and how they justified them all in several Pamphlets,
which are in the hand of almost all that can read them. How obstinately they
died, justifying themselves in those horrid Actions: choosing rather to die,
than confess the sinfulness of them, and to beg pardon, or to pray for the
King, and promise obedience. Mitchel at his death said, That he laid down his
life willingly, in opposition to the perfidious Prelates, and in testimony of
the Cause of Christ; and in his Speech, says, Blessed are all they that take
the proud Prelates and dash their brains against the stones. And yet we have
had some at home, who have not only pitied these men, but promoted their
Practices there, and frequently attempted the same in England.

Since his Majesty's return, who can but wonder at the Enthusiastic madness of
Venner and the Fifth-monarchy-men, who with less than half an hundred of men,
attempted the whole City of London! And the Plot in December 1662, to cut off
Root and Branch, King. Queen, Duke, Bishops, and Gentry, that none of them
might run beyond Sea; for which Tongue, Philips, Stubbs, Hind, Sallers, and
Gibbs, were executed at Tyburn: which Plot was to be carried on upon the fear
and jealousy of a Popish Massacre. And seditious Letters were dispersed to
that purpose; a copy of which was read in the Court: and the
Fifth-monarchy-men, Quakers, Anabaptists, and all sorts of Fanatics were
invited to join in the Plot.

The next year, March 21. 1663. another Plot was discovered in the North, of
which the King says in his Speech, That it was of a large extent, and very near
execution, had he not by Gods goodness come to the knowledge of the principal
Contrivers, and secured them from executing their intended mischief.

In the year 1666. there was another Plot to murder his Majesty, and overthrow
the Government; to kill the General, surprise the Tower, fire the City; and a
Junto settled in London, and Money provided to carry on this design: for which
Rathbone, Sanders, Tucker, Flint, Evans, Miles, Westcot, and Coals, were
executed.

And whether such bloody practices as these have not been encouraged by those
Principles which the Jesuits and Fanatics, especially Mr. White and Mr. Baxter
have published in print, is so evident, that it can admit of no dispute or
contradiction; especially if it be considered of what a cruel disposition that
man who has published so many Pleas for Peace (but such a Peace as the
Historian speaks of; Desolationem volunt, and Pacem vocant, cannot be had but
by the ruin of Church and State) was, who kept the Field against the King from
the beginning of the Wars, till he became a Prisoner, as has been collected
out of his own boasting Confessions, in a little Tract called The second part
of the History of Separation; to which I shall add the following Relation.

Mr. Vernon in his Life of Dr. Heylin (Preface ad finem:) Mr. Baxter (says he)
may be pleased to call to mind what was done to old Major Jennings in the last
War, in the Fight that was between Linsel and Longford in Salop; where the
Kings Party being worsted, the Major was stripped almost naked, and left for dead
in the Field: but Mr. Baxter and one Lieutenant Hurdman walking among the
wounded and dead bodies, perceived some life left in the Major; and Hurdman run
him through the body in cold blood, Mr. Baxter all the while looking on, and
taking off with his own hand the Kings Picture from about his neck; telling
him, as he was swimming in his Gore, that he was a Popish Rogue, and that was
his Crucifix: which Picture was kept by Mr. Baxter for many years, till it was
got from him, but not without much difficulty, by one Mr. Summerfield, who then
lived with Sir Tho. Rous, and generously restored it to the poor man, now alive
at Wiche near Parshore in Worcestershire, although at the Fight supposed to be
dead, being, after the wounds given him, dragged up and down the Field by the
merciless Soldiers; Mr. Baxter approving of the inhumanity, by feeding his
eyes with so bloody and barbarous a Spectacle. For the truth of which, we have
this Subscription:

I Thomas Jennings subscribe to the truth of this Narrative abovementioned,
and have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, the second day of March 1681/2.

Signed and sealed in the presence of John Clerk Minister of Wiche, Tho. Dark.

But to return. That which I desire the Reader chiefly to observe, is, that all
the designs of the Dissenting Parties ever since Q. Elizabeth's time, have
been ushered in with Remonstances and Intelligences of Popish Plots, and
Massacres, and the change of our Religion, and loss of Liberties. This is the
common Prologue to all their intended Tragedies; as in the Plot of Tongue and his
Confederates, Sir Jo. Maynard observed, About five thousand Letters were to be
dispersed through the Nation. to possess the people that the Papists would
about that time massacre the Protestants; which was done (says he) to raise a
fear and discontent in the Nation, to induce them to join in the design, which
was to kill the King, and alter the Government. The Letter then read in Court,
was to this effect.

SIR,
OVt of the respect which I bear to you in particular, and to the Protestant
party in general, I give you notice of this passage. About a fortnight since a
woman, which you must be ignorant where, who had it from a correspondent of the
Papists, that they intend to make use of their Army, (which all the world sees
they have provided) against All-Hallow's Eve next. It was thought good
therefore, in as prudent a way as may be, to give notice to our friends in
remote parts, that they may do what Piety to God, Loyalty to their Prince, Love
to their Country, and self-preservation should direct them. Sir, I call the
Eternal God to witness, that it is not to trepan, to put a trick upon you, but a
sober truth, and also communicated to a Justice of Peace, and by him to the
Privy Council, etc.


Another Intrigue of the two Factions, was to effect the dissolution of the
late long Parliament; of whose Loyalty and love to the Church, the King had
such signal proofs, that he kept them between fourteen and fifteen years
together, notwithstanding many attempts to have them dissolved. They found all
things in confusion, and met with great difficulties and opposition; the
Revenues of the Crown were exhausted, the Church was razed to the very
foundations, and the Three Kingdoms turned into that which the Factions called
a Commonwealth, but indeed was a Common woe: but by their Conduct, the Kings
Revenues were increased to such a competency as might support the Royal Crown
and dignity, and freed Him from that precarious and necessitous condition which
was the occasion of his Royal Fathers ruin: the Church also was by good and
wholesome Laws so well established for holiness and beauty too, as that it was
once more the envy of the Factions. The Laws made for conformity to the Public
Worship were so full, that there needed nothing but a due execution of them, to
destroy the Separation. And as to Popery, the old Laws were not only revived,
but a new Test contrived, to discover and disable those of that Persuasion from
doing mischief. There was a Bill prepared by the House of Lords for securing
the Protestant Religion as it was then established, especially against Popery;
which was so contrived by a select Committee of the most Religious and Loyal
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that the Popish Party said, If that past into an
Act, they must expect fire and faggot. These things exasperated both Parties.

The Earl of Shaftsbury, who had been of all parties, but never true to the
interest of any, had serew'd himself into the quality of a Chief Minister of
State; but not content therewith, he aspired to ingross the whole conduct of
Affairs both at home and abroad; which the King and his Royal Brother not
permitting, he became an enemy to both, and made it his business to perplex and
embroil the affairs of the Three Nations. And the better to effect it, made
himself the Head of the Fanatic Party; who thinking themselves oppressed for
want of liberty to ruin themselves and others, and finding no hopes of such a
liberty from that Parliament, used all possible arts to bring it into contempt,
in order to its dissolution; being confident, that if that could be effected,
they should be able to make such a choice of Parliament Men against another
Session, as would espouse their interest. And indeed they were not deceived:
for in the succeeding Parliaments, they had retrieved the Good old Cause, if
the great prudence of His Majesty, and the Religious Loyalty of the House of
Peers, had not prevented it.

And herein they might be assured of the mutual assistance of the Popish party,
who had conceived as great a prejudice against this Parliament, as the other;
and whose hopes were grounded on our Divisions which they also, in conjunction
with the Fanatics, thought would most probably be effected, by the new
Election of Parliament Men. Coleman is made chief Agent of the Popish party;
upon whom though Shaftsbury looked asquint, yet they both acted the same thing,
(viz.) the dissolution of the Parliament. Some said they were a company of
young raw Statesmen, that granted whatever the King desired, without any
deliberation. To this the King answered, that if they were young and beardless
now, he would keep them till their beards were grown, and they had got more
experience. Then comes forth in print a Narrator, which tells the people, that
the House of Commons are a company of indigent and outlawed persons, The
Court-Favourites, or the Dukes Creatures, and Pensioners to the King of France;
and as such, the Names of the most Loyal Members were posted up in the City,
and published in the Country, to render them odious, and incapable of another
Election. The Bishops also are reviled, as in 41, as being Popishly affected.

At length, the King having, for reasons best known to himself, Prorogued this
Parliament for fifteen Months, being to meet again on the fifteenth of
February, 1675. they were no sooner met, but the Earl of Shaftsbury had got a
small Party in the House of Lords to question the legality of their sitting as
a Parliament. And first, the Duke of Buckingham insists, 4 Edw. 3. c. 14. and
36 Edw. 3. o. 10.
that there being diverse Acts of Parliament is force for Annual Parliaments,
this Prorogation for fifteen Months, made those Acts impracticable, and so in
effect the Parliament was dissolved. This Motion and Argument was followed by
the Earls of Shaftsbury, Salisbury, and the Lord Wharton; but so ill resented
by the House of Lords, that they were all four sent to the Tower. Yet the
dispute ended not here; for several Pamphlets are written and dispersed, to
persuade the people that the Parliament was actually dissolved, and they were
now only a Convertion, and no Parliament; and that no Taxt^ imposed by them,
ought to be paid, nor any of their Orders obligatory. One Pamphlet ^^
entitled, The Long Parliament dissolved Another called, A seasonable Question,
and useful Answer. The Question is put, in a Letter from a person pretending to
be chosen ^^ fit in that Parliament, to a Bencher, desiring to be resolved
before he took his Journey, Whether the Parliament were not dissolved (...) the
Prorogation of fifteen Months: which the Bencher resolved in the Affirmative.
But the artifice was quite ruined, by the Submission of the Lords in the Tower,
before they could obtain their liberty. But both this and the other Faction
were so restless, that they pursued their designs till they brought them to the
desired end, the dissolution of that Loyal Parliament.

During this interval of Parliaments, the two Factions are very industrious to
provide ^or the choice of such men as were known enemies to the Church and
Government established; and several such were chosen, who had been actually
engaged against the King in the ^ate Wars, or were the Children and next
relations of such. And in the next Parliament, the ^ld leaven began to ferment;
the methods of Sedition in 41 are renewed, fears and jealousies of Popery and
Arbitrary Government a^muse the whole Nation; Supplies for necessarily
occasions are denied; Comprehension and Toleration pleaded for; and in one of
the subsequent Parliaments, the Act of 35 of Queen Eliz. is voted a grievance,
and thought fit to be abrogated: whereat all that knew the opinion of the
Dissenters, (viz.) that that Act was principally, if not solely intended
against the Papists) did greatly wonder; for most certainly that Act laid a
restraint on the Papists, under very severe penalties; from which though the
Dissenters pleaded that they were exempted, yet it was the judgment is well of
the Judges that then were, as of all those that have been in the succeeding
times ever since, that they were as abnoxious to it a^ the Papists. And indeed,
the occasion which procured that Act, and the preamble there^^ do plainly
evince that it equally respected the Recusants and Non-conformists of both
parties^ for the end of it was to retein her Majesty's Subjects in due
obedience. And doubtless the Popish party would have purchased the abrogation
of that Act with a great sum of money but the other Dissenters were ready to
gratify them in the disannulling of it; to which the House of Commons had
agreed by a plurality of voices: but it proved abortive for want of that
Authority which gives lif^ to all Laws. And so the Factions remain ^^ statu quo
to this day.

How violent and unjustifiable the Action and Speeches of diverse persons in the
following Parliaments were, and of what evil consequences, the ensuing
particulars will demonstrate.

It is credibly reported, that the late Scottish Stirs (as some are pleased to
call them were fomented not only by several Jesuitical persons that acted
secretly among them, and preached in some of their Conventicles; but by some
correspondence and intelligence from England, particularly by an Harangue of ^^
great Lord, who (as himself says) spoke by the Dictates of the Spirit within
him, to this purpose.

-- We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our
Sister in the ^ay when she shall be spoken for? -- Popery and Slavery, like two
Sisters, go hand in hand: sometime One goes first, sometime the other in ^t
doors; but the other is always following close ^t hand. In England, Popery was
to have brought in Slavery; in Scotland, Slavery went before, and Popery was to
follow -- They have ^n Illustrious Nobility, a gallant Gentry, a Learned
Clergy, and an understanding worthy people -- They are under the same Prince,
and the influence of the same Favorites and Counsels. When they are hardly
dealt with, can we that are the richer, expect better usage? for it is certain,
that in all absolute Governments, the ^oorest Countries are always most
favorably dealt with. When the Ancient Nobility and Gentry there, cannot enjoy
their Royalties, Shri^aldoms, and Stewardies, which the, and their Ancestors
have possessed for several hundreds of years, but that nou they are enjoined by
the Lords of the Council to make Deputations of their Authorities to such as
are their known enemies; ^an we expect to enjoy our Magna Charta long, under
the same persons and administration of Affairs? If the Council Table there can
imprison any Nobleman or Gentleman for several years, without bringing him to
Trial, or giving the least reason for what they (...), can we expect the same
men will preserve the Liberty of the Subject here? -- Scotland has outdone all
(...) Eastern and Southern Countries, an having the^^ Lives, Liberties, and
Estates subjected to t^^ Arbitrary will and pleasure of those that govern: They
have lately plundered and harasse^ the richest and wealthiest Countries of th^^
Kingdom, and brought down the barbaro^^ Highlanders to devour them; and all
this without almost a colorable pretense to do it. No can there be found a
reason of State for wh^ they have done, but that these wicked Minister^
designed to procure a Rebellion at any rate which as they managed, was only
prevented by the miraculous hand of God, or otherwise all (...) Papists in
England would have been armed and the fairest opportunity given in the ju^^
time for the execution of that wicked and blood design the Papists had. And it
is not possible for any man that duly considers it, to think ^^ther, but that
those Ministers that acted it we^^ as guilty of the Plot as any of the Lords
that a^^ in question for it. My Lords, I am forced ^^ speak this the plainer,
because till the pressu^^ be fully and clearly taken off from Scotland, ^^ is
not possible for me or any thinking man to believe that good is meant us here:
we must sti^^ be upon our guard, apprehending that the principal is not changed
at Court; and that these men that are still in Place and Authority, have that
influence on the mind of our excellent Prince, that he is not nor cannot be
that to us, that his own nature and goodness would incline him to, etc.

By the very next Post after this Speech was said to have been spoken, forty
written Copies of it were sent from London to Edinburgh; and the Fanatics grew
so insolent and daring on it, that several loyal Gentlemen wrote up accounts to
what height of insolences this Speech had blown up the enemies of the Church
and Monarchy; and that they had just reasons to fear, that very dangerous
attempts, if not a downright Rebellion, would speedily ensue thereupon. For
now they began to look and speak big in Edinburgh; and many were heard and seen
on the Crown of the Causway, who had skulked about in darkness before. And as
for the disaffected parts of the Country, they now displayed the Banners of
Jesus Christ, as they blasphemously called their Colors at their Conventicles
everywhere: and their Preachers now told them. That the time of their
deliverance, and Gods taking vengeance on their enemies, was now at hand; only
they must repent, and be strong and of a good courage to fight the battles of
the Lord. They also threatened in all places such as they thought were seriously
active against them, talking of great Changes and Revolutions in England; and
in public places dropped Lists of the names of those men whom they had a mind
should fall by Heroical hands: particularly at Cupar the Shire-town in Fyffe, a
threatening Declaration was found, while the Deputy-Sheriff was there demanding
the legal Fines from those who had been convicted of frequenting
Field-Conventicles, and entertaining declared and attainted Traitors and
Fugitives, and intercommuned Rebels. The Declaration was thus directed.

To all and sundry to whom these presents shall come, but especially to the
Magistrates of the Town of Cupar in Fyffe.
BE it known to all men, that whereas under a Pretext of Law, though most
falsely, there is most abominable, illegal, and oppressive Robberies and Spoils
committed in this Shire; Captain Carnegie and his Soldiers, by virtue of a
Precept from William Carmichael, etc. he being authorized and held on to it by
that Apostate Prelate Sharp, who, etc. These are therefore to declare to all
that shall any way be concerned in this villainous Robbery and Oppression,
either by assisting, recepting, levying, or any manner of way countenancing the
same, that they shall be holden as guilty thereof. And however they bethink
themselves for the present secured, being guarded by a Military Force, and
those that are thus robbed despicable; yet let them take this for a warning,
that they shall be handled severely, answerable to their Villainies, and that by
a Party equal to all that dare own them: and that shortly, as God shall enable
and assist them, whose names may be read in these following Letters, A B C D,
etc. to the end of the Alphaber.

On this followed the Murder of the Archbishop upon the third of May 1679.
because, as their first Declaration said, It was appointed as a day of solemn
Thanksgiving for setting up an Usurper to destroy the Interest of Christ, and
assume the power which is proper to him alone.

These Assassinations were commended to this barbarous people by Mr. Knox of
old, who in his History of Scotland approves of the private murdering of the
Cardinal Beton by Norman Lesley Son to the Earl of Rothsey, and James Melvin;
calling it a godly fact, and proposing it as an Example to be followed by
Posterity. And in a Scottish Pamphlet printed at the beginning of the late Wars,
called Sions Plea, the Heroical Fact of Felton is commended, as fit to be
followed by the Nobles of Scotland, saying, God has chalked out a way, guiding
you by the hand, in giving this first blow; will you not follow him? Mr. Hunt
and Baxter of later days, insist on the same Example. So that we see the
Fanatics come nothing short of the Jesuits in the practice of Assassinations,
and promoting Open Rebellions: concerning which, we have this ingenious
Distick, accommodated both to Ignatius the Founder of the Jesuits, and Lesley
the Champion of the Presbyterians.

Quam bello plus pace noces and ad ocia versus, Crudeles animum vertis ad
insidias
Scotia and in media conscripto milite regnas Diraque (fraterna nomine) bella
geris.
How mischievous the designs of these men were, appears partly by their
obstinate persevering in their treasonable opinions, and justifying their
rebellious practices, even to their deaths, and refusing to save their lives by
asking pardon, and praying for the King; and partly by the following
Declarations which were taken with some of them.

The new Covenant taken from Donald Cargil a Field-preacher, at Queens-ferry,
the third of June 1680.
Sect. 4.
SEriously that the hand of our Kings has been against the Throne of the Lord,
and that now for a long time the Succession of our Kings, and the most part of
our Rulers with him, has been against the purity and power of Religion and
Godliness, and freedom of the Church of God -- and has of late so manifestly
rejected God, his Service and Reformation, disclaiming the Covenant of God, and
blasphemously enacting it to be burnt by the hand of a Hangman. -- Governed
contrary to all right Laws divine and humane; exercised such Tyranny and
Arbitrary Government, oppressed men in their Consciences and Civil Rights; used
free Subjects, Christian and reasonable men, with less Discretion and Justice
than their Beasts, etc. We do reject that King, and those associate with him,
from being our Rulers, because standing in the way of our right, free, and
peaceable serving of God -- according to our Covenant; and declare them
henceforth to be no lawful Rulers, as they have declared us to be no lawful
Subjects -- And that after this, we neither owe nor shall yield any willing
obedience to them, but shall rather suffer the utmost of their cruelties and
injustice, until God shall plead our Cause: and that upon these accounts;
because they have altered and destroyed the Lords established Religion,
overturned the fundamental and established Laws of the Kingdom, taken away
Christ's Church and Government, and changed the Civil Government of this Land
into Tyranny -- So that none can look upon us or judge us bound in Allegiance
to them, unless they say also we are bound in Allegiance to Devils; they being
his Vicegerents, and not Gods. -- We do declare, that we shall set up over our
selves, and over all that God shall give us, Power, Government, and Governors,
according to the Word of God, and especially to that, Exodus 18.21. and shall no
more commit the government of our selves, and the making of Laws for us, to any
one single person and lineal Successor; we being not tied to one
Family-government, not being an Inheritance, but an Office. -- And we declare
against enacting that [blasphemous] (so Calvin calls that Supremacy of Henry
the Eighth, upon which this Prerogative is founded) and scrilegious Prerogative
given to a King over the Church of God.

A Declaration and Testimony of the true Prssbyterian, Anti-Prelatick, and
Anti-Erastian persecuted Party in Scotland.
IT is not amongst the smallest of the Lords Mercies to this poor Land, that
there has always been some who have given testimony of every course of
Defection which we are guilty of; which is a token for good that he does not as
yet intend to cast us off altogether, but will leave a Remnant in whom he will
be glorious, if they through his grace keep themselves clean still -- from
Popery, Prelacy, and Erastian Supremacy, so much usurped by Him, who it is true
(as far as we know) is descended from the Race of our Kings; yet he has so far
deborded from what he ought to have been, by his Perjury, and Usurpation in
Church Matters, and Tyranny in matters Civil, as is known by the whole Land,
that we have just reason to believe that one of the Lords great controversies
is, That we have not disowned him, and the men of his practices, whether
inferior Magistrates or others, as enemies to our Lord and his Crown, and the
True Protestant and Presbyterian interest in their hands. Therefore although we
be for Government and Governors, such as the Word of God and our Covenants
allows; yet we for our selves, and all that will adhere to us, as the
Representatives of the true Presbyterian-Church, and covenanted Nation of
Scotland, considering the great hazard of lying under such a sin, do by these
Presents disown Charles Stuart, who has been reigning, or rather we may say
tyrannizing on the Throne of Scotland (forefaulted several years since, by his
Perjury and breach of Covenant with God and his Church) and usurpation of his
Crown and Royal Prerogatives therein -- and by his Tyranny and breach of the
very leges regnandi in matters Civil; for which reasons we declare that several
years since he should have been denuded of being King -- As also being under
the Standard of Christ, we declare War against such a Tyrant and Usurper, and
all the men of his practices, as enemies to our Lord Jesus Christ, his Cause
and Covenants, and against all such as have strengthened him, sided with him,
or anywise acknowledged him in his Usurpation and Tyranny Civil and
Ecclesiastical; yea, and against all such as shall strengthen, side with, or
anywise acknowledge any other in the like Usurpation and Tyranny, etc.

Given at Sanquair, 22 June 1680. Collected out of the true Copies, collated
with the Originals, kept among the Records of his Majesty's Privy Council. Al.
Gibson, Will. Paterson.

But that the hand of Joab ( i.e. the Jesuits) was in all these Tumults and
Rebellions, will thus appear:

Dr. Oats, whose Testimony ad homines is very creditable, assures us, That the
Jesuits creep in among Dissenters under the disguise of Nonconforming
Ministers, to divide and exasperate, to blow up Animosities and Calumnies into
actual Rebellion against the Civil Government, under a pretense of the dislike
of the Ecclesiastical. Thus in his printed Narrative, part 1. he says, That
Rich. Strange Provincial, John Keins, Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, and
Harcourt, Jesuits, did write a treasonable Letter to one Father Suiman an Irish
Jesuit at Madrid in Spain, in which was contained the plotting and contriving a
Rebellion of the Presbyterians in Scotland, against the Episcopal Government:
in order to which, they employed Matthew Wright, Will. Morgan, and one Ireland,
to go and preach under the notion of Presbyterians, and give the disaffected
Scots a true understanding of their sad estate and condition by Episcopal
Tyranny; and to tell them, they had now a fair opportunity to vindicate their
Liberty and Religion; and that it could be done no other way but by the Sword.
Paragr. 18. That the Fathers of the Society in Ireland were very vigilant to
prepare the people to rise for their Liberty and Religion, and to recover their
Estates. Parag. 35. That the Jesuits, by order of their Provincial, were to
send new Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and to
inform the people of the great Tyranny they lay under, by being denied liberty
of Conscience; and that not being to be procured but by the Sword, they must
take that course to purchase their liberty. Parag. 43. That two new Ministers
were sent into Scotland on the fifth of Aug. 78. one by the name of Father
Moore, the other of Sanders, alias Brown, with instructions to carry themselves
like Nonconformist-Ministers, and to preach to the disaffected Scots the
necessity of taking up the Sword for defense of liberty of Conscience, These
Dr. Oats saw dispatched, Parag. 150. The Doctor saw a Letter from Father
Ireland, Aug. 7. 1678. where he intimates the joy he had that the disaffected
Scots would not lay aside their endeavors for liberty of Religion, and that
the Catholics of Scotland had promised to use their utmost interest to keep up
the Commotions there. (And a good Author observes what fell out in the tragical
end of the Lord Forester in Scotland, who after the defeat of the Rebels at
Bothwel-bridge, took occasion, on the Indulgence granted by his Majesty, to
erect a house within two miles of Edinburgh, for a public Conventicle of
Nonconformists: and for building this ^^^agogue, he went for a zealous man
among them: but not long after, he was murdered by a woman-relation with whom
he had lived incestuously many years. After his death, a Dispensation was found
in his Closet from the Pope to marry her; which he delaying to do, she took his
life in reparation of her abused Honor. Which shows that the Supporters of the
Nonconformists may be secret Papists.) Parag. 51. John Keins told the Doctor,
That the Provincial had taken care of keeping alive the Differences between the
disaffected Scots and Duke Lauderdale; that Mum and Chocolet should be put
down, and the Order of the Magpies should be turned to their primitive
institution and habit; by Mum; and Chocolet meaning the Protestant Peers, and
by Magpies the Bishops. Paragr. 67. n. 7. One means (he says) they were to use
to bring in Popery, was by Seditious Preachers and Catechists set up and
maintained, and directed what to preach in their own or other private or
public Conventicles and Field-meetings. And my Author says, I have heard Mr.
Prance affirm, that both Gauan and White-bread used to preach frequently in
Conventicles in Southwark and other places: and that he was able to prove,
Whitebread the Provincial of the Jesuits, who was executed for the Plot, did
not many months before the discovery preach in a Conventicle as a Nonconformist
at Spaldwick within five miles of Huntingdon; and that he had several times
done the like before, as was attested by several of the Congregation before
diverse Gentlemen in the County of Huntingdon.

But to return for England; where we are told by a marvelous cunning man, That
the next Scene that opened, would be Rome or Paris. But the Prophet saw nothing
of Geneva or Scotland, which was also so nearly conjoined in the Intrigue, that
I scarce know how to separate them. For as I believe there was, is, and will be
a Popish Design to overthrow the Government, as long as the Jesuits retain
their Principles and avowed Obedience to the Sea of Rome: so I am confident,
there was, is, and will be a Fanatic Plot against the Church and State, as
long as so many Factious and Seditious persons retain their Antimonarchical and
Separating Principles.

As for the Papists, they thought their work was sufficiently carried on, by
the Divisions which they had increased among our selves by the Toleration; and
therefore for a while they contented themselves with working, as so many Moles,
under ground, heaving at the Foundations of our Government. But, through the
mercy of God, Parturiunt Montes -- their intended Babel proved but a Molehill
which was easily scattered. For,

Die Lunoe 1678. it was Resolved (Nemine Contradicente) in the Parliament, That
there was, is, and for several years last past, has been a horrid and
treasonable Plot and Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by those of the
Popish Religion, for murdering of his Majesty's sacred Person, and for
subverting the Protestant Religion, and the ancient and well-established
Government of this Kingdom. Of which Coleman, by several Evidences, and his own
Letters, was found guilty, in conspiring the death of the King, and
endeavoring to subvert the Protestant Religion, and to bring in Popery, by the
aid of foreign Powers; for which he was executed, December 3. 1678. Ireland,
Pickering, and Grove, were executed for the like Treasons, Jan. 24. Green,
Berry, and Hill, were condemned, Feb. 10. for the Murder of Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey. Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gauan, and Turner, were condemned on
the 14th of June 1679. And Richard Langhorne was condemned the same day. And
the Lord Stafford was also executed for the same Plot and Conspiracy.

It is true, that all these ( Coleman only excepted, whose Letters then
produced were so plain, that they admitted of no evasion) denied their
guiltiness to the last breath; but it was a practice allowed to men under their
circumstances, and had been practiced by other of their Persuasion, in the like
case: for Garnet ( Whitebread's Predecessor, a Principal of the Jesuits) being
accused for the Gunpowder-treason, as holding correspondence with one Hall then
in the Tower, utterly denied it with horrid Imprecations: which when Hall
confessed, he begged pardon, and confessed he had offended, if Equivocation did
not help him. Tresham, another of the Conspirators, had confessed that Garnet
was privy to the Treason; but afterward, by the importunity of his Wife, he
protested a little before his death, that his former Confession was false, and
that he had not seen Garnet in sixteen years before. Which Protestation of his
was afterward proved to be false, and Garnet himself confessed that he had seen
him many times within that space. And in a Book called The Jesuits Catechism,
penned, as is said, by some Secular Priests, Anno 1602, they say, That a Jesuit
being condemned to die, after he has made his Confession to a Priest, he is
not tied to reveal his guilt to the Judge, but it is lawful for him to stand in
a stiff denial of it at the time of Execution, as being clear before God,
although he persist in a Lie, after he has discharged his Conscience to his
Confessor, p. 166, 167.

The Author of Remarks on the Debates of the House at Oxford, tells us, That
those Debates were as great a Witness for the King, as any he had: For R. M.
(says he) said, That the King's telling them in his Speech that he would stick
to his Resolutions as to the Succession, and his proposing an Expedient, is
arbitrary, and French; and that it was the Kings design to cow the Parliament,
to bring them to Oxford: And that neither Bishops, nor Counselors, nor
Ministers of State, nor those of the Gospel, have endeavored to preserve
Religion or Safety. T. B. says plainly, They must let blood. Sir N. C. says, As
I understand, it is proposed the Government shall be in Regency during the
Duke's life: I would be satisfied, if the D. will not submit to that, whether
those that fight against him are not Traitors in Law. H. B. says, The same
interest that passes the Bill here, will do it in Scotland. Another insists,
That all about the King should be removed; and that, though Ministers have been
altered, yet the Government has been in such hands, as that the same
Principles remain. Sir W. C. says, That the weight of England is the people;
and the more they know, the heavier they will be; and that in all Ages they
have sunk ill Ministers of State. (And doubtless good ones too.) R. H. looks on
the slipping the Bill for Repealing the Act of 35 of Eliz. to be a breach of
the Constitution of the Government; which if it had been moved in Queen
Elizabeth 's days, that motion would certainly have been so thought. B. W. says
of the King's Speech, That it was none of his; that it had nothing of his in
it; that it is flat and short; That his Majesty was a better man, and a better
Protestant, than to make it himself; and that they who advised it, must answer
for it. And yet to show on whom he meant to throw this Dirt, he says afterward,
The King has gone on in a resolution as far as this in his Speech, in his
Declaration formerly. Sir W. J. observes, That no man knowing in Laws or
History, but can tell us, that to Bills grateful and popular, the King gives
his consent. L. G. is dissatisfied with these hands in which the Government is,
and fears the Kings being Absolute: And therefore Sir F. W. says, The same
Authority that can make a descent of the Crown, can modifie it.

All their Votes and Speeches must be Printed, to show they are not ashamed of
what they do. Col. M. hopes that his Posterity will do as he among the rest
has that Meeting and the former done.

This Bill of Exclusion to alter the Succession and modifie the Crown, and the
Repeal of the Act 35 Eliz. is the means used to secure the King's Person, and
the Protestant Religion. Though the King and the established Church are of a
quite contrary judgment. And the Act 13 Car. 2. 1660, which says, That by the
undoubted fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Kingdom,
nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor any other person
whatsoever, ever had, has, or ought to have any Coercive power over the
persons of the Kings of this Realm. And by the person of the King, is meant all
such persons to whom the Crown legally descends.

The mischiefs of altering the Succession, has cost too dear already, to
attempt another Experiment. The Dispute between the Houses of York and
Lancaster cost the Nation the lives of Eight Kings and Princes; Forty Dukes,
Marquesses, and Earls; Two hundred thousand of the People; besides Barons and
Gentlemen; and so much Money and Spoil, as cannot be valued.

So that it is sufficiently evident, that these irregular and violent
Proceedings were a Prologue to some intended Tragedy. There were hot Irons on
the Forge; we heard the blows throughout the Nation, and sparks of fire flew
about our ears. But, God be thanked, none of those Weapons which were forged
against the King or the Church, have prospered. Hitherto the Lord has helped
us.

The Fanatic Party carried on their designs more openly than the Papists,
insomuch that they thought to bear down all before them, by the numbers and
strength of their Party. The Pulpits and Presses do not only sound Alarms, but
cry Victoria. Their Peaceable design had divided the Bishoprics between
Presbyterian, Independent, and Anabaptist. They promise the true Protestant
Peacemakers more favor than they had from their Conforming Brethren, because
they joined in a Complaint of Persecution. Mr. Baxter, in his Book of Obedience
and Patience, p. 265. tells us, That Persecutors are not immortal, but must die
as well as others; and they have not always the choice of their [Successors]. He
had intimated what one such man as Felton could do; and that some great men
might be dealt with as Cardinal Beton was.

The King must be delivered from evil Counselors, and the House purged of
Pensioners. Petitions are procured from the City, and thanks given the
Petitioners for their care, etc. Appeals are made to them and the people; who
are encouraged to join Tumults with their Petitions. Mr. Hunt, p. 30. of his
Preface, says, So strong is the tie of duty on him ( i. e. the King) from his
Office, to prevent public calamities, as no respect whatsoever, no not of the
right Line, can discharge; nor will he himself ever think, if duly addressed,
that it can. And p. 34. At this time, if ever, the applications of an active
prudence are required from all honest men.

If any loyal persons make their Addresses, and publish their dislike of such
Seditious Petitioners, they are branded as Abhorrers; as if the Votes for No
more Addresses to the King in 1648. were still in force. The lawfulness of
Resistance is publicly printed, and even to this day defended by several
Writers.

Page 22. of Mr. Hunt, The Nation (says he) begins to be impatient, by the
delays of public Justice against the Popish Plot: That the dissolution of
Parliaments gives us cause to fear that the King has no more business for
Parliaments, p. 27. That the number of the Addressers may be reduced to the
Dukes Pensioners: That the Addresses were obtained by application; and the
design was to make Voites for discontinuance of Parliaments, and for a Popish
Successor. And p. 12. That such as plead for the established Government, are a
hired sort of Scaramouchy Zanies, Merry Andrews, and Jack Puddings: That the
Succession to the Crown is the Peoples Right. And to this end Doleman or
Parsons the Jesuit's Tract of Succession is reprinted, and recommended to the
People. And p. 172. the King is told, if he will follow the counsel of that
excellent Bill, he may live long and see good days: as if he were in danger if
it passed not; and so he expresses, p. 171. If this Bill do not pass, they
will take him for a wicked King too ( viz. as they took his Father) and will
say he has no lawful Issue to succeed him, for his own sins; and many other
remarks of wickedness will they make on him. And as to the Duke, he adds, p.
193. Let him attempt the Crown notwithstanding an Act of Parliament for his
Exclusion, he is all that while but attempting to make us miserable. If he be
not excluded, he does it certainly: and we will not entail a War upon the
Nation, though for the sake and interest of the glorious Family of the Stuarts.
And to effect this, he tells the People, That the Original and Rise of
Government is in the People; and that as they gave, so they may take it away as
they see occasion: That Government is the perfect creature of men in society,
made by pact and consent, and not otherwise; most certainly not otherwise; and
therefore most certainly ordainable by the whole Community, for the safety and
preservation of the whole.

The active men of the Fanatic Party had with great industry and cost got in
many Members to serve in Parliament, of whom they had a very great confidence
that they would promote their designs. Those men that had been actually in
Arms against the Royal Martyr, are now esteemed the Patriots of their Country;
and such as acted loyally, are branded, fined, and imprisoned.

The Earl of Sh. who had caused the Exchequer to be shut up, broken the Triple
League, and advised a Delenda Carthago, being now discontented by reason of a
Pique between his Royal Highness and himself, is made the Head of the Faction;
and either he or the Duke must fall; and no consideration is had, whether the
King and Kingdom fall with the Duke or not. Certain it is, that by the intended
Association (whereof I shall here give you a Copy) it was intended to reduce
the Government to a Commonwealth.

WE the Knights, etc. finding to the great grief of our hearts, the Popish
Priests and Jesuits, with the Papists and their Adherents and Abettors, have
for several years last past pursued a most pernicious and hellish Plot, to root
out the true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life
of our gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up
Arbitrary Power and Popery.

And it being notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
countenance and protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their expectations of his succeeding to the Crown; and that through crafty
Popish Counsels, his Designs have so far prevailed, that he has created many
and great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in
Church and State.

It appearing also to us, That by his influence mercenary Forces have been
levied and kept on foot for his secret Designs, contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard
of his Majesty's Person, our Religion and Government, if the danger had not
been timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces, with
great difficulty, caused by them to be disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense:
And it being evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver his Majesty from the counsels, and out of the power of
the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministers of State and others have been so
prevalent, that Parliaments have been unreasonably prorogued and dissolved,
when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill
Ministers of State their Assistants.

And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power, has procured
the Garrisons, the Arms and Ammunition, and all the power of the Seas and
Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these three Kingdoms, to be put into the
hands of his Party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and
Order of the last Parliament.

And as we considering with heavy hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation,
and Treasure of the Kingdom, both at Sea and Land, is wasted and consumed, and
lost by the intricate expensive management of these wicked destructive
Designs; and finding the same Councils, after exemplary Justice upon some of
the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish Malice, and
desire of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being murdered
to make way for the said D.'s advancement to the Crown, and the whole Kingdom
in such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and
Liberty, sad experience in the case, Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws
to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince.

We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way, by a Bill for the
purpose, to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and
to banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the
first means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to advise and act for the preservation of his Majesty
and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the dangers
aforesaid are so imminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power to fecure the Kingdom against them. We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves, by
solemn and sacred promise of mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion, his Majesty's Person and Royal State, and our
Laws, Liberties, and Properties; and we hold it our bounden Duty to join our
selves for the same intent in a Declaration of our united Affections and
Resolutions in the form ensuing.

I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly promise, vow, and protest to
maintain and defend, to the utmost of my power, with my Person and Estate, the
true Protestant Religion, against Popery and all Popish Superstition, Idolatry,
or Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavor to spread or advance it
within this Kingdom.

I will also, as far as in me lies, maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the Power and Privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary Power whatsoever; and endeavor entirely to disband all such
Mercenary Forces as we have reason to believe were raised to advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great amazement and
terror of all the good People of the Land.

Moreover, J. D. of Y. having publicly professed and owned the Popish
Religion, and notoriously given life and birth to the damnable and hellish
Plots of the Papists against his Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and
the Government of this Kingdom; I will never consent that the said J. D. of Y.
or any other, who is or has been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the Papists
in their wicked Designs, be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England;
but by all lawful means, and by force of Arms, if need so require, according to
my abilities, will oppose him, and endeavor to subdue, expel, and destroy him,
if he come into England, or the Dominions thereof, and seek by force to set up
his pretended Title, and all such as shall adhere unto him, or raise any War,
Tumult, or Scdition for him, or by his command, as public Enemies of our Laws,
Religion, and Country.

To this end, we and every one of us whose hands are here underwritten, do
most willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other, jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association; and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces we will
oppose and pursue unto destruction, all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous Ends of this Association; and maintain, protect,
and defend all such as shall enter into it, in the just performance of the true
intent and meaning of it. And lest this just and pious Work should be any ways
obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil-minded
persons, under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association,
should attempt or commit Disorders; we will follow such Orders as we shall from
time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting,
or the major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association,
when it shall be prorogued or dissolved; and obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, until the
next meeting of this or another Parliament; and will then show the same
Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for fear, or reward,
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution thereof
during our lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted and
suppressed as perjured persons, and public enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which Pains and Punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us, without benefit of any color or pretense to excuse us.

In witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this present
Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit
any others hereafter into this Society and Association.



This is evidently a Plot to retrieve the Good Old Cause: and to second this,
the Bill against the Succession (of which I have also given you a Copy) is
violently prosecuted.

A Copy of the BILL against the Duke of York.
FOrasmuch as these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, by the wonderful
providence of Almighty God, many years since have been delivered from the
slavery and superstition of Popery, which had despoiled the King of his
sovereign power, for that it did and does advance the Pope of Rome to a power
over Sovereign Princes, and makes him Monarch of the Universe, and does
withdraw the Subjects from their Allegiance, by pretended Absolutions from all
former Oaths and Obligations to their lawful Sovereign, and by many
Superstitions and Immoralities, has quite subverted the ends of the Christian
Religion: but notwithstanding that Popery has been long since condemned by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, for the detestable Doctrine and treasonable
attempts of its Adherents against the Lives of their lawful Sovereigns, Kings
and Queens of these Realms, yet the Emissaries, Priests, and Agents for the
Pope of Rome resorting into this Kingdom in great numbers, contrary to the Laws
thereof, have for several years late past, as well by their own devilish arts
and policies, as by counsel and assistance of foreign Princes and Prelates,
known enemies to these Nations, contrived and carried on a most horrid and
execrable Conspiracy to destroy and murder the Person of his most sacred
Majesty, and to subvert the ancient Government of these Realms. and to
extirpate the Protestant Religion, and massacre the true Professors thereof:
And for the better effecting their wicked designs, and encouraging their
villainous Accomplices, they have traitorously seduced the Duke of York,
presumptive Heir of these Crowns, to the Communion of the Church of Rome, and
have inveigled him to enter into several Negotiations with the Pope, his
Cardinals, and Nuntio's, for promoting the Romish Church and Interest; and by
his means and procurement have advanced the power and greatness of the French
King, to the manifest hazard of these Kingdoms; that by the descent of these
Crowns upon a Papist, and by foreign Alliances and Assistance, they may be able
to succeed in their wicked and villainous designs. And forasmuch as the
Parliaments of England, according to the Laws and Statutes thereof, have
heretofore, for great and weighty reasons of State, and for the public good
and common interest of this Kingdom, directed and limited the Succession of the
Crown in other manner than of course it would otherwise have gone, but never
had such important and urgent Reasons as at this time press and require their
using their extraordinary power in that behalf: Be it therefore enacted by the
Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same; and it is hereby enacted accordingly, That
James Duke of York, Albany, and Ulster, having departed openly from the Church
of England, and having publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion, which
has notoriously given birth and life to the most damnable and hellish Plot, by
the most gracious providence of God lately brought to light, shall be excluded
and disabled, and is hereby excluded and disabled for ever, from possessing,
having, holding, inheriting, or enjoying the Imperial Crowns and Governments of
this Realm, and these Kingdoms, and of all Territories, Countries, and
Dominions, now, or which shall hereafter be under his Majesty's subjection; and
off and from all Titles, Rights, Prerogatives, and Revenues with the said
Crowns now or hereafter to be enjoyed: And that upon the demise or death of his
Majesty without Heirs of his body, (whom God long preserve) the Crowns and
Governments of this Kingdom, and all Territories, Countries, and Dominions,
now, or which shall hereafter be under his Majesty's subjection, with all the
Rights, Prerogatives, and Revenues therewith of right enjoyed, and to be
enjoyed, shall devolve and come upon such person who shall be next lawful Heir
of the same, and who shall have always been truly and professedly of the
Protestant Religion now established by Law within this Kingdom; as if the said
Duke of York were actually dead: And that whatever acts of sovereign power the
said Duke of York shall at any time exert or exercise, shall be taken, deemed,
and adjudged, and are hereby declared and enacted High Treason, and to be
punished accordingly. And forasmuch as the peace, safety, and well being of
these Kingdoms, do so entirely depend upon the due execution of, and obedience
to this Law, Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person shall in anywise, at any time, during the King's life (which God long
preserve) or after his demise or decease, aid, assist, counsel, or hold
correspondence with the said Duke of York, who is and ought to be esteemed a
perpetual Enemy to these Kingdoms and Governments, either within these Kingdoms
or out of them; or shall endeavor or contrive his return into either of them,
or into any of the Territories or Dominions of the same; or shall during the
King's life publish or declare him to be the lawful or rightful Successor,
apparent, presumptive, or other Heir to the Crown of England; or shall after
the demise or decease of the King that now is, proclaim, publish, or declare
the said Duke of York to be King, or to have right or title to the Crown or
Government of England or Ireland; or shall by word, writing, or printing,
maintain or assert that he has any manner of right or title to the Crown or
Government of these Kingdoms, and shall be therefore convict upon the evidence
of two or more lawful and credible Witnesses, shall be adjudged guilty of
High Treason, and shall suffer and forfeit as in cases of High Treason. And
forasmuch as the Duke's return and coming into any of the foresaid Kingdoms,
Countries, Territories, or Dominions, will naturally conduce to bring vast
mischiefs, and all the evils hereby provided against upon them, in War and
Slaughter, and unspeakable Calamity, which therefore the said Duke must be
presumed to design by such his return or coming into any the foresaid
Kingdoms, etc. Be it therefore likewise enacted, and it is hereby enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That if the said Duke do at any time hereafter return
or come into any of the foresaid Kingdoms, etc. he shall be, and hereby is
thereupon attainted of High Treason: And all manner of persons whatsoever are
authorized and required to apprehend, secure, and imprison his person; and in
case of resistance made by him, or any of his Accomplices, to subdue, etc.
imprison him or them by force of Arms.

Now let any considering man judge whereto these violent proceedings tended;
when the King's necessary Guards be thought a grievance, and the executing the
penal Laws on Dissenters be made a grievance of the Subjects, an encouragement
to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom: when the King may not
raise moneys on his own Revenues, and his People will give him none; nay, they
shall be accounted Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, that assist him: when
his Customs shall be taken from him, and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
dispensed with; the Bill for excluding the lawful Successor resolutely insisted
on, and a War threatened by some, if it did not pass: when the D. of M. must be
restored to his Offices, and all that should oppose the Bill of Exclusion,
shall be dealt with as Betrayers of the King, the Protestant Religion, and the
Kingdom of England, and Pensioners of France; and it must be taken as a favor,
that the D. of Y. was only to be excluded, and another would persuade him to
destroy himself, and another threatens in print, that rather than not exclude
him, they would exclude the whole glorious Family of the Stuarts: when
seditious Petitions were counted part of the Liberty of the People, and no
Addresses to the King by the Loyal Party to be tolerated; and public^ thanks
given to a seditious Party of the City, for their manifest Loyalty to the King,
their care, charge, and vigilance for the preservation of his Majesty's person
and the Protestant Religion; and the King's Prerogative to call or dismiss his
Great Council questioned; and they who infused fears and groundless jealousies
of the Kings ruling by an Arbitrary power, did in an arbitrary manner fine and
imprison diverse loyal Subjects: And when it was published, That if the King
should die a violent death, they would avenge it on the Papists: when the chief
Ministers of State, the Bishops, the Lord Mayor, and Magistrates, and all that
were eminent for their Loyalty, were already condemned, as being Popishly
affected, and the Clergy branded as Projectors for the Church of Rome.

Hereupon (a Discovery being made by one of the Conspirators) the Kings Majesty
issues his Declaration, 27 of July 1683. to inform his Subjects of a Plot
contrived by persons of several Persuasions, to make a general Insurrection in
this Kingdom and Scotland. And that while this Design was forming, some
Villains were carrying on that horrid and execrable Plot of Assassinating his
Majesty's person, and his dearest Brother. And a Massacre was to follow;
wherein they principally designed for slaughter the Officers of State, the
present Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and others that had been most
eminent for Loyalty. Upon which Discovery, James Duke of Monmouth, the Lord
Melvin, Sir Jo. Cockrane, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Robert Ferguson, Richard
Goodenough, Francis Goodenough, Richard Rumbold, William Rumbold, Richard
Nelthorp, Nathaniel Wade, William Tompson, James Burton, Joseph Elby, Samuel
Gibbs, Francis Charleton, Joseph Tyley, Casteers and Lobb two
Nonconformist-preachers, Edward Norton, John Row, John Ayloff, and John
Atherton, fled from Justice, Ford Lord Gray made his escape, Arthur Earl of
Essex killed himself in the Tower: William Lord Russel, Thomas Walcot, William
Hone, and John Rous, were on their Trials convicted and executed. And it is
observable, that each of them confessed enough to clear the Justice of the
Nation. The most that they could plead for themselves, was, that their Crime
could amount only to misprision of Treason.

Algernoon Sidney (another of the Conspirators) was tried, condemned, and
executed afterward; who professed to die for the Old Cause wherein he had been
engaged from his youth. And indeed, he was so far engaged, that being named for
one of the Royal Martyr's Judges, he often appeared at his Trial. And Manus
haec inimica Tyrannis, was his Motto.

The Earl of Shaftsbury had been indicted of High Treason, 24 November. 1681. for
endeavoring to depose and put to death the King, and levy war within the
Kingdom: he having declared, That in a short time the Parliament was to sit at
Oxford, and that he had inspected the Elections, and was satisfied that the
Parliament would insist on three matters (viz.) The Bill of Exclusion against
the Duke of York, The abolishing the Act of Parliament of the 35 of Queen
Elizabeth, and a new Bill for uniting Protestant Dissenters; which he was
confident the King would not consent to: and if so, that he and other Lords had
provided strength to compel him, under the command of Captain Wilkinson and
John Booth: he declared the King to be a man of no faith, and there was no
trust in him: That he deserved to be deposed as well as King Richard the
second. And the said Earl further declared, That (...) would not desist till he
brought this Kingdom (...) a Commonwealth, as Holland was: That the King was a
man of an unfaithful heart, not f^^ to rule and govern, being false, unjust,
and crue^ to his people; and if he would not be governed they would depose him.
Though the Witnesse^ swore positively to the particulars, yet there was such a
Jury provided, as brought in an Ignoramus, Sir Sam. Bernardiston being their
Foreman; who has since been found guilty of Misdemeanors of a high nature.

During the late seditious Stirs and Tumults, none was more active than one
Stephen College, (a Joyner of London) a pragmatical person, that pleased
himself with the title of The Protestant Joyner; he had been busy for a long
time, sowing Sedition, and talking Treason so openly, that his Friends advised
him to forbear, lest he came to the Gallows. He made it his business to serve
some dissenting Lords, boasting of his acquaintance with the Earl of
Shaftsbury, Lords Gray, Howard, Clare, Huntington, Pagit, Lovelace, etc. He had
fitted his Raree Show, and scandalous Songs and Pictures reflecting on the
Royal Family. The sole pretense for his treasonable actions, was his zeal
against Papists, who (he said) had feigned seventeen or eighteen Shamplots
against the Protestants: he affirmed that London was to be seized by the
Papists, and that they had a design against the Parliament at Oxford; and
therefore he, with some others whom he had persuaded, came well armed thither.
Diverse Ribbons were provided as a mark of distinction, bearing this Motto: NO
POPERY, NO SLAVERY; one of which he gave to Turbervil, and it was proved, as
the Lord Chief Justice said at the close of the Trial, whom he called Papists:
The King was a Papist, the Bishops and the Church of England were Papists.

He was indicted for High Treason, the 17 and 18 of August 1681, it being
proved that he said, That nothing of good was to be expected from the King:
That he minded nothing but beastliness, and the destruction of the people: That
he endeavored to establish Arbitrary Government and Popery, Dugdale, Smith,
and Turbervil, who had been Witnesses against the Lord Stafford, were of the
Evidence against him; though there were enough, if these had been laid aside,
to have proved him guilty.

Mr. Masters testified against him, p. 31. That he said, The Parliament in
1640. was as good a Parliament as ever was chosen. To which Mr. Masters
answered, I wonder how you have the impudence to justify their proceedings
that raised the Rebellion against the King, and cut off his head. To which
College replied, They did nothing but what they had just cause for; and the
Parliament at Westminster was of their Opinion, p. 31. And being demanded what
he had to say against this testimony; he answers, That Mr. Masters had said
nothing material, and that it was but a jocose discourse, p. 39. To which Mr.
Justice Jones replied, Do you make mirth of the blackest Tragedy that ever was,
that horrid Rebellion, and the murder of the late King? College answered, I
never justified that Parliament in any thing that they did contrary to Law.

One Mr. Jennings, who was another Witness, testified, that on the bleeding of
Colledge's Nose, he said, It was the first blood that he lost in the Cause, but
it will not be long ere more be lost. He saw him sell the Ribbons with NO
POPERY, NO SLAVERY, to a Parliament Man as he supposed, who tied it on his
Sword, etc. p. 32.

It is observed in the Trial, that there was not one Papist that gave evidence
against him; and that they were such of whom College had formerly given a good
Character; though now the case was altered. The Jury were so well satisfied
with the Evidence, that they quickly agreed, and brought him in guilty: and so
he was condemned and executed at Oxford, on Wednesday 31 of August 1681.

Captain Tho. Walcot was indicted for High Treason at the Old Bailey, July 12,
etc. 1683. for endeavoring to move and stir up War and Rebellion against the
King, to deprive the King of his Crown, and to put him to death; for which he
conspired with diverse other Traitors, and had several meetings and consults to
those ends, and provided Blunderbusses, Carbines, and Pistols, etc. Which being
proved by Col. Rumsey, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Bourne, Mr. West, and Captain
Richardson, he was found guilty, sentenced, and executed.

Then was William Hone arraigned on the like Indictment; the Evidence against
him were Mr. Keeling, Mr. West, Sir Nicholas Butler, and Capt. Richardson: upon
whose testimonies he was found guilty, and executed also.

July 13. the Lord Russel was tried for endeavoring to raise a Rebellion, to
seize and destroy the Kings Guards, to deprive the King, and put him to death.
The Attorney General urged, That the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, Sir Tho.
Armstrong, Mr. Ferguson, and this Lord, with the Earl of Essex then dead, were
of a Council for a general Rising; to which end they received several Messages
from the Earl of Shaftsbury, who being disappointed by Mr. Trenchard, who had
promised to raise a thousand Foot and two or three hundred Horse, he and
Ferguson left the Kingdom. The Witnesses were Col. Rumsey, Mr. Shepherd, and
the Lord Howard, on whose evidence he was found guilty, and sentenced to die;
and accordingly he was beheaded in Lincolns-Inne-Fields, July 21. 1683.

The next was the Trial of Mr. Rous, against whom Mr. Leigh, Mr. Lee, Mr.
Corbin, Mr. Richardson, gave such evidence, that he was presently found guilty,
and received sentence to die; and was executed accordingly.

Captain Blague being indicted for conspiring to seize the Tower of London,
received his Trial, but was acquitted.

Algernon Sidney was tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar, on the 7th, 21th, and 27th
of November 1683. His Indictment was almost the same as the former, only there
was added to it, his sending of Aaron Smith into Scotland to excite and stir up
the Subjects to a Rebellion there; and his being the Author of a traitorous
Libel, containing, among other seditious discourses, these words (viz.) The
power originally in the People of England is delegated unto the Parliament: He
(the most serene Lord Charles the Second now King of England meaning) is
subject unto the Law of God, as he is a man; to the People that makes him a
King, inasmuch as he is a King: the Law sets a measure unto that Subjection,
and the Parliament judges of particular cases thereupon arising. He must be
content to submit his interest to theirs, since he is no more than any one of
them in any other respect, than that he is by the consent of all, raised above
any other. If he does not like this condition, he may renounce the Crown: but
if he receive it upon that condition (as all Magistrates do the power they
receive) and swear to perform it, he must expect that the performance will be
exacted, or revenge taken by those that he has betrayed.

And in other places these traitorous Sentences are contained: viz. We may
therefore change or take away Kings without breaking any Yoke, or that is made
a Yoke which is not one: the injury is therefore in making and imposing, and
there can be none in breaking it, etc. In p. 23, 24, 25, and 26. many other
things were read at the Trial, out of that Libel; particularly p. 26. where
speaking of a King, he says, When the matter is brought to that, that he must
not reign, or the People over whom he would reign must perish, it is easily
decided. As if the Question had been asked in the time of Nero or Domitian,
whether they should be left at liberty to destroy the best part of the world,
as they endeavored to do, or it should be rescued by their destruction! And as
for the Peoples being Judges in their own case, it is plain they ought to be
the only Judges, because it is their own, and only concerns themselves. The
Attorney General ( p. 13.) says, The whole Book is an Argument for the People
to rise in Arms and vindicate their Wrongs. He (i. e. Sidney) lays it down,
That the King has no authority to dissolve the Parliament: but it is apparent
the King has dissolved many; therefore he has broken his Trust, and invaded
our Rights. And concludes, We may therefore shake off the Yoke: for it is not a
Yoke we submitted to, but a Yoke by Tyranny (that is the meaning of it) imposed
on us.

The Witnesses who swore to the Indictment were Mr. West, Col. Rumsey, Mr.
Keeling, the Lord Howard, Sir Andrew Foster, Mr. Atterbury, Sir Philip Lloyd,
Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Carry, and Mr. Cook: upon whose evidence the Jury found him
guilty of High Treason; and accordingly sentence was pronounced against him,
and he was executed on Tower Hill, December. 7. 1683.

I shall add only a few Remarks on the dying Speeches and Confession of these
men: and first of Col. Sidney. He had no other Apology for himself, but that he
had been engaged from his youth in that Old Cause; for which he prayed, in
these words: Defend thine own Cause, and defend these that defend it: stir up
such as are faint, direct those that are willing, confirm those that waver;
give wisdom and integrity unto all -- Grant that I may die glorifying thee for
all thy mercies, and that at the last thou have permitted me to be singled out
as a Witness of thy Truth, and even by the confession of my Opposers, for that
Old Cause in which I was from my youth engaged, and for which thou have often
and wonderfully declared thy self. Now the Old Cause wherein Col. Sidney was
engaged, was the destruction of the Church, and the Royal Martyr, to set up a
Commonwealth; in which he acted as a Colonel, and one of the Judges of the
Royal Martyr: yet he calls these Treasons Gods Truth. In what Religion this
Gentleman died, God only knows: for he made no profession at all, whether
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or Quaker; but a Protestant at large, as
any of those Factions term themselves.

As to the Lord Russel, he was also unhappily engaged in the same OLD CAUSE
from his youth, as may appear by the following Relation. Mr. Johnson, the
Author of the Life of Julian, confirmed him in his riper years in those
opinions which This Lewis was a stickling Presbyterian, that had gotten the
Sequestration of Totnam-high-cross from Mr. Wimpew a loyal Minister of the
Church of England. To this Lewis many Noblemen and Gentlemen sent their Sons
for Education: among whom was the late Lord Russel. And to divert his Scholars,
he composed a Farce, wherein the young Gentlemen were to be Actors. The Farce
had all the Formalities of a High Court of Justice; President, Solicitor,
Witnesses, etc. The Criminal was an old Shock Water-Dog, which he called
Charles Stuart. This Dog was arraigned, tried, condemned, and executed by
cutting off his head. By which action he instilled the Principles of
Ring-killing into his Scholars; as if the murdering of a King, were no more
than the cutting off a Dogs neck.
Mr. Lewis and Dr. Manton had educated him. For Mr. Johnson having written that
Traitorous Book, to defend the mischievous Doctrine of Resistance, this unhappy
man could not be extricated from that snare, to his death. And it was long
before his acquaintance with this Seditious Author, that Dr. Manton, a great
Abettor of the first War, and a Favorite of Cromwell, had instilled the same
Principles into him. For in his Comment on St. James 4.1. he proposes this
Question: Whether Religion may be defended by Arms? To which he answers; That
sometime the outward exercise of Religion and Worship may be established and
secured by Laws; and among other Privileges and Rights, the liberty of pure
Worship may be one; which being invaded by Violence, may be defended by Arms.
-- The Estates of a Kingdom may maintain their Religion against the tyranny and
malice of the Prince.

This Doctor had the greatest influence on the Education of that Noble
Gentleman, being a Chaplain to the Family, and Preacher at Covent Garden for
many years. It is also very observable what this Gentleman says in his Paper
delivered to the Sheriffs, where he blessed God that he fell by the Ax, and not
by the fiery trial; as if it were safer to die as a Traitor than a Martyr. --
But he says, Whatever apprehensions I had of Popery, and OF MY OWN SEVERE and
heavy share I was like to have under it when it should prevail.

The Lord Russel in all probability had some regard to the loss of those Lands
which descended from his Ancestors, but had been in the days of Henry the
Eighth alienated from the Church, and which by the return of Popery, might be
taken from his Family. And he being persuaded, as he expresses it in that
Speech -- I did believe, and do still, that Popery is breaking in upon the
Nation; and that those who advance it, will stop at nothing to carry on their
design; he on the other side would stop at nothing to keep it out. This most
likely made him so zealous for the Bill of Exclusion; and unhappily engaged him
(the Bill being it self excluded) in this other desperate Attempt: for, as
Solomon observed, It is a snare to a man to devour that which is holy. And
indeed there is no other means so likely to bring in Popery, as the impotent
and unlawful outcrys and endeavors of Fanatical persons pretending to keep it
out. Religion is for the most part made a Cloak and Pretense to serve Interest.

In Queen Mary's days, when the Pope solicited the Queen for a restoration of
Churchlands and Dignities, it was first proposed to the Cabinet-Council; where
the Lord of Bedford being present, and knowing himself greatly concerned, fell
into a great passion; and breaking his Chaplet of Beads from his girdle, flung
them into the fire, swearing deeply, That he valued his sweet Abbey of Wooharn
more than any fatherly Counsel or Commands that could come from Rome. Whereupon
the Queen considering of what temper others of the Nobility might be, was
discouraged from prosecuting that design.

This Lord delivered a Paper to the Sheriffs, wherein he acknowledges that
when he was at a meeting at Mr. Shepherd 's, there was some discourse about the
feasableness of seizing the King's Guards: and several times by accident in
general discourse elsewhere (says he) I have heard it mentioned as a thing
easy to be done; particularly at my Lord Shaftsbury 's; but never consented to
it as fit to be done. That the Duke of Monmouth told him he was glad that he
was come to Town; for my Lord Shaftsbury and some hot men would undo them all,
if great care were not taken. That being at Mr. Shepherd 's with a Company that
met there, there were things said by some with more heat than judgment. And it
is by some inferred (says he) that I was acquainted with these heats and ill
designs, and did not discover them: but this is but misprision of Treason. He
says, Nothing was sworn against him but some discourse about making some Stirs;
and this is not levying War against the King, which is Treason, and not the
consulting and discoursing about it, which was all that was witnessed against
me: and the design of seizing the Guards, was construed a design of killing
the King; and in that I was cast.

Captain Walcot in his last Speech said, I do neither blame the Judges nor
Jury, nor the Kings Council: I only blame some men that in reality and truth
were deeper concerned than I, that came as Witnesses against me. He confesses
that he was invited by Col. Romsey to some meetings where some things were
discoursed of in order to asserting their Liberties and Properties, which they
looked on to be invaded and violated: That Mr. West often discoursed with him
concerning lopping off the two Sparks, meaning the King and the Duke; and
proposed it might be done at a Play, saying, that then they would die in their
Calling: That he bought Arms to that end, and said they had fifty employed to
that end: That he told them the killing the King would carry such a blemish and
stain with it, as would descend to Posterity; and that he having eight
Children, he was loath they should be blemished with it: That by the Law of the
Land he ought to die, for being in those meetings where a War was debated.
Being asked by Dr. Cartwright whether the death of the King was proposed while
he was there; he answered, It was so, and that he and those Lords who were like
to suffer, were under general apprehensions of Popery and Slavery coming in.
And he confessed to the Doctor, He was guilty enough to have his life taken
away; adding, The same measure we mete to another, that measure God will mete
to us. So that on this man's Confession, if there were no other, (considering
the circumstances wherein he was, being a person formerly engaged in the
Rebellion, a man of Estate and Parts) nothing can be more evident than both
parts of the Plot (viz.) to raise a Rebellion, and to murder the King and his
Royal Brother.

Which was farther confessed by Mr. Hone, who told Dr. Cartwright that he was
guilty of the Crime according to the Law of the Land, and to the Law of God;
that he was to meet the King and Duke of York, but did not know at that time
when or where, nor what was his business; and afterward, that he told Mr.
Keeling he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke of York; for which
being asked a reason, he answered, As to that, I think this, That the Duke of
York did openly profess himself to be a Roman Catholic, and I did say I had
rather dispose of the King than the Duke of York. And being asked again by the
Doctor, Had you rather a Papist should reign over us, as you take him to be,
than the King? he replied, I do not know what to say to that.

Captain Walcot it seems had said of Rous, that he would die an Atheist: and in
truth, such bloody men are no better; they are of the mind that Colonel Morly
and some other Commanders in Cromwell's Army were, who said, They would cast
themselves on any Prince, even on the Turk, rather than suffer themselves to be
subdued by the King. But this Mr. Rous did confess, That since the
Hurly-burlies concerning Parliaments going off and coming on, he had been a
hearer, and understood too much of some kind of Meetings, and especially of
those that call themselves Protestants, who are ten thousand times worse than
any others; and prayed God to forgive him that he had not been as careful and
diligent, and as ready and forward to discover them a great while since. I gave
his Majesty (says he) an account to the best of my knowledge, and he seemed to
be well pleased, and thankt me for it: but before I had power to put it in
writing, the Council thought it fit that I should be committed to Prison. That
there was a design to set up the Duke of Monmouth, I will not say, while the
King reigns; though some extravagant hotheaded men have taken upon them to
discourse these things, but not any worthy man. I know those that have been
worthy to be called by that name, have declared in my hearing, that in
opposition to the Duke of York, if the King be seized, they would stand by the
Duke of Monmouth. There are others that were for a Commonwealth, and some few
for the Duke of Bucks. He confesses, that Goodenough told him the King was to
be taken off as he came from Windsor; that they wanted a place of meeting in
order to it; and the place pitched on was Black Heath, where Rous advised that
a Ball of Silver worth thirty or forty pound might be thrown up, and the people
invited to come and drink a Bowl of Punch: which would have gathered thirty or
forty thousand in two or three days time: That this Goodenough spoke in base
Language concerning the Duke of York, calling him Rogue and Dog, and that we
will do his work; and that after the Kings decease, the Duke of Monmouth having
a Vogue with the People, must of necessity succeed. And he confessed that it
was just in God, and righteous and just in the King, that he died.

On the 6th of February 1683. in Hillary-Term, John Hambden Esquire was tried at
the Kings-Bench-Bar, upon an Indictment of High Misdemeanour, for assembling,
meeting, consulting, etc. with diverse ill-disposed Subjects of the King, to
disquiet, molest, and disturb, and, as much as in him lay, to incite, stir up,
and procure Sedition within this Kingdom of England; and further, to cause an
Insurrection, and to provide Arms and armed men for that purpose. And also, for
that he did consult, agree and consent that a person should be sent into
Scotland to invite and incite diverse ill-disposed people to come into England
to consult and advise with him and others here, concerning a^^ and assistance
from thence to bring about their designs. He pleaded Not guilty: but upon a
full and fair hearing, he was found Guilty and Fined forty thousand pounds.
Which Sentence was given the 12th of February, being the last day of the said
Term. The Witnesses were, James Duke of Monmouth (but he did not appear)
William Lord Howard, whose evidence is supported by Sir Andrew Foster, Mr.
Atterbury, one Sheriff tha^ lodged Aaron Smith at Newcastle, and Be^ that
directed him the way into Scotland The Lord Chief Justice tells the Jury, Th^^
if there were another Witness as positive against the Defendant as my Lord
Howard, the matter would amount to no less than High Treason.

The next day (being the 7th of February 1683.) Lawrence Braddon and High
Speak, Gent. were tried upon an Information of High Misdemeanour, Subornation,
and spreading False Reports, at the Court o^ King's Bench; for that whereas the
Earl of Essex on the 10th of July in the thirty fifth year of the King, was
committed to the Tower for High-Treasons supposed to be committed; on the 13th
did there kill and murder himself, as appear by an Inquest taken in the Tower
the 14th day of July in the year aforesaid: They, not being ignorant thereof,
but contriving and maliciously and seditiously intending to bring the Kings
Government into hatred, disgrace, and contempt, did conspire and endeavor to
make the Kings Subjects to believe that the said Inquisition was unduly taken,
and that the said Earl was murdered by some person in whose custody he was. And
to bring this to effect, they procured false Witnesses to prove it. And to
persuade others to the belief of it, they caused to be declared in writing,
that the said Braddon would prosecute the matter. This is the sum of the
Indictment. To which they pleaded Not guilty.

How the Intrigue was managed, in brief.
The 13th of February in the morning, the King and Duke going to visit the
Tower, in the interim of their being there, that dreadful accident of the Earl
of Essex cutting his own throat happened. The rumor of the one and the other,
caused a great concourse of people. Among the rest, there was one Edwards his
son, a Schoolboy of about thirteen years old, that having played Truant in the
Tower that morning upon this occasion, thought it best to tell some strange
story when he came home to Dinner, to palliate his Truantry; and accordingly
goes home and tells his Mother and Sisters that he saw a hand throw a Razor out
of the window of the Earl of Essex his Chamber. They were surprised at this,
and charged the Boy to tell truth, and not to tell lies to excuse his play, as
he used to do. He persisted in it. Mr. Braddon being told of this Boy, goes to
his fathers house, pretending he came from Sir Henry Capel and the Countess, to
examine the Boy: which when he had done, he writes a Paper, and reads it to the
Boy, for him to sign. The Boy refuses to sign it, because (he said) the whole
matter was a lie. So Braddon went away: but coming another time, he got the Boy
to sign it, telling him it was no harm. He also found out a Girl of about the
same age, that said she saw a hand throw out a bloody Razor, but from whose
window she knows not: and she said many others saw it, but she could name none
Braddon goes with this to Sir Henry Capel, desiring his assistance in the
prosecution of the Earl's murder: but Sir Henry directs him to a Secretary of
State, it being of public concern. He goes to a Secretary, has his little
Witnesses examined before the King in Council, and the business found false and
frivolous. Mr. Braddon would not rest here (being in Conscience bound to
prosecute the Murder, as he alleged) but resolves for the Country; and goes
to one Mr. Speak, desiring his Letter commendatory to Sir Robert Atkins in
Gloucester-shire: which was granted by that Gentleman, who also sent his man
along with him, to defend him from Assaults. To color this, it was pretended
that Braddon had word sent him that my Lords death was discoursed the same day
it was done, at Marlborough, and at the Posthouse in From; nay at Andover, two
or three days before it happened. Mr. Speke's Letter to Sir Robert Atkins,
concerning Braddon (which he had about him when taken) commends his great
integrity and courage, thanking the person 'twas writ to for great kindness to
him and his friends; hoping to get my Lords Murder tried before the Trial of
any in the Tower; saying the Tide run strong against them: and he must not be
called Braddon, but Johnson, for fear of being knocked on the head: he desires
the Knights directions in the management. He says Mr. Braddon has been at great
charge and trouble already; and he knows few that would have undertaken it but
himself.

And all this pains was taken, to insinuate to the people, that because the
King and Duke were that morning walking in the Tower, about the time this
Murder was done, therefore they designed it. How base, how devilish, and
hellish a design is this! (as my Lord Chief Justice justly exclaims.) After a
long and fair Trial, they were found guilty; but continued under Bail till next
Term, when, on April 21. Braddon was Fined 2000 l. and to find Sureties for
good behavior during life, and be imprisoned till performed; and Speak (as
being not so guilty, being only concerned in the Letter) 1000 l. with Sureties
also for good behavior during life, and imprisonment till performed.

Among the rest of the late Conspirators, was one James Holloway (a forward
busy young man, Inhabitant of Bristol) who having been acquainted with all the
Methods, and attended on all the motions of the Design (without effect,
blessed be God) till its discovery, then sensible of his guilt and danger,
thought it time to consult his own safety; and leaving London in a disguise, he
ranged several parts of England as a dealer in Wool, till he could find an
opportunity to take shipping: which having obtained, he set sail; and after
some loss of time by stress of Weather, he made Antegua in the West Indies,
resolving to visit the rest of the Caribby Islands also, and so to St.
Christophers: which he judging to be the safest place, sent thence to his
Factor at Nevis about some concerns he had there; which Factor discovered him;
whereupon Sir William Stapleton sent to St. Christophers to apprehend him; and
thence brought him to Nevis, where he was prisoner thirteen days, and then sent
for England; where being come, he was examined before the King in Council, and
committed to Newgate, till Easter-Term 1684. he was brought to the Kings
Bench-Bar, to show cause why he should not suffer death (he having been
Outlawed for High Treason in his absence.) He told the Court he had nothing to
say, having told all he knew to his Majesty, from whom he hoped mercy. The
Court told him they had nothing to do with the Kings mercy; but they had leave
to let him take a Trial, notwithstanding the Outlawry, whereby he might have
opportunity to make his defense, if he had any thing to say for himself. But he
declaring that he had nothing more to say, a day was set by the Court for his
execution (as is usual in Outlawries) which was done at Tyburn on the 30th of
April 1684. He had liberty to speak there what he pleased, and held a long
Dialogue with the Sheriffs; delivering them a Paper (which he acknowledged to
be his own writing) which is a kind of Epitome of what he had before delivered
to Mr. Secretary Jenkins. And so after a short Prayer, he was hanged drawn and
quartered, and his Quarters brought back to Newgate, and sent thence to
Bristol, which should have been the Scene of his activity in this cursed
Tragedy.

He says in his Paper delivered to the Secretary, that asking one Tyly of
Bristol, What News ( July 1681) he told him, All naught; and if some speedy
course be not taken, we shall be all undone: for -- they have got Sheriffs to
their minds -- ( naming North and Rich) who will find Jurors to believe any
evidence against a Protestant: and so hang up all the Kings friends by degrees.
He told him also, that all the Protestant Gentry, naming the Earl of
Shaftsbury, Lord Howard of Escrick, and others, were come to a resolution,
seeing fair means would not do, but all things on the Protestant side are
misrepresented to the King by such great Criminals, and none more in favor
than those, to take the King from his evil Counsel, and that by an Insurrection
in -- London, Bristol, Taunton, Exeter, Chester, Newcastle, York, and other
places in the North; and that there would be a considerable party in Scotland,
and another in Ireland. Mr. West told him there was a design to take off the
King and the Duke coming from Newmarket -- to prevent bloodshed. Holloway
dislikes that, saying the design was only to take the King from his evil
Counsel. He calls it a PROTESTANT PLOT.

He says to the Sheriff, I hope it will be a satisfaction that there was a
Plot. Again, I pray God that no other people may concern themselves with
Public affairs out of their own way; and that the Scriblers might be put down;
for they do more to the Kingdom than any thing else: Which was both the
beginning and end of his discourse with the Sheriffs.

And he begins his Paper left with the Sheriffs, with exclaiming against
Pamphleteers and News-Scriblers. And afterward -- And did by some Scriblers
and News-mongers constantly know most public affairs -- which they undertook
to represent according to their own humor.

He declares his hearty sorrow for yielding thereto, or acting therein, being
satisfied it might have caused very much bloodshed in the Nation. He concludes:
I repent not my Confession; and could I discover more, would do it thoroughly,
though I find not mercy with man.

On Thursday, Feb. 14. 1684. Sir Samuel Bernardiston was Tried and Convicted
for High Misdemeanour, at the Sessions of Nisi Prius holden at Guild Hall,
London.

It was upon an Information exhibited by the Attorney General, wherein is set
forth, That there having been lately a horrid Plot discovered, Sir Samuel
Bernardiston intending to scandalize the Evidence, wrote a Letter containing
these Sentences:

The return of the Duke of Monmouth to White Hall, and his being received into
extraordinary Favor of his Majesty, has made a strange alteration of affairs
at Court: for those that before spoke of him very indecently, now court,
cringe, and creep to him. His Grace complained to the King of the scandalous
misrepresentation that was made of him in the Mondays Gazette, upon which the
Gazetter was called to account for it, who alleged for himself, that a Person
of great Quality sent him in writing the words therein recited, commanding him
to put them in the Gazette. Testerday being the last day of the Term, all the
Prisoners that were in the Tower upon the late Sham Protestant Plot, were
discharged upon Bail. Mr. Braddon who prosecuted the Murder of the Earl of
Essex, the Information put in against him in the King's Bench by Mr. Attorney,
for a pretended Subornation, etc. was not prosecuted, and his Bail was
discharged. And the passing Sentence upon the Author of Julian the Apostate,
and the Printer of the late Lord Russel's Speech, was passed over with silence.
Great applications are made to his Majesty for the pardoning Mr. Sidney in the
Tower, which is believed will be attained, and that he will be banished. The
Lord Howard appears despicable in the eyes of all men; he is under guard at
White Hall, and it is believed will be sent to the Tower, for that the Duke of
Monmouth will accuse him concerning the Testimony he has given: and the
Papists and High Tories are quite down in the mouth, their Pride is abated,
themselves and their Plot confounded; but their Malice is not assuaged. It Is
generally said, the Earl of Essex was murdered. The brave Lord Russel is afresh
lamented. The Plot is lost here, except you in the Country can find it out
amongst the Addressers and Abhorrers. This sudden turn is an Amazement to all
men, and must produce some strange Events, which a little time will show.


And then he goes on further, and says in another Letter, these words:

I am to answer yours of the 27th and 29th past; and truly I cannot but with
great sorrow lament the loss of our good Friend honest Mr. John Wright: but
with patience we must submit to the Almighty, who can as well raise up
Instruments to do his work, as change hearts, of which we have so great an
instance in the business of the Duke of Monmouth, that no Age or History can
parallel. I am now thoroughly satisfied, that what was printed in the Mondays
Gazette is utterly false, and you will see it publicly declared so shortly.
The King is never pleased but when he is with him, has commanded all the
Privy Council to wait upon him, and happy is he that has most of his favor.
His Pardon was sealed and delivered to him last Wednesday. It Is said he will be
restored to be Master of the Horse, and be called into the Council Table, and
to all his other places; and it is reported he will be made Captain General of
all the Forces, and Lord High Admiral, etc. He treats all his old Friends that
daily visit him with great Civilities; they are all satisfied with his
integrity, and if God spares his life, doubt not but he will be an Instrument
of much good to the King and Kingdom. He said publicly, That he knew my Lord
Russel was as loyal a Subject as any in England, and that his Majesty believed
the same now. I intend shortly to wait on him my self. It would make you laugh
to see how strangely our High-Tories and Clergy are mortified; their
Countenances speak it. Were my Shesorary to be moved for now, it would be
readily granted. Sir George is grown very humble: It Is said Mr. Sidney is
reprieved for forty days, which bodes well.


And then he goes on further, and in a third Letter says,

The late change here in public affairs is so great and strange, that we are
like men in a dream, can hardly believe what we see, and fear we are not fit
for so great a mercy as the present juncture seems to promise. The Sham
Protestant Plot is quite lost and confounded. The Earl of Mackensfield is
bringing Actions of Scandalis Magnatum against all the Grand Jurymen that
indicted him at last Assizes.


And then in a fourth Letter are contained these Expressions:

Contrary to all men's expectations, a Warrant is signed at last for beheading
Col. Sidney at Tower Hill next Friday. Great endeavors have been used to
obtain his Pardon, but the contrary Party have carried it, which much dasheth
our hopes: but God still governs.


He pleaded Not guilty: but the Jury found him Guilty without stirring from the
Bar.

April 14. he was brought to the Kings Bench-Bar to receive Judgment of the
Court; which was, That he should pay a Fine of Ten thousand pounds to the King,
should find Sureties for his good behavior during his life, and should be
committed to the Kings Bench Prison till the same was paid and done.

By that which has been said, it clearly appears how near a Correspondence
there has been between the Jesuit and Fanatic both in Principles and
Practices; and that the Government and Church established has been the only
Bulwork against Popery, that has withstood all its assaults, though assisted
by the united force of the Fanatics. Yet all this notwithstanding, we still
suffer under the imputation of Popery; our Worship is still calumniated as
Popish; and for any to return to our Communion, is to make a step toward Rome:
the Ministers of our Church are accused as disguised Emissaries of the Romish
Church; and the Arguments used for Conformity, are but endeavors to pervert
men to the Papal Superstition: our Common Prayer is but the Mass in English;
kneeling at the Sacrament, worshipping of the Host: our Bishops Antichristian,
and our Clergy Factors for Rome. And by these slanders, the Fanatics have
employed the aversion of the people against the corruptions of Rome, to a
direct opposition against the Church of England, which, above any of the
reformed Churches, has most strenuously and successfully opposed it.

And it will easily appear, that the leading Fanatics have misled their
Disciples with more invincible prejudice and implicit faith than any of the
Popish Priests do their Proselytes; who can persuade them, that that Church
which has so peremptorily disclaimed the Popes Supremacy, Infallibility,
Wilworship, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, adding to the number of Sacraments,
and detracting essential parts from those which they retain: That the Church of
England, which in their Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy, have exceeded all the
reformed Churches in their detestation of Popish Doctrines; that have still
built on the foundations of Reformation laid by Cranmer, Ridly, Latimer; which
has still been chiefly maligned, and from its infancy assaulted by the
Romanists as its greatest Adversary, should now be reproached by those, who in
this serve the Romish interest more than their own, as well-willers to the
Church of Rome.

And in truth, there needs no other Argument to prove how ignorant this sort of
men are of the great corruptions of Rome, that forsake our Church, on a
persuasion that we have embraced those corruptions: for either they expect that
we should renounce all things that they retain, and then once more we must lay
aside the Creed, the Commandments, the Lords Prayer, etc. or that we should
retain and practice nothing that was practiced in the Primitive Church, long
before Popery was known in the World. And it is very apparent, that we have not
more displeased the Fanatics by retaining those decent Ceremonies and ancient
Orders of the Primitive Church, than we have incensed the Papists by retaining
of them: for by these Apostolical Orders and Rules of Decency, we have such a
beauty added to Holiness, as was in use in the most pure and primitive times,
free from the Innovations and Superstitions of Rome: and this has raised the
envy of that Church, as well as the causeless malice of Dissenters against us:
what these rail against as Popish ( viz. our Government, Worship, Discipline,
and Ceremonies) the other behold with grief, and envy to see a Church much
nearer to the primitive constitution than their own.

I doubt not but the Reader will join with me in this Opinion, that it is a
necessary duty incumbent on all sorts of Fanatics that have accused our Church
and Government of Popery, for retaining those innocent and indifferent things
agreeable to the primitive practice, to make a public declaration of their
abhorrence of Romish principles and practices, such as I have already charged
them withal. To which I may add their claiming of a Supremacy above Princes
and Parliaments in matters Ecclesiastical, and diverse other things, which are
the most pernicious and Antichristian Doctrines and Practices of that Church;
which have drawn the greatest reproach and odium on the Reformation. And if
they would heartily perform this duty, I doubt not but they would see a
necessity of returning to the Communion of the Church as it is now established,
and to assist her in her conflicts against the Church of Rome: than which,
there is no means more probable to keep out that Popery against which they
pretend so great an aversion. And to induce them hereunto, I shall recommend to
their serious consideration how far the Principles and Practices of the Jesuits
under the name of Doleman, and of the old Regicides under that of Bradshaw, and
our new Conspirators under the Notions of Sidney, do agree, as it is fitted to
my hand in this Parallel.

THE PARALLEL.
1. DOLEMAN.
THere can be no doubt but that the Commonwealth has power to choose their own
fashion of Government, as also to change the same upon reasonable Causes. In
like manner is it evident, that as the Commonwealth has this Authority to
choose and change her Government, so has she also to limit the same with what
Laws and Conditions she pleases. Conference about Succession, part 1. cap. 1.
page, 12, 13.

All Law, both Natural, National, and Positive, does teach us, That Princes are
subject to Law and Order; and that the Commonwealth, which gave them their
Authority for the common good of all, may also restrain, or take the same away
again, if they abuse it to the common evil. The whole Body, though it be
governed by the Prince, as by the Head, yet is it not Inferior, but Superior
to the Prince. Neither so gives the Commonwealth her Authority and Power up to
any Prince, that she depriveth her self utterly of the same, when need shall
require, to use it for her defense, for which she gave it. Part 1. cap. 4. page
72.

And finally, the Power and Authority which the Prince has from the
Commonwealth, is in very truth, not Absolute, but Potestas vicaria and
delegata, i. e. a Power Delegate, or Power by Commission from the Commonwealth;
which is given with such Restrictions, Cautels, and Conditions, yea with such
plain Exceptions, Promises, and Oaths of both Parties (I mean between the King
and Commonwealth, at the day of his Admission o^ Coronation) as if the same be
not kept, but wilfully broken on either Part, then is the other not bound to
observe his Promise neither, though never so solemnly made or swor^^ Part 1.
cap. 4. p. 73.

By this then you see the ground whereon depends the righteous and lawful
Deposition and Chastisement of wicked Princes, viz. Their failing in their Oath
and Promises which they made at their first entrance. -- Then is the
Commonwealth not only free from all Oaths made by her of Obedience or
Allegiance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover for saving the whole
Body, to resist, chasten, or remove such evil Heads, if she be able; for that
otherwise all would come to Destruction, Ruin, and public Desolation. Part 1.
cap. 4. p. 77, 78.

2. BRADSHAW.
THe People of England, as they are those that at the first (as other Countries
have done) did choose to themselves this Form of Government even for Justice
sake, that Justice might be administered, that Peace might be preserved; so,
Sir, they gave Laws to their Governors, according to which they should govern:
and if those Laws should have proved inconvenient or prejudicial to the
Public, they had a Power in them, and reserved to themselves, to alter as they
shall see cause. Kings Trial, p. 64.

CHARLES STUART King of England, The Commons of England assembled in
Parliament, according to the fundamental Power that rests in themselves, have
resolved to bring you to Trial and Judgment, p. 29. If so be the King will go
contrary to the end of his Government, Sir, he must understand that he is but
an Officer of Trust, and he ought to discharge that Trust, and they are to take
order for the Animadversion and Punishment of such an Offending Governor. p.
65.

Sir, Parliaments were ordained for that purpose, to redress the Grievances of
the People. And then, Sir, the Scripture says, They that know their Masters
will and do it not, what follows? The Law is your Master, the Acts of
Parliament. p. 66, 67.

This we know to be Law; Rex habet superiorem, Deum and Legem, etiam and
Curiam; and so says the same Author: and truly, Sir, he makes bold to go a
little further, Debent ei ponere fraenum, They ought to bridle him. p. 65.

That the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power. Vid. Char. p. 30.

The House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of the Kingdom,
p. 48. Which Authority requires you, in the name of the People of England, of
which you are elected King, to answer them, p. 36. Sir, you may not demur the
Jurisdiction of the Court, -- they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of
England; and all your Predecessors and you are responsible to them. p. 44.

For there is a Contract and Bargain between the King and his People, and your
Oath is taken; and certainly, Sir, the Bond is reciprocal. -- Sir, if this Bond
be once broken, farewell Sovereignty. p. 72.

Sir, though you have it by Inheritance in the way that is spoken of, yet it
must not be denied that your Office was an Office of Trust: Now, Sir, if it be
an Office of Inheritance, as you speak of your Title by Descent, let all men
know, that great Offices are seizable and forfeitable, as if you had it but for
a year and for your Life. p. 73.

And, Sir, the People of England cannot be so far wanting to themselves, which
God having dealt so miraculously and gloriously for, they having Power in their
hands, and their Great Enemy, they must proceed to do Justice to themselves and
to You. p. 75.

3. SIDNEY, And other of The True Protestant Party.
GOd has left Nations unto the liberty of setting up such Governments as best
pleased themselves.

The Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the Laws
of that Country made it to be. Sidn. Pap. p. 2.

St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. styles Kings, as well as the Governors under him,
the Ordinance of Man; which cannot have any other sense, but that Men make
them, and give them their Power. Hunt's Postsc. p. 37. By all which it is
evident, That the Succession to the Crown is the Peoples Right. And though the
Succession to the Crown is Hereditary, because the People so appointed it,
would have it so, or consented to have it so; yet in a particular Case, for the
saving the Nation, The whole Line and Monarchy it self may be altered, by the
unlimited Power of the Legislative Authority. Hunt's Postsc. p. 43. Some men
will talk as if they believed themselves, That the Legislative Power is in the
King, when no King of England yet ever pretended to it. A Legislative Authority
is necessary to every Government, and therefore we ought not to want it; and
therefore Parliaments, in which our Government has placed the making of Laws,
cannot be long discontinued. Hunt's Postsc. p. 28.

BRACTON says, that the King has three Superiors; to wit, Deum, Legem, and
Parliamentum: that is, the Power originally in the People of England is
delegated unto the Parliament. Sid. Trial, p. 23.

All Government is founded in Trust, and settled in such a Person, or limited to
such a Family, for the safety and advantage of the People, as well as of the
Ruler.

It is remarkable that there was never a conveyance of the Crown of England to
any person, but upon the tacit Concurrence, and with the virtual or implicit
Consent of the People. And therefore anciently, before any King of England was
actually crowned, the People being first acquaintainted with the day appointed
for that Solemnity, were three several times publicly asked, whether they
would have such a Person to rule over them. Letter from a Gentleman in the City
concerning the D. of Y. p. 13, 14.

Those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the force
of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated without
danger of dissolving the whole Fabric. Sidn. Pap. p. 2.

If he does not like his condition, he may renounce the Crown; but if he
receive it upon that Condition (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive)
and swear to perform it, he must expect that the performance will be exacted,
or revenge taken by those he has betrayed. Sidn. Trial, p. 23.

I will hope there are very few in this Nation so ill instructed, that do not
think it in the power of the People to depose a Prince, who really undertakes
to alienate his Kingdom, or that really acts the destruction or the universal
Calamity of his People. Great consid. relating to the D. of Y. considered, p.
6. And he fixes the Government in the major part.

To give every one his due, is to administer Defense to the Innocent, and by
Authority of Law to subdue the Aggressors of mankind, how great and mighty
soever they be. Fiat justitia therefore. Id. p. 16.

The Author of the Plea to the Dukes Answer, says, that when Kings are ill
ones, God not only approves of their removal, but he himself does it. The
Political Catechism places the Government in the two Houses of Parliament: and
the Letter to a Person of Honor says, There may be a self-deposition of a
Prince actually regnant. Thus far the Parallel.

If there be a Note above Ela, the Sweet Singers of Scotland have reached it,
in crying, Down with the established Government, down with it to the ground.
Cargil a Field-preacher, in the name of the true Presbyterian Kirk of Scotland,
pronounced the King excommunicate, forbidding the people not only to obey him,
but to pray for him. These men set up a Mock-Convention of States (like
Bradshaw's High Court) wherein, without the formality of a Trial, they take a
forfeiture of his Majesty's Crown, and pronounce him deposed: and all the
Officers of the Crown, Privy-Counsellors, Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of
the Army, who adhered to the King, and opposed their Field-Conventicles,
especially the Conforming Clergy, as perjured and apostate persons, were
marked out for destruction. Kid and King, two Field-preachers who were executed
August 14. 1679. for preaching Sedition and Rebellion to some thousands of
armed men, who had set up a Banner, and called it The Banner of Jesus Christ,
in an open War against the King, and pronouncing the King guilty of Perjury,
and that he had no right to govern, having driven Christ out of his Kingdom:
These men in their dying Speeches bore witness to their National and the solemn
League and Covenant (which they believed could not be dispensed with by any
person or Party on earth) against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to it,
especially that of Supremacy, and the Bond for Peace; and against all that
connive at, comply with, or strengthen the hands of the Prelatical, malignant,
and persecuting Party. Kid counted it an honor, that he was counted worthy to
be staged upon such a consideration, and encourages the people to persist,
saying, God would perfect his strength in their weakness; and threatened the
Nation with the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon.

The Scottish book called Naphtali says, Whatever indignity is done to the
Solemn League and Covenant, is no less than doing despite to the Covenant of
Grace in his most eminent exerting himself, and is a sin of the nature as that
of those men who ascribed our Saviors casting out Devils by Beelzebub, but far
greater. They condemn all Acts of State against it, particularly this which
follows, which some would choose to die rather than consent to: I do sincerely
affirm and declare, that I judge it unlawful to Subjects, upon pretense of
Reformation, or other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Leagues or Covenants,
or to take up Arms against the King, or those commissionate by him; and that
all those Gatherings, Convocations, Petitions, Protestations, and erecting and
keeping of Council-Tables that were used in the beginning, and for carrying on
of the late Troubles, were unlawful and seditious: and particularly, that those
Oaths whereof the one was commonly called The National Covenant, as it was
sworn and explained in the year 1638, and thereafter; and the other entitled
The Solemn League and Covenant, were and are in themselves unlawful Oaths, and
were taken by and imposed upon the Subjects of this Kingdom against the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of the same: and that there lies no obligation
upon me or any of the Subjects from the said Oaths, or either of them, to
endeavor any change or alteration of the Government either in Church or State,
as it is now established by the Laws of the Church and Kingdom. But instead of
allowing this Declaration, they declare their assent to all the Rebellions and
Blood that had been shed in defense of their Field-meetings and Covenant
against the Kings Armies, as of Wariston, Guthrie, etc. shortly after the Kings
Restoration; the Rebellion at Pentland-hills and Bothwel-bridge, the Murders
of Melvil Mitchel, and the Ruffians that assassinated the Archbishop; and that
Field-Fast at Jedburgh in Tiveot-dale, where were seven Field-preachers, and
five thousand people, the men being in Arms, to seek God for three things,
(viz.) To put an end to their Persecution, To give them Grace to repent who
took the Bond for Peace, and That he would bless those Lords that were gone to
London. This was such another Fast as those that were kept in the days of their
Q Mary: of which she was wont to say, That she was as much afraid of a Fast of
the Ministers, as of an Army of Soldiers.

And yet if you will believe themselves, or some Advocates of theirs nearer
home, there are not a more innocent, peaceable, and harmless people in the
world; as the Author of Naphtali said of the Rebellion of Pentland hills: There
has not been in Britain such a company of men in Arms for the Covenant and
Cause of God, for sound Judgment, true Piety, Integrity, and fervent Zeal, and
undaunted Courage. But all this Zeal and Courage was still directed against the
King and the established Government and Worship of God. For in the year 1679.
the Convention of Estates gave the King a Tax of 30000 l. to maintain a
Regiment of Foot, three Companies of Dragoons, and three Troops of Horse, to
suppress the Field-Conventicles; which met in Arms: against which their Leaders
preached, saying, It was given by the enemies of Christ to drive him out of his
Kingdom; and it would be as great a fin to pay it, as it was in Judas to betray
Christ: and that now was the time to try them whether they would have Christ
for their King or no. And the same Ruffians that murdered the Archbishop, did
several times lay wait for the Collectors of this Tax; and they so perplexed
the peoples Consciences, that a Servant of the Earl of Dondonald fell
distracted through trouble of mind for having assisted his Master in laying the
Tax on Renscot.

This is that little Sister for whom the Noble Peer pleaded, that having no
Breasts, she might, like the Amazons, have liberty to take up Arms, and once
more enter our Nation, and rent us in pieces as formerly. And it were easy to
show, from the Writings of some of our own Nation, that the same Principles
have been preached to the people of this Land, who have greedily swallowed and
digested the same, and think themselves under the same obligation of Covenant
as those barbarous people. Dr. Lake in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor, says,
That discoursing some Rebels that were then in Goal in Scotland, who did openly
avow the Rebellion, and refused to pray for the King, He told them they were
variously reported to be Jesuits, or Jesuitically affected, or to be
Fifth-Monarchy-men, wild arrant Fanatics. They told him they were neither one
nor other, but true Presbyterians according to the Covenant. He replying, That
we had Presbyterians in our own Kingdom, who yet did not obstinately maintain
such King-deposing and murdering Doctrines; They told him, he did not
understand them; for they believed the same Doctrines, but only wanted Power
and Courage to act them. And at their execution they desired the people to take
notice, That they died true Presbyterians, according to the Covenant.

It is another Artifice of these People, agreeable to the practice of the
Papists, that they keep their People in ignorance, and under the power of an
implicit Faith and blind Obedience, as the Papists do; and bring them up in
strong prejudices against their Governors. Some have been so mad, as to baptize
their Children into the National Covenant; which they are not ashamed to
compare with The Covenant of Grace.

Mr. Alexander Gibson, Clerk of his Majesty's Privy Council, certified, May 13.
1678. that one David Ferguson taken at a Field-Conventicle, being asked why he
kept not to his Parish Church, answered, That he had sworn the Covenant,
whereby he was obliged not to hear Bishops, Deans, or Curats: and that others
being asked why they kept Conventicles, answered, To hear Gods truth: and being
demanded what that was; they answered, They could not tell. And upon
examination, they could not say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, or ten
Commandments.

Mr. Jo. Dickson preached to them, That all the Bishops and their Clergy never
did nor ever will convert one Soul. They believe without farther enquiry (being
forbid to read the Books written for Obedience and Conformity) that Episcopacy
is Antichristian, and Presbytery is Christ's own institution. They hold with the
Papists, That the actions of their Kirk and Teachers in Field-Conventicles, and
armed and fighting men, is not Rebellion, because the Presbytery is not subject
to the Secular Power: That the Subjects may enter into Solemn Leagues and
Covenants, without and against the Prince: That Kings may be excommunicate and
deposed; which some of them have practiced against his present Majesty: That
not the King in some cases, but the Kirk have power to convocate and dissolve
Assemblies; and that they may make Laws without the King: That Salvation is not
to be had but in their Communion. They enjoin new Articles of belief; as, That
Episcopacy is an Antichristian Order; and so are the Church-Festivals and
Ceremonies: That the Oath of Supremacy is an unlawful Oath, and the People are
absolved from it: That the Power of the King is originally in the People, and
that there is a mutual obligation between them; and if the King perform not his
part, the People are free from performing theirs: That for the good of the Kirk
and Gods Cause, they may rebel against their Prince: That the Prince nor any
Secular Power can silence or deprive a Minister, who is subject to none but
Christ: That Passive Obedience to the unjust commands of a Prince, is as great
a sin as Active Obedience to the same: That a private person may kill a
Magistrate by impulse of the Spirit, after the Example of Phinees, to deliver
the Kirk from Oppression: That it is lawful to kill Protestant Bishops and
their Curates, as enemies to true Godliness, and such as would bring the Kirk
to a slavish dependence on the King. James Mitchel, who was executed for
attempting the murder of the Archbishop, said in his dying Speech, They are
all blessed that shall take the proud Prelates and dash their brains against
the stones; as afterward some Ruffians did by the Archbishop.

These are their Principles, and all these they have practiced, when they had
opportunities. They come little behind the Papists for equivocation and
persisting in falsehood, where they think their lives or the good of the Kirk
concerned.

Jo. King being charged for bearing Arms against the King in the late
Rebellion, denied it, until one that apprehended him swore that he had both
Sword and Pistols. To which he answered, he did it not in an hostile manner:
which was a Jesuitical Equivocation.

He bore testimony against that woeful Supremacy so much applauded, and
universally owned of such of whom better things might be expected, as usurping
on Christ's Royal Authority, spoiling him of his Royal Crown, Scepter, Sword,
and Royal Robe, by taking those Princely Ornaments to invest a man whose breath
is in his nostrils. And both Kid and King bore their Testimonies against the
Oath of Allegiance and Bond of Peace; of which, to satisfy the Reader, I give
him a Copy.

I A. B. for testification of my faithful obedience to my most gracious
Sovereign Charles King of Great Britain, etc. affirm, testify, and declare, by
this my solemn Oath, That I acknowledge my said Sovereign only Supreme
Governor of this Kingdom, over all Persons, and in all Causes; and that no
foreign Prince, Power, State, or Person, Civil or Ecclesiastic, has any
Jurisdiction, Power, or Superiority over the same: and therefore I do utterly
renounce and forsake all foreign Power, Jurisdictions, and Authorities; and
shall to my utmost power defend, assist, and maintain his Majesty's
Jurisdiction aforesaid, against all mortals; and shall never decline his
Majesty's Power and Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to God.

The form of the Bond.
I A. B. underscribing, do faithfully bind and oblige me, that I, my Wife,
Barnes, and Servants respectively, shall no ways be present at any Conventicles
and disorderly Meetings in time coming; but shall live orderly, in obedience to
the Law, under the penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament made
there-anent. As also I bind and oblige me, that my whole Tenants and Cotters
respectively, their Wives, Barnes, and Servants, shall likewise refrain and
abstain from the said Conventicles and other illegal Meetings not authorized by
Law; and that they shall live orderly, in obedience to the Law: And further,
that I nor they shall receipt, supply or commune with forfeited persons,
intercommuned Ministers, or vagrant Preachers; but shall do our utmost
endeavor to apprehend their persons. And in case my said Tenants, Cotters, and
their foresaids shall contravene, I shall take or apprehend any person or
persons guilty thereof, and present to the Judge Ordinars, that they may be
fined or imprisoned therefore, as is provided in the Acts of Parliament made
there-anent; otherwise I shall remove them and their Families from my ground.
And if I shall fail herein, I shall be liable to such penalties as the said
Delinquents have incurred by the Laws, consenting to the registration hereof in
the Books of his Majesty's Privy Council, or Books of any other Judges
competent, that Letters and Executorials may be direct hereupon, in form as
effairs, and constitutes my Procurators.

The Field-preachers damned this Bond, as an Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Illegal
proceeding: and Mr. Welsh a Field-preacher having condemned the people for not
coming armed to their Meetings with Swords and Pistols to defend the Gospel,
said, That the subscribing this Bond was a renouncing their Baptism, and making
a Covenant with the Devil more express and worse than that of Witches. And Mr.
John Dickson at a Conventicle, May 26. 1678. said, That those who subscribed it
had committed a greater sin than the sin of the Holy Ghost, and were already in
Hell. This Mr. Welsh, as Ravilliack Redivivus relates it, preaching to about
seven thousand people, told them, That the King, the Nobles and Prelates were
the Murderers of Christ: And sitting down in his Chair, he said, O People, I
will be silent; speak, O People, and tell me what good thing the King has done
since his coming home; yea, has he not done all the mischief a Tyrant could
do? And at another time he said, That God would assert the Cause of
Pentland-hills, in spite of the Curates and their Masters the Prelates, and in
spite of the Prelates and their Master the King, and his Master the Devil.

It was but a little before the Duke of York's going to Scotland, that they
were forming their Presbyteries after the Model of Ignatius, dividing the
Nation into several Provinces, each of which was to have a Provincial, and over
all there was appointed a General, who, as Ignatius, had been a Soldier, and
was thought fit to lead an Army. The Provincials were to take an account of the
growth or decay of their Party, to mark out their Friends and their Enemies,
and to renew their Contributions, and to give account of all to their General,
who was to reside at Edinburgh or London.

If this design had succeeded, no two Factions in the world had been more
like, whatever they are now, than the Jesuit and Fanatic. Which was the
Incubus, and which the Succubus that brought forth the two last hellish Plots,
or whether they were not Twins; or as it is in the Riddle, Matter me Genuit,
eadem mox gignitur ex me, may puzzle the Reader to resolve. It is certain the
same plastic Principles formed them both, and the Subjects were equally
disposed to receive those Forms which have so affrighted the Nations: and there
is little difference (the name excepted) between a Clement and a Melvil, a
Ravilliack and a Mitchel, a Bradshaw and a Cargil, or the Jesuitical and a
Fanatical Regicide: both make the King accountable to the People; both are for
excommunicating, deposing, and assassinating of Kings; both have been such
Firebrarnds as have kindled consuming fires wherever they have fixed their
cloven feet. It is no great wonder that they are sometimes transformed into
Angels of light, seeing Satan himself may be so transformed: neither of them
can do their work, if they should appear in their proper colors, armed with
Pistols and Blunderbusses, in flames of fire, and an horrible stench of
Gunpowder and Brimstone: they come clothed with Zeal as with a Cloak, and in
Sheeps clothing, with demure looks and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of
the Simple; but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, and by their fruits you may
know them.

It is not a pretense of acting for a Good Old Cause, or the Catholic Church,
that can justify unnatural Rebellions and Bloodshed: they who do such things,
are of their Father the Devil, though they own Rome or Geneva for their Mother.
It is said of Augustus, that meeting with a young man in the Country exactly
like him in growth and features, he asked him merrily whether his Mother was
never at Rome. No, says the young man, but my Father has been there; meaning,
it was more likely that Augustus and he had one Father, than that he should be
the Son of Augustus. Though our Fanatic Plots were conceived by those that
were never at Rome, yet the Principles that begot them, most certainly came
from thence. The Fanatic Zeal embracing Popish Principles, has brought forth
many of those Plots and Conspiracies which have so often disturbed our Peace
and Government. And by this time I hope the vizard and pretense of these men
will vanish, (viz.) that such of them as have suffered by the hand of Justice,
have died as Patriots of their Country, for their zeal against Popery, and in
defense of the Liberties of the People against Tyranny and Arbitrary
Government. This has been pleaded a thousand times in behalf of a Noble Peer;
and persons of the same Principles, but of the lowest rank, have pleaded it for
themselves. This design (says College) is not only against me, but against
all the Protestants in England that have had the courage to oppose the Popish
Plot; and dies praying that his may be the last Protestants blood that
murdering Church of Rome may shed in Christendom. And in his dying Speech he
says, He went armed to Oxford to defend himself in case the Papists should make
any attempt by way of Massacre or Invasion; and that he came thither to live
and die with the Parliament, if the Papists and their Party (as was sworn and
feared they would) had offered to destroy the Parliament. And generally all
that died as Conspirators, endeavored to persuade the People that they fell as
a Sacrifice to Popery, and died Martyrs for the Old Cause; which has been no
other than the opposing of Monarchy and the established Religion, under the
odious names of Popery and Tyranny; when they have had no more sense of true
Religion and Obedience, than the Ribbons intended to be worn in their Hats,
that could only declare No Popery, no Tyranny; but was intended to distinguish
a Party for cutting of Throats.

Thus I have shown the Intrigues between the Papists and Fanatics to destroy
the established Church and Government of the English Nation; than which, there
is none in the world settled upon better foundations, for Piety, Liberty, and
Moderation; nor has any had more signal tokens of God's Almighty Providence,
and wonderful Blessings. We may truly say in the words of David concerning his
enemies, Many a time have they assaulted us from our youth up, but they have
not prevailed against us. We have been like a City besieged by two potent
enemies; and while one Party has attacked us on one side. the other has taken
advantage to storm us on the other: and though they never could agree among
themselves, yet they always conspire both in Principles and Practices to destroy
the established Government both of Church and State. And it is not to be
wondered if it be so for the future, seeing thus it has been not only with us
from the time of the Reformation; but ever since the Gospel was preached, it
has had many enemies confederate against it. For of a truth (says St. Peter,
Acts 4.27.) against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, have been
(associated) or gathered together.

From these Premises, I do earnestly recommend to the Reason and Consciences of
my dear Countrymen, that have any love to the Protestant Religion, these
following Conclusions.

I.
That the Papists have ever since the Reformation endeavored to raise up Sects
and Differences among Protestants, by disguised Emissaries among the Zealous
and Wellmeaning people, to seduce them to Separation.

II.
That they look on these Practices as the most effectual means to bring back
the people to the Romish Religion.

III.
That for this purpose they have been industrious to deprave the Government of
our Kings and Bishops as Tyrannical, the Liturgy as Popish, and extolling
Extemporary Prayers as Spiritual; encouraging an unlicensed Ministry, and
preaching up Liberty of Conscience; and that it is to be obtained and
maintained by the Sword: And that all persons who preach and practice such
things, do really and effectually propagate the designs of the Papists, and
ever have had, and shall have encouragement from them.

IV.
That it is manifest that our late horrid Wars, Rapine, and the Murder of our
Royal Martyr, and Banishment of our Sovereign, were effected by the contrivance
of the Papists and Fanatics in conjunction.

V.
That the Commotions and Rebellions in Scotland, ever since 1639, sprung from
the same Counsel and Conduct; and that the Papists, in hopes of effecting our
ruin, will not cease to carry on the like designs, so long as our Divisions
give them the like opportunities.

VI.
That the pretenses of some men to the true Protestant Religion, are but vain,
while they practice such Rapine, Oppression, and Bloodshed as the very Pagans
and Infidels do abhor.

VII.
That Obstinate Dissenters are, before God and men, guilty of all the real
danger of Popery's prevailing in these Nations on the ruin of the established
Protestant Religion.

VIII.
That the Church of England is the greatest Enemy that the Papists have,
according to their own Apprehensions and declared Judgment; and consequently,
wholly innocent of any Designs, Compliances, or Approaches to the Church of
Rome; seeing it still persists in the same Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship
for which the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days laid down their lives.

IX.
That those of the Communion of the Church of England, ever since the
Reformation, have given proof of their fidelity to the Crown, and opposition to
Popery, as well as Heresy, Schism, and Rebellion: which has procured them
equal hatred and opposition from the Papists and Fanatics.

X.
That the Providence of Almighty God has wonderfully appeared in preserving
the established Church and Government from the many violent and subtle
Attempts and Conspiracies of the several Factions.

XI.
That they who pretend Religion to countenance Faction and Rebellion, do least
regard it, and generally do destroy that which they pretend to build up.

XII.
That Covenants and Associations without and against the will of the Prince, do
end in Confusion and Bloodshed.

XIII.
That common people are easily seduced with fair pretenses of Liberty and
redress of Grievances, by such as neither intend nor are able to effect it.

XIV.
That there has not been a Succession of four such Princes lineally descended,
for eminency in Religion, Peaceableness, and Clemency, in any Age or Nation,
since our Saviors time, as among us: And therefore the Murmurings, Seditions,
Conspiracies, and Rebellions of Subjects are the more to be condemned: and all
unlawful endeavors to break the Line of such a Succession, is to entrench on
God's Prerogative, and to distrust his Mercy, who, as old Brithwold said, will
take care for the Succession.

XV.
That generally Conspirators and Traitors, whether they succeed or not, live
and die impenitently; and if so, that they procure to themselves damnation,
Romans 13.

XVI.
That to murmur, resist, and rebel against such a Government as by God and our
Laws is established in Church and State, is to resist the Ordinance of God, to
disgrace and betray our Religion, and to bring upon our selves both temporal
and eternal destruction.

XVII.
Lastly, That all the Outcrys made by the Fanatics since the discovery of the
Popish Plot, have been directed chiefly to the ruin of the Established
Government both in Church and State, as if they favored that Persuasion, and
as if none but themselves were enemies to Popery: whose separation from the
Church established, in the judgment of the wisest, even of their own Party, is
most like to bring it in; and nothing more like to keep it out than Obedience
to the King, and Conforming to the Church as it is now established.



Thus Baxter in his Preface to the Defense of the Cure, p. 17. Our Division
gratifieth the Papists, and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion; and that
more than most of you seem to believe or regard, speaking to the Separatists.
And by that separation, Popery (says he) will get so great advantage as may
hazard us all; and we may lose that which the several Parties do contend about.
Defense of the Cure, Introduction, p. 52. Two way especially Popery will grow
out of our Divisions: First, By the odium and scorn of our Disagreements,
Inconsistency, and multiplied Sects, they will persuade people that we must
come for Unity to them, or else run mad, and crumble into dust, and
individuals: thousands have been drawn to Popery, or confirmed in it by this
Argument already. And I am persuaded that all the Arguments else in Bellarmine
and all other Books, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the
multitude of Sects among our selves. Yea, some Professors of Religious
strictness, of great esteem for Godliness, have turned Papists themselves, when
they were giddy, and wearied with turnings, and when they had run from Sect to
Sect, and found no consistency in any. Secondly, Either the Papists by
increasing the Divisions would make them be accounted seditious, rebellious,
and dangerous to the public peace; or else when so many Parties are
constrained to beg and wait for Liberty, the Papists may not be shut out alone,
but have Toleration with the rest. And shall they (says Mr. Baxter) use our
hands to do their work, and pull their freedom out of the fire? We have already
unspeakably served them, both in this, and in abating the Odium of the
Gunpowder-plot. ana their other Treasons, Insurrections, and Spanish Invasion.
And in Sacrilegious Desertion, p. 103, 104. We are endangered by Divisions
principally, because the self-conceited part of Religious people would not be
ruled by their Pastors, but would rule them -- you have made more Papists than
ever you or we are like to recover. Nothing is considerable that any Papist
has to say, till he comes to your Case (and says) Does not Experience tell
you, that without Papal unity and force this people will never be ruled or
united? It is you that tempt them to use Fire and Faggot, that will not be
ruled: and must you that should be our Comfort, become our Shame, and break our
hearts, and make men Papists by your temptations? Woe to the world because of
offenses, and woe to some by whom they come.

But a much wiser and better man than Mr. Baxter has demonstrated the same
thing Preface to his Sermons, Sect. 18. Three ways (says he) our dissenting
Brethren, though not intentionally and purposely, yet really and eventually
have been the great Promoters of the Roman interest among us. 1. By putting to
their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy: and it is very well known
to many, what rejoicing that Vote brought to the Romish Party, how even in Rome
they sung their Io Paeans on the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now
the day is ours, now is the fatal Blow given to the Protestant Religion in
England. 2. By opposing the interest of Rome with more violence than reason. 3.
By frequent mistaking the Question, but especiallly through the necessity of
some false principle or other, which having once imbibed, they think themselves
bound to maintain, whatever becomes of the common Cause of our Reformation;
which may suffer as much through some men's folly and indiscretion, who pretend
to be the most zealous Protestants, as by all the arts and designs of our open
enemies: for many a man, when he thought most to make it sure, has quite
marred a good business by over-doing it.

FINIS.

