THE LORD CHANCELLOR OF SCOTLAND HIS SPEECH To the King in NEWCASTLE, JVLY,
1646. As it was sent up by a Faithful Hand from thence.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for Rich. Tomlines at the S^nne in
Pie-Corner. 1646.

(...)^^^ter of 13th. instant, from Newcastle, where several Coppies had been
given out (as was supposed) by the Lord Chancellors consent and direction; and
a transcript thereof falling into my hands, I thought it so worthy of publik
view, that although the Scottish Commissioners had omitted to Print it; yet I
have done both them and England that right as to commit it to the Press: I
shall for present say no more on it but this, Well weigh all things in it.

August 29. 1646. Thine Ingenuously, I. I.

THE LORD CHANCELLOR OF SCOTLAND his SPEECH, To the King in Newcastle, July
1646. As it was sent up by a faithful Hand from thence.
YOur Majesty was pleased on Monday last to eall the Lords of Your Council and
Committee, to acquaint them with the Propositions, and told them before you
would deliver Your Answer, You would make the same known to them: The time
assigned to the Commissioners stay is so short, and the consequence of your
Majesty's Answer of so great importance, either for the preservation or ruin
of Your Crown, and Kingdoms, as we could not be answerable to God, nor to
that Trust reposed in us, unless we represent to your Majesty how necessary it
is that your Majesty assent to the Propositions as the condition of affairs
now stand in so great extremity, and that the danger and loss of your refusal
will be remediless, and bring on a sudden ruin and destruction.

I shall begin first with the last, which is the Danger, and shall next speak a
word of the Remedy.

The differences betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament (which no man knows
better then your Majesty's self,) are grown to such a height, that after many
bloody battles, the Parliament having your Majesty, all the Forts, Garrisons,
and strong holds in their hands, having your Majesty's Revenue, Excise,
Assessements, Sequestrations, and the Authority to raise all the men and money
in the Kingdom, and having, after many victories and great successes, a strong
Army on Foot, are now in such a posture for strength and power: they are in a
capacity to do what they will, both in Church and State. And some are so
afraid, and others so unwilling to submit themselves to your Majesty's
Government, that they desire not you, nor any of your Race, longer to reign
over them: But the people are so wearied of the War, and great burdens they
do groan under, are so loath to have Monarchical Government destroyed, that
they dare not attempt to cast it totally off, till once they send Propositions
of Peace to your Majesty, least the People (without whose concurrence they are
not able to carry on their design) should fall from them; but after so great
War and trouble, that they may have a perfect security from opposition and
Arbitrary power, they have resolved upon the Propositions, which are tendered to
your Majesty, as that without which the Kingdom and your people cannot be in
safety, and that there cannot be a firm Peace upon any other terms.

Your Majesty's friends in the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland,
(after much wrasling) did consent to the sending of those Propositions, or to
be rated the hinderers of Peace, or otherwise to send no Propositions at all.

And now Sir, if your Majesty (as God forbid) shall refuse to assent to the
Propositions, You will lose all Your friends in the Houses, lose the City, and
all the Country. And all England will join against you as one man; they will
process and depose you, and set up another Government; they will charge us to
deliver your Majesty to them, and to render their Garrisons, and remove our
Armies out of England, and upon your Majesty's refusal of the Propositions,
both Kingdoms will be constrained for their mutual safety, to agree and
settle Religion and peace without You, which (to our unspeakable grief) will
ruin your Majesty and your Posterity, and if your Majesty refuse our
faithful advice (who desire nothing on Earth more then the preservation of
your Majesty's Royal Throne.) And if your Majesty lose England by your
wilfulness, you will not be permitted to come and reign in Scotland.

Sir, we have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have asked Counsel and
direction from God, and have had our most serious thoughts upon the Remedy,
but can find no other to save your Crown and Kingdoms, then your Majesty's
assenting to the Propositions, and dares not say but they are higher in some
things, (if it were in our power and option to remedy) then we approved of,
but when we see no other means for curing the distempers of the Kingdoms, and
closing the breach between your Majesty and your Parliament, Our most humble
and safe advise is, your Majesty will be graciously, pleased to assent to them
as the only way to establish your Throne; Because your Majesty shall be
thereby received again in your Parliament, with the applause and acclamations
of your people, by your Royal presence all friends will be strengthened, and
all Enemies, (who fear nothing so much as the granting the Propositions) will
be weakened; your Majesty will have a fit opportunity hereafter, to offer such
Propositions as You and your Parliament in wisdom shall think fit, for your
Crown and Kingdom, the Armies will be disbanded, and your people finding the
sweet fruit of a peaceable Government: you will gain their hearts and
affections, and that will be your Majesty's strength and glory, and will
recover all that you have lost in this time of tempest and of trouble.

And if it please God to incline your Royal heart to this advise of your
humble, and faithful servants, who next to the honor and service of God,
esteem nothing more precious, then the safety of your Person, and Crown: our
actions shall make it appear, that we esteem no hazard too great for your
Majesty's safety, and that we are willing to sacrifice our Lives and fortunes
for establishing your Throne and just Right.

FINIS.

