KING DAVID's Danger and Deliverance: OR, THE CONSPIRACY OF Absolon and
Achitophel defeated. IN A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of EXON, On
the Ninth of September, 1683. Being the day of Thanksgiving Appointed for the
Discovery of the Late Fanatical Plot.

By Thomas Long B. D. one of the Prebendaries.

Psalm. 129.1,2. Many a time have they fought against me from my youth up -- yea
many a time have they vexed me from my youth up; but they have not prevailed
against me.

Qui haec non videt, Caecus; Qui videt, nec laudat, Ingratus; Qui Laudanti
reluctatur, Insanus est.

August. de Civit. Dei, l. 1. c. 7. LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman
Collins, for Fincham Gardener at the White-horse in Ludgate Street. To be sold
by Walter Davies in Amen-corner 1683.

To his Grace, CHRISTOPHER Lord Duke of Albemarl, etc. Lord Lieutenant of the
County of DEVON and the City of EXON, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, One of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, And Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.

The AUTHOR Humbly devoteth Himself, And this Thanksgiving-SERMON.

BOOKS lately published by the same AUTHOR.
THe Unreasonableness of Separation: the Second Part. Or, a further Impartial
Account of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the
Communion of the Church of England. Begun by Edw. Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of
St. Paul's. Continued from 1640. to 1681. With special Remarks on the Life and
Actions of Mr. Richard Baxter. No Protestant, but the Dissenters Plot
Discovered and Defeated: Being an Answer to the late Writings of several
Eminent Dissenters. Wherein their Designs against the Established Church of
England, and the unreasonableness of Separation are more fully manifested.
Both printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Dan. Brown, at the Black Swan
and Bible without Temple bar.

A Vindication of the Primitive Christians, in point of Obedience to their
Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book entitled The Life of Julian, written
by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also the Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared, in
defense of Dr. Hicks. Together with an Appendix: being a more full and distinct
Answer to Mr. Tho. Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is added the
Life of Julian enlarged.
Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, and sold by Robert Kettlewell, at the
Hand and Scepter over against St. Dunstan's Church.

PSALM. 64. v. 9. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God: for
they shall wisely consider of his doing. In the Bishops Translation it is thus:
All men that see it shall say, This has God done: for they shall perceive that
it is his doing.
ST. Athanasius says, that the Psalms are so composed as to represent the case
and condition of every man. And though I thought it impossible to find in
sacred or profane History a fit Parallel for this horrid Conspiracy, yet by a
few meditations on this Psalm, our present Case appeared to be so fully
described, as if the Royal Prophet had penned a Prophecy of our times, rather
than a History of his own; there being scarce a considerable circumstance in
the rise, growth, discovery, or defeating of the one, which has not a parallel
line in the other: whether we consider Gods many miraculous deliverances of the
King, the Kings excessive Clemency to an unworthy People, or that Peoples
deplorable ingratitude both to God and the King. Nor was there more of the
Malice of the Devil and unreasonable men in contriving, nor of the Mercy of God
in defeating the Conspiracy against King David, than in this against King
Charles; which by that time the Parallel is drawn, will so appear, that all
that see it shall say, This has God done, etc.

The Title does not declare the occasion of the Psalm, which consists of Prayer
and Praise, and is directed to the chief Musician, to be set as a holy Anthem
to perpetuate the memory of a gracious deliverance from a formidable Enemy that
sought after his life. It is not agreed who this Enemy was. Dr. Hammond, with
some others, think it to be Saul; but the whole contexture of the Psalm
expresses the Rebellion of Absolon and Achitophel so fully, that there is not
a thread wanting or misplaced. It is a Rule with Expositors, that where the
Title of the Psalm is defective, it ought to be referred to the preceding
Psalm, wherein, v. 11. the Prophet gives himself the Title of King, which he
never did while Saul was alive, and therefore some very learned Expositors
conclude that it was written (contra Achitophelem and Collegas ejus) against
Achitophel and his Confederates.

Instead of a Comment on the Text, I shall only join the two authentic
Translations together, and there will need no other Exposition; for thus it
runs: All men shall see it ( i. e. the Iniquity of the Conspiracy, and the
righteous Judgments of God on the Conspirators) and fear, and shall declare the
work of God, saying, This has God done: for they shall perceive that it is his
work, and shall wisely consider of his doing. The Parallel runs in five or six
lines.

The first shows the Person against whom the Conspiracy was aimed. The second,
a Character of the persons joined in the Conspiracy. The third, the Matters of
Fact, or overt Actions. The fourth, the Methods and Arts used to bring it to
effect. The fifth, Gods Goodness and Wisdom in the discovery and defeating of
it. And sixthly, if our Gratitude may run parallel with that of David, God may
have the Glory, and we may enjoy the Comfort and Continuance of this signal
Mercy.
First, of the Person against whom the Conspiracy was intended, King David; a
King who was the greatest Favorite of Heaven, who had been exercised with as
many Troubles, delivered and established on his Throne by as many Miracles, as
ever the People of Israel were till they were settled in Canaan. And it is no
less a wonder, that after so good a King had been so long in the Throne (which
was well-nigh forty years) and God had done so great things for him, and he for
God, his Church, and the true Religion, against all Opposition; when for Plenty
and Peace, Laws and Liberties, Religion, and all necessary helps to Devotion
and true Piety; when for so long a time there had been no decay no leading into
captivity, but their Sons did grow up as young Plants, and their Daughters were
as the polished corners of the Temple, that there should be any complaining in
their streets: Much more, that the People should grow weary of such a King as
was the Fountain of such Blessings, and, like Lucifer, not content with the
beatifick Vision, and the pleasures at Gods right hand, confederating with evil
Angels to divide the Glory and Power of that Kingdom among themselves, be
deservedly condemned to chains of darkness, and reserved to the judgment of the
great day.

King David, v. 4. is called a perfect man; not that he was exempted from
humane infirmties, but as to the main: he was a Prince chosen by God out of all
the Tribes and Families of Israel, endowed with all Royal virtues of Fortitude,
Wisdom, and Clemency, that might qualify him for Government; a man after Gods
own heart, who minded the building of Gods house more than his own: for in the
midst of all his troubles, when he was driven to shift for himself from one
place and Kingdom to another, he gave the Priests a special charge to secure
the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 15.25. And it was his good will to Sion, that created
him so much ill will from his and Gods Enemies: they were for Conventicles at
Hebron, he for the Uniformity of Gods Worship at Jerusalem; and hinc illae
Lacrimae. Those Dissenters knew they could not destroy Gods Vine, but by a blow
at the root of that Royal Oak that supported it. No Prince ruled more strictly
by the Laws of God, and the Statutes of Israel, than David: Psalm. 78.73. He fed
them with a faithful and true heart, and ruled them prudently with all his
power. The greatest imperfection in David's government, was his too great
indulgence to such as Absolon and Shimei, who abused it, to an attempt of his
overthrow: for he granted to some who had been his professed Enemies, more
Favors, Privileges, and Dignities, than other munificent Princes have done to
their approved Friends.

This good King is said, v. 4. to be thus persecuted while he thought himself
secure, Nil tale metuentem. His Innocence was his chief Guard; which caused him
to expose himself in all places, among all sorts of persons: having deserved
well of all, he suspected none: Whatever Clamours were noised against him, he
was not conscious of any guilt of Arbitrary government or Oppression, or any
deviation from the established Worship of God to Idolatry; though in the time
of his banishment among idolatrous Nations, he met with such Temptations, as
none but a true Israelite, in whose spirit there is no guile, could resist. Yet
wanted there not some that slandered the footsteps of Gods anointed.

The best men are least suspicious: it is Impiety and Guilt that multiplieth
Fears and Jealousies, and makes men froward and impatient: Malefactors are
always Enemies to those that have the power to punish them, knowing they cannot
be safe, but by diverting their Governors from the execution of the Laws. The
best Princes, like the best men, have usually the most Enemies, as will appear
in

The second Parallel, the persons joined in the Conspiracy.

Wherein Achitophel was the first Mover, and the great Wheel that gave motion
to all the rest. A treacherous false Brother, as his name signifies, Frater
defectus vel ruinae: That person to whom David had respect, Psalm. 41.9. My own
familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his
heel against me. Wherein he was a type of Judas that betrayed his Lord and
Master. He was (as Tacitus says of Sejanus) facinorum omnium repertor; the
spirit and life of that wicked Association, which from its first conception was
impregnated with an Assassination. He had been a long time David's Counselor,
as he is called by way of Eminency, the chief Minister of State: He was
preferred, 1 Chronicles. 27.33. before Hushai, though he is styled the kings friend
and companion; before Jehoiada and Abiathar, and Joab the Kings General. He had
been entrusted with the Arcana Imperii. A man of great Experience, and no less
Subtilty: he knew the Intrigues of all the Factions in Israel, and of all the
neighboring Princes; and by his compliance had insinuated into the affections
of them all so, that he drew them all into an Association with him: Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, and them that dwell at Tire. He had the art
of uniting them to himself, who never could agree with one another: With all
these, the Counsel of Achitophel was as if they had enquired at the Oracle of
God; and no wonder, for it was so with David and Absolon also. He had seen
diverse Revolutions of the Government (Quorum pars magna fuit.) from Saul to his
Son Ishboseth, from Ishboseth's short Reign to David; and now he sets up for
Absolon: and who would not confederate with the Kings Son, having the Kings
great Counselor on his side!

We cannot find any cause given by David for Achitophel's Revolt, who had been
obliged by all the Favors that a potent and prosperous Prince could heap on a
well-deserving Subject: and therefore must impute it to his own ambitious and
restless spirit: for a right Gilonite he was, a Revolter and Renegade from
Party to Party, as his interest and ungovernable spirit led him. Perhaps the
prudent Prince had rejected some of his rash Counsels, his assuming and
engrossing the sole power of making War and Peace, his violating
well-established Leagues, his Delenda Carthago, his courting the Affections of
the People, alienating them from their Prince, sowing Seeds of Discontent and
Sedition among them. For impatient he was of any Discontent, or Corrival in the
Kings favor; he never did nor could, in all the Revolutions, endure a
Superior: for when he endeavored to assume the Command of Absolon's Forces to
himself, (as we read, 2 Samuel 17.1,2. I will choose out 12000 men, and will up
and follow David, (i. e.) he would have headed the Rebellion, and left Absolon
to shift for himself) his design being frustrated by the seasonable advice of
Hushai, it so grated on his Spirit, that he could find no rest but in his
Grave. Evident it is, that his grand design was to have broken the Chain of
Succession to the Crown of Israel: and though he pretended to set up Absolon,
yet it is apparent that his aim was to assume the Government to himself: for
when he perceived that Absolon was persuaded to command his own Forces in
person, and in open Field, and not cowardly to assassinate his King, being
unarmed (which one of his most daring Captains refused to do) he quite deserted
young Absolon.

I know that some Divines tell us that Achitophel was incensed against David by
a revengeful spirit for the sake of Bathsheba, who was the Daughter of Eliam, 2 Samuel 11.4. and Eliam, Achitophel's Son, chap. 23.34. But here lies a Mystery:
Chileab, old David's second Son, was yet alive, though some would have him
dead; he was to be excluded from the Succession for Absolon's sake, as is
pretended: but that Chain being broken, though but in one link, the whole would
be laid aside as useless and burthensom; and then, notwithstanding Absolon's
pretense, the Crown might have descended to his own little Solomon.

But what if David were guilty in the matter of Bathsheba? our Achitophel, of
all men living, was unfit to revenge that sin on his Sovereign, of which he was
so notoriously guilty himself, who, as an old Fornicator, having consumed his
own strength on strange Women, having incestuously abused the Mother and
Daughter, as some modern Historians report, did, also (to cut off all hopes of
a Reconciliation between the Father and Son) persuade Absolon to go in to his
Fathers Concubines, and that in the sight of all Israel; than which, as
Sanctius says, the Devil himself could not have given a more pernicious
Counsel, nor, if he had been incarnate, done a viler act. And by this time the
Devil was entered into the heart of Achitophel, and drove him furiously to
destruction, and (quod facis, fac cito) his design of rising suddenly, that
very night, with his twelve thousand Brisk Boys, and falling on David, while he
was weak and weary, to seize his person, and smite him only, knowing that in
him who was the breath and life of all his Loyal People, they would all be as
the King was, but dead men, 2 Samuel 17.2, and 3.

This design, I say, when it was brought to the birth, though at first it
pleased Absolon and all the Elders of Israel, v. 4. yet on second thoughts they
all abhorred the bloudiness of that execrable design; and God heard the Prayer
of David, and the Supplications which were incessantly made for him, and
confounded that devilish device, turning the counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness; who being deserted of all his Confederates, deserts himself too;
and foreseeing that Absolon would be defeated, and all his own evil Arts and
Impostures laid open; his suborning false Witnesses, his encouraging seditious
Petitions, his lying Slanders against the Lords Anointed, his obstructing the
execution of Justice, and acting arbitrarily against the Loyal Party; he
becomes desperate, and thinks of nothing but going (with Judas) to his own
place, as the Text says, he went home and hanged himself. Morbus ob nimiam;
Animi tristitiam.
But the word (...), signifies Suffocatus est, he was suffocated; and so the
Septuagint render it (...), and R. Elias says he was strangulatus ab Angina, he
died of a Squinzy in his Throat: His own Choler, his gross and indigested Lies
and Perjuries, were instead of an Halter. So that though he escaped the hands
of David's Executioners, the Vengeance of God pursued him, and suffered him not
to live. Qui ejusmodi ingenii sunt quodvis libentius subeunt quam ignominiam
and dedecus.
Yea, his own Malice did destroy him, and quia non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus
est; the overflowing of his gall, and his venomous spirit, consumed his Vitals,
and eat up his Flesh. Thus died our Achitophel; and thus let all the Kings
implacable Enemies perish, but upon himself let the Crown flourish.

Achitophel is dead, but his Malice survives; he had sown those Serpents teeth,
that sprung up into armed men: but he never showed more of his Serpentine
subtilty, than in choosing apt and active Instruments, and managing them to the
best advantage for the perfecting of his execrable designs.

His first great Engine was the debauching of Absolon, one of the Royal Blood,
a person too well qualified for such an unnatural design; who being of a
bloody and ambitious spirit, was not satisfied with the death of Amnon his
eldest Brother, but sought his Fathers life too. Achitophel having baited the
Hook with the present hopes of the Crown, the possession whereof would expiate
the greatest Villainies, as his Politician had informed him, was easily
ensnared. Him our Achitophel took into his tuition; and too great a Proficient
he was in all the evil Arts of his Tutor; by whose Methods he courted the
People so successfully, as in a short time he was the Idol of the People: for
the Vulgar are led by Sense and Raree Shows, a flattering Tongue, and beautiful
Aspect; for all which, there was none like Absolon, 2 Samuel 14.25. As for beauty
(and multum egregio decus enitet ore:) in all Israel there was none to be so
much praised as Absolon; from the soal of whose foot to the crown of his head,
there was no blemish. And as his Beauty was attractive of Love, so the
symmetry, strength, and activity of body fitted him for Arms and Action: and of
his personal Valor and daring Spirit, he had given the people sufficient
proof: his natural Advantages and Abilities were polished and set off with all
imaginable arts of Courtship and indefatigable Industry. For he rose up early
and stood by the way of the gate (where Judgment was to be given) to meet and
encourage such Petitioners as Achitophel sent thither with Complaints: And it
was so when any came to the King for judgment, Absolon called them to him, and,
without more ado, said, Thy matters are good and right, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee. O that I were made judge in the land, that
every man that has any suit or cause, might come to me, and I would do him
justice! 2 Samuel 15.2,3,4. But he did not only verba dare, but omnia serviter
pro imperio; If any did him obeisance, he returned the complement threefold; he
put forth his hand, and embraced them in his bosom, and kissed them too, v. 5.
and as if he would breathe his very Soul into theirs, he whispers to them his
sense of their Grievances, and promises Redress: He condoles the defects of his
Fathers Government, who through old Age and new Delights was wholly indisposed
for the government of so great a People, which was now devolved on corrupt
Magistrates and a carnal Priesthood, by whom judgment is turned into gall, and
the fruit of righteousness into hemlock, Amos 6.12. yea, truth fails, and he
that departs from evil makes himself a prey, Isai. 59.15. Inest omni populo
malignum quid and querulum adversus Imperatores.
These were placentia to the People, who are never better pleased, than when
they hear well of themselves, and ill of their Governors.

And now Absolon is more the Peoples Darling than ever he was his Fathers; he
and his Adherents are the Patriots and Saviors of their Country: all the
foundations are out of course, and they alone bear up the pillars of it: His
Fame is ecchoed now from Dan to Beersheba: He has his Friends and Confidents
in every corner of the Country, who proclaim Absolon's Graces and Perfections,
for which his Soul was more beautiful than his Body; and that he was the Hope
of Israel, that was oppressed, and ready to expire, through the growth of
Tyranny and Idolatry.

And now look to thy self, David; the hearts of thy People are stolen from
thee, and it is no difficult matter to employ their hands to take the Crown
from thy head. These Alarms awaken David's Spirit, and put him into a great
straight between his Fatherly affection to Absolon, and his own preservation,
in which that of his People was bound up; and this later prevails against the
former: Absolon is banished for the space of tw years from the presence and
Dominions of his Father, 2 Samuel 14.28. during which time he saw not his fathers
face; but by the mediation of Joab, David's General, he was restored again to
savor, being so passionately beloved of him, that the heart of David longed to
go out to him in his Exile, 2 Samuel 13.39. And chapter 14. v. 33. in token of
perfect reconciliation, his Father kissed him.

But Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, from which few or none are thoroughly
reclaimed; no Merit, Mercy, nor Miracles, can reduce them to a steadfast
Loyalty: for though Absolon was pardoned for some almost-unpardonable crimes,
yet even from hence he takes encouragement to conspire against his Father.
Scelera dum non resecantur crescunt; and in argumentum facinorum adhibetur,
quoties secura impunitate peccatur.
David's too great Indulgence to Absolon, was the occasion of his, and had like
to have been so of his own ruin. Because judgment is not speedily executed
against an evil work, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11.

For though by an Act of Oblivion, and many Indulgences, the Coals of
Discontent and Sedition seemed to be raked up; yet by a factious Party that
Achitophel left behind him, they were so blown up, and scattered through the
whose Kingdom of Israel, that nothing but the wisdom and power of God could
prevent a general Conflagration. For the flame that seemed to be extinguished
by Absolon's Reconciliation, and Achitophel's Death, was but confined, and
breaks forth with greater violence than ever. Absolon constitutes a Council of
Six persons, who had been privy to Achitophel's Conspiracy; such were Shimei
and Sheba, Doeg and Nabal, and Ziba, and Amasa his General. These consult in
secret, and act severally according to their several capacities.

First Shimei comes forth, as another Balaam, to curse the King to his face, 2 Samuel 16.5. He is noted to have been a man of the house of Saul, who had long
endeavored to revive the Good Old Cause, by the same scurvy old methods of
belying and slandering the footsteps of Gods anointed: He still came forth
(says the Text) in Person, or by Proxies and Libels, and cursed as he came. He
cast stones at David, as a token that he had deserved to be stoned; Sanctius.
and cast dirt on him and all his servants, v. 6. And this he did maledictione
forti; according to the Politicians Rule, fortiter calumniare, aliquid
adherebit. And thus said Shimei when he cursed: Come out, come out, thou bloody
man, thou man of Belial; (as if he had been a dead Dog, that could not be moved
with those intolerable affronts and indignities) the Lord has returned on thee
all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have reigned; and the
Lord has delivered the Kingdom into the hands of Absolon thy Son; and behold,
thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

The Rabbis on the word (...), as is observed by St. Hierome, do conceive that
Shimei under every letter in that word, intended a notorious Calumny: In Nun
they intended Noeph, an Adulterer; in Mem, Moabita, as descended from Ruth; in
Resch, Roseath, a Murderer; in Tzade, Tsarvah, Leprosus; in Thau, Tobea, an
abominable person.
What Piety and Innocence can secure a Prince, when so good a King is thus
blasphemed to his face! or what aggravation can such Impiety admit more, when
the Name of God is blasphemed, to give countenance to such impieties! The Lord
has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absolon thy son. What Cause so
good, as to be exempted from the reproach of men? or what so bad, as not to
find some Abettors, when David himself is represented as a bloody man; and the
Crown that was fixed on his head by God's own hand with a Chain of Miracles, is
by no lower pretense than a Divine Right, given to his rebellious Son; and when
such a one as Saul, and those that perished with him, are canonized for Saints
after the modern fashion of the Church of Rome; and all the blood shed in that
Irreligious War, charged on the head of David? It is noted by S. Peter, 2 Pet.
2.10. that presumptuous sinners are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: And
S. Jude, v. 9. notes, that the Devil himself durst not do it: But these men, as
natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of things
which they understand not: they bend their tongues like a bow, and shoot out
their arrows, even bitter words, against heaven it self; not considering that
they would at length fall on their own heads, as Shimei's did; and, as the
Psalmist says, their own tongues should make them fall, v. 8. But this is the
language which Shimei and his Accomplices had learnt from the Covenanters and
Conventiclers at Hebron, who doubtless, if David had fallen in that Rebellion,
would have with one consent condemned his memory as a man of Belial, a bloody
man; as some of those who are yet alive (O Divinam Clementiam!) did by our
David's martyred Father; and though they now only shake their heads at the
miscarriage, would have lift up their tongues and proclaimed him a Tyrant and
Traitor. Yet how does this Wretch crouch and fawn on the King when God had
delivered him! 2 Samuel 19.19. Let not my Lord impute iniquity to me, neither do
thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my Lord the
King went out of Jerusalem, that the King should take it to his heart, for thy
servant does know that I have sinned. Words smoother than oil, when war was in
his heart.

This has ever been the practice of rebellious persons, to chalk out that way
with their Tongues and Pens, which they intend to cut out with their Swords.
But if indeed any such Offenders are sorry for what they have done, let them do
at least as Shimei did, who came the first of all the house of Joseph, v. 20.
to congratulate the Kings safe return, and acknowledged his fault. Notorious
Offenders ought to signalize their repentance by some public acts of Loyalty
that may bear proportion with those of their disobedience: Let them therefore
come and abhor themselves, and ask forgiveness for abhorring the Abhorrors of
that accursed Association; let them for once show so much of Ingenuity and
serious Penitence as those Sorcerers did, Acts 19.19. who of a long time had
bewitched the people, as Simon the Conjurer, who was esteemed of as the great
power of God; who brought their books together and burned them before all men,
Acts 8.9. What though the price of them be twice 50000 pieces of Silver? it
would make a Boonfire that would in some measure satisfy for the Conflagration
of our great City, and perhaps prevent a second setting of the whole Kingdom in
Flames. Some of the wisest and best men in the Nation have given them an
excellent Example, and it would be their happiness to imitate them. For I dare
aver, that there are more Arguments for resisting of lawful powers, which they
cannot but know is threatened with Damnation, Romans 13.2. in the books of some
who term themselves true Protestants, than in all those which are written by
such as they justly condemn for Idolatrous and Traitorous Papists. Let any of
them read over all Coleman's Letters, as printed by Authority, and extract the
most dangerous Positions for Rebellion in them; and I dare parallel all of them
in one Book of a Leading Dissenter, which he yet styles his Holy Commonwealth.
With what face can these men pretend any longer that they cannot through
Scruples of Conscience come up to the Church of England in the practice of an
innocent Ceremony, who have outgone the Church of Rome as well in the practices
as in the principles of Rebellion and Bloodshed!

The second Conspirator was Sheba the Son of Bichri, of whom David was the more
afraid, because he came Sobrius ad evertendam Rempub. 2 Samuel 20.6. Now shall
Sheba do us more harm than did Absolon. But notwithstanding his professed
Sobriety, the Text calls him a man of Belial: and as it is said, when one mad
Dog bites another, and that a third, they all run mad; so the Venom of
Achitophel's tongue infected all that conversed with him with perfect madness:
for who but a mad man would kick at the Crown of David, and think to make a
Football of it to be tossed by every Clown? Yet this the virtuous and noble
Sheba attempted: He blew the trumpet against the Succession, 2 Samuel 20.1. We
have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every
man to his tents, O Israel. And mighty numbers of the men of Israel withdrew
from David to follow Sheba; except the men of Judah, who clave unto their King.
So great a Party had he formed in the City Abel, that it was like to have
perished with him: but by good advice his head was cut off, and so that
Mischief prevented, 2 Sum. 20.22. Yet this great man thought to do as Sampson,
to pull down the Pillars of the State, and to slay more at his death than he
had done in his lifetime: and as if it had not been enough to draw others into
the same Perdition with himself in his lifetime, heacted so as to make Israel
to sin after his death. For what man that pretends to be a true Protestant,
would think it more eligible, and thank God that he died by the Ax, being
condemned as a Traitor, than to go to Heaven in flames of fire for the true
Religion, if it had pleased God to call him to a fiery trial?

The next person (among David's Enemies) was that Churl Nabal, who was of the
house of Caleb; that Caleb, I suppose, of whom it is written, Numb. 14.24. that
he was a man of another spirit, who obeyed God and served his servant Moses
fully. And by the blessing of God, and the Kings bounty, he became a very great
man, and had large possessions, all which were preserved to him by David, 1 Samuel 25.21. I have kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, so that
nothing was missing of all that pertained to him. Now David being in distress,
he sent ten young men to greet him in his name; Peace be to thee, and peace be
to thy house, and peace be to all that thou have: we come in a good day, a day
when Nabal kept a feast like the feast of a king: and his request is very mean;
Give, I pray thee, to David and his servants whatever comes to thy hand. This
was extremely modest, where all was owing, to entreat so small a pittance; and
there was extreme folly, as well as ingratitude, in denying a little portion to
him that could have commanded all. Yet hear the Answer of this Churl, 1 Samuel
25.10. Who is David, and who is the son of Jesse? shall I take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh, and give it to men that I know not whence they be? At
which Answer David was greatly provoked, being thus rewarded evil for good, v.
21. and railed on, v. 14. by him who had been a will unto him both by night and
day, that none did hurt him, v. 16. for which he was sentenced to death. But
probably he might have obtained pardon from David, if he could have pardoned
himself: but at the very hearing of the Sentence, his heart died within him, v.
37. and he became as a stone; and within ten days after he was found dead.

The next Character of the Conspirators is that of Ziba, who was a servant of
the house of Saul, as his Father had been, in the first War against David; a
wealthy man he was too, but a great part of his wealth was raked together by
false Informations, subtle Insinuations, and Sequestrations. As he never loved
the King himself, so he hated all those that did love him. Mephiboseth the Son
of Jonathan, David's old and faithful friend, gave order to Ziba to prepare his
Asses that he might wait on the King in his distress; but as he complains, 2 Samuel 19.26. Ziba deceived him, and yet he had the confidence to accuse his
Master in a high degree, chapter 16.3. as if he tarried at Jerusalem, with a
purpose to make a Party for himself against David, and had said, To day shall
the house of Israel restore me the Kingdom of my Father. By such slanderous
suggestions many of David's most loyal Subjects were rendered suspected of the
People, as Pensioners to a foreign power, Promoters of an Arbitrary
Government, and evil Counselors. And so subtle and importune were the
Informers in their Accusations, that David was inclined to believe them rather
than Mephiboseth, who had been a great sufferer and hearty sorrower for him,
chapter 19.24. He had neither dressed his feet (being lame in them both) nor
trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed,
until the day he came again in peace: and ready he was to part with all that he
had, though to Ziba himself, for the preservation of the public peace: yea,
let him take all, for as much as my Lord the King is come to his house in peace.

This Ziba was a fellow servants in the house of Saul, with Doeg the Edomite;
that Doeg who at the command of Saul fell on Abimelech and the rest of the
Priests of the Lord, and slew in one day fourscore and five persons that wore
the linen Ephod; and their wives, and their children, and sucklings, and all
their cattle, he slew with the edge of the sword, 1 Samuel 22.18. And wherefore
slew he them? but only for their fidelity to David, because they gave him
victuals, and assisted him with a sword, and prayed to God for him, v. 10. when
he was persecuted by Saul. A cruelty which none of Readiness Footmen would
execute, v 17. but these children of Edom, in the day of the distress of
Jerusalem and Sion, cried out, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundations
thereof, Psalm. 137.7. Ziba was a principal Persecutor of the Church of God next
to Doeg; he countenanced the Meetings at Hebron, and was a Patron to those
mock-Priests which sacrificed there, in opposition to the established service
of God at Jerusalem; Baxter's Dedications to Hambden.
and in requital, as his Father was registered among the Saints in Everlasting
Rest, so has he many Memorials dedicated to him by those who incessantly
sought the ruin of Jerusalem, as their great Patriot: and no doubt, if he
suffer, though never so justly, for his Conspiracy against David, yet shall he
be reputed a Martyr for the Good Old Cause.

The last of the Consult was Amasa, whom Absolon made Captain of his Host; a
person of a turbulent and ambitious spirit, who could not be obliged by any
favor, though infinitely beyond his deserts: his design was to have supplanted
Joab, and to have been made David's General; and David had made him a promise,
chapter 19.13. but was willing first to have some proof of his fidelity: and, chapter
20.4. he gave him command to assemble the men of Judah, and to pursue Sheba at
a set time; but he delayed the business, and disappointed David: yet still he
intruded himself, and would fain lead the Forces raised by Abishai; so that his
ambition became so intolerable to Joab, that he smote him in the fifth rib, and
shed out his bowels, v. 10.

Having seen the Characters of the men,

We are now, in the third Parallel, to consider their Communication, the matter
of Fact, the Means and Methods of carrying on the Conspiracy, which in v. 2. is
described to consist of two parts. 1. The secret counsel of the wicked. And, 2.
The insurrection of evil doers. The Prophet prays God in the first place,
Adversus occulta conventicula nocentium hominum; as Rudinger interprets it. The
Assassination of the King, which as you have heard, was designed by Achitophel,
but prevented by his own death, was now undertaken by a secret Cabal, who
narrowly watched every step that he made, in his going forth, and in his coming
in; in his business, and in his recreations, at home and abroad; but still the
wonderful Providence of God frustrated them: for as Pallas hid her Aeneas,
Cernere ne quis eum ne quis contingere possit; so did the Almighty hide his
David under the shadow of his wings, that no son of violence could approach to
do him hurt: for though they did often commune of laying snares privily, v. 5.;
though for the space of three years together (...), they deliberated how, where
and when to surprise him; though v. 6. they did search out iniquity, and
accomplish a diligent search, (...) and (...), as so many Bloud-hounds, which,
being at a fault, search every Bush and every Path; and compassed Sea and Land
to lay hold on an opportunity; on the River in his Barge; in his Royal Palace,
where his Father was murdered; in the City, at the Mayors Feast or the
Bull-Feast; in his great Council, and in his Journey to and from Newmarket and
Hampton Court: yet, as in 2 Samuel 8.14. God preserved David whithersoever he
went.

Never was a Partridge so hunted from Mountain to Mountain as David was.
Parties were formed in every City and County, to drive him into their toils; in
Corporations and Conventicles, by Nonconformists and Conformists too; among
whom, some accused him of Persecution, and pleaded for resistance, and dealing
with him as a Julian, an Infidel and Apostate; and omit nothing that the wit of
men, inspired by the malice of Devils, could contrive to perfect this execrable
Parricide. At length the Monster was come to its birth; but by the blessing of
God it proved abortive: For as David complains, Psalm. 140.5. The proud have
laid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the way side, and set
grins for me. They were informed that the King was to return from Newmarket on
the Saturday, and they were ready for the execution on the Friday: the way-side
was spread, not with Cords and Nets, but Carts and armed men. And now they
thought him sure: for who, say they, shall see? v. 5. persecute and take him,
for there is none to deliver him; there is no help for him in his God: for v.
5. they encouraged one another in this evil matter: the Devil was a lying
spirit in the mouths of their Prophets, though they were transformed into
Angels of light, persuading the Assassinates that they should do God an
acceptable Service in killing his Anointed, and be honored as the deliverers
of their Country, and do as meritorious a work as the destroying of ravenous
Beasts.

Now what greater encouragement can be given men pretending to Religion and
Conscience, than when their Guides, to whom they have committed the conduct of
their Souls, shall Prophecy lies in the name of God, and urge them to
Rebellion by Scripture and Examples? And whether it be not a just Judgment of
God on those Regicides, who for above Thirty years together have shown no token
of repentance for murdering the best of Kings, to give them up to the hardness
of their own hearts, that they may fill up the measure of their iniquities, by
attempting the barbarous butchering of him that was second to none but his
incomparable Father, I wish they would consider. Besides, the Laws of the Land,
as well as Gods, were made a nose of Wax, and wrested to the acquitting of the
Guilty, and condemning the innocent, by Ignoramus Juries, and suborned
Witnesses, by Tumults and Riots, and being thus possessed by a spirit of
obstinacy, they are like him in the Gospel whom no Bonds or Chains could
restrain from practicing the mischief they had imagined; no obligations of Laws
or Conscience, of Fear or Favor, of Oaths or Promises, could hold them; but
they mock God himself, that they may the more unsuspectedly destroy his
Vicegerent: Addito Juramento, says Arnobius.
Witness their profaning the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which they
never took for the sake of Peace and Unity, but only to secure their Worldly
Interest, or to beget a firmer resolution, and engage them to greater secrecy
for the effecting of this hellish Design. Tantum Religio potuit suadere
malorum. Yet this was David's case, Ps. 102.8. They that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me; So that probably the Executioners of Charles the
Second might have been as unknown, as he that executed Charles the First; for
all this while they are his Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, and experienced
Friends, (but that experience cost the whole Nation dear) yea, and intend to
make him as glorious as his Father. And now they are ready to give another
instance of their Loyalty, v. 7. Suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear
nothing. There was but a step between death and him, that was the breath and
life of us all; in a moment of time was the beauty of Israel to be vilely cast
away. It was not a Bow and a Dart, a Sling or Javelin that was to do this
execution; those were visible and avoidable Engines; but the Instruments of
Death in this case were Blunderbusses and Carbines, that by force of Fire and
Brimstone, a hellish invention, could cast invisible and infallible Messengers
of Death.

Barbarous and ever-to-be-abhorred was that detestable Parricide of the Royal
Martyr; yet (if I may so say) they gave him fair warning of that foul
Enterprise; he had time to forti^ie himself against the terrors of Death, and
to anticipate the joys of Heaven to himself, amidst those devilish tormentors,
by divine Contemplations; of which we may have a happy taste from his
incomparable Meditations. So that he died as Moses on Mount Nebo, within sight
of the Promised Land, and, as the Rabbis say, with a Kiss of Gods Mouth that
drew up his Spirit. But for such Varlets to assassinate a Prince in an instant,
coming from his Recreation, not fearing any such thing, having deserved well of
all men; this was like the Italian malice, that designed to slay his Enemy Body
and Soul. Certainly King James spoke as a Prophet when he told his Son: I
protest before the great God, and as I am now on my last Will and Testament,
you shall never find with any Highland or Borderthieves greater ingratitude,
more lies and vile perjuries, than with these Fanatic spirits: and suffer not
the principles of them to brook your land, if you like to sit at rest; except
you would keep them for trying your patience, as Socrates did an evil wife,
Basilicon doron, p. 41,42.

So much of the Oculta conventicula; The second part of the Plot is the
insurrection of evil doers; for the King was not to perish alone; they meant
him a more noble attendance in his death, than they would afford him in his
life, even a glorious Army of Martyrs. It was Achitophel's advice, the man whom
thou seek is instar omnium: When the Head is cut off, all the Members must
perish with it, Chapter 17.3. So that it was not some Small Stirs, as they minced
the matter in a Scottish Dialect, but a general Insurrection. The great City
where Absolon had seated himself, was to be cantonized in twenty parts; an
hundred of Saul's old Captains were ready to marshal the Rabble: A great
Assembly of ill-assected Nobles and Gentry were invited thither; the City
wanted not men nor Magazines of Arms; the men wanted not Courage nor Malice.
They expected only the Signal, and then all the City had been once more in a
flame, and filled with the shout of God save King Absolon. Nor was the Country
much behind the City in preparation for the Insurrection: Absolon had made
frequent excursions into every part, and had settled Spies and Correspondents in
all the Tribes of Israel, 2 Samuel 15.10. wherever he came, he was received
with acclamations of joy, and worshipped as the rising Sun, the redeemer of
Israel from Tyranny and Idolatry; King David himself, nor Solomon in all his
glory was more splendid: yet our Absolon exceeded him; he had but 50 men of all
that great City to run before him, ours had 1500 in this little City: and how
many of the Gentry waited on him, and caressed him, is not yet to be spoken.
Insomuch that David had even done what our King was advised to do, to leave the
Government as he loved his life; David himself called him King, Chapter 16.16. and
Hushai, David's friend, cries more than once, God. save the King, God save the
King. And no wonder then if so many of the people did adore him. And with so
great concern were Elections canvased through the Nation, as if a Prize were to
be played for the Imperial Crown against the black Box, and as if the success
depended on the suffrages of the Mobile.

The Cabals are kept up for Consultation in every County, and Factions formed
in every Corporation; the Loyal Party are braved by Disloyal Clubs, and Treason
made the familiar Discourse of Coffee-houses and Taverns: And he that pleaded
for the Established Worship or Government, was threatened, as the Apostles that
preached Christ, to be brought before the Sanedrim and Elders of Israel. Amasa
their General had listed his Army; Gilead was the place for pitching his Tents;
the signal was given for appearing in Arms. Chapter 15.10. As soon as ye hear the
sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absolon reigns in Hebron. And so
confident they were of success, that when they were putting on the Harness,
they boasted, as if they were putting it off.

And now let the World judge whether there were a Fanatic Plot or no; whether
David's life, and the life of his Subjects, were in danger; or whether those
that brought his life to the Pits brink, were Rebels or not. Let such as are of
a contrary mind, read over all the Histories Sacred or Profane; let them
contract the Rebellion of Corah and Jehu, of Jeroboam and Judas; and add those
of Catiline and Sejanus, of the men of Munster and Rome: And I dare find a
Parallel to every circumstance in all those Plots, in this One. Here was
Corah's Spirit of Contradiction, Jehu's pretense of Zeal, Jeroboam's Calves,
and Judas his Kiss: Here was, in a word, the Compendium of all Treasons: An
Armado was provided to seize the Kings Ships, the Gunpowder-Treason in a
Blunderbuss, the Irish Massacre in the Insurrection, the Scottish Rebellion in
Argile, and the Votes and Ordinances of Forty One, etc. in the Bill of
Exclusion. And now I suppose the Parallel is so well drawn, that he that runs
may read, how far the Counsel of Achitophel and the Practice of Absolon, is
outdone by our Modern Politicians.

But it will be objected against what has been said, That it was not the Body
of Dissenters that were engaged in the Horrid Conspiracy, but only a few
Malcontents, or men of desperate fortunes, and some of them lived in the
Communion of the Church of England, and were religious and godly men.

To which I answer, 1. The same Objection was made by the Papists concerning
the Powder Treason, that they were men of broken Fortunes, and were not
permitted the Exercise of their Religion, which they valued beyond their Lives:
yet it is well known, that Digby and others of them were men of Estates; that
the execution of the Penal Laws against them was generally suspended, and they
enjoyed equal privileges and favors with other Subjects: and though all of
that Perwsasion were not privy to it, yet it is evident they would have
approved of it, and rejoiced in it, if it had succeeded; because though it were
defeated, the Design was approved at Rome; and a Priest of that Church, who
was proved guilty of the Conspiracy, and suffered for it, was honored as a
Martyr. Now if the Principles allowed of in any Community of men, do
countenance the resisting, deposing, and murdering of Princes, be it on
pretense of Heresy or Tyranny, or for the good of the Kirk, reforming Abuses,
or redressing Grievances; though there be but a few Actors, yet all are
Criminals; and, in the sense of the Law, there are no Accessories in the case
of Treason.

But secondly, a Secret of such consequence could not be entrusted with all the
Faction; it was enough that their Principal Guides and Leaders were engaged in
it; where some performed the Function of the Brain, to consult; others of the
Eyes, to search out Opportunities and Advantages; others of the Ears and
Tongue, to listen after and scatter false Reports, as so many Firebrarnds;
others of the Hands, to execute such traitorous designs: the whole Body was
certainly engaged, and without all peradventure would at least (post factum)
have rejoiced in it, as they did of the most detestable Murder of the Royal
Martyr; when a Representative Body of these Dissenters laid a foundation for
such an ungodly Enterprise; when they had even buried the King alive, and by
false Insinuations stolen away the hearts of the People, and deprived him of the
Comforts and necessary Supports of his Crown and Dignity, voting his Guards to
be a Grievance, and the executing the Penal Laws on Dissenters to be grievous
to the Subjects, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the
Kingdom; when he was denied to raise Money on his own Revenues, and such as
should assist him pronounced Enemies to the Peace of the Nation; when a
considerable part of his Customs were taken from him; the Bill for excluding
the lawful Successors was resolutely insisted on, and a Vote passed for
restoring the Duke of Monmouth to his Offices; for which, application was to be
made to the King by such Members of Parliament as were of the Kings Privy
Council: when it was voted that all who should oppose the Bill of Exclusion,
should be dealt with as Betrayers of the King, the Protestant Religion, and the
Kingdom of England, and Pensioners of France: when one pronounced it a favor
that the Duke was only excluded, and another would have persuaded him to
destroy himself, and a third threatened that rather than not exclude him, they
would exclude the whole Glorious Family of the STUARTS: Mr. Hunt.
when seditious Petitions were promoted, and the Thanks of the House voted to
be given to a seditious Party of the City, for their manifest Loyalty to the
King, their Care, Charge, and Vigilance for the preservation of his Majesty's
Person and the Protestant Religion: when his Majesty's Prerogative to call and
dismiss his Council, was questioned; and while they who infused fears and
groundless jealousies of the Kings ruling by an Arbitrary power, did in an
Arbitrary manner fine and imprison diverse of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects. I
doubt not to say, that though such a petite venomous Insect as Achitophel was
sat on the Axle, and boasted of his moving all these great Wheels, yet there
were many more than a few rash and desperate persons engaged in the Commotion.
And what was the meaning of that Vote, That in case the King should die by a
violent death, they would revenge it on the Papists, when the chief Ministers
of State, the Bishops, and all that were eminent for their Loyalty, were
condemned as being Popishly affected, and the Clergy branded as Projectors for
a Conjunction with the Church of Rome, and had made many steps toward it? Nor
were these things whispered in a corner by some Malcontents, but proclaimed on
the housetop; they were vox and votum Populi.

When Absolon was sacrificing at Hebron, the Conspiracy was strengthened, says
the Text, chapter 15. It seems then Absolon had his Levites who set up their Altars
at Hebron, (which signifies a Society or Association) in opposition to that at
Jerusalem; and these were they that strengthened the Rebellion. For as every
Chieftain had his Levite, so every Levite had some hundreds whose Purses and
Consciences were at their command; and instead of catechizing them in the duty
of Obedience, they preached Satyrs against their Governors, and instilled the
Doctrine of Resistance. Their Texts were usually such as these: Ye take too
much upon you, Moses and Aaron; all the congregation is holy every one of them,
and the Lord is among them, Numb. 16.3. Curse ye Meroz, say these Angels of
Light, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help
the Lord against the mighty, Judge. 5.23. Cursed be he that does the work of the
Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he that withholds his sword from blood, Jer.
48.10. If ye do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed both you and your King, 1 Samuel
12.25. The kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them -- but it shall
not be so with you, Mat. 20.25. He reproved kings for their sakes; saying,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. Stand fast
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. I hate them that hold lying (or
superstitious) vanities, Psalm. 31.6. Come out of Babylon, my people, that ye
partake not of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. The
hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4.23.
Why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances? Touch not,
taste not, handle not: which all are to perish with the using, after the
commandments and doctrines of men, Col. 2.20. I thank thee, O Father, that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto
babes, Mat. 11.25.

These are the Texts; and it is easy to conjecture what Uses and Applications
were made to the People. For from these, the People are instructed in their
great Privileges and Power: That there is Idolatry and Superstition in the
Church, Oppression and Tyranny in the State: That they ought to shake off those
Yokes of Bondage, and vindicate themselves into the glorious liberty of the
sons and daughters of God: That they may bind their kings with chains, and
their nobles with fetters of iron, to execute judgment upon them; for this
honor have all the Saints, Psalm. 149.8. Hence every Idiot thinks he
understands the Scriptures better than his Priest or Bishop. And the watchmen
of Israel may in vain forewarn them of the sin and misery which their false
Prophets are leading them to, though it be demonstrated, that as naturally as
the same cause does produce the same effects, so do the same seditious
Principles spring up into rebellious Practices: which a Prophet of their own
was so sensible of, that he told those men, that they were nati ad bis
perdendam Rempub. Anglicanam, Born to destroy the English Government a second
time. But though an Angel from Heaven, or one from the dead should persuade
them contrary to what their Teachers have infused into them, their
Understandings are so oblinded, and Consciences seared, that sooner may a Jew
or a Turk be converted from such sins, than a bigoted Separatist.

One tells the People, that they are the Original of Civil Authority, and if
Magistrates act not by the Laws, (quas vulgus eligerit) they forfeit their
Authority: Others, That it is lawful for them to enter into Leagues and
Covenants for defense of themselves and their Religion, without and against the
Magistrates command: That it is not against Scripture, or the practice of
Primitive Christians, violently to resist the Higher Powers, when they
persecute them for Religion, or when the Prince commands against the Laws of
the Country: That Success justifies a Cause; and to pursue it, is to comply
with the Will of God, and the Conduct of Providence: That King Charles the
First was lawfully put to death, and his Murderers were the blessed
Instruments of Gods Glory in their Generation: That he first made War on the
Parliament, and therefore might not only be resisted, but ceased to be a King;
and many that died in the War against him, are glorious Saints in Heaven: That
the Presbyterian Government is that Scepter of Christ to which all the Kings of
the Earth must bow, or he will break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel: That
the Removal of our Ceremonies was sufficient to countervail for all the Blood
and Treasure spent and spilt in the late Wars. In an Epist. to the Lord
Hallifax. Tune inter se concordant, quam in perniciem justi conspirant; non
quia se invicem amant, sed quia cum qui amandus erat; simul oderant.
They are told, that all the true Protestants are united, Presbyterian,
Independent, and Anabaptist (sound Protestants all!) Materials for a new
Establishment are prepared; there wants only the perfecting skill of some
Master Builder, such as his Lordship was, and then hands to work: That the
Wheel was turning, and that part which was under, would shortly be uppermost.
And out comes the Celeusma, a barbarous Outcry not unknown to Mariners, by
their Ho-up, calling all Hands (or One and all) to hoist up the Sails for a new
Commonwealth.

Under such Doctrines as these, the Presses have sweat, the Church has
groaned, the Peoples Souls led Captive in Chains of Darkness; and under these,
this Horrid Conspiracy has been hatched. The Devil himself, when he appeared
in the Mantle of Samuel, never did nor could teach Saul more pernicious
Doctrines than these. Yet these are the Religious, Godly, Soul-saving Teachers
of the Time; though by their Fruits we may know them, and as well expect Grapes
from Thorns, and Figs from Thistles, as any good Effects from such ill Causes.

Ferguson, Casteers, and Lob, three Conventicle-Preachers, are discovered to
have been in the Plot.
Philostratus, in the life of Apollonius, contends, that the murder of Domitian
was more owing to the Doctrine of Apollonius, than to the hands of Stephanus
and Parthenius who slew him. And as the death of Charles the First was
imputable to such Preachers, so might the death of Charles the Second, had not
our gracious God prevented it by the death of these Conspirators, to which
their false Prophets have betrayed them. If you look for a Character of their
Godliness, you have it in a Character in Text-hand; Without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.3, and
4.

But the Objection says, that some of the Conspirators were of the Communion of
the Church of England.

Answ. This is as great a truth, as that Fiction of Mr. Baxter, that the first
War was begun by Episcopal men, such as sided with Archbishop Laud: when it is
well known that that learned Loyal Prelate was one of the first that was struck
at, and in him the whole Church of England, Root and Branch. And this is the
first time since the Reformation, that any of the Church of England were
accused of Rebellion against their Princes. There may be a Judas or two that
have partaken of that Tessera of our Communion, the body and blood of Christ;
but I think that having first resolved to betray their Master, the Devil entered
into their hearts, and filled them with all iniquity, and at last brought them
to destruction. The Church of England was that thorny Hedge of which Mr. Baxter
says he made it the most serious action of his life to pull it down; and he
would still endeavor it, though by going on both sides the hedge, ( i. e. I
suppose, complying with all Parties) and though he were well scratched for his
pains. And he has been as big as his word, not only endeavoring it himself,
but encouraging all his Disciples by his Moral Prognostications; of which, see
The second part of the History of Separation, where the Piety of such men is
made transparent.

Saepe deprehensi obstinate agunt.
And now, as from the Principles of Popery, I do believe that there was, is,
and will be a Popish Plot against the Established Government and Religion; so
from the like Principles of Dissenters, and their correspondent practices, I do
verily believe that there has been, is, and will be several Attempts for the
Confusion both of Church and State, as now established. Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say, yet have they not prevailed
against me, Psalm. 129.1. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side when
men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was
kindled against us. But blessed be God, who has not given us up as a prey unto
their teeth: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the Name
of the Lord, Psalm. 124.1.

All men shall see it, and fear, and declare the work of the Lord, saying, This
has God done: and shall wisely consider of his doing.

Having seen David's danger, in the first part of the Parallel; we now proceed
to consider his Deliverance, in the next part.

As God is the Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe; so
among Believers, in a most peculiar manner, he has in all ages of the World
showed forth his power and Mercy in the miraculous and gracious Deliverances of
his Church, and protection of Righteous and Religious States professing his
holy and eternal truth. This David often experimented; God sometime preventing
him with his Blessing; and when he foresaw to what distress his Enemies had
reduced him, he heard the cry even before he called. The very misery of Gods
People often moves him to pity. At other times God delivered him from the
violent man, and covered his head in the day of battle, and gave victory to his
King over all his Enemies; so that when they dealt most proudly, God was above
them, and brought them down. When their Plots were laid so secret, that they
boasted none should see it, God tells them all men shall see it: while they
encouraged one another in their wickedness, God confounded, them, and
disappointed their Plots: for when they thought to shoot suddenly at him, God
shot at them, and wounded them. As David acknowledged in his Psalm of
Thanksgiving, 1 Samuel 22.14,15. The Lord thundered from heaven, the most High
uttered his voice: he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and
discomfited them.

And a more discomfortable fire never happened to David's enemies, than that
which happened at Newmarket, which frighted the King out of those snares which
were laid for him, and, like our ancient custom of firing our Beacons, was a
Signal of an approaching danger, and a means to escape it. Yea, God has made
their own tongues to fall upon them, v. 8. so that one of them discovered the
rest; and as many as were apprehended, confessed enough for their own
condemnation, and, with Haman, suffered in the like manner as they had intended
against others: The rest are scattered in Jacob, and divided in Israel; and the
portion of foxes (Psalm. 63.10.) is their reward, to be hunted up and down
through all Countries as Beasts of Prey. When their Bows were bent, and their
Arrows made ready on the string, and level taken, (...), their Bows were
broken, and flew back in their own faces. When the Knife was even at Isaac's
throat, God laid hold on it, and discovered the Ram that was hid in the bush,
and made it the Sacrifice. And thus the Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes: the wicked are ensnared in the work of their own hands, Psalm. 9.16.

God shot one arrow of Infatuation among them; so that the Counsel of
Achitophel, which if it had been followed might probably have succeeded, was
rejected by Absolon and all his people, 2 Samuel 17.14. An Arrow of dread, and
remorse of Conscience; the villainy of the Crime flew in their faces; and one
above the rest, reflecting on the execution of College, had no rest till he
discovered his Confederates. An Arrow of Despair, which wrought the same effect
with one, as with Judas, who having betrayed his Master, hanged himself. An
Arrow of Vengeance, which seized another, who, with Sheba, had his head out
off. And though Absolon escaped for a while, yet God, who employs every
creature to preserve his Servants, and saved our David in an Oak, caused
another Oak to take hold of Absolon, and become both his Gibbet and
Executioner. And now Absolon has built him a Pillar, but such as may
perpetuate his Infamy to the worlds end; for every passenger that goes by his
Grave in the Kings dale, casts a stone on it, saying, Cursed be the Parricide
Absolon, and cursed be every unjust persecutor of his Father. And doubtless the
curses of the Fatherless and Widows of those who perished with him, which were
above 40000, sell on him who led them to their ruin, wherein the greater part
died as Absolon did; more were devoured by the Wood, than by the Sword. So let
all the Kings enemies perish, and become as the dung of the earth.

Now as we see the judgment of God, so we must declare it to be his work, and
say, This has God done. In David's deliverance there was some appearance of an
Arm of flesh; Hussai was got into their Consults, and by a subtle and
seasonable opposition, overthrew Achitophel's design. Zadock and Abiathar
tarried at Jerusalem, to send intelligence to David; and David gathered a
considerable Army, who gave the Rebels battle, and overthrew them; the Victory
was with confused noise, and garments rouled in blood: But this defeat was
made, not by fraud nor force, but by the Spirit of the Lord, who brought to
light the hidden things of darkness, and by the light of his countenance
blasted them in a moment: It is he that is the preserver of Kings, that keeps
them as the Apple of his eye, and saves them in fortitudinibus dextrae suae,
with the saving strength of his right hand: Dii non servassent, nisi sibi
servassent.
and because the King trusted not in his Sword or his Bow, but in the
protection of God, therefore God delivered him, and delighted to do him good.

And therefore we ought in the last place wisely to consider of his doing: The
Psalmist speaking of the wonderful providence of God, Psalm. 107.43. says,
Whosoever is wise, will observe those things, and they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. Our first consideration therefore shall be, of the
special Care and Providence of God over Kings and Governors: For if we grant
that God has any respect to the Welfare of Mankind, we must acknowledge it
especially in his protection and ordaining of Rulers and Governors, without
which no Society of men can subsist. Now of all Governments, that which comes
nearest to the Sovereignty and Dominion of God, has most of his inspection;
and that is Monarchy, which he owns for his Institution: By me Kings reign; and
the Apostle calls it his Ordinance, Romans 13. and therefore he must be worse
than a Heathen, who denies a Special providence over Kings, when it reaches
every man, yea, every sparrow that falls to the ground. Hence God owns them as
standing in a nearer relation to himself: They are his Ministers; his
Shepherds, to protect and feed his flock; his Vicegerents, to bear the Sword
for the punishment of evil doers, and protection of them that do well: They
have more of the Image of God, in Authority and Power to dispense Favors and
Rewards, even to Life or Death. God calls them by his own Name, sets them in
his Throne, and over his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 13.8. and they that resist, resist
the kingdom of God, and fight against him. God calls them to a difficult and
invidious work, such as Jethro said was too heavy for Moses himself, Exodus
18.18. and Solomon starts at it with a Quis sufficit? Who is able to judge this
so great people? 1 King. 3.9. They have as many enemies as there are sins and
vices in the Nation; and the best Kings, that are most diligent to restrain
evil doers, have the most adversaries. If there be any national Judgments, any
Invasion from abroad, any Tumults or Factions at home; if Fire or Famine, the
Pestilence or the Sword afflict the Nation; if there be any Injustice or
Oppression in the inferior Magistrates, any Ambition or Emulation among the
Nobles and Gentry, any decay of Trade among the Commonalty, the burden of all
lies on the King; and the people are ready to cry out against their
Governors, as the Heathen did against the Christians, Imperatores ad Leones.
Of this burden David complains, Psalm. 75.3. The earth and all the inhabitants
thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pillars thereof. By reason of these
disorders, God is said to have established the Kingdoms of the world on the
floods, and waves, which though they often roar horribly, and lift up their
voice, yet he has set bounds to them, and stilleth the raging of the waters
and the madness of the people.

Circa personas publicas, Specialis habitat providentia.
Wherefore as God calls them to a more operose and dangerous work, so he gives
them proportionable helps and assistances; for which he covenanted with David
when he gave him the Kingdom: I have found David my servant; with my holy oil
have I anointed him; with whom my hand shall be established, and my arm shall
strengthen him: the enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness
afflict him: I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that
hate him, Psalm. 89.20,21,22,23. And these were the sure mercies of David, which
God that cannot lie did always perform unto him: And when he does the like to
other good Kings, he fulfils his own Covenant, and pleads his own Cause. Thus
as the Heathen fancied every King of the Nations had a God to be his Guardian
(Mulciber in Trojam pro Troja stabat Apollo:) so certainly every Prince,
especially such as defend the true Faith, have God for their Protector: and as
Phidias's portraicture was so engraven in the Statue of Minerva, that the Image
of the Goddess was violated with that of her Workman; so the honor of God is
reflected on by any injury offered to the King. Therefore God has enjoined,
first of all, that prayers supplications, and thanksgivings be made -- for
kings, and all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2. So in the Old Testament,
Prayers shall be made for him, and daily shall he be praised, Psalm. 72.15. not
cursed and reproached.

Therefore God has given such strict Rules and Commands concerning them, Not
to speak evil of dignities, for that is a kind of Blasphemy; Thou shall not
speak evil of the rulers of the people, Acts 23.5. Nor to hearken to any
murmurings or discontent: for such murmurings are not against them, so much as
against the Lord, who chose them to that Office. Not to scatter false reports,
and create fears and jealousies, whereby the affections of the Subjects may be
alienated from their Prince; Excordem reddidit, and amentem populum.
for that were as Absolon, to steal the hearts of the people; which is not
only to take the Crown from his head, but in effect (as we have seen) his Head
from his Shoulders, and to leave the Body of the people as a Carkas fit only
to be devoured by Birds and Beasts of prey.

And as the Laws are strict, so the Sanctions to enforce those Laws are so
severe, that no wit of men, though all the Kings of the earth should consult
together, can either prescribe better Laws, or oblige their Subjects to
obedience under such penalties: for it is not the King only that executes Wrath
and Vengeance on the Disobedient, and, as Solomon, Prove. 17.11. sends a cruel
messenger to them that contrive Rebellion; but God has threatened that they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. which is certainly
to be understood of eternal Damnation, as due to this as to any other sin, this
being one of the first magnitude, and the cause of an infinite number of other
sins: and no less a penalty, in the judgment of all Divines, would be effectual
to affright men from any beloved Lust: And therefore I present this as another
wise consideration, to such as are tempted to this Impiety. And now I may
infallibly conclude from these premises, that as surely as Achitophel's Counsel
and Absolon's Rebellion was from Satan, so was the contrivance and practice of
our Late Conspirators from the same evil Spirit; and the Kings Deliverance from
God, as sure as David's was, Qui facit mirabilia magna solus, who only does
great and marvelous works, and does them in such a manner, that they ought to
be had in everlasting remembrance.

A second consideration may be this: Gods hand is most evidently seen in those
Actions that make most for his Glory, and for those ends for which he has
established Rule and Government in the World, i. e. that under it we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. And as these ends are
generally attained under Religious Princes, so if they should perish untimely
and violently, nothing but Disorder and Confusion would follow; as it was with
Israel of old, and with us in later days, when There was no king in Israel,
every one did what seemed right in his own eyes. If this prodigious Design had
succeeded, God should have been entitled the Author of it, and be mocked with
a Thanksgiving-day for the success; the Actors had been honored as Patriots
and Saints: the Protestant Religion had by these true Protestants received
another indelible Blot, and the true Protestant been rendered more odious than
the most treacherous Papists, or those Hungarians that fight under the Great
Turk against Christianity; Heresy, Hypocrisy, and Regicide, been made the
public Profession and Religion of the Nation. But God is not the Author of
such Confusions: He has by this Discovery vindicated his own Glory, and the
established Religion and Government among us; and if our sinful Ingratitude do
not separate between God and us, he will do it to the end of the World.

These things ought wisely to be laid to heart by every serious Christian:
therefore thus says the Lord, I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel,
but for my holy Names sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, and --
that the heathen may know that I am the Lord when I shall be sanctified in you
before their eyes, Ezekiel. 36.22. And God grant that what follows in that Prophet
may be found among us, That God may put his Spirit within us, and cause us to
walk in his Statutes, and keep his Judgments, and do them, that we may dwell in
the Land that he gave unto our Fathers; and we may be his people, and he our
God, Ezekiel. 11.23. And then, though (as Isay says) our enemies associate
themselves, they shall be broken in pieces; though they gird themselves (to
battle) they shall be broken in pieces; though they take counsel together, it
shall come to naught: for God is with us, Isai. 8.9,10.

Thirdly, Again, let us consider wisely, that in this wonderful Deliverance
there appeared no other Agent or Instrument but Gods immediate and
outstretched Arm, working Deliverance for us, not by means, but without and
against means; by contrary means, even by the same that would have destroyed
us: Not by force, nor by might, but by my Spirit, says the Lord: it was not
our Sword nor our Bow, but it was God that saved us from our Enemies, and put
them to confusion that hated us. By this we may know that it is God alone, and
beside him there is no Savior: When he commands and creates Deliverances, and
we are saved so as by fire, by the very means that would have destroyed us; he
must be blind that cannot see it; and may he be dumb, that will not say, This
has God done. And Qui solus in Opere, sit solus in Laud.

Fourthly, Let us wisely consider that God saved us in the very instant of
Danger, plucked us out of the very Jaws of Death, and as firebrarnds (fit indeed
to be consumed) out of the fire; when Horae momento Cita Mors: when we were
brought to the brink of a Sea of Blood, and Pharaoh and his Host pursuing us,
and crying Victoria, that then God should divide the waters, and make a safe
passage for us, and overwhelm our Enemies, and the Cita Mors was made a
Victoria laeta; this was, Deo vindice Nodus, the Lords doing, and is mavelous
in our eyes.

Fifthly, When such strange and unexpected Deliverances are often repeated, and
God appears to us not once or twice, as he did to Solomon, but as often as he
did to David, saving him from the Lion and the Bear, and the uncircumcised
Philistines, and from the Sword of Saul, and the Counsel of Achitophel, and the
Rebellion of Absolon, and from the hands of all his Enemies; may not David
conclude, By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemies do not
triumph over me? Psalm. 41.11. Raro futilibus micat ignibus ether.
And when God shall usher in a Prince into the World by the unusual appearance
of a Star at Noon, and lead him through a tedious Wilderness by a Pillar of a
Cloud, to hide him from his Enemies, and guide him by a Pillar of Fire out of
their Snares; when he not only keeps his heart upright amidst almost
invincible temptations to Idolatry and Superstition, but covers his head in the
day of battle, and at last with a non obstante, sets him to reign as a king
upon his holy hill of Sion, to defend his true Religion, and to execute
Judgment and Justice to all his People: They must be more obdurate than
Pharaoh, and more perverse than his Magicians, that will not confess digitus
Dei hic, the hand of the Lord is in all this; that God has magnified the king
in the sight of all the people, as he did Joshua, Josh. 3.7. and made his glory
great in such Salvations, Psalm. 21.5.

Sixthly, We may also wisely consider that David himself made no use of any
other Weapon against Achitophel, but a short Prayer, and his constant trust and
confidence in the power and goodness of God. You have his Prayer, chapter 15.31. O
Lord, I beseech thee, turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness: and the
Prayer of this righteous man was more effectual than Chariots and Horsemen, for
there is a certain Omnipotency in Prayer: Concerning the works of my hands (any
thing that God can do) command ye me, says God, Isai. 45.11. and whatever we
ask according to the will of God, we know that he hears us.

Now this being Gods express Will and Command, that first of all, prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for kings and all
that are in authority, etc. it should endear the use of Liturgy unto us, and
cause us in full assurance of Faith to put up our Requests to God, that he
would abate the Pride, assuage the Malice, and confound the Devices of all the
Kings Enemies: That he would replenish him with the Grace of his Holy Spirit,
that he may always incline to Gods Will, and walk in his way; that he would
grant him in Health and Wealth long to live; that he would strengthen him that
he may vanquish and overcome all his Enemies; and finally, after this life he
may obtain everlasting Joy and Felicity: That those Evils which the craft and
subtilty of the Devil or man works against us, may be brought to naught; and by
the providence of his goodness they may be dispersed, that we may be hurt by no
persecutions; but being armed with his defense, may be preserved evermore from
all perils, to glorify him who is the giver of all victory, through the merits
of Jesus Christ our Lord. With such sacrifices God is well pleased; this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.3. And blessed be
God who has not turned away his face from us, nor our Prayers from him.

Lastly, Let me persuade all those whose hearts the Counsel of Achitophel, and
subtle Insinuations of Absolon, had stolen from their King, wisely to
consider what in all probability would have been the consequences of this
Conspiracy if it had succeeded. All wise men do propose some apparent
advantages and prosperous ends to themselves. I demand therefore, if the fatal
Blow had been given, what prospect could they have but of Confusion and Misery
in such ways? what though David had been set on when weak and weary handed?
yet, as Hussai said, 2 Samuel 17.8. David's men were mighty men, and would not
have died as Cowards, tamely yielding their throats to those Butchers; but
being chafed in their minds, would have pursued the Murderers, as a Bear
robbed of her Whelps: and the Country was not yet secured to Absolon, for which
cause he rejected the Counsel of Achitophel as rash and dangerous. But suppose
they had massacred not only David and his Guards, but a thousand of the Loyal
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy; some thousands also of the Rebel-Party might have
perished in the Attempt, and Achitophel and Absolon been cut off in the head of
them: then he among the Rabble that had the longest Sword, would have set up
for himself; and they that had jointly acted Treason against their King, would
have avenged his Blood by turning their Swords one against another; and
executed the vengeance of God upon themselves, when there was no Power or
Authority of men to do it.

And if all things had fallen out to their expectation, if they had killed and
taken possession, and divided the Spoil, to every man a Damosel or two, beside
the Houses of God, the Portion of the Priests, and the Kings Lands; they might
have had as short an enjoyment of their Prey, as Sisera's Captain, which was
but during the Dream of some silly women, Judge. 5.30. or God himself would have
driven a nail through their temples, and bereaved them of the sense of their
sin or misery, that, as Regicides generally have done, they would have lived
and died impenitently, and so perished eternally: And this probably had been
their portion, whether they were defeated, or had succeeded; which I wish they
were so wise as seriously to consider, and lay it to heart. As also, that
having brought the Nation into so great Distraction and Confusion, while they
were violently contending to divide the Prey among themselves, how easily they
might be made a Prey to a foreign Enemy, who need no other advantage to
swallow us up, than our being thus divided and cut in pieces by our selves:
Then Prince, and Priest, and People, might have made their Enemies Swords drunk
with Blood; or if they had escaped that, might have wandered up and down
begging their Bread in desolate places: or if this had not happened, a
perpetual Civil War might have been intailed on the Nation, one Party still
supplanting another; Armies kept up by the several Factions; and the poor
Laborers must have fed those Vulturs with their own Vitals: they must have
partaken of their Sins too, as well as of their Oppressions; they must have
been taught to blaspheme God as well as the King: there would have been no
Neuters, but all Actives or Passives, to mock God with Thanksgiving for their
own Misery, and fast for Strife and Debate; to violate their Oaths and Vows, or
to yield themselves a Sacrifice to the Rage of their Enemies. Now when this
abominable Desolation is prevented, and God has preserved Order, Peace, and
Truth, Justice and Righteousness, so that every man may sit under his own vine,
and eat the Fruits of that, and of Gods Vine also which he has planted in the
midst of us; he must be an incarnate Devil that shall repine at such Blessings,
and pine away in his Iniquities.

As for us, let our hearts be filled with Joy, and our mouths with Praise: Let
the king rejoice in God his Savior, and all that swear by him (all the (...),
that have kept their Allegiance,) put their trust in God: for the mouth of them
that speak lies (and swallow Perjuries) shall be stopped, Psalm. 63.11. And
indeed, God has done that for us, which all the Wisdom and Learning, the Laws
and Penalties of the Nation, could not do. In vain have we endeavored to
confute their Fanatic Opinions and Doctrines, which in vain have been confuted
an hundred times: This one act of God, that has plucked off the hood from these
Hypocrites, and discovered their inward parts to be very wickedness, and shown
us what they are by their fruits, is an argument beyond any demonstration of
Euclid, to satisfy the world, that under the Sheeps clothing they were as so
many Wolves ravening for the innocent blood both of Sheep and Shepherds: but
(Pan curat oves, oviumque Magistros) God has plucked us out of their teeth.

And now there wants but one Parallel more, to complete our deliverance, and
perpetuate our happiness; and that is, wisely to consider, with David, quod
retribuam Domino, what returns we ought to make to God for all the benefits
that he has done unto us. Good Mephiboseth was ready to part with all when the
King was returned to his house in peace. We cannot now sacrifice to our own
nets, to our own strength, or wisdom, or merit: O let us not do it to our own
Lusts, to Intemperance and Excess, to carnal Secrity and Impenitence; nor to
Malice and Revenge against any thing but those sins which war against God and
our own souls, and had brought us so nigh to a sudden death, and to everlasting
destruction; but let us wisely consider the opportunities of knowing and doing,
in this our day of mercy, the things that belong to our peace: For God has as
many miraculous ways and methods to destroy us, as he has hitherto manifested
to preserve us. Especially let us guard our selves against those sins which had
a more direct tendency to this accursed design; the sins of Ambition and
Discontent, of murmuring and repining against, and speaking evil of our Rulers,
of having itching ears after new Doctrines and seducing Spirits, though they
appear as Angels of light. The two hundred men that went to Hebron with
Absolon, went in the simplicity of their hearts; they were told only of
Sacrificing and Feasting, of performing religious Vows and Covenants, and
serving God in a better and freer manner than they could do at Jerusalem; and
there indeed they might find all the elders of Israel consulting with Absolon
and Achitophel, Chapter 17.4. and voting for them; and hear Achitophel pray
Extempore as readily as any Modern Enthusiast: for the Rabbis report of him,
that he had a new Prayer for every day in the year; and there they were rapt
with admiration at the Declamations of Absolon, whereby he harangu'd the
people, spreading before them the miscarriages in his Fathers Government, and
promising them a redress of all their Grievances, and restoring them to their
ancient Privileges of the people of God: there they had Priests also, who
being accustomed to the shedding of blood, taught them that they might slay
such as had their faces set toward Jerusalem, with the same zeal and opinion
of doing God service, as they could kill an Ox for Sacrifice. And though the
Israelites were by nature cruel enough, yet the Doctrine of these men, like
those of the Pharisees, made them threefold more the children of wrath, malice,
and cruelty, than they were. An ill Religion it is, certainly, that transforms
Men into Beasts, and a Flock of Lambs into a Den of Lions: but this some such
Doctrines as I have mentioned can do.

Take heed therefore of leaving the established Worship at Jerusalem, for the
Conventicles at Hebron: you know how great a matter a little fire kindles,
when it is blown up from beneath. When the People had been a little while at
Hebron, they could not return; but having gone so far, must go a little
farther, and proclaim -- Absolon reigns in Hebron, and then they must follow
him from the Conventicles to the Camp, and engage in a Battle against David, to
their ruin and destruction. Let us learn to be wise and sober, from the
effects of their folly and madness: Let us study to be quiet, and to do our own
business, not meddling with things that are above us; But, as Soloman advises,
My son, fear thou God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? Prove. 24.21.

FINIS.

