A Practical Discourse Concerning REPENTANCE, And the NATURE OF THE Christian
Religion.

By A. LORTIE, Rector of BARTON, near Nottingham.

IMPRIMATUR,

Oct. ult. 1692.

Guil. Lancaster, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.

To My much Honored Lord, and Noble Benefactor, The Right Honorable, AND
Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY, Ld Bishop of LONDON, One of the Lords of
Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My LORD,
THE incomparable Goodness and Affability your Lordship uses toward all, not
excepting the meanest Persons, encourages me humbly to lay at your Lordship's
Feet, this plain Practical Discourse, which as I have had the comfort to
understand that they were edified, who heard it, so I hope it may be of farther
use, when more leisurely considered, and perhaps may serve to give the common
sort of People a clearer and more distinct Notion than they usually have, of
their indispensable Duty, and of that wise and holy Religion which they profess.

The zeal of doing something toward this, before I die, according to my little
Sphere, made me desirous to leave this Discourse with my Parishioners. It would
be indeed an unspeakable satisfaction to me, if it prove any advantage to them;
but chiefly, if your Lordship might condescend so far as to accept it, as a
Token of my most humble and hearty Gratitude (instead of what I should, but am
not able to perform) for the great and many Obligations laid upon my Relations,
and my self in particular, for which we shall ever stand indebted to your
Lordship.

My Lord,

Your Lordship, and all the World knows it very well, has not only been ready
upon all Occasions to assert and maintain, even with the most eminent danger of
your Life, your Country's most admirable Laws and Reformation; but has been a
common Father to all the Persecuted of France, who were forced to flee from
their Native Country.

How many Souls can declare to the World, and shall testify at the Great Day,
before our blessed Lord and his holy Angels, to your Lordship's immortal Glory,
that they have tasted of no other Bread in this their Distress, but that which
your Lordship did put into their hands! There my Father will stand, with his
Family, in the forefront of that vast multitude of the Witnesses of your
Lordship's unbounded Charity; and we shall thereby convince the World, that
Christianity was not then lost among Men.

In the mean while, my Lord, I submit my self wholly, and this little Treatise,
to your Lordship, assuring your Lordship it is meant heartily, and purely for
God's Glory, and the Salvation of Souls, proceeding from a sincerely penitent
Heart, having studied nothing so much as this Subject, these several Years, in
which I have so often been in a state of dying.

I shall add no more, but this, That the chiefest Blessing I shall always ask
of GOD; and my chiefest Happiness the remainder of my Life, will be to see
God's Glory furthered, and your Noble House, my Lord, and Yourself in
particular, prosper and flourish, to the Honor and Felicity of this Church and
Nation.

I humbly beg your Lordship's Blessing. I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Humble, most Dutiful, and most Obliged Servant,
A. LORTIE.

A Practical Discourse Concerning REPENTANCE, etc.
JOHN the Baptist came Preaching, as we read, Mat. 3.1, 2. and saying, Repent
ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

That was the Voice that cried before the Messiah, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight, Luke 3.4.

And at the eighth Verse of that Chapter, we learn what was to be done in order
to that, viz. to Repent, without any further excuse, upon no account whatsoever.

Repentance indeed is a Duty incumbent upon all Men, seeing all have sinned,
and therefore must certainly be for ever undone, except they Repent.

As the World goes, it is a Duty to be insisted upon at all times. But if it be
specially called for at some Seasons more than others, it is surely in times of
Public Humiliation, when we address our selves to God, or he addresses himself
to us, and whenever we are called to renew our Engagements to Religion.

All we can do without it, is but Hypocrisy, and a mere mocking of Almighty
God.

John the Baptist, it seems, esteemed it the true and only Preparative for the
Christian Religion: Repent ye, says he, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

All Men are therefore highly concerned to have a right Notion of Repentance;
otherwise they can never be good Christians.

I shall endeavor to show, in the following Discourse,

I. What Repentance is.

II. What is the Nature of the Christian Dispensation, which is called the
Kingdom of Heaven.

III. What reason there was to Repent, the Kingdom of Heaven being at hand; and
what reason then there is now we should Repent.

And IV. I shall represent what manner of Persons are the Subjects of this
heavenly Kingdom; that we may know assuredly, whether we are such, or not; that
if we are, we may praise God for it, and continue to be so; and if we are not,
we may see what is to be done to become such.

Then I shall draw some Inferences from the whole.

First, What Repentance is.

For there are too many in the World, take that for Repentance which indeed is
no such thing; their Hearts being evil, and therefore willing to substitute any
thing in its room, to be excused from it.

But God is not mocked; and their very Consciences, were they permitted to
speak, would cry aloud against them, for their unpardonable blindness and
folly, in mistaking so easily, if not wilfully, in so clear and plain a matter.

Some fancy a fence of Sin to be Repentance. That is, if they are but sensible
that they have done what ought not to have been done; that they are miserable
Sinners, and that Sin is a most wretched and odious thing, which 'twere good
never to be guilty of: I say, if they do but feel themselves sensible of all
this; then they think they are well enough, and are so presumptuous as to hope
well of their state, though they still continue in their sins.

Others, something more modest, do not think it sufficient to have a bare fence
of sin, if withal they do not entertain a hearty sorrow for it. But if they do
but grieve and weep for their sins, they question not but they have made full
amends for them, although they grow never the better, but still sin on, still
complaining and sorrowing for their sins, and bemoaning their infirmities.

But others yet come nearer to the business; for to all this they will add
vows, and resolutions, and endeavors.

They are not only sensible that they have done those things which they ought
not to have done; they are not only heartily sorry for it, but they for malso
good resolutions against sin; they vow they will endeavor with all their might
never to fall into the same temptations, never to commit the faults they have
been guilty of, never to yield to their lusts again; and perhaps they
endeavor, and that more than once. Why, these, all these, are steps toward
Repentance. But I must tell ye, as I shall answer it at the great Day of the
Lord, all these yet are not Repentance; if we go no further than this, we do
not truly repent, we die in our sins, and our iniquities shall inevitably be
our ruin.

Say not, you have wept sore, you have grieved bitterly, and perhaps fasted
often, have shunned the temptation, and avoided the ill company, and resisted
your lusts as much as ever you could.

These were excellent means: but if we have not overcome our sins, if we commit
the same faults still; what are we the better? What we have done is
ineffectual, we are not then in a state of Repentance.

What does it avail to strive to enter in at the straight Gate, if Men do not
actually enter in thereat? For many seek to enter in, and yet do not, as we
read, Luke 13.24.

Ye did run well; who did hinder you? Gal. 5.7.

So run, that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24.

When it repented the Lord that he had made man, he said, I will destroy man,
whom I have created, from the face of the earth, both man and beast; for it
repents me that I have made them, Genesis 6.6, 7.

And as the Lord said, so he did. He had not truly repented to have made 'em,
if he had not destroyed them.

For to repent, is not barely to wish that what is done, had not been done, but
to take quite contrary measures, and undo, as far as we repent, and as much as
we are able, that we had done before.

We read, Luke 19.8. when Zacheus, the unjust Publican, repented, he made full
restitution of all he had got unjustly; that is, he entered into a quite
opposite course to his former practices: He said to our Savior, as soon as he
was converted, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have
taken any thing from any man, I restore him forufold.

When the Prophet Isaiah exhorts the People of Israel to Repentance, he bids
them, Cease to do evil, and learn to do good, Isai. 1.17, 18. Wash ye, make you
clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, and relieve the
oppressed.

God himself teaches us what it is to repent, when he says in Ezekiel, If the
wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes
of life, without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 33.15.

And John the Baptist teached also plainly enough, that neither fair Promises,
holy Vows, and good Resolutions, nor even a bare Cessation of evil, make up
Repentance; when he charged the Pharisees and Sadduces, that came to his
Baptism, to bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Bring forth, therefore,
fruits meet for repentance. Mat. 3.8. As if (like St. James, concerning Faith,
Jam. 2.18.) he had bid them show their Repentance, and prove it to be right and
true, real and sincere, by good Works, and a holy Life.

To the Publicans he said, Exact no more than that which is appointed you. And
to the Soldiers, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your wages, Luke 3.13, 14.

And at the eleventh Verse of the same Chapter, he says to all them that came
to be baptized of him: He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has
none; and he that has meat, let him do likewise.

That was his Doctrine: and that is the Doctrine of Repentance. That is, in
short, as if he had said, Forsake those sins you have been guilty of, be sure
you commit them not again, but lead godly lives in all virtue and honesty:
Learn to practice Charity, which is the sum of the Divine Laws; and then you
are right Penitents.

But this is no more than what our own Consciences dictate to us. I Will refer it
to any one that is a Father, and has an undutiful Son; or to him that has an
Enemy.

The Father exhorts his Son to leave off his wicked Courses, and return to his
Duty; promising upon those Terms to be very good and kind to him.

You agree with your Enemy, (on Condition that all old Quarrels and Animosities
shall be forgotten, and he shall carry himself civilly toward you for the
future) to be Friends with him again, to pardon him, and to love him.

Now, if either such a Son, or such an Enemy, after a long Complement, and many
repeated Protestations of Sorrow for what is past, and as many Vows and Promises
of a better Behavior for the time to come: If, after all this, I say, they
fell to their old ways, and grew never a jot the better, would you seriously
say they have repented?

If you could not say it, why then will you say that you repent, when yet you
find no change, no amendment in you?

Let this teach us what Repentance is; for, sure, Repentance toward God is not
of another nature, nor ought to be less than that we would expect from an
Enemy, or a rebellious Child.

Away then with all these Pretenders to Repentance, which persist still in
their sins.

You have been passionate and revengeful, full of malice and bitterness: Do you
still hate your Brother, or your Enemy? could you find in your heart to do him
an injury? would you rejoice at his calamity? would not you be willing to serve
him? don't you study the opportunity to show him how heartily you are
reconciled with him? cannot you abide to see him, or to speak with him? Why,
then, truly you are not in a state of Repentance.

You have been an Extortioner, or an unjust Man; and you have used Tricks, and
practiced ill Arts to overreach and cozen your Neighbors, to serve your own
Ends.

And have you made them amends for it?

To be plain, Have you made full restitution? Have you nothing left but what is
justly your own? Do you use no more these base and cursed Tricks? and are you
well cautioned against them for the future? Had you rather die than wrong any
one again? Instead of Injustice, do you now practice Charity? If this be not
your Case, be not deceived, you are not a fit Man for the Kingdom of Heaven.
You stand in great need of Repentance.

Have you been an unclean Person, or a Drunkard? Don't say you are heartily
sorry for all your sins, and you have strived with all your might against them.
Is it otherwise now with you? Are you now chaste and temperate? Do you ever
withstand the temptation? Can you deny the wicked Company that entices you to
sin? Do you keep your self now pure and sober? Had you rather pluck out an Eye,
or cut off an Hand than offend? If this be not your disposition, read your
Doom, (except you actually repent and amend) 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Neither
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor drunkards, shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

And so for all other Crimes and Vices, as Lying and Swearing, etc. If you have
contracted the Habit and Custom of Swearing, and taking God's Name in vain,
then (and then only) you shall have repented, when you shall have overcome that
evil Habit, and accustomed your self never to pronounce that sacred Name but
with Adoration and Religion, for God's Glory and Service.

If you have been careless, and have neglected Religion, then you shall have
reason to think you have repented, when you are become diligent, when you pray
frequently and fervently; when you humble your self often in mourning for your
sins, and in fastings, to subdue your sensual inclinations, to keep your body
under, and bring it into subjection; and when you are grown zealous of Good
Works, and constant in all Religious Duties.

For Repentance is a true and real change of Mind, and a conversion from sin to
God. I say, Repentance is a true change of Mind, not some one bare Act of
change, but a lasting durable state of new Life. Otherwise it is not sincere: it
is but a mock Repentance.

Some Men think, when at the Year's end, or Quarter's end, they go to the
Lord's Table, cry out against their Sins, form a thousand Resolutions, and
force themselves into a Religious Posture of Mind, after a long Habit of Sin
and Carelessness: These Men, I say, fancy that they have well repented, that
they are right Penitents, and that (after this) they may safely begin upon a
new Score, with an intent to repent again (as they call it) at the time
appointed. So that, after a day or two, the pious fit is over, or to speak more
properly, the hypocrisy cease, and they are themselves again. They return to
their old sins, as the dog to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to
her wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22.

But do you find a change in you? Are you not the same you were five, ten, or
twenty Years ago, when you were led by Vanity, and you committed those things,
whereof virtuous Men, and true Penitents are ashamed?

Are you now of another Mind? Do you find you self another Man? a new Creature?
Have you now better Dispositions?

Have you not only ceased to do evil, but also learned to do good? For then,
and not else, are you Penitents.

Having thus stated the true Notion of Repentance, let us next consider,

II. What we are to understand by the Kingdom of Heaven, and what the Nature of
it is.

It was the Precursor of the Messiah, exhorted Men to Repentance upon the
account of the approach of the Kingdom of Heaven: We may be sure therefore,
that by the Kingdom of Heaven, then at hand, is meant the Messiah's
dispensation or oeeconomy. It was an ordinary expression for it among the Jews.
They then looked for, and were in expectation of the Kingdom of Heaven, or the
Heavenly Kingdom, meaning the Coming of the Messiah in great Power and Glory:
They were used to call it so, because they thought the Redeemer of Israel, the
promised Savior, was to be sent to them from Heaven; and, for the most part,
they little understood the Nature of his Kingdom, or the true End and Design of
his Coming.

But certain it is, that it is a most heavenly Kingdom; as is manifest to any
one that is acquainted with it; not only because that Kingdom is not of this
World, but is seated in the Hearts and Spirits of Men; but because it is a real
Theocracy, God himself is the King, the Legislator and Governor; and the
Members, the Citizens or Subjects of it, are all heavenly Persons, or Men that
lead heavenly Lives, ag^eeable to the most holy, most wise, righteous, and
everlasting Laws of God. That is Christianity.

It Is therefore an heavenly Constitution, or Heaven upon Earth. God reigns in
our Hearts, and over all our Passions, and his Will is the Rule of all our
Actions.

And what is it the Lord requires of us, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with our God? As it is, Micah 6.8.

Or, according to the Gospelrevelation, To deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit.
2.12. It is nothing but the state of Repentance continued and perfected, that
is, a state of Holiness.

But some, perhaps, will say, this is Morality; And does the Kingdom of Heaven
consist in this?

Why; are not these express Texts of Scripture? And does not the very
Preparative to Christianity, teach us, wherein the Nature and Essence of it
does consist? If Men must repent, that is, Cease to do evil, and learn to do
well, before they can be fit to become Christians; Does not that teach us that
the Christian Religion does consist in an entire conformity to the Divine Laws?
And does not the Apostle declare as much in the definition or description he
gives us of it? The kingdom of God, says he, is not meat and drink (does not
consist of things in themselves indifferent) but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. For, does he add, he that in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men, Romans 14.17, 18.

And Gal. 6.15. In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

Nevertheless Men generally have strange odd Notions of the Christian Faith,
and of Morality.

We are apt to fancy, that the improvement of our Knowledge and Speculations is
the end of our Faith, the ultimate end of the Gospel-revelation. But St. James
tells us, the Devils then may be as good Christians as we, for they also
believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19. And at the 26th Verse, As the body without the
spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.

Good Works then; are the very Life and Spirit of Christianity. So that we are
infinitely mistaken, if we think that any one Article of the Christian Faith
ends merely in Speculation, and has not a necessary influence upon Practice.

That Belief is good for nothing, and that Revelation is not worthy of the God
of Heaven, which does not tend to the reformation and perfection of Men's Lives
and Manners. That Is the only wise and reasonable End of all Religion: That Is
the only reasonable Service; and therein the true Glory of God does consist.

Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this: To visit the
fatherless, and widows in their afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world, Jam. 1.27.

We are indeed to be very zealous of Faith; so it be such a Faith as works by
Love, Gal. 5.6.

For without that it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, Hebr. 11.6.

But to him that has such a Faith, nothing is impossible; as we find in that
Chapter.

By Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten Son; accounting that God
was able to raise him up, even from the dead.

By Faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of the reward.

The time would fail to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of
Jephtha, of David also and Samuel, and of the Prophets: who through faith
subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths
of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies
of the aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were
tortured not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; they were
stoned, they were sawn asunder, were slain with the sword: they wandered about
in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of whom
the world was not worthy).

All these obtained a good report through Faith. But you see it was a lively
and operative Faith, that had such an influence upon all their Actions, as to
make 'em comply in every thing with the good and holy Will of God.

Those then have not Faith, who do not lead good Lives, or at least not such an
one as is spoken of in this Chapter; that is, an active and saving Faith; for
that Faith is good for nothing, which does not effect a thorough Reformation,
and cause Men to live justly and virtuously.

But now what is it we mean by Morality? If by it you understand a mere formal
and outward conformity to the Laws of Holiness, without inward Purity; that is
very far from the Kingdom of Heaven: As for Example, the Giving of Alms,
Praying, Fasting, and the like, not from a Principle of Piety, or a Religious
Fear and Love of God, but merely to be seen and approved of Men, and had in
good repute, or the like: But this is not true Morality; it is Hypocrisy.

Or if you mean the Morality of the Heathen Philosophers, that was imperfect
and deficient, weak and obscure.

And so was in some measure the Moral Law of Moses; as is evident from many
places of Scripture. Yet it was a great Advantage to the People of the Jews,
and a peculiar Blessing; being a very considerable Help to Natural Religion,
and an Introducement to Christianity.

But if you will know what true Morality is; that is, Christianity itself: It Is
an exact and perfect conformity of our Lives and Actions, of our Thoughts,
Words and Deeds, to the eternal Laws of right Reason, naturally (that is, by
God himself) imprinted upon our Consciences, and as it were, reprinted (and
that more deeply) by the Gospel of his Son.

And whoever vilifies Morality taken in this sense, vilifies and undervalues
the Christian Religion, and rejects the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the Sanction of the Second Covenant is fulfilled the Divine Oracle of the
31st of Jeremy, at the 33th Verse, where God did promise, That he would put his
Laws in our inward parts, and write them in our hearts; that he would be our
God, and we should be his people.

Since most Men were so dull as not to perceive it, and find it out themselves,
they are told, That the kingdom of God is within them, Luke 17.^1. That the
true way to worship God, is to worship him with the Mind, and in sincerity of
Heart, John 4.23. That the Dictates of our Consciences are the very Laws of
God, which we ought to reverence, and to observe religiously: that to
contradict them is an abominable guilt; and that God hates Sin mortally; that
is, whatsoever is against right Reason and Equity.

For the Gospel unfolds and proposes to us all the Precepts or Dictates of
Conscience; that is, the everlasting Laws of right Reason; and denounces the
Wrath of God against every Soul that will not submit to 'em, and be ruled by
'em; declaring that this is the Will of God, that God delights in no other
Service but this; but if we do this, we shall live, as it is written, Luke
10.28.

And the holy Jesus, the only begotten Son of God, is come into the World, not
only to tell us of this, but to give us a full assurance of it, and present
unto us all the helps and motives necessary, thereby to recommend our Duty to
us, and imprint the everlasting Laws of God in our inward parts, according to
the Oracle in Jeremy.

He has therefore undergone the bitter and ignominious Death of the Cross, and
has offered the Sacrifice of himself, not only to make Satisfaction for our
past Rebellions, in order to a reconciliation, and to make a public reparation
of the Divine Honor and Authority, which was affronted by all our Actions that
were contrary to his Laws, and to right Reason; but also to give us thereby an
invincible Proof, and a convincing Argument that God cannot love sin, that he
cannot away with it, that he will never be Friends with sinners, till they
actually forsake their sins, and learn righteousness: Since (as an excellent
Man of our Church has it) his Infinite Justice and Holiness would not permit
him to propound Terms of Reconciliation with fallen Mankind, without such a
glorious and open manifestation of his just hatred and displeasure against sin
and rebellion.

For no other consideration could prevail with God to be reconciled with us,
and to remit our Offenses upon condition of amendment and newness of Life, but
the powerful interposition of his dear and only begotten Son, and his suffering
in our Nature the punishment due to sin; when he took upon him to make
satisfaction for it, in our behalf, to the injured Majesty of God, that the
Justice and indispensable Obligation of God's Laws might be thereby
acknowledged and demonstrated, and so a due reparation made to the Divine
Honor and Authority.

Not but that, as the same Reverend Author goes on, God Almighty by the
unlimited Goodness of his own Nature, is infinitely inclined to all Acts of
Favor and Pity; and he might without wrong to any one (if he had seen it fit)
absolutely have pardoned the Sins of Mankind, without any other Consideration
than their repentance and amendment.

But he best knowing Men's Hearts, did not think it sufficient barely to send
his Son among us, to declare his Will, and demand our Obedience; he was pleased
also; (to print his Laws, the eternal Laws of Holiness, in our Minds, and to
make a deeper impression upon our Spirits;) he was pleased, I say, to make an
Example of his own begotten Son, when he took upon him to be the Advocate and
the Pledge of Sinners, thereby to convince us, that since he spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up unto Death, upon the account of sin, he will surely
show no mercy to us, if we are not wrought upon to forsake all our evil ways,
and turn unto the Lord our God, and suffer him to Reign over us.

For that was the very thing Christ came into the World for, viz. to restore
rebellious Men to the Favor and Love of God, in bringing them again to their
Duty and Allegiance.

He tells us himself, Mat. 9.13. He came to call sinners to repentance. And the
Apostle St. Paul teaches us, that this was the end of his Death, Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from all iniquity.

And indeed he fully demonstrated, by his Death and Sufferings, the absolute
necessity of returning to our Duty; assuring us thereby, That the wages of sin
is death; that God will by no means spare those that persist in their
Rebellion, and reject the Offers of Grace made to them in the Gospel, and that
there is no way to escape, if we neglect so great a salvation.

As he forewarns us in the Parable, the Lord will surely order, at the Great
Day of Accounts, All his Enemies, which would not that he should reign over
them, to be brought and slain before him, Luke 19.27.

But this is not all that was done by our blessed Savior to establish the
Kingdom of Heaven among Men. He not only did reveal the pure Laws of Heaven,
and manifested to the World the Wrath and Judgment of God against them that
will not be ruled by 'em; he has also brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel: He has not only revealed, but also given full assurance, by
his own Death and Resurrection, that God will reward with everlasting Life and
Felicity, and an immortal Crown of Glory in Heaven, those that will submit to
his Government, live according to the Gospel of his Son, and be his faithful
Subjects in this World.

Thus did the Mediator of the Second Covenant put the Laws of God in our inward
parts, and write them in our hearts.

I have thus long insisted upon this Point, on purpose to make Christianity, or
the Messiah's Dispensation the better known. For these are wholly and
absolutely ignorant of the Nature of this his Heavenly Kingdom, who conceit
that Christ has reconciled God to sin, or to sinners that continue in their
sins; as I hope does appear from what has been said, particularly concerning
the Nature of the Christian Faith; and as must needs indeed be evident to any
one who will but consider seriously the Precepts, the Promises, and the
Threatenings of the Gospel.

We are told, Acts 3.26. That the end for which God sent his Son, was to bless
us, in turning away every one of us from our iniquities.

It must needs therefore be a great Blessing to be freed from our sins, and
brought again under the Dominion of the Kingdom of Heaven.

What pretense then, or what excuse can we now frame, if we still despise and
reject God's Laws, and will not submit to his Divine Government?

How can we refuse to yield our selves unto God, and become God's obedient
People; seeing he requires nothing of us but what is agreeable to the best
Reason in the World, and the Light of our own Consciences, and what tends to
our truest Happiness, even in this Life, (such as must necessarily arise from
Contentment, Peace of Conscience, and Serenity of Mind, and all the Christian
Virtues) and will secure our everlasting Happiness in the World to come?

For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (it does not consist in
indifferent things) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; as
we saw before, Romans 14.17.

When we are admitted to the freedom of the Kingdom of Heaven, we take a solemn
Oath of Allegiance, which comprehends these three things:

I. That we renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

II. That we receive and embrace all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

And III. That we will keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the Days of our Life.

And as long as we are true to this Oath, we remain good and faithful Subjects,
we are God's People, and he is our God.

This is the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, the Christian Religion.

Now 3ly, it is not hard to discern what reason there was to repent, the
Kingdom of Heaven being at hand; and what reason then there is for Repentance,
now the Kingdom of Heaven is come.

The Kingdom of God being such as we have now seen, it is evident that
Repentance is a necessary step or preparative to it.

How will Men submit and conform themselves to the Divine Laws, if they do not
forsake their Sins, and learn to practice the contrary Virtues? They cannot
serve God and Mammon, Luke 16.13. For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness; what communion has light with darkness; and what concord has
Christ with Belial? as says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.

It Is certain Men will never be thoroughly converted, if they do not first
repent, and begin by Reformation.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 9.10. So Repentance is
the beginning of Christianity.

Those that forsake their Sins, and repent heartily of them, are fit Men to
make Christians of; but no wonder that the Rulers, the Pharisees and Sadducees,
and the rest of the Hypocrites and Reprobates of that Age believed not in Jesus
Christ. The secret of the Lord is only with them that fear him; the secret of
the Lord is with the righteous, and to such he will show his covenant, as we
read, Psalm. 25.14. Prove, 3.32.

In a word, the good Seed takes no effect, but when it falls in a good and
well prepared Ground, that is, in an honest and good Heart; as is apparent from
the Parable, Luke 8.15.

Is it now necessary to bring any further Proofs to show how much reason then
there is for us Christians to repent?

Hear what Christ himself, the Author of our Faith, has expressly declared, Luke
13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish. And if we are called with an holy
and heavenly calling. (As it is 2 Timothy 1.9. Heb. 3.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. and in
other places of Scripture) it must needs be surely to this end, that we should
stablish our hearts unblameable in holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. And perfect
holiness in the fear of God, having cleansed our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1

He that never began to study, nor ever was acquainted with Books, may with as
much reason conceit himself a great Scholar, as he that has not sorsaken his
Sins, and repented, think he may be a Christian.

Let us therefore repent, that we may follow peace with all men, and holiness
without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

We cannot barely say, as the Baptist, Repent ye for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand; but the Hour now is, that we must bid all Men repent, because the
Kingdom of God is come, and that is inconsistent with a state of Sin and
Wickedness.

The Times of our Ignorance God winked at; but now he expects we shall all
repent: And the reason of it we find, Acts 17.31. Because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom he
has ordained; whereas he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead.

Finally, in Luke 12.48. we read that unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required. What manner of persons than ought we to be, (we to whom
Christ is preached, and the Kingdom of God fully revealed) what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? as St. Peter has
it in his 2 Epist. 3.11.

Hence we may take occasion, in the 4th place, to consider, what sort of
Persons are the Subjects of the Heavenly Kingdom; that we may assuredly know
whether we are such or not; that if we are, we may praise God for it, and
continue to be so; or if we are not, we may see what is to be done to become
such.

It is evident that a through Conversion from Sin to Holiness, is the Business
of Christianity. The Design of Christ's coming into the World, was to make Men
truly holy. The only Preparation necessary for the Entertainment of the
Messiah, or the Reception of his Heavenly Doctrine, consisted in having this
work begun in them, by Repentance. Repent ye, said the Baptist, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.

A Christian therefore (a true Christian I mean, and not one in name only) is
one that has forsaken all his evil ways, and is turned with all his heart unto
the Lord his God, to do his whole Will and, keep his Commandments, as long as
he lives.

They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24.

It is one who has denied himself, and taken up his cross, Matt. 16.24. One
that treads upon the steps of his Savior, and runs with patience the race that
is set before him, looking unto Chrst Jesus, who for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is now set at the right
hand of God. Hebr. 12.1, 2. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, says
the Apostle St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.17. And Romans 6.3. etc. They that are baptized in
Jesus Christ are baptized into his death; therefore they are buried with him by
baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so
they also should walk in newness of life.

Leaving, therefore, the principles of the doctrine of Christ, they go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and
of faith toward God, as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has it, 6.1.

In a word, true Christians are a peculiar people, purified from all iniquity,
and zealous of all good works, Tit. 2.14.

But if you will know more particularly what manner of men true Christians are
in their Life and Conversation, you must read all the Precepts of the Gospel.

For we can never take them for true Christians, that do not love Jesus Christ,
and are none of his Friends. And I am sure all those are mere Hypocrites, who
pretend to love him, and yet keep not his Commandments.

He has said it expressly, If ye love me keep my commandments, John 14.15. And
at the 21 ver. of the same Chapter, He that has my commandments and keeps
them, he it is that loves me, or as it is at the 23 ver. If a man love me, he
will keep my words.

By this we shall know certainly whether we are his Disciples, or not. Love is
the fulfilling of the law, as we read, Romans 13.10. that is, it is the sum of
it: Charity comprehends all the Precepts of Christianity, and implies all the
Duties of Religion. Therefore our Savior has made it the Criterion, or the
Sign and Mark to know true Christians by, John 13.35.

In the 15th Chapter of the same Gospel, at the 12th ver He calls it his
Commandment, This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I loved you.
And at the 14th ver. Ye are my friends, says he, if ye do whatsoever I command
you.

Than we are not his Friends, if we do not whatsoever he commands us, then
surely we are not Christians. But there is no difficulty in the case, we are
true Christians, we are his Friends, if we do whatsoever he commands us.

Some Men perhaps, at the first blush, will be apt to think that this
Representation of a Christian is defective; because though I show him to be one
that renounceth Sin and the Devil, and makes it his Business to frame his Life
according to the Commandments of God; yet I do not mention the particulars of
his Belief. But they may consider that this were needless to our present
purpose, and superfluous; it being supposed that he who yields himself
entirely, and without any reserve, to our Lord Jesus Christ, to do his whole
will, does most sincerely believe his holy Gospel, and receives and adheres to
all the Truths revealed in it.

It were unreasonable in this occasion to think that a too general Catalogue of
the Articles of his Faith, since it is most certain God requires no more, and no
more is necessary to the Design of the Gospel, and the Business of Religion,
that is to make Men truly holy.

Men may be ignorant of the meaning of several obscure places of Scripture,
nay, and be mistaken in their Understanding of several places (for no body is
infallible) and yet be right good Christians, if they do but answer the Design
of Christianity, which cannot be mistaken but wilfully.

So that if a Man can say, The Design of Christianity.
I am sincerely willing to obey my Creator and Redeemer in all things commanded
by them; I do entertain and harbor no Lust in my Breast, I do heartily
endeavonr to have a right understanding of the holy Scriptures, and chiefly of
the Gospel, and to know what Doctrines are delivered there in order to the
bettering of my Soul by them, and the direction of my Life and Actions
according to them.

If a Man can but say this truly of himself, he may be sure whatsoever Mistakes
he may labor under, they cannot be such as will undo his Soul, since they do
not hinder him to answer the Design of the Gospel, and the end of our Savior's
coming into the World, that is to return sincerely and heartily to the
Obedience of God, to submit to his divine Government, and frame his Life
according to the Laws and Constitutions of his most Heavenly Kingdom.

It is certain Faith is required to no other end but this; whoever reads the
Scriptures cannot but see that this is the thing aimed at by all God's
Dispensations. Let us always remember then to make it the end of our Faith.

Our Savior tells us, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a
field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes and
sells all that he has, and buyeth that field, Matthew. 13.44. That is, they
that will purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, must part with all their darling
Sins, and all their beloved Lusts: Christianity is not to be attained unto any
otherwise.

O then, how many dream of Divine Treasures and Kingdoms, fancy they have found
the Pearl of great Price, and as we say, Build Castles in the Air, and are
still errant Beggars, as to the concerns of the everlasting Riches, and in the
sight of God?

How many are there in the World call themselves Christians, and have nothing
at all of it but just the Name? They have nothing to show for their Title to
the Kingdom of Heaven, but their own false and impudent Claim, without any
Grounds.

But we may as well call our selves Jews and Mahometans, when we do not observe
the Laws of Moses, or of the Alcoran, as call our selves Christians, when we do
not live according to the Precepts of the Gospel; would you therefore know
whether you are Christians? Compare your Lives with the Laws of Christianity.

Our Savior has commanded us to let our light shine before men, that they may
see our good works, and glorify our father which is in heaven, Matt. 5.16.

And in the following Verses he adds, (a warning very necessary to this present
Generation) Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the propbets. I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least
in the kingdom of heaven.

For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case, enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill; and
whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say unto you,
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
the judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger
of the Council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
fire.

Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shall not commit adultery, but I say unto
you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it
out, and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off. It is better for thee that
one of thy members should perish, than that thy whole body should be cast into
Hell.

Swear not at all. Love your enemies. Be ye perfect, even as your Father which
is in heaven is perfect.

All these we find in the 5th Chapter of St. Matt. and in the 11th of the same
Gospel, at the 29th Verse, Take my yoke upon you, says our blessed Savior, and
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.

We are infinitely unreasonable, if we fancy that to be a Christian, it is
sufficient to own Christ by an outward Profession, without actual Obedience to
all his Commands. He declares expressly, Matt. 7.21. That it is not every one
that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of God.

Yet after all this, we have but too much reason still to complain and cry out
with the Psalmist, Psalm. 82.5. They will not be learned nor understand; but
walk on still in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

Still Men will needs fancy themselves Christians, that is, members of the
kingdom of Heaven, when they are evidently the Subjects of the Kingdom of
Darkness.

How many are there that commit Sin, and yet pretend that they are born of God?
against the positive Declaration of the Apostle St. John, 1 John 3.9.

But some will say, If none were true Christians but those who keep the
Commandments of God, and do not commit sin; who then can be a Christian?

I answer in the words of our blessed Savior, Matt. 7.14. Straight is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find
it.

Few, God knows, few they are, especially in these our days, that are true
Christians indeed, though there be many that call themselves by that holy Name.

But the mischief is, the greatest part of them who name the Name of Christ,
depart not from iniquity, and therefore the greatest part of them that call
themselves Christans, shall find by a sad Experience, at the great and terrible
Day of the Lord, that they have no share in Christ Jesus.

For either we must not believe the Scriptures, or we must be sure that all
Drunkards, Swearers, unjust or uncharitable Persons, etc. are far from being
Christians; and yet how many such do we find among the Professors of
Christianity? What more frequent now a days than Wrath, Malice and Revenge,
Fraud, Injustice, Drunkenness, Swearing, and all sort of Sin.

And still if you believe it, we are all Protestants; that is the purer sort of
Christians.

But how few, notwithstanding all this pretended Purity, how few are there
among us that are truly humble, meek and lowly in heart, charitable, patient
and of long suffering? How few are there that do not to others, what they would
not others should do unto them? How few do we see that will bear an affront or
an injury without resentment and revenge? How few can find in their Hearts to
forgive their Enemies? How few then love their Neighbors, that is, all other
Men as themselves.

And yet we may be sure that without all this, our Pretentions to Christianity
are groundless, vain and insignificant.

But is it then impossible to be a Christian? No such matter, we read of many
in the holy Scriptures, that they were just in their Generations, and perfect
in the sight of the Lord, as of Noah, Genesis 6.9. Job, Job 1.1. David, 1 Kings
11.34. and 14.8. Asa, 1 Kings 15.11. Josias, 2 Kings 22.2. and Zacharias and
Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.

Which shows that God does not expect of us a perfect state of Impeccability,
but a perfect Sincerity, I say, a perfect Sincerity. We must love the Lord our
God, with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our mind, Matt.
22.37. And therefore we must obey his Commandments, and do his will, with all
the power of our Soul, and all the sincerity of our Mind, and sure that is not
impossible.

But never flatter your selves that you have done all you can, and that you are
sincere, as long as yon continue in a wicked course of Life. Alas! you are then
worse then Heathens.

Don't you believe that God affords us the Aid and Assistance of his Holy
Spirit? Our Savior affirms it, Luke 11.13. He gives it to them that ask it,
viz. in devout and constant Prayers. And sure his Grace is sufficient for us,
as God Almighty says it himself, 2 Cor. 12.9.

Whosoever therefore is buried with Christ in the Baptism of Repentance, Sin
shall have no dominion over him, he is freed from it, as we read, Romans 6. at
the 7th and 14th Verses. And whosoever is born of God, overcomes the world, 1
John 5.4.

Those that walk in the spirit, do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal.
5.16. But, like St. Paul, they keep under their bodies, and bring them into
subjection, lest they should be cast away, 1 Cor. 9.27.

They baffle Hell and the Devil, they resist him till he begone from them.
Resist the devil, says St. James, and he will flee from you, Jam. 4.7.

In a word, The weapons of their warfar are mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of God, as it is, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

So that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, northings to come, nor height, nordepth, nor any other
Creature is able to separate them from the love of God. Romans 8.38, 39.

And if this be true, if nothing hinders but they may, then surely they are
obliged ever to continue in his Love, that is, as I have proved from the 21st
Verse of the 14th Chapter of the Gospel according to St. John, in the constant
Practice and Observance of his will.

For they (and they only) that endure unto the end shall be saved, as it is,
Matt. 24 13. But no man, we are told, Luke 9.62. having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

Our blessed Savior in Matt. 7.24.25. compares him that learns his will and
does it, to a wise man, who builds his house upon a rock, which stands firm,
and will never fall, though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds
blow and beat upon that house.

From all has been said, we may draw the following Inferences.

I. No Doctrine can be more Antichristian, than such as encourage Vice and a
loose way of living.

For nothing can be more contrary to the Nature and Constitution of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Whatsoever does so is directly opposite to the very design of
Christianity, tends to the Subversion of it, and conspires the Ruin and
Overthrow of the Kingdom of God among Men.

Nothing then can be vainer or more ridiculous, than to take that for a true
Christian Doctrine which allows Men in, or encourages them to Sin. Whosoever
does not righteousness is not of God, 1 John 3.10.

So that, though our Righteousness does not reach unto God, so as to add to his
Happiness, yet are we obliged to be righteous. Though when we have done all, we
must say, We are unprofitable servants; yet we must do all.

Though we must not be proud, and indeed we have no reason to boast for all our
good works; yet we are obliged to do all good works.

Though we can do nothing without the Grace of God; yet we must believe he
affords us sufficient Strength, and we are to act upon that Supposition, and do
our Duty diligently; otherwise our Neglect and Folly is inexcusable.

Though our Savior died and made a full and sufficient Satisfaction for us;
yet it was in order to our Reconciliation to God and Holiness; He has not
purchased for us a License to sin; but except we repent, purify our selves
from all Iniquity, and grow zealous of all good works, we shall still perish,
we shall receive no Benefit by his Sacrifice.

For though the Ceremonial or Judaical Law be abolished, yet the Natural Law,
the everlasting Law of Holiness, of Reason and Equity, or Conscience stands
firm, and can never be repealed. Could you imagine that that Law was made void
through Faith? God forbid, says the Apostle, yea, does he add, we establish the
Law, Romans 3.31.

And though we are justified freely, and saved by Grace, yet it is through
Faith, and that not a dead Faith, such as the Devils may have; but such an one
as works by Love, as we have seen, Call. 5.6.

Let us not then object any thing against our Duty, but set about it instantly;
knowing that we are to expect no Grace, no Favor, no Mercy at God's Hands upon
the Account of our Faith, if it does not purify us from all iniquity; and that
it will avail us nothing at all to have believed in Jesus Christ, if we do not
believe in him, so as to forsake all our Sins, and become pure, and holy, and
fruitful in all good Works, and frame our Lives perfectly according to his Will
and the Precepts of his Gospel, submitting our selves wholly to his Government
and his most heavenly Kingdom, and letting him rule us, and reign over us.

Otherwise our Faith is a dead Faith, no better than that of Devils, who
believe and tremble, Jam. 2.19.

We are therefore inexcusable, if we are so impertinent, after this, as to
wrest (either through our Ignorance or Instability) any Saying in the Bible, to
favor our Lusts, and so flatter us in our own Destruction.

Some Men are very fond of these and the like places, Be not righteous
overmuch. And, What I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do. It is
no more I then that do it, but sin that dwells in me: As if by these, or the
like, they were discharged from the Duty and Necessity of Holiness.

But either these Words are capable of a good sense, reconc^leable with our
strictest Duty, or else they are (not the Dictates of the Spirit of God, nor
the Sense of the Holy inspired Men themselve, but (the Proverbs or Sayings of
dissolute Men, who are there personated, which lie under the Dominion of sin,
and are brought into captivity to the law of sin.

We are little verst indeed in Scripture, if we know not there are some things
obscure in it. Yet we must be blind, if we do not plainly perceive that it does
indispensably exact of us a righteous and just, and a virtuous and holy Life,
agreeable to the heavenly and everlasting Laws of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Our God has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with him.
Such as be foolish shall not stand in his sight; for he hates all them that
work vanity. He shall destroy them that speak leasing: The Lord will abhor both
the blood-thirsty and deceitful man, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6.

And God is not of another Mind under the Gospel; but if the Christian Faith
did indeed make void the Necessity of being truly righteous and holy, and
allowed its Professors the Liberty of living in Immorality and Sin; it ought to
be rejected of all sober Men, with Abomination and Horror, as a damnable
Contrivance of Hell and the Devil: Nay if it were not more apt to reform Men's
Lives and Manners, and make them much better and holier, than any other
Religion that was established in the World before: I don't see what Reason we
could have to think that God is the Author of it, or that God will have us
prefer it to his former Revelations.

But I am sure if it was true that the Christian Religion did not exact a
perfect Comformity to the Laws of Nature, but encourages Men to, or indulgeth
them in the Practice of Immorality and Wickedness; we could never persuade the
wise Heathens, and much less the Jews; and we our selves should have no Reason
at all to believe that it proceeds from God. For the only convincing Reason
that we have, to prove that our Savior's and the Apostles Miracles (which both
Jews and Heathens attributed to the Power of Magic, or at best to God's
Permission to try the Children of Men) were affected by the immediate Power of
God, in confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel; is because the Doctrine of the
Gospel, or the Christian Religion is infinitely averse to the Genius of the
Devil, and most agreeable to the Spirit of God, the Dictates of right Reason,
and our own Consciences, that is the divine and everlasting Laws of the Kingdom
of Heaven.

If the Design of the Christian Religion had been to alienate Men's Minds from
God and Goodness, we could not but conclude it to be the Works of the Devil.

But if it tends to the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind, if it be apt to
promote true Piety and Virtue, and if its Design be to inspire Men's Minds with
great and worthy Thoughts of God, and suitable Affections toward him, and to
reduce the World to the Practice of Charity, Justice, and Humility, Chastity,
Temperance and Sobriety, Patience, Meekness and Gentleness, and all other
divine Virtues; then it is impossible (or at least absolutely unreasonable) to
attribute the wonderful Deeds that were wrought in confirmation of the Truth of
its Promises and Threatenings, to a wicked, malicious, proud, unjust, revengeful
and impious Spirit.

It being then evident that all those Doctrines which reconcile Vice with
Religion, are false and Diabolical; we may therefore be sure if we explain any
obscure Saying of Scripture, so as to make it encourage or palliate Wickedness,
and excuse Men from being holy and doing Righteousness, we put a false Sense
upon it.

Our Traditions are false and abominable, if by them we make the Commandments
of God of none effect. That Is the First Inference.

Secondly, Those Men are infinitely mistaken, who fancy the Essence of Religion
to confist in Speculation and not in Practice; and cry out against Morality, as
if true Morality was not true Religion.

Hollness is the end of Faith, and the end of Divine Revelation, it is the Law
and the Prophets, and the very Gospel. For God's Design in the Gospel is no
other than that of the Law, or any former Revelation: As we read of the
Householder of the Parable Matthew. 21.33. etc. That he sent several of his
Servants at several times, and last of all his own Son, to those Hubandmen to
whom he had let out his Vineyard; and that all the Messages he sent, were to no
other end but this, viz To demand the Fruits of his Vineyard: So God at sundry
times has sent diverse Messengers to the Sons of Men; Angels and Prophets, and
at last his only begotten Son: And to what end was all this but to excite Men
to pay him those Fruits he expects from them; to take them off from their Sins,
and persuade them to their Duty and Allegiance, to make them good and obedient,
that they may become his good Subjects, and may be Partakers of his Holiness
and divine Nature, and so of his everlasting Kingdom?

We must then beware of those who make the end of Religion and the Essence of
it to consist in Speculation, and not in a holy Practice.

Those Men know not the Power of the Gospel, they are not acquainted with the
Nature of the Kingdom of Heaven, they are ignorant of what they pray for, in
their daily Prayers, when they say unto God, Thy kingdom come.

Thirdly, It follows, that our chief and main Business is to study our Duty, to
learn it and to practice it, that we may work out our own salvation with fear
and trembling, as it is, Phil. 2.12.

Those are in a great Error who imagine we must always rest in the Doctrines of
Repentance and Faith, against the express Commandment of the Apostle, Hebr.
6.1. For as St. James says, What does it profit, though a man say he has faith,
and have not works? can faith save him? Faith without works is dead, and
therefore unprofitable, Jam. 2. at the 14 and 26 Verses.

They are then ignorant and senseless Christians, or rather no Christians at
all, who do not much regard God's Commandments, or do not much care to learn
his Will, and what it is he requires of every one of us; who undervalue and
despise those Books and Discourses that instruct them in all the parts of their
Duty, and teach them that without the sincere Performance of it, it is in vain
to hope for Heaven; and rather delight in curious and speculative Notions,
fondly persuading themselves, that the Knowledge and Belief of such, will bring
them to everlasting Happiness, and fully discharge them from the Practice of
the whole Duty of Man, as if there was a way to be righteous without doing
Righteousness.

But if we are seriously desirous of the things that belong to our Peace, that
our Faith may be approved, and may be such as will be accepted of God; and if
we will not deceive our selves with a vain and dead Faith: If we design in good
earnest to have a Share in Christ Jesus, to enjoy the Benefit of that glorious
Redemption he has wrought in the behalf of fallen Mankind, and to be included
in that Act of Grace and Indemnity he has obtained for all Rebels that will
return to their true Allegiance, that is, all penitent Sinners: Then it
concerns us to return sincerely and impartially under the Dominion of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and become God's faithful Subjects, which cannot be, if we
do not conform to his divine Laws.

Our Business therefore must be to study diligently and learn his whole Will,
and to practice it with all the Zeal and Sincerity of our Souls.

Our Business (if we will be Christians indeed, and not barely in Name) is to
know perfectly what is our Duty to God; what is our Duty to ourselves; and what
is our Duty to all other Men.

We must know exactly what is the Duty of Children to Parents; of Parents to
Children; of Servants to Masters; of Masters to Servants; of Husband and Wife,
of Friends and Enemies one to another; of the Poor to the Rich, and the Rich to
the Poor, and the like.

But it does not only concern us to know these things; our main Business is to
practice them, otherwise we are as far from Christianity as before.

For, Though we have all knowledge, if we have not Charity, we are nothing, 1
Cor. 13.2. And as our blessed Savior tells us, Luke 12.47. That servant which
knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Fourthly, If, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and if it be
impossibe, and a very contradiction, to be a Member of the Kingdom of Heaven,
without doing the will of God, and living in Obedience to his Commands; then it
follows necessarily that if we have any concern for our Souls, or any value for
our Salvation, we must neglect nothing in order to it, but must proseeute the
means of Grace with all diligence.

Some Men neglect the hearing and reading of God's Word their private and daily
Devotions, the Public Service of God, or if they meet in his House, they
little mind what is done there; they neglect the Opportunities of coming to the
Lords Table, to commemorate with pure and thankful hearts the inestimable Death
of Christ, and there renew solemnly their holy Vows and Resolutions; they are
perfect Strangers to the Doctrine of Fasting, and they let their Bodies grow
too headstrong for them: Then if you talk to them of governing their Appetites
of Self-denial and Resignation, forgiving Injuries, and the like; they complain
of their Infirmities, and cry, Who is sufficient for these things?

But whose Fault is it if they are not? Judge I pray you betwixt me and my
vineyard, says the Lord of Hosts, what could have been done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore then when I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes, Isa. 5.3, 4.

Lastly, We must be sure to remember, it is a great piece of Madness for Men to
pretend to the Name of Christians, whilst they put off their Repentance, and
live in the Practice of any Sin; and it is no less unreasonable for them after
a wicked Course of Life, and a continual Neglect and Contempt of the Grace of
God during their Life time, to conceit they depart right good Christians out of
this World, by virtue of a late and Deathbed Repentance.

Alas! Repentance at best, is but the way, or a Step to Christianity, and even
that is a Business that requires a great deal of Pains and Time, many repeated
Resolutions and Endeavors.

I shall not need to add more to show the Unreasonableness and Invalidity of a
Deathbed Repentance; but this I will freely say, I believe there is nothing in
the World causes the Destruction of more Souls, or does more effectually the
Work of the Devil, than that Doctrine which makes Christianity so easy, so
slight and trifing a Business.

I will not indeed dishearten Men at no time from doing their Duty, and turning
unto the Lord with all their Heart and with all their Soul; but neither will I
encourage any to be presumptuous at their last Hour upon the Account of a late
and Death bed Repentance.

I will advise such sinful Wretches, (who while they enjoyed their Life and
Health, and thought themselves out of God's reach) rejected the Offers of
Grace, and spent their time in Sin and Vanity, or lived in the Practice of any
Sin, and now are loath to be damned, for their Folly, and would fain make their
Peace, when they see themselves launching into Eternity: I say, I will advise
them not to throw away the poor Remnant of their Time in unprofitable
Profession of their great Grief and Sorrow; (who doubts it, when Hell is open
before them, and they are upon the Brink of the precipice?) in passionate
Profession of great Kindness for God and Virtue, (when they have laughed at
both, as long as they could enjoy their Humor) or in fulsome Flatteries and
Complements; and least of all in confident Ecstasies, bold Claims of Salvation,
and Triumphs in the Mercy of God.

But I would have them humble themselves to the Dust before him; like fugitive
Slaves, who are apprehended, much against their Will, and are brought by Force
and Violence, to appear before their Lord's Tribunal: I would have them dispose
themselves with just Fears and profound Humility to submit to God's Judgment,
whatever it shall be: And I would persuade them to set all in order by the way,
as much as ever they can; to undo as much as they are able all the Evil they
have done, and do all the Good that may be done in so little time; that is,
make all the Restitution, and all the Reparation possible, (if they have
wronged or injured any) frame their Minds, as much as they can, by sober and
serious thoughts and strong and well grounded Resolutions, to quite different
Dispositions than those they had before, and endure all the Pains and Misery of
their Sickness with Patience and Submission, proceeding from a due sense of
their Deserts and an acknowledgment of the divine Justice; and when they have
effected all this, I will advise them to cry to God for Mercy in the deepest
Humility of their Souls, acknowledging that they have not performed what God
requires in the Gospel; that therefore they have no Reason to presume upon his
Mercy; and that if he consumes them in an everlasting Fire, it is but that they
have deserved, and what was foretold them by his Ministers.

Yet I will urge them still to cry to God, Mercy, Mercy, and put themselves, as
much as they are able, in a fit Disposition to obtain Mercy. For who knows
whether God will not be entreated, and who can tell whither the Almighty has no
hid Treasures of Mercy in store?

However, it must beacknowledged, this is the safest and reasonablest Course
they can take, having no other Hopes left but this. And these are very far from
affording any grounds of Confidence and Presumption.

O then, since we know these things, ought we not to remember now our Creator,
according to the Exhortation, Eccl. 12.1. now, while it is called to day, Heb.
3.13.

Ought we not, with the Psalmist, to make haste, and delay not to keep God's
Commandments, Psalm. 119.60.

Certainly if we do not take warning, after all this, if we refuse to hearken
to the heavenly calling, and are not wrought upon to forsake all our
Rebellions, and return to the Obedience of God with all our Heart, and with all
our Soul; not only these things will rise in Judgment against us, and condemn
us, but our Condemnation will be most fearful and terrible; for even those
impious and wicked Men of Sodom, who have been guilty of the most shameful and
unnatural Lusts, and did provoke God by their abominable Sins to rain Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven upon them, and consume them in an Eternal Fire: Even
these Men at the last Day, shall be treated far more tollerably, than those who
reject the Offers of of Grace, when the Kingdom of Heaven is preached unto
them, as our Savior assures us, Luke 10.12.

Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love, as
Christ also loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor. But fornication and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes saints; neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient; but
rather giving of thanks.

For this you know, (or, may be sure of) that no whoremonger, uor unclean
person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for
because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.1. etc.

Let us not therefore flatter our selves with a conceit of God's singular
Favor, whilst we are the very Children of Disobedience, we must either
renounce our Christianity, and our Hopes of Heaven, or renounce our Sins.

It is the most ridiculous thing in the Word to pretend to either of the
former, whilst we continue in the Practice of any evil thing.

The Lord allows the righteous; but the ungodly and him that delights in
wickedness does his soul abhor, Psalm. 11.6.

Since therefore there is no other way to obtain God's Favor, but in being
righteous and forsaking all manner of Wickedness; since the very Principles of
our Religion oblige us to cease from all that is evil, and learn all that is
good; let us be sure to avoid Sin as Men would the Plague, and let us daily
grow in grace, according to St. Peter's Exhortation, 2 Pet. 3.18.

Let us be sure, whatever Interests we have to serve, whatever Dealings we may
be engaged in, to be always strictly just and upright. Let us never use any ill
Tricks to serve our own ends, but in all our Transactions with one another; let
us deal with that Simplicity and Integrity and good Conscience, that becomes
those who would be accounted the Disciples of the holy Jesus.

Sin is the Transgression of a known Law. Now what a horrid thing is it, what
Impudence, for mortal Men to do that they know is forbidden by the Almighty
Governor of the World, the righteous and impartial Judge of the Quick and the
Dead!

But (I cannot forbear saying it once more) What piece of Madness is it for Men
to do this, and yet pretend to be God's Servants, and the Disciples of the Son
of his Love, whom he has sent into the World a purpose to reform the World, and
show the strayed Race of Mankind, the way to true Happiness and Bliss, in
teaching them to turn from their iniquities, as it is, Acts 3.26.

We do infinitely mistake the Design of his Coming, and the Nature of his
Religion, if we do not believe that it is to make Men much better and holier
than they were before, and indeed to make them as good and as holy as it is
possible for Men to be.

Let us then study earnestly his whole Will, and practice it accordingly, least
those who have never heard of him, should be accounted better than we.

If we will be truly Christians, let it be the earnest Endeavor of our Lives
to render our selves as excellent and as exemplary for all sort of amiable
Qualities, as it is possible for Men to be in this World.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report: If there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things, Phil. 4.8.

See what your Obligations are! We that have such a glorious light vouchsafed
unto us, and such unvaluable Promises, and such mighty Assistances made over to
us by the Gospel of Christ; must in reason imagine that in return of these
great Advantages, great things are expected from us.

It will not satisfy our Engagements that we do believe and profess the
Gospel, that we do no Wrong to our Neighbors, that we are neither given to
Lewdness, nor Drunkenness; (though yet even these, as the World goes, are very
great things, and could all Men that profess Christianity truly say this of
themselves, we should soon see Heaven upon Earth,) but our Christianity obliges
us to aspire after greater things, we must get our selves possessed of the
whole Circle of Virtues; we must be kind and charitable, as well as just and
honest; we must he modest, and meek and humble, as well as temperate and chaste.

Then (may I add to these, excellent Words of an Excellent and most Reverend
Prelate of our Church) Then will Christ indeed own us for his Disciples; for
then we shall be true Subjects to God's Kingdom upon Earth: and if we continue
to be so unto the end, we shall not fail at last to be admited into his most
glorious Kingdom in Heaven, where we shall enjoy the infinite Pleasure of
Holiness to everlasting Ages.

A Morning and Evening PRAYER.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Creator of Men and
Angels, and the supreme Governor of the World, in whom, and by whom we move,
we live, and have our Beings; who show thy self to be perfectly Good and
Bountiful, infinitely wise and glorious, and perfectly just and holy.

We thy poor Creatures, prostrate our selves in the deepest Humility of our
Souls before thy Divine Majesty, to render unto thee the due Tribute of our
Homage and Worship, and offer the Morning, [ Evening, if it be at Night.
Evening] Sacrifice of our Prayers and Thanksgivings; to beg Pardon for all our
Sins and Failings, and implore thy all-sufficient Grace, that we may from
henceforth serve thee better than we have done, and may daily grow in Grace,
and in all Christian Virtues; and finally, to sue for thy Protection and thy
most gracious Favor, both for our selves and all Men.

We confess, O Lord, we are not worthy to appear before thee, to beg any thing
at thy Hands. For thou, O God, love Righteousness and hate Iniquity. Thou
requirest Holiness, and art perfect in all thy ways.

But we are miserable and wretched Creatures, who have not minded our Duty as
we ought to have done, nor regarded thy Word, thy Promises nor thy Threatings,
but have often been so unreasonable as to slight thy Commandments, and prefer
our Will to thine; as if we had not believed, that thou know what is best
for us to do, better than we our selves; or as if we had not believed that thou
searchest our ways and know all our Thoughts, and wilt judge the World in
Righteousness, and reward every Man according to his Works, at the great and
last Day, in the which we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
there to receive the things done in our Bodies, according as we shall have
done, whether it be good or bad.

To us, O Lord, belongs Shame and Confusion. Everlasting Misery must inevitably
be our Portion, if thou have not Compassion upon us. For by our Unbelief and
Disobedience we have deserved the Flames of Hell, and our Folly and
Inconsideration has plunged us into Destruction.

O good Lord, punish us not in thine Anger. Suffer us not to perish for ever,
and fall into the bitter pains of Eternal Death. But give us Grace now to
repent, actually and sincerely of all our Sins. And then for the sake of our
blessed Savior, be pleased to accept of our hearty and sincere Repentance. Be
merciful unto us, O Lord, be merciful unto us, who are grieved for our
Transgressions, and are ashamed that we have offended thee.

Help us to contract such holy Dispositions, that we may obtain the Salvation
of our Souls. Give us thy Holy Spirit, we humbly beseech thee, that we may
perfectly hate and forsake all Sin, and love and follow after Righteousness and
true Holiness; and that instead of our former Carelessness and Neglect of
Religion, we may now become earnest and diligent in learning and practicing thy
whole Will, being always filled with that Zeal and Devotion, which ought to
accompany our Prayers, that we may obtain thy Grace and Benediction.

Give us a true Contrition, O Lord, for all our Sins, a deep Veneration for thy
great Name, a profound Humility, a meek, and charitable, and contented Spirit;
and entire Trust and Dependence upon thy all-wise Providence; and a Christian
Hope that may purify us as thou art pure.

Give us Grace to be always prepared against all that shall happen unto us in
this World, resigning our selves entirely into thy Hands.

Give us the Wisdom that is from above, which is pure, peaceable, gentle and
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy, and of good Fruits.

O give us that Peace which the World cannot give, and which surpasses all
Understanding, and fill our Hearts with that blessed Joy, which is a continual
Feast, and a perpetual Comfort, and is no where to be found, but in a holy
Mind, and a good Conscience.

And particularly, we pray thee, give us a due sense of all thy Benefits, that
we may never be so ungrateful as to forget how many good things we have
received from thee.

Blessed be thou, O good God, for all thy Temporal and Spiritual Blessings.
Blessed be thou that thou have been so good and kind to us, notwithstanding all
our Provocations, that we are still alive, and that thou have preserved us to
this Hour, and have waited for our Repentance with so much Patience and
Long-forbearance.

And for ever blessed be thy good Name, for the inestimable Hope thou have set
before us, by the Mediation of thy Son our Savior, whom thou have sent to make
Propitiation for all true Penitents, and to bless us, and lead us into the way
of Happiness, in turning every one of us from his Sins; who therefore has
brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, and has so
powerfully called us to Glory and Virtue, by exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these we might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having
eseaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust.

O Infinite Goodness, to snatch us from Death, and lead us in the way of
Eternal Life! How shall we escape, if we neglect that great Salvation? Good
God, since the Blessed Jesus shed his precious Blood, to redeem us from all
Iniquity, that he might deliver us from this present evil World, to make us New
Creatures, holy and pure, to live with thee eternally in Heaven: O may we
become a peculiar People unto thee, zealous of all good Works, that through our
Vileness, we make not the Blood of thy Son ineffectual to the saving of our
Souls, and so loose the Benefits of his Redemption! May we ever submit our
selves unto thee, and live soberly, justly, and godly in this present World,
and work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, till we arrive at last to a
happy Death, and remit our Spirits into thy Hands.

Suffer us not, O Lord, to lust after evil things, to fix our Hearts and place
our Affections upon the things of this World, nor to be restless and impatient
for any Enjoyment of it. Make us more and more sensible of the Uncertainty and
Vanity of all worldly things, and of our own Unworthiness, of the least Good we
enjoy, that we may be content to want the Pleasures and Comforts of this World,
and if it be thy Will, endure patiently its Crosses and Troubles, so at last we
do but obtain Heaven, and for ever escape those dreadful and everlasting
Torments of Hell, which we have righteously and often deserved.

Have Pity, O Lord, upon the whole Race of Mankind. More particularly, take thy
Church, we humbly beseech thee, into thy special Care and Protection. There is
none that fights for us, but thou, O God. O let not thy Truth fail in the
World; grant that all Men may come to the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that we may all serve thee unanimously under his Banner; and having conquered
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, whilst we follow the Captain of our
Salvation, we may enjoy the blessed Effects of that glorious Victory, in mutual
Love and universal Charity, and so attain to the Felicity of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Bless and protect our Sovereign, whom thou have set over us. Defend him in all
Dangers, and give him good Successagainst his Enemies, and the Enemies of our
holy Religion. Bless and preserve our gracious Queen, and the Royal Family.
Grant to all that are put in Authority under them, that they may truly and
indifferently minister Justice, to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and
to the Maintenance of thy true Religion and Virtue. Bless all those that
minister unto us the Word of Life, that they may save themselves, and those
that hear them.

Be good and gracious, we beseech thee, to all our Relations, our Friends, and
Benefactors. Pour thy Blessings upon this whole Family, and all those among
whom we live. Put thy Fear and thy Love in our Hearts, that we may live
comfortably, like Brethren and Christians, one with another.

Have mercy, O good Lord, upon all that are in Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness,
or any other Adversity, and those especially to whom our Prayers are due,
succor and relieve them, comfort them with the Hopes of a better and eternal
Life, and fit them for that blessed Life.

Pardon our Enemies, give us Grace to love them and do good unto them, and them
Grace to repent, that we may all live better than we have done for the time
past, that we may all be Partakers of thy Salvation. O give us Grace daily to
amend what is amiss in us, that we may go on unto Perfection, and may be so
happy as to enjoy the Pleasures of divine Love and Holiness to Eternity.

Take us all this Day, [Night] O Lord, into thy good and mighty Protection. [
That is to be said in the Morning, but omitted at Night.
Give us Grace to do and undertake nothing, but what we are sure is agreeable
to thy Will, and to thy Glory, and the Salvation of our Souls; and then let thy
Blessing be upon all our Endeavors. O may we so live, that we may be always
prepared for Death.]

[ This to be said at Night.
Grant us a comfortable Rest and Sleep, that we may be the better fit for our
Duty the next Day. And give us Grace, O Lord, when we lie down in our Beds,
always to remember that the time will shortly come, when we shall lie down in
our Graves; that by serious thoughts and a holy Life we may timely prepare for
our Death.] So that whenever it comes, we may not feel the Horrors and
Torments of a guilty Mind, but may be fit and content to leave this World, and
looking upon Death only as a Passage to a far better, we may receive it with
that Resolution and Constancy as becomes them that hope for Eternal Life.

Grant this, O most merciful Father, for the Blessed Jesus his sake, who has
taught us, when we pray, thus to say,

Our Father, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen. THE RECAPITULATION, WITH A
Prayer and an Exhortation TO ALL Who desire to lead Christian Lives, to be
constant in PRAYER.
REpentance is a change of Mind, that shows it self to be read by all our
Actions, which then are contrary to our former Practices.

Nothing absolutely can be Repentance, in religious Matters, but an actual
forsaking of Sin, ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well, Isa. 1.16.17.
and contracting all the Habits of Virtue.

Christianity is a state of Purity and Holiness. It is Repentance perfected,
and an entire Conformity to the Will of God.

The three general Heads of the Christian Religion, are

Piety toward God,

Justice toward all Men,

And Sobriety in respect of our selves.

That is the Kingdom of God, or the Kingdom of Heaven, and that Heavenly
Constitution and Government which is agreeable to the Nature of God, and is as
much unalterable as his Nature.

It is therefore impossible for a Man to be a Christian, that is a faithful
Subject of the kingdom of Heaven, if he has not repented of all his Sins; since
to be a Christian is to live soberly, righteously and godly, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13,
14. from a Principle of Faith in Jesus Christ, in Obedience to his Commands,
and in Expectation of his Promises.

No Doctrine can be more antichristian, more contrary to, nor more destructive
of the Design of the Gospel, than such as encourage Vice, or allow Men in a
loofe way of living.

They are infinitely mistaken, who fancy the Essence of Religion to consist in
Speculation and not in Practice. Saving Faith is an operative Faith, a faith
that works by charity, Gal. 5.6. The end of Revelation is our Sanctification,
1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2, 3, etc. The turning us away from our iniquities, Acts 3.26.
which otherwise would prove our ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30.

It is therefore a gross Error to think there is any thing revealed that has no
Influence upon Practice, and is not designed and conducive to the Conversion of
the World, and the Amendment of our Manners. Those then that undervalue and
vilify Morality, vilify and undervalue the Christian Faith and Religion. We
see plainly in Scripture that the end of Faith is Holiness (it is required to
no other end, than that believing we might have life, John 20.31. Which is not
to be attained unto without holiness, for without it no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 11.14. and none but the just shall live by faith, Hebr. 10.38. For that
which is altogether just, we must follow, and we must seek good, and do God's
commandments that we may live, Dent. 16.20. Amos 5.14. Matthew. 19.17. Luke
10.28. and true Morality is true Religion.

For true Morality is an enaxt Conformity of our Lives and Actions, of our
Thoughts, Words and Deeds to the eternal Laws of right Reason, naturally (that
is by God himself) imprinted upon our Consciences, and as it were reprinted,
and that more deeply by the Gospel of his Son.

Our grand Business therefore, is to study from our Duty (from a Principle of
Faith) to have it persect, and to practice it accordingly. As we have any
serious Concern for our Souls, we must neglect nothing that is necessary and
conducive to that end, to the purifying (that is) of our Spirits, and making us
holy. We must prosecute the means of Grace with all the Earnestness and
Diligence imaginable. For it is but a folly to pretend to the Name of
Christians, if we do not live according to the Rules of Christianity, and do
not govern our selves according to the Laws of the kingdom of Heaven.

Repentance is but the Preparative to Christianity. He that intends to live the
Devil's Subject, as long as he can enjoy his Life and Health, (though he is
loath to have his Portion with the Devil in the other World, and designs to
repent upon his Death. bed is resolved not to be a Christian whilst he lives.

The Design of the Christian Religion is to make Men as Good and Holy, as it is
possible for Men to be. And our blessed Savior has taught us expressly, that it
is not the crying, Lord, Lord, will serve to enter into the kingdom of Heaven,
but the doing of the will of God, Matthew. 7.21.

As we desire then to be admitted one Day into Heaven, Let us from this Moment
conform to its Divine Laws, and let us detest and abhor all those Antichristian
Traditions, which make the commandments of God of none effect, Matthew. 15.6.

God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.

In particular, let all that shall be willing to strive to enter into the Gates
of Righteousness, and shall be persuaded of the Obligation and Necessity of a
good Life, be constant in Prayer.

Prayer is not only a Duty of Religion, which we cannot omit without a defiance
of Christ's Precepts and Authority, and a professed Contempt of that great
salvation, which was spoken by the Lord, Hebr. 2.3. But it is also the best
means in the World to become truly religious.

A Man is never entirely reformed, till a new Principle governs his Thoughts,
and nothing makes that Principle so strong, as frequent Addresses to God, and
serious and deep Meditations of his Nature and Will, of all the Benefits we
have received, and do still receive daily from him, the Engagements and
Obligations we are in to serve and obey him, the great Neglect we have bin guilty
of in a Business so vastly concerning, and how much reason there is to set more
earnestly about it than ever.

The Effects of such Addresses to God, and of such Meditations, besides the
Grace of God we draw upon us thereby, (which is promised to our Prayers) are
very sensible; they make very evidently the Apprehensions of God, and the
Obligations of Religion have a deeper Root, and a stronger Influence on us.

We must not imagine God demands our Prayers and Thanksgivings, as if he
received any Benefit from them, any Addition to his Happiness, was fond to hear
himself entreated and commended, or was not of himself willing to do us good,
but must be overcom'd, as it were through mere Importunity, by many repeated
Addresses.

But Experience teaches us how apt they are to create in us a vigorous sense of
God, our Duty, and Eternal Interest, and how necessary to preserve it; since
any considerable neglect therein bereaves us by degrees of that devout and
zealous Temper, which is the chief Root of all true Holiness and Virtue.

It was not for nothing our Blessed Savior spent so many hours, both day and
night, in Meditation and Prayer.

It was not for nothing he set so good an Example to us, and gave us an express
Command, to watch and pray always, Luke 21.36. and his Apostle after him,
exhorts us to continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving, Col.
4.2.

Would not one guess Christians, after this, to be the most devout men in the
World, and the most constant in Prayer? Yet it is nothing so.

He had not the advantage of the Gospel of Christ, that sang unto God; I have
remembered thy Name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy Law; seven times a
day do I praise thee; in the night-season I am not silent; I call to
remembrance my Song in the night; I commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit
makes diligent search, Psalm. 119.55. and 164. Ps. 22.2. and 77.6.

Even the Mahumetans, we are told, fearing that a whole Night would cause too
great an Interval between their Devotions, interrupt their Sleep, and rise
constantly every night to spend some of that time in Prayer.

But we, who have the Son of God for our Master and Teacher, nay, for our Guide
and Pattern; we that are commanded to pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. that
is, constantly; how cold and careless are we in the performance of this Duty!
There are but few of those that call themselves Christians, will spend so much
as an hour in the day in God's Service: If ever they pray God, it is but by
Fits: And how uneasy and unattentive are the most part of them all the while!
Strange! We scandalize our Neighbors, and those we live and converse with,
often perhaps in a day. It would make some reparation, if presently after we
gave them the Marks of our Sorrow and Repentance, by our Devotion, and the
constancy, earnestness, and fervency of our Prayers: But, alas! how little is
this minded! What makes us so dull and sottish in the things that concern the
Service of God, and the eternal Salvation of our Souls, when we are so
sagacious, so earnest and vigilant about poor momentany concerns?

For shame let us no longer be so very childish and foolish: If we'll act
seriously and rationally, to mean and do as we profess, we must either renounce
the Name of Christ, or become new Creatures, that we may be holy, as our
Blessed Lord is holy, and as his Divine Religion indispensably obliges us to
be.

There are a great many that name the Name of CHRIST, who rise, eat and drink,
follow their Worldly Business, lie down at night, and scarce ever think of God
all the while, tho they cannot subsist one moment without Him, and they receive
from Him daily, nay, hourly innumerable Benefits. They pretend to be the
Disciples and Followers of the Son of God, and yet they are perfect Strangers
with God.

It Is no wonder therefore there is so little Zeal, so little Charity, and so
much Malice and Wickedness, to be seen among those that are called Christians:
But it is not to be questioned, we should soon see, with the Blessing of God,
that primitive Christian Purity break forth, and shine again in the midst of
us, if Men would be persuaded to use constant Devotions in their Families.

Many excuse themselves, as if they were not able, or had not the Time and
Opportunity to perform them: Yet they can find the time and opportunity to meet
together for their Repasts, Morning and Evening: And why not to pray God, and
consult his Word? Are the Concerns of this World and this Body so precious, as
to be more worth than our Souls?

And is it not strange, that those that have the Word of God in their Hands,
and have often heard it read and expounded, should not know what great
Obligation God has laid, and daily heaps on them, for which they are to thank
him, and praise his Holy Name; what Failings they have been subject to, which
they are to beg Pardon for, and pray against, that they may never be guilty of
them; and what things they stand in need of, which they are to beg of God? And
do they not know we are to pray one for another, 1 Timothy 2.1. and are commanded
to make Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings for all men?

Let none think to excuse himself because he is not eloquent: Out of the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, Luke 6.45. He that cannot pray,
cannot be a Christian. There Is no man, though never so mean, but can reason
pertinently of his Business. It is a sign he does not look upon Religion as his
Business, that can say nothing of it.

But, are Scholars only, and Learned men, commanded to pray? Or, is it a Duty
incumbent upon All? And is it our Words and Phrases God looks at, and not the
pious Dispositions of our Souls rather?

In fine, Has not our Church put most excellent Prayers into our Hands? And
have we minded them so little all this while, as to remember nothing of them?
That those that shall meet with these Papers may be absolutely without Excuse,
I conclude with a Prayer, that may serve both for Morning and Evening. They
that have so much Piety, as not to think that time lost, which is spent in
Devotion, will not complain of its length: And as for them that are otherwise
disposed, it is no matter what they shall think of it.

I have but one thing to add by way of Caution, to those that shall use this or
any other Form of Prayer, that is, To take care they let not their Tongue run
faster than their Understanding, but (considering to whom it is they speak,
namely, to Him who is to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth) let their Hearts
ever accompany their Words; and then they may be sure, that the LORD, (who is
far from the Wicked) will hear the Prayer of the Righteous, Prove. 15.29.

FINIS.
By Mistake at the Press, the Recapitulation, which should have followed next
after the Discourse, etc. is put after the Prayer.

Books Printed for William Rogers.
A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
12o. The eighth Edition; price bound six pence, in 8o stitcht 3 d.

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, the 27. of October,
being the day appointed for a public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the
signal Victory at Sea, for the preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and
for his sase Return to his People, 4.

Both by the most Reverend Father in God John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence; two Sermons preached before the
Queen at Whitehall, on Aug. 17. and 24. 1690. 4 to.

Of Religious Melancholy; a Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitchall,
March 6. 1691/2.

Both by the Right Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Norwich.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death, in 8o. price 3 s. in 12o. price 2 s.

A Practical Discourse concerning a Future Judgment, 8o.

The Charity of Lending without Usury, and the true Notion of Usury briefly
stated: In a Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor at St.
Bridget's Church on Tuesday in Easter-week 1692. 4o.

These three by William Sherlock, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, Master of the
Temple, and Chaplain in ordinary to Their Majesty's.

The necessity of Serious Consideration and Speedy Repentance, as the only way
to be safe both living and dying, 8o. price 1 s. 6 d.

The Folly of Atheism demonstrated to the Capacity of the most unlearned
Reader, 8o. price 1 s. 6 d.

The Lambs of Christ fed with the Sincere Milk of the Word; in a short
Scripture-Catechism, in 12o. price 6 d.

These three by the Reverend Mr. Clement Elis, Rector of Kirkby in
Nottingham-shire.


