MOSES AND THE Royal Martyr (King CHARLES the First) Paralleled.

IN A SERMON Preached on the 30th of January, 1683/4.

IN THE Cathedral-Church of St. Peter's, EXON.

By THO. LONG, one of the Prebendaries.

Mat. 6.29. Solomon in all his glory, was not like One of these.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. Collins, for Daniel Brown at the black Swan
and Bible without Temple Bar; and are to be sold by Walter Davies in
Amen-corner. 1684.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY Lord Bishop of London, One of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordship,
THE Great Devotion wherewith your Lordship indefatigably seeks to promote
Works of Piety, Loyalty, and Charity, and especially the high veneration that
you have for every little thing that concerns the Honor of the ROYAL MARTYR,
has given me the presumption of this Dedication.

Finding among some neglected Papers such Pieces as seemed to retain (though
but an obscure) Character of the (...), I carefully collected and composed them
in this little Tablet. And though I well know that your Lordship has a far
more perfect Idea of that Best of Kings engraven on your heart; yet perceiving
that this made a good impression on a Loyal Audience at the first view, I have
presumed to make it more public under your Lordships Name, which gives a value
and luster to such things as in themselves are but of little worth: hoping that
by this Recommendation of it, it may prove as an Amulet to confirm some in
their Loyalty, and shame and convince others of their Disloyalty, by
manifesting to all, the incomparable Graces of that Man of God, and the
unparalled Barbarity of those Sons of Belial, the Ignoramus's and Ignatians
that were Actors in that Tragedy; some of which still survive, and like the
Devil himself, seek to draw others into the like Conspiracies and Condemnation
with themselves, and by another fatal Blow to deprive us of all those Blessings
Spiritual and Temporal which by Gods wonderful Providence and Mercy we yet
enjoy, and to reduce us to our former Distractions and Confusions.

Nor is it your Lorships public Merit and Reputation only, but a particular
and signal Favor to my self, which (though forgotten by your self, shall be
ever thankfully commemorated by me) has obliged me to this confident Address.
For in truth, I have been uneasy and displeased with my self, that I found no
sooner opportunity, nor as yet a better demonstration, of my Gratitude, and to
let the World know what freedom of Access, what candor of Countenance, and
endearing Affability, Counsel, and Assistance, the meanest Clergyman may hope
for from so noble and munificent a Spirit. In testimony whereof, I have done my
self the right, with your Lorships favor, to subscribe my self

Exon, Feb. 12. 1683. Your Lordships most Humble and Obliged Servant, THO. LONG.

DEUTERONOMY. 34.5. So Moses the servant of the Lord died in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the Lord.


ST. Gregory Nyssen being desired by his friend Cesarius to give him the
Pattern of a holy life, transcribes the History of Moses's Heroic Actions, and
reducing them to Moral Duties, proposes them for his imitation. If ever the
memorable Actions of that man of God were copied to the life, it was done by
our ROYAL MARTYR, who so imitated whatever was excellent in Moses, that it may
be thought that God took of the Spirit of Moses, and put it upon him. So like
him he was in his life, that in his death he was not separated. So he lived,
and so he died, as Moses the servant of the Lord died in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the Lord.

The Text and the time requires me to run a Parallel between Moses and the
Royal Martyr; whose Obsequies we then duly celebrate, when we not only bewail
and detest that execrable Murder, and renounce those Principles, and repent of
those Sins which betrayed that good man into the hands of deceitful and cruel
meu, but do heartily endeavor to imitate that Christian Example of Faith and
Patience which God by him has commended unto us.

This Parallel I shall extend, 1. To his private and personal Excellencies, as
he was Moses. 2. To his public and political Capacity, as he was the servant
of the Lord (i. e.) by way of Eminency, as he was a King in Jesurun, Deuteronomy.
33.5. who ruled the People of God in the integrity of his heart, and with all
his might.


And it is observable, that Moses was born when there was a Generation of men
that dealt subtily with the people of God; but God endued him with so much
Patience, as well as Meekness and Resolution, that no difficulty was
insuperable to him.

The first Grace that appeared in him was his Humility and Meekness; of which
the Scripture testifies, that he was the meekest man on the earth, Numb. 12.3.
And though this were as another Vail on the face of our Moses for a time, to
obscure the splendor of his Virtues, yet even that tended to his greater glory
and admiration among such as did more intimately converse with him. He lived
long in a retired condition, being educated in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians,
that might qualify him for the Government to which God had designed him: yet
his Meekness appeared first in a diffidence of his own judgment; which though
it were grounded on strong Reason, and mature Deliberation, yet he always
submitted to such as he thought better skilled in their several Sciences;
though usually when the Kings Opinion was neglected, and theirs followed, the
success failed: and when Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed; when he let
them down, Amalek prevailed.

His Affability, another branch of Meekness, was such, that the meanest Subject
had a a gracious access to him; nor needed there any Favorite or Advocate to
mediate for him, save the justness of his Cause; which he would always hear with
great Patience, and determine with Prudence and Justice. And if at any time he
perceived an Egyptian smiting one of his Brethren, he would voluntarily
interpose, and avenge the Oppressed.

As for the Power which he exercised over his Passions, he was as much a King
in that, as in any other Vertue^ The Stoical Philosophy never prescribed a
better Apathy than he practiced; never discovering any Passion, but when the
Cause of God and his Church was concerned: nor was he ever known to act any
thing by way of revenge, though none was more provoked, and though he had Jus
utriusque gladii. His Enemies indeed made a self-denying Ordinance, but none
besides himself did practice it. His moderation even in words was so great,
that he seldom spoke unadvisedly with his lips: and if he did, after
insufferable Affronts and Injuries, call his implacable Enemies Rebels, he did
no more than Moses, Numb. 20.10. Hear now, ye Rebels: and yet he mitigates the
harshness of that title with the Epithet of a Religious Rebellion, and a
misguided Zeal; and prays for them in the words of our Savior, Father, forgive
them, they know not what they do.

His Innocence did so arm and fortify him against all Reproaches and Injuries,
that when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not; insomuch that Philo says it was doubted of Moses, (...). whether he was a
God, or man, or mixed person. And without doubt our Moses was in St. Peter's
sense, Partaker of the Divine Nature. And if it be true what both Philosophy
and Divinity affirm, That he is a more valiant man that overcomes himself, than
he that subdues many Cities, Alexander himself was not so great a Conqueror,
who lost all the glories of his former Conquests, by yielding to a base Lust:
but never did any rebel thought rise up against the Reason or Religion of our
Moses, which was not presently and easily suppressed.

So that none of his Age better deserved his Motto of More than Conqueror. And
as he was an Absolute Master of his Irascible, so of his Concupiscible
Appetites: for whereas he was of so sound a Constitution, and equal temperature
of body, that he might be naturally thought inclinable to Excess, and lived
amidst such plenty and variety of Temptations, that nothing but the grace of
God could restrain him; that Grace was sufficient to preserve his righteous
Soul, in the midst of a Profane Generation.

A professed Enemy he was to three great Debauchers of the Nation; Wine, Women,
and Tobacco; so that, as Philo said of Moses, Frugalitatem colebat, ut nemo
alius in universum a deliciis abhorrens, animo malebat vivere quam corpori.

As for his Diet, he would feed heartily, but not nicely, nor intemperately:
Hunger was his best Sauce, and he ever observed his set-hours. He was none of
those Princes that brought a Woe to the Land, by rising early to follow strong
drink, and continue till wine inflame them, etc. Isai. 5.11. but guided himself
and others by the wholesome Rules of Temperance: And by these means he enjoyed
that double Blessing, of a sound mind in a healthy body.

His Apparel was suitable to his mind; a plain man; no example of Expensiveness,
or aping new Fashions: He thought it more necessary to adorn his Soul, on which
he bestowed more time and thoughtfulness than on his Body; by which only he
outshined all the Gallantry of the Court; in which respect, should we compare
him with other Princes, it will be hard to find out a Parallel. For all
circumstances considered, Solomon in all his glory was not like him.

As for his Chastity, considering the Temptations that attended a person of his
Complexion, he was another Joseph, not only a Worthy, but a Wonder of the
World; insomuch as he was suspected of a natural Impotency and Frigidity, until
God blessed him with a numerous Issue. Never was he suspected by his greatest
Enemies of any unclean Lust. So that he deserved that Character which the
Historian required in Caesar's Wife, Oportet uxorem Caesaris non solum omni
crimine, verum etiam omni criminis suspicione vacare. He was above the
suspicion of being a Wanton; yet to his death did the malice of his Enemies
pursue his Reputation, giving order to some that were appointed, to see him
dissected, to enquire whether there were not a defect of nature in his body;
who found, to their shame, that it was no decay of nature, but the strength of
Grace that restrained him. His conjugal love to his endeared Spouse, whom her
Enemies painted blacker than Moses's Egyptian Wife, admitted no muttering of
Accusations: he was often condemned by them of too much, never for too little
affection toward his Royal Spouse; who, as she could never incline his Heart
to her Idols, as Solomon's was, so his Love and Learning together had
undoubtedly wrought her to a better opinion of the Protestant Religion, had not
their vile Practices disgraced that holy Profession. Such was the Chastity of
his holy Conversation, that he was coupled rather in the fear of God, than any
carnal consideration: So that his very Body, as well as the Soul, was the
Temple of the Holy Ghost.

The whole course of his life gives such reputation to his dying words, that no
sober man can doubt of the truth of that Charge he gave the Princess Elizabeth,
to tell her Mother, That his thoughts had never strayed from her, and his love
should be the same to the last. And as Philo says of Moses, Non quicquam ventri
dabat praeter tributum naturae necessarium, nec voluptatam sub ventre
nascentium nisi liberorum causa meminerat; though he lived amidst (...)
infinite Provocations, he resisted them all, and made every thing subservient
to Virtue.

It is thought a sufficient Panegyric for some Princes, that they are sine
vitiis, without any predominant Vice; or at least if they are conspicuous for
any one Virtue: but our Royal Martyr, as he wanted all the Vices, so he had all
the Virtues of his worthy Ancestors, and even of Moses himself. He was so like
Moses, that he partook of the same infirmities: he was not (...), but of a slow
speech and stammering tongue; but that was abundantly supplied by a sound
Judgment and sententious Elegancy. He did not (...), make long and popular
Harangues, like the old Roman Gracchi, our Extempore-men, to lead the People by
Noise and Clamor; but he could (...) teach them Maxims and Principles of
Reason and Religion; and was, as Moses, mighty in word and deed. For,

In the next place, he was, as the Scripture testifies of Moses, Learned in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. Now the Sciences taught in Egypt were,
as Philo says, Numeros and Geometriam, Musicam and occultu Hieroglyphica,
praecipue vero Mathematica. And for these, you have the testimony of an
Adversary, what a Proficient he was. Lilly in his Discourse of Monarchy or no
Monarchy, says, He had singular skill in Limning and Pictures; a good
Mathematician, not unskilful in Music; well read in Divinity, excellently in
History, and no less in the Laws and Statutes of the Nation; of a quick and
sharp Conception; would write his mind singularly well, and in good Language
and Style: he would apprehend a difference between party and party with great
readiness, and methodize a long matter, and contract it in few lines: Insomuch
that I have heard Sir Robert Holborn often say, he had a quicker Conception, and
would easier understand a Case in Law, and with more sharpness drive the matter
to a head, than any of the Privy Council: and when the King was not at the
Council, Sir Robert cared not to be there. He had also among other special
Gifts, the Gift of Patience, so that if any offered him a long discourse, he
would without any interruption or distate hear it out. He had exquisite
judgment by the eye, to discover the virtuous from the wanton; and honored
virtuous men. He was nothing at all given to Luxury, but extreme sober in his
Food and Apparel. He would argue logically, and frame his Argument
artificially, etc. The like we have from another, though bitter Enemy of his,
and a Solicitor against him at his Trial, Cook, in his Apology for their
proceedings against him, p. 35. He was well known (says he) to be a hard
Student in his younger days -- He had more learning and dexterity in
State Affairs undoubtedly, than all the Kings in Christendom; and for his
Parts, if they had been sanctified (said that unsanctified wretch) he was
another Solomon. This Testimony being true, how sharply were they to be rebuked
that persecuted him to death!

But we must search farther, to find out the Excellencies of Moses. Diodorus
Siculus notes, that he was bred up in Pharoah's Court, Vt urbanitatem,
Elegantiam, Liberalitatem, aliasque virtutes Regias quasi Rector populi futurus
addisceret. And though our Moses were a Nonsuch in all these, yet all these
were nothing in respect of that Wisdom which he was taught of God. Though his
whole life was no more than what Moses spent in his retirement, yet he attained
to a proportionable measure of all useful knowledge. For as he marked many good
Authors throughout with his own hand, so he transcribed their choice Precepts
into his heart. So studious and reserved he was, that Prince Henry took the
Archbishops Cap and put it on his head, saying, If I live, Charles, I Will make
thee Archbishop of Canterbury. Being at the age of thirteen years, on
Easter-Munday 1613. he was strictly examined in order to his Confirmation, by
the Archbishop and the Bishop of Bath and Wells; as Dr. Hackwel his Tutor, who
was present, and heard his Answers, which gave great satisfaction to them all,
relates. On which occasion the Doctor wrote his Treatise of Confirmation.

When his Father King James sent him to Spain, he charged his Attendants not to
begin Disputes concerning Religion: But if you be engaged, let George, says
the King, hold the Conclusion, and Charles will maintain the Premises; for I
dare venture him against the best studied Divine of them all. Nor was his
Learning confined to one part, but he digested all the Wisdom of his Age. His
Pen was incomparably the most Princely, and best polished in his time. In the
Camp, none discoursed more like a Soldier; in the Council, none so like a
Senator: among the Lawyers, as an Oracle; among the Bishops, as another
Constantine. He always triumphed over his Enemies, as Spartianus says of the
Emperor Trajan in Imagine; overthrowing them by his Arguments, whom he could
not reach by his Arms. His Pen did what his Sword could not do; for that, like
Jonathan's Arrows, was never employed in vain.

In his Deliberations with his Council, he led them by Argument, not by
Authority: and though he left them to the liberty of their own Determinations,
yet were they never so successful, as when his Majesty's advice was followed:
insomuch as they all said, If he had been a Counselor to any other Prince, he
had been esteemed as an Oracle. When his Secretaries had drawn up public
Dispatches for foreign Princes, he would often take the Pen in hand, and saying
pleasantly, I am a pretty good Cobbler, would make such advantageous alterations
both in words and matter, as were approved by them all. So that even his
Enemies would say, If he had not been born to be a King, no man deserved it
better than he: which Sir H. Martin testified of him, in that House where the
Question was proposed in favor of Cromwell, Whether they should have a King or
no King. If we must have a King (says he) I had rather have him than any
Gentleman in the Nation. So that it seems he had no other fault, than that he
was born to be a King, and God had anointed him above his fellows.

Which brings me to the second part of the Parallel; How like our Royal Martyr
was to Moses in his public and political Capacity, as he was the servant of
the Lord; for so is the King called, Romans 13.4. (...), Gods Minster or Servant,
by way of eminence, and immediate relation; the man of God, 1 Chronicles. 23.14. The
man of Gods right hand.

Now the Regalia which both adorn and support the Throne, are Mercy and Truth,
which preserve the King, Prove. 20.28. and Prove. 29.14. The king that faithfully
judges the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.

And first, of his Mercy and Clemency, which, as the holy Oil, kept his Crown
fresh and fragrant, and added a beauty to all the other Jewels that adorned it.
In all the former Virtues he excelled others, in this he exceeded himself: Like
the Ointment on the head of Moses, it ran down to the skirts of his Garment, to
the meanest of his Subjects, and the most malicious of his Enemies. If it be
possible that any Virtue can be in excess, this of Clemency was so in him. I
thank God, says he, I never found but my Pity was above my Anger: nor have my
Passions ever so prevailed against me, as to exclude my compassionate Prayers
for them whom devout errors, more than their own malice, have betrayed to a
Religious Rebellion. Here is Charity indeed, that could cover such a multitude
of sins! His usual Prayer for them was, That Repentance might be their greatest
punishment. Being asked by Colonel Hammond his Jailer, what regret his Spirit
had against his Enemies; he answered, I can forgive them, Colonel, with as good
an appetite, as ever I eat my meat after hunting; and that I Will assure you was
no small one. Moses in his charity did not only wish that all the people were
Prophets, but that God would blot him out of the book of life, (i. e.
Legislaturae, or vitae temporalis) so the people might be spared. To procure a
Calm, says the Royal Martyr, I could be content to be the Jonas thrown over
board. Next to his Wife and Children, he professed to love his Enemies dearest:
and so far was he from seeking to destroy the living, that he wished he could
revive them that were dead. He gave so long, till his Enemies left him nothing
more for them to ask, or him to grant: he gave not only to the one half, but
the whole of his Kingdom. He forgave and pardoned those who were
self-condemned, and had never charity enough to pardon themselves, but like
Cain and Judas, thought their Murders and Treasons greater than could be
forgiven. He pardoned those, whom God himself has said he will never pardon,
such as continued obstinately to offend out of malicious wickedness. Yet did
the Charity of Moses not only pordon that stiff-necked people himself, but
kept wrestling with God to pardon them also. Let me alone, that I may destroy
them, and I will make of thee a great Nation: Yet still Moses prayed and
prevailed, Exodus 32.10, etc. It is said of Archbishop Cranmer, that the way to
make him a friend, was to do him an injury. The less our Royal Martyr was
beloved by his Enemies, the more he loved and pitied them. Though the most
tender mercies of his Enemies toward him were very cruelty, his greatest
cruelty toward them, was his too tender mercy, which they ungrateful wretches
so abused, as to turn his Bounty into Lasciviousness, kicking at those bowels
that yearned toward them, and turning his Acts of free and undeserved Grace,
into sins of Presumption: for some of them did say, They knew the King had
Charity enough to forgive them all; as indeed he did, to the last moment of his
life.

Secondly. His Justice and Innocence was another Regale. No man, woman, or
child could ever complain, of any thing taken from them by force or fraud in
which they had a right: Liberty and Property, Mercy and Truth met together, and
kissed each other; Righteousness and Peace like a mighty stream flowed thorough
the Land, and made glad the City of God; and so secured the Nation in Peace and
Plenty, as the Waters that compass the Land round about. No drop of Blood was
shed during seventeen years of his undisturbed Reign, save of an ear or two of
such turbulent men, who survived to be the Authors of shedding whole Rivers of
more innocent blood.

As for the third Regale, which is truth and Faithfulness; he was, as Moses,
faithful in all Gods house; Deo, Sacerdotio, Populo: To God, to his Priests,
and People: not permitting willingly any pin to be wanting that was for
necessary or decent use in all the Tabernacles of the Lord; nor enjoining any
thing but what was agreeable to the pattern in the Mount, (i. e.) to the Word
of God, and primitive practice. He was indeed a Nursing Father to the Church of
God; he carried it in his bosom, and ingraved it on his heart. His care was,
that the Daughter of Sion might not only be all glorious within, but that her
Garments might be of fine Needlework. So zealous was he to preserve her
Revenues, that if it were true of any since our Saviors time, it was true of
him, The zeal of Gods house did consume him. His love to the Church as far
exceeded that of David to Jonathan, as that surpassed the love of women. He
offered to sell part of the Crown Lands, to preserve those of the Church; which
that scurrilous Milton called his Ephesian Goddess, perceiving that he was
willing to sacrifice his life and all for its Prosperity: for if he would have
consented to the Alienation of those Lands, he might have patcht up a Peace
with his Adversaries, and in probability have saved his life: but no
importunity of his Favorites, no necessities of his own, could gain his
consent to any Sacrilegious Act. Tell me not (said he to a great Counselor)
what I may do to save my life, but what I may do with a safe Conscience: I have
done what I can to the saving of my life, without losing my Soul: I can do, I
will do no more; Gods will be done: I shall never think my self less than my
self, while I am able to preserve the integrity of my Conscience: Leave me
that, and let what will befall me: I shall choose any affliction, rather than
sin. And again, Though I am sensible enough of the danger that attends my care
of the Church, yet I am resolved to defend it, or make it my Tombstone. --
Nimirum hoc est regnare.

Nor was he careful only to preserve the Church during his own life, but
provided for its prosperity after his death. Charging his dearest Son, that he
should not let his heart receive the least check or dissatisfaction against the
Church, or esteem any thing little or despicable, so as not speedily to
suppress Errors and Schisms. Nor can any man impute these Resolutions to his
Wilfulness, but Conscience, who shall consider with what strength of Argument
he defended the Church against its Adversaries of all sorts. His discourse with
the Marquess of Worcester, (though printed to his great disadvantage, and but
partially related) showed his Learning in Popish Controversies, and his
aversion from that Persuasion. His Papers to Henderson show his acquaintance
with the Fathers and Modern Divines in our present Controversies. He alone
disputed a whole day in the Isle of Wight (concerning Church Affairs
especially) on the Propositions sent him, against fifteen Counselors and four
Divines, to the Conviction of them all; who coming prejudiced against him, as a
man of slender parts, went away admiring how he became so learned; and willing
they were his Concessions might have been admitted as a ground to treat of
Peace. Mr. Vines, the best Disputant of the Party, said he was sorry the King
was not better understood; for he thought him the best Divine of any Layman in
England.

Now who can distrust the truth and fidelity of such a King toward his
Subjects, that was so steadfast and faithful to God and his Church? the love of
God and of our Brethren being inseparable. His many Protestations of his
innocence as to the things whereof his Enemies accused him, especially as to
Poper, yat York in the head of his Army, at Oxford upon taking the Holy
Sacrament at the hands of the Archbishop of Armagh, and in this place (St.
Peter's, Exon) after the Defeat of Essex's Army in Cornwall, and at several other
places, being compared with his great Knowledge, Candor, and Integrity, were
enough to convince any but such hardened Pharachs and Egyptians as Moses had to
deal with.

So that his Enemies most notoriously condemned themselves, when they so falsely
accused him of Inconstancy in the Established Religion; which they so quickly
razed to the very foundation with their Swords, and he so resolutely defended
with his last blood. But as neither the Divinity of our Savior's Person,
Doctrine, and Institutions, nor his miraculous Works could satisfy the
unbelieving Jews, who were resolved to put him to death; so could neither the
Piety of his life, his Meekness and innumerable Condescentions and Messages for
Peace restrain these Jewish Infidels from imbruing their hands in his innocent
Blood, and entailing the guilt thereof on them and their children.

This great man did not receive his Religion by Tradition from his Fathers, or
by an implicit Faith in his Teachers (as most men now do; which makes them so
wavering and unstable, leaping from one Persuasion to another:) he searched
into the fundamental grounds and principles; he considered and confuted all the
Objections against it; and from hence it was that he stood as a Temple built
upon a Rock, immovable, notwithstanding all his and its Adversaries violent
Assaults. So that the best Reformed Church in the World stood and fell with
him; and, blessed be God, has had a Resurrection with his Son our dear
Sovereign.

As for his constant attendance on the Public Worship, which he duly
frequented, he performed that with that incomparable Devotion and Reverence,
without which all Religion is in vain. And if at any time he had omitted his
duty of praying twice a day, which he scarce ever did in all the time of War,
consecrating some place as a Chapel in the open Field; so tender was his
Spirit, that he exacted it of himself at anothor time. As Philo observes of
Moses, Si quando ab officio defuisset, severe a se paenas exigebat. He had that
tenderness of Conscience which was only talked of by others: for as soon as
the wrath of God was gone out against the Land, like Moses, he ran and stood in
the gap, and humbled himself with Fasting and Supplications to divert the wrath
of God. And for his secret Meditations and Vows, he has raised such a Monument
to himself, and given such an Example to the World, as all men may admire, but
few or none can imitate. King Francis the First said, that of all Books in the
World, next to that of the Gospel, he would have that of Moses his Pentateuch
to be preserved. And indeed those Books are, as Philo says, (...). these are
the only Records of the Creation and miraculous providence of God, wherein
also the fundamentals of all Laws are preserved. And next to Holy Writ, and the
Records of the Church, there is no Book savours so much of Divine Rhetoric,
and the Primitive Spirit of Christian Devotion, as the (...) does. I have seen
his Majesty's Picture drawn in the Text of David's Psalms; a fit shadow for the
Devotion of his Soul: but this which was drawn by his own unimitable Pen, will
be a more lasting Monument, and give him a better Immortality than all the
Regal Memoirs of the best-deserving Princes: by this, as Sampson, he conquered
more at his death, than he had done in all his lifetime. Vota dabant, quae
bella negarunt; his Pen obtained what his Sword could not. As none but Caesar
was fit to write his own Comment, so the King did it in such a style, as will
perpetuate his Fame to the end of the World. And for my part, I shall like it
the better, for that which that scurrilous Milton said to defame it, viz. that
his Party admired it, and were stricken with such blindness, as next to the
darkness of Egypt, happened not to any people more gross or misleading. For
which saying perhaps it was, that he himself was smitten with blindness long
before his death. I conclude this point of the truth and fidelity of our Moses,
with that which Philo says of his: Qualis erat Oration, talis erat vita, ut in
instrumento musico nil discrepavit, mentem actis exprimens, facta dictis
accommodans.

I shall not presume to extend my Parallel between Moses and the Royal Martyr
for working of Miracles; though God gave him such a (...) or gift of healing,
as was very wonderful, and highly beneficial to the Nation, in the curing of
thousands that were otherwise incurable. But that which causes me to mention
this, was that Cure which Moses wrought upon Miriam, who was troubled with a
kind of Kings Evil, being smitten with a Leprosy somewhat like it, for her
murmuring against Moses; but was cured by his Prayer, Numb. 12.13. Moses cried
to the Lord, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee. And when the rude
Soldiers that guarded his Majesty denied a poor afflicted woman that was very
importunate to have access to him, deriding her as a superstitious woman; the
Royal Martyr observing and pitying her condition, told her, Though he could not
touch her, he would pray to God to heal her: and she went to her home, and was
healed. But to return,

But these Supporters of the Royal Throne, his Kingdoms were preserved in Peace
and Prosperity for near seventeen years together: there was no decay of Trade,
no leading into Captivity, no Wars nor rumors of Wars among us. The King
himself was the greatest sufferer, being left in some straights, and engaged in
expensive affairs by his Father: which his Adversaries taking notice of,
instead of easing him by timely supplies, they add to it by murmurings, and
reviving the old Quarrel between the Kings Prerogative and the Privileges of
the People. For the decision of which, our Moses summons an Assembly of the
Princes and Heads of the People, hoping that they would take part of the burden
of the Government from his shoulders, which was too heavy for him to bear
alone, as Moses complained to God, Numb. 11. v. 14. wherefore by Gods decree he
calls the Elders of the people to stand with him, v. 16. but v. 26. we hear of
Eldad and Medad, two Field-Chaplains that separated from the Tabernacle, and
prophesied in the Camp against Moses. Miriam also, chapter 12. 1. a zealous woman,
spoke against Moses because of an Ethiopian woman whom Moses had married: whom
God reproved, v. 7. testifying of Moses, that he was faithful in all his house;
and v. 8. saying, How were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? And
this Leven, though but a little at first, fermented the whole lump: for, chapter
16. 1. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with 250 Princes of the Assembly, famous in
the Congregation, men of renown, began to make set Speeches against Moses and
Aaron; and so incensed the people, that, as Josephus says, they came with a
confused tumult to apprehend and stone Moses, and with noise and uproar they
came to the very door of the Tabernacle where Moses was, crying out, that the
Tyrant was to be cut off, and the people delivered from thraldom, having great
burdens laid on them. Dathan and Abiram come also with their armed Servants to
resist Moses in case of force. And now Corah, a man of popular Eloquence, talks
aloud, That Moses had lifted up himself without any Commission above the
People, thinking to exercise an Arbitrary power over them, who were all holy,
and to whom, as Saints, the power of Dominion did belong: and accused them as
men of blood, v. 41. Ye have slain the people of the Lord; though as yet
neither Moses nor Aaron had used any other weapons but their Prayers and Tears
to appease the rage of the people, and to turn away the wrath of God from them.
But from this time began the Affliction of Moses, whom God seemed to have
raised up to this very end, that he might show in him the power of his grace;
how able he is to support a weak vessel, amidst an ocean of troubles: for as
Philo says of Moses, Tota vita Mosis Martyrium Deo reddidit, his whole life was
but a Martyrdom: from the time that he was drawn out of the Bulrushes of Tweed,
where he was exposed in a languishing condition, till he died on Mount Abarim,
before his Royal Palace; his Enemies made him to pass through fire and water
more than seven times, that he might be as tried Gold, the more precious and
splendid: for though, as Moses Bush, he was still burning, yet was he not
consumed; but they made him, in a better sense than ever they intended, a
glorious King. Non eripit terrena, qui regna dat Coelestia.

And now our Moses has another Pharaoh and his Egyptian Armies to deal with,
who by vile arts had stolen the hearts of the people from him, and were deaf
to all his Messages and Entreaties for Peace; God having given them up to the
hardness of their hearts, with a Quis constituit te, Who made thee a Judge and
a Ruler over us? Acts 7.27. They had wrested the Rod of Government out of his
hands; and being cast to the ground, it became a Serpent; and all the Plagues
of Egypt which befell the obdurate people, could not reclaim them. The rivers
were turned into blood, Exodus 7.20. And murmuring seditious Libels and
Declarations, like the Frogs of Egypt, were croaking in every house and
chamber, chapter 8. 6. Poverty and Oppression, like swarms of biting Lice and
Flies, filled the Land, chapter 8. 17. 24. A grievous Murrain there was upon the
Beasts, chapter 9. 3. and Botches, and Blains, and Pestilence upon men, chapter 9. 10.
The Cannons and Murdering-pieces were as loud and fatal as the Thunder and
storms of Hail, v. 23. And destroying Soldiers, like Armies of Locusts,
covered the face of the land, confuming every herb, and all the fruit of the
trees. And though Pharaoh saw and confessed that these Plagues would destroy
him and his servants, yet would he not submit to God, and his servant Moses, to
let the people go and serve their God. But mercenary Preachers, like so many
Balaams and Magicians, were still hired to oppose and blaspheme God and Moses
their King.

Herein indeed the sufferings of the Royal Martyr exceeded those of Moses, That
they were Egyptians who thus oppressed Moses, but they were his own natural, or
rather unnatural Subjects, that dealt thus cruelly with our Royal Martyr; in
whom not only all the sufferings of Moses, but of all the Martyrs met, to
afflict and consume him. For he was not only deprived of all the comforts of
his Life, Wife and Children, Counselors and Chaplains, as if they intended to
destroy his Soul as well as his body; but moreover he had trial of cruel
mockings, of bonds and imprisonment: he was tempted too; but would not accept
deliverance by betraying the Cause of God and his Church: and at last was sawn
asunder, and slain with the sword, Heb. 11.36. And to aggravate all these
Impieties, I may add, that they were done to him of whom the world was not
worthy.

He suffered in his Body, being not allowed convenient Food and Raiment, as if
they would try whether he could live by Manna and Miracle: He was forced to
borrow money to buy him bread; and wanting Linen when he was at Holdenby, being
advised to make his case known to them at Westminster, he said, he would not
give them the satisfaction of knowing his wants. Next, he suffered in his good
name, as if they would bury him alive under a heap of Reproaches; sometimes
they reported him to be an easy and misguided fool, led away by wicked
Counselors; and anon, as an obstinate and cruel Tyrant.

He died often as a King and Confessor, when he survived as a man; that at last
he might endure a double Martyrdom; and die as his Savior did, with a Crown of
Thorns on his head, and a Reed in his hand, while they that crucified him bowed
before him, and mocked him. And as if this Impiety were not great enough, they
mock the Justice of God and the Land, by setting up the highest Court of
Injustice that ever was heard of in the world. With great Reason therefore and
undaunted Resolution he denied their Authority; to which if he had submitted,
they would have established Iniquity by a Law, and urged the Kings submission
against the Laws and Liberties of any of his Subjects. He therefore required a
Reason of their usurping that Authority over him. Bradshaw told him, The Vote
of the Commons was the Reason of the Nation: against which, when the King
offered his Reasons, Bradshaw replied. That Reason was not to be heard against
the highest Judicature. To which the King replying, Show me that Count where
Reason is not to be heard; he answered, We show it here, the Commons of
England: so evident it is that they had lost their Reason as well as their
Religion, and had banished all fear of God with the Reverence of man. This is
that Bradshaw, who a little before, some say but three weeks, when he was made
a Sergeant at Law, took the Oath of Allegiance, that at the same time he might
condemn himself with Perjury, when he betrayed his Master. Yet all these
Indignities drew only some smiles of Indignation; and pitying of those
unreasonable and cruel men; and so he received that Ugly Sentence, as he called
it, as the Primitive Martyrs were wont to do, with a Deo gratias; blessing God,
that as he had sent him Afflictions, so he had given him Patience to endure
them. And now they make haste to lead him away, and crucify him: and that he
might yet be more like his Savior, one of the rude Soldiers that guarded him
spit in his face; which he meekly wiping off, said, My Savior suffered more
for my sake. The Sunday before his death, a Guard of barbarous Soldiers were
crowded into his Chamber, drinking and smoking Tobacco, to which he had a
natural antipathy, cursing and upbraiding him to his face: so that Daniel was
not so ill at ease in the Lions Den, as his righteous Soul among those men of
Belial. And to disturb him yet more, he was lodged so near the place of
Execution, that he might hear every stroke of those who wrought all night on
the Scaffold. Peter's and Goodwin, two Army-Chaplains, would have given him
Vinegar and Gall to drink, in the words of Isai. 14.18, 19, etc. but a better
Angel was sent from Heaven with a Cup of Consolation: for on the very day of
his death was read the History of our Saviors Passion, Mat. 27. and thanking
the Bishop of London, who then ministered unto him, for his choice of so
seasonable a Lesson, the Bishop told him it was not by his choice, but by the
course and order of the Church, that that Lesson was appointed to be read;
which he owned as a gracious providence and favor from his God. Nor were they
more hasty for his Execution, than he was for a deliverance from them: for he
desired the Guard to mend their pace, assuring them, that he never marched in
the head of any Army with better courage to fight for his Earthly, than he did
now for the Heavenly Crown. He was not appaled when he saw a red Sea before
him, and Armies of Egyptians on every side: he did not, as Moses, exceedingly
quake and fear, but was more concerned for his Murderers than for himself. And
Philo says of Moses, Non calligavit oculus, nec mutatus est Splendour Gratiae
vultus ejus, Deuteronomy. 34.7. his eye and countenance retained the same Majesty and
Splendour on the Scaffold, as on the Throne: and as Philo goes on, Jam jam
assumendus, and in ipsis stans carceribus, unde ad coelestem metam erat
evolaturus, tunc quoque afflatus Divinitus vivens adhuc Prophetavit. He being
yet alive, blessed all the tribes of Israel, and prophesied of their future
prosperity, Deuteronomy. 33. Being now to go up into Mount Nebo, and die, he went as
from his Prison to a Throne, and from a glimpse of that earthly Canaan which he
was denied to enter, to possess that heavenly Canaan which was open to receive
him.

Which brings us to the last part of our Parallel.

Our Royal Martyr was like Moses in his death also: for, so died Moses the
servant of the Lord in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord. He
began to die as a King, when Aaron the Saint of the Lord, his chief Minister
about the Tabernacle, and the things belonging to the Worship of God, was
violently plucked from him, not for consenting to, but for his endeavor to
suppress those golden Calves which the people had made, and set up to
themselves as their Gods, not to go before them toward Canaaa, but to lead
them back to Egypt, whither they were returning. He died on Mount Hor, the
Tower Hill. Jethro also, his great Counselor, was taken from him by the same
bloody hands. And the circumstance of the place where Moses died, is very
considerable in our Parallel: for he must go up from the plains of Moab, the
land of his inheritance; (for so Moab signifies de Patre, the Land which
descended to him from his Fathers) to Mount Abarim, where stood the Metropolis
of Moab, and where the greatest concourse of people was: for (...) signifies
transitus. Near Abarim stood the Hill Nebo, where was the Royal Palace: and
adjoining to that was the Vertix Pisgah, the Banqueting House, where he had a
prospect of the Land of Canaan, which God had promised to give him as an
Inheritance; yet here die he must, not so much for his own sins, as for the
sins of the people, who now had cast off all fear of God, and what then should
a King do among them? Hosea 10.3. But our Moses must die (say the Rebel-people)
according to the word of the Lord. Certainly there was no word of the Lord
Jehovah, that the people should put their King to death: it must be some
enthusiastic dream of an infatuated spirit from the God of this world, that
inspired them with such a Revelation. The word which God spoke concerning
Moses, (Deuteronomy. 32.49.) was only this; Ascend and morere, Go up and die. He had
an ascension, even before his dissolution: An ascension I call it, because God
had promised ( Exodus 33.14.) to go up with him, and to give him rest; to gather
him to his fathers, and hide him in the clifts of the rock until the storm was
over, Exodus 33.22. So that though God had told him that it was a terrible thing
that God would do with him, Exodus 34.10. yet having the presence of an
Allsufficient God, with whom he might converse as a man talks with his friend
face to face, Exodus 33.11. and having seen all the goodness of the Lord pass
before him, and proclaiming the Lord God to be gracious and merciful, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, and that would by no means clear the guilty, Exodus
34.6, 7. this made the face of our Moses to shine, even when that black vail
was laid over it.

And now he gives instruction to his Successor Joshua, concerning the Church
and People of God; not doubting but that God, under his conduct, would bring
that stiffnecked people into Canaan. And then with an undaunted courage,
addresseth himself to his last Combat, being assured of victory over all his
Enemies: and more like an Orator from his Desk, than a dying man on the
Scaffold, he thus exhorts the People, as it is recorded by Josephus.

I thought it requisite, lest I should fail of my duty, to lay open the way
that leads to your happiness. Obey God, and keep his Laws, which I have given
you, not innovating any thing in Religion. Hearken to the counsel of Eleazar
the Priest, and Joshua my successor, with the Senate. Be not stiff-necked, and
think it not your liberty to mutiny against the commandments of your Prince.
God forbid you should be so exasperated against them as against me: for I have
been more often in hazard of my life by your means than by my enemies. I speak
not this to upbraid you, but to admonish you, and make you wiser for the time
to come, in obeying the Laws of your Country, in abhorring the Gods of the
Nations, and adhering to the Religion in which I die. God having prefixed the
day and place of my departure, I give him thanks, and submit. And thus after
mutual embraces between him and Eleazar the Priest, blessing the People,
praying for himself and his enemies, he laid down his earthly Tabernacle, his
Crown of Thorns, and distracted Kingdoms, to receive an immarcescible Crown of
Glory, and a Kingdom that cannot be moved, eternal in the Heavens. (...) Super
Os Domini.
And thus he died, as the Rabbis interpret the Text, with a kiss of God's
mouth; or according to the Word of the Lord.

And now exeunt Tyranni: His Murderers having killed the Heir, they go and
take possession; but the Land spewed them out one after another, till Shiloh
came, to whom it did belong. But as soon as the People had time to consider
their great loss, and the Books of the Law written by Moses, and left as a
Legacy to the People, and were made sensible of the Rapine and Oppression of
his Murderers, they wept extremely, says Josephus; the men rent their
clothes, the women beat their breasts, and sadness covered all faces; his very
Enemies being ashamed of that Horrid Parricide. It was pity (said some) his
Concessions had not been better considered. Had he not been a King (said others
of them) he might have lived longer. And even those who had betrayed and
murdered him, would, like Judas and Pilate, have washed their hands from his
blood, if it had been possible. The Actors in this Tragedy would still keep
themselves as unknown as the Executioner. It was not we, say the Presbyterians;
nor we, say the Independents: nor did the one destroy him as a King, and the
other as a man; but both were Regicides, and both lift up their hands against
the Lords Anointed. The London-Ministers endeavored, but in vain, to wash
their hands from that blood: but their Vindication carries a Confutation with
it: for they say, The woeful Miscarriages of the King himself, which we cannot
but acknowledge to be many and very great in his Government, that have cost the
three Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from his Excellency into a horrid Pit
of Misery almost beyond example. Was this a more likely means to preserve his
life, or to destroy it? to charge him with all the miseries of the late War.
And a Leader of this Party says, that the removal of our Ceremonies only,
might countervail for all the Blood and Treasure spilt and spent in those
Distractions. Jenkins Sermon, Sept. 24. p. 23. which was spoken in 1656. about
8 years after the Kings death. They did not indeed erect a high Court of
Justice to arraign him, but they raised Armies to fight against him: And it is
to be believed (says Mr. Baxter) that a man would kill him whom he fights
against. And Mr. Marshal, p. 19. of a Letter of his, says, That if the King had
been slain in battle, it had been none of the Parliaments fault: for he might
have kept himself farther off if he pleased. And they might have kept
themselves at home, and done their own business, and not the Devils work, in
pursuing their King to his Prison, which has usually been the Grave of Kings,
as it was his. And in this the Army-men, in a Book called Bonds and Bounds,
argued not amiss: If by the Covenant (say they, p. 45.) we were indispensibly
obliged to preserve his ( i. e. the Kings) Person, how comes it to pass that we
were obliged by the same Covenant to wage War against him? I have heard of a
distinction between his Person and his Power, but never between his Person and
Himself. So that if the Covenant would have dispensed with any Soldier of
England or Scotland to kill his person by an accident of War (as his life was
often in danger, before he was brought to the Scaffold) his death had been
violent, and the obligations to preserve him had ended; and yet according to
this argument, the Covenant had not been broken: why then should these men
think the World so dull, as not to understand plainly enough that the Covenant
provided for his death more ways than one? And in brief, the Actions of the two
Parties differed only as Diminutio and obtruncatio Capitis: They that took
away his Regal Power, did diminuere caput Regis; they that took away his Life,
did obtruncare Caput: they that first gave Commission to raise a War against
him, and they that slew him, were equally guilty; for they are all Principals
in such an execrable Treason.

Nec dum finitus Orestes. The immortal hatred of these persons would not permit
the dead body of Moses to be gathered with his Fathers, and be at rest: for we
read in St. Jude, v. 9. of the Devil and his Angels disputing with Michael and
his Angels about the body of Moses: either while it was yet alive, the Devil
intending to send some evil Spirit to dispatch him secretly, which the good
Angels opposed; or being dead, to deny him a Burial-place with his Ancestors;
for the same reason perhaps that the Apostate Julian removed the Bones of
Babilas the Martyr, because the Devils Oracle could not assist him while the
Martyr lay so near it: and therefore he must be buried at a distance in the
Valley, lest the Regicides should be minded of their guilt, and the People
enraged at the remembrance of their loss. But as Pliny, de viris Illustribus,
speaking how the Romans were incensed to revenge the death of Romulus their
Founder, Proculus stepped forth and said to them, Be not troubled, O ye Romans,
for I saw your King in a glorious Chariot ascending up into Heaven: So, to
allay our sorrows, and to cause us to lay aside all thoughts of revenge, I say,
his Enemies have so far kept their words with him, as to make him a glorious
King.

Thus fell the best of Kings by the worst of men, that had generally sworn
Allegiance to him, and often perjured themselves by Covenants and Engagements
against him. He fell before his own Palace, and at the Gates of his great, but
unrelenting City. He fell in the midst of his Age, and maturity of his
Strength, and fullness of Grace, the Prodigy of Wisdom and Meekness: He fell by
the Sword, and for the sins of a stiff-necked and rebellious People. He fell
not alone, but our Religion, our Laws, and Liberties fell with him: and out of
the Ashes of that Phaenix, they all rose again, and resumed their first
strength and splendor. If we number him among the good Kings, none of them was
so wise; if among the wise, none of them was so good. Charles le Bon was not so
wise, nor Charlemain was ever so good. If the names of all the best Princes
were to be engraved in a Ring, the name of this King would serve as a Diamond
to give virtue and luster to it. Carolus Primus nulli Secundus; his Murder
therefore was a Murder (all circumstances considered) not to be paralleled by
any but the Passion of our great Lord and common Savior; and, next to that, to
be detested and abhorred of all men.

And this is the first Use and Conclusion that I shall draw from these
Premises; That we seriously lament and repent for those Impieties which the
sins of the Nation drew upon it self, and from which the Land is not purged to
this day. For as God threatened Israel for the sin of making the golden Calves,
that when he visited, he would visit that sin upon them; from whence the Jews
observed, that in every judgment there was an ounce ( i. e. some greater weight
for the sin) of the golden Calf: So we may justly believe, that by those
dreadful Plagues and Conflagrations that have been on the Land, and especially
on the great City, God would call to our remembrance that great sin for which
his anger is not yet turned away, but his wrath is stretched out still. And
because amendment of life is the best sign of Repentance, let us imitate his
Example in Meekness and peaceableness of Spirit, in Temperance and Chastity, in
Patience and Charity, even to our greatest Enemies; but especially in his Love
to that Church which adhered so faithfully to him, and which therefore he so
loved, as to lay down his life for it; and in whose Doctrine and Communion if
you keep your selves, you will be free from that great iniquity of Rebellion
and Conspiracies, which are like the sin of Witchcraft. Which word minds me of
one Admonition more, That you would consider the nature of this sin, which
comes so nigh to the sin of Witchcrast, that it seldom admits of any
repentance: for a sad observation, and yet too true it is, that among all the
Regicides that were executed for that actual Murder of the Father (which how
horrid it was, you have heard) and among those that died for the intended
Murder of the Son, whom God long preserve! though they all acknowledged or
were proved guilty of the Fact, not one repented of the sin, notwithstanding
that God has threatened such resistance with damnation: and though such may
escape the judgment of men, it will be a fearful thing for them in their
impenitency to fall into the hands of God.

2. Let us be careful of being corrupted by such Principles as will lead us
directly to the practice of Rebellion; as, That there is any earthly Power
above or coordinate with the King, whether it be that of the Pope and his
Conclave, or that of the Presbyter and his Consistory, or that of the People
and their Representatives; as if the Original of the Kingly Authority were in
them, and they might give or reassume it as they please: That the King, though
he be singulis major, yet he is universis minor: That Dominion is founded in
Grace; on which Maxim, as a Popish Prince may be cut off by his Protestant
Subjects, so a Protestant Prince may be cut off by his Popish Subjects: and
then as often as any jealous, seduced, or discontented Subjects shall judge, or
be persuaded, that their Prince is of a different Persuasion from themselves in
matters of Religion, they may think it lawful to resist him: and so, no King
nor Government in Christendom can be secure.

3. Take heed also of entering into Covenants, Associations, and Engagements,
without and against the King: from these, as from the Trojan Horse, whole
Armies have issued out.

4. Take heed also of being persuaded that your former Oaths and Obligations to
Obedience are dissolved, by the addition of new Vows and Covenants; which would
vacuate all Oaths of Fidelity between men, and make them as Sampson's Withs, to
be broken at pleasure.

5. Take heed of that keen distinction, which divides between the Kings Person
and his Power, and teaches that it is lawful by his authority to fight against
his Person, contrary to the Law of God and the Land; and of all those other
Paradoxes which the famous University of Oxford has condemned and burnt, as
tending to Rebellion.

Lastly, Beware of all those seditious suggestions of discontented, ambitious
and factious men, that do insinuate Jealousies and suspicions of evil
Government, and labor to make Parties and raise Sects and Divisions in Church
or State, such as Corah raised against Moses and Aaron, and Absolon and
Achitophel against David: for from hence come murmurings, and speaking evil of
Dignities, Strife and Envyings, bitter Zeal and Contentions, Wars and
Fightings, Confusions, and every evil thing. And take the more heed of those
things at this time especially, when there are as yet some of the old
Incendiaries kindling the Coals of Sedition and Rebellion, and leading
multitudes of seduced Souls step by step into those ways and methods which
ended in our late Civil Wars, and would carry us headlong a second time into
the same Confusions. I conclude with Solomon's advice: My son, fear thou the
Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change: for their
calamity shall come upon them suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them both?
Prove. 24.22.

And one point of Charity more I shall commend, as most seasonable at this
time, which may help to imbalm the memory of the Royal Martyr, and cause our
Prayers to ascend as Incense, by joining our Alms with them; that as we seek to
break off our sins by repentance, so we would purge out our iniquities by
giving to the poor, whose number and necessities the hand of God in this
Extreme Weather has increased among us. Methinks I hear them crying to us,
Give something for King Charles his sake. And our Liberality at this time will
be such a testimony of our Religious affection to the memory of that good King,
as Mary Magdalen's Ointment which she poured on Christ's head, Mat. 26.12. She
has wrought a good work; in that she poured out this ointment on my body, she
did it for my burial. And if we be ready to do good, willing to communicate, we
are assured that with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

FINIS.

