THE ORIGINAL of WAR: OR, THE Causes of Rebellion. A SERMON Preached in the
Castle of Exon, On the 15th of January, 1683. BEFORE The Right Reverend Father
in God THOMAS Lord Bishop of Exon, And other His Majesty's JUSTICES of the
Peace For the County of DEVON. By THO. LONG, Prebendary of St. Peter's, Exon.

Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of
the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver. Scatter thou
the people that delight in war,

Psalm. 68.30. -- Quem discordiae, quem caedes Civium, quem bellum Civil
delectat, eum ex finibus humanae naturae exterminandum puto.

Cicero, Philip. 13. LONDON: Printed by J. C. and F. Collins, for Daniel Brown
at the black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar; and are to be sold by Walter
Davies in Amen-corner. 1684.

TO The Right Reverend Father in God THOMAS Lord Bishop of Exon, And other His
Majesty's JUSTICES of the Peace For the County of DEVON.
My LORD and GENTLEMEN,
I Have the more readily complied with your Desires for Printing this Sermon,
that I may acquaint the Nation with an Exemplary instance of Religion and
Loyalty; which I beg your pardon for Reprinting in your Own words, as follows.

Devon. ss. Ad General. Quarterial. Session. Pacis Dom. Regis tent. apud Castr.
Exon. in and pro Comitat. praed. Secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni Dom. nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensor, etc. Tricessimo quinto, Annoque Dom. 1683. WE have been so
abundantly convinced of the Seditious and Rebellious Practices of the Sectaries
and Phanaticks, who through the Course of above One hundred years since we were
first infested with 'em, have scarce afforded this unhappy Kingdom any interval
of rest from their Horrid Treasons, as that we must esteem 'em, not only the
open Enemies of our Established Government, but to all the common Principles of
Society and Humanity it self. Wherefore, that we may prevent their Horrid
Conspiracies for the time to come, and secure (as much as in us lies) our most
Gracious KING and the GOVERNMENT from the Fury-and Malice of 'em, we resolve to
put the Severest of the Laws (which we find too Easy and Gentle, unless
enlivened by a vigorous Execution) in force against 'em.

1. We Agree and Resolve, in every Division of this County, to require
sufficient Sureties for the good Abearing and peaceable Behavior of all such
as we may justly suspect, or that we can receive any credible Information
against, that they have been at any Conventicles and Unlawful Meetings, or at
any Factious or Seditious Clubs; or that have by any Discourses discovered
themselves to be disaffected to the present Established Government, either in
Church or State; or that have been the Authors or Publishers of any Seditious
Libels; or that shall not in all things duly conform themselves to the present
Established Government.

2. Because we have a sort of False Men, and more perfidious than professed
Phanaticks, who either wanting Courage to appear in their own shape, or the
better to bring about their Treasonable Designs, privately associate with, and
encourage the Seditious Clubs of the Sectaries, and with them Plot heartily
against the Government; and yet, that they may pass unsuspected, sometime
appear in the Church with a false show of Conformity, only to save their
Money, and the better to serve their Faction: that we may (if possible)
distinguish and know all such dangerous Enemies, we will strictly require all
Churchwardens and Constables, at all our Monthly Meetings, to give us a full
account of all such as do not every Sunday resort to their own Parish-Churches,
and are not at the beginning of Divine Service, and do not behave themselves
Orderly and Soberly there, observing all such decent Ceremonies as the Laws
enjoin: And that they likewise Present unto us the Names of all such as have
not received the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper in their own
Parish-Churches Thrice in the Year.

3. Being fully satisfied, as well by the clear Evidence of the late Horrid
PLOT, as by our own long and sad Experience, That the Nonconformist Preachers
are the Authors and Fomenters of this Pestilent Faction, and the implacable
Enemies of the Established Government, and to whom the late Execrable Treasons,
which have had such dismal effects in this Kingdom, are principally to be
imputed, and who by their present obstinate refusing to Take and Subscribe an
Oath and Declaration, That they do not hold it lawful to take up ARMS against
the KING, and that they will not endeavor any Alteration of Government either
in Church or State; do necessarily enforce us to conclude, that they are still
ready to engage themselves (if not actually engaged) in some Rebellious
Conspiracy against the KING, and to Invade and Subvert his GOVERNMENT:
Wherefore we resolve in every Parish of this County, to leave strict Warrants
in the hands of all Constables, for the seizing of such persons. And as an
encouragement to all Officers and others, that shall be instrumental in the
apprehending of any of them, so as they may be brought to Justice, we will give
and allow Forty shillings, as a Reward, for every Nonconformist-Preacher that
shall be so secured. And we Resolve to prosecute them and all other such
Dangerous Enemies of the Government, and common Absenters from Church, and
frequenters of CONVENTICLES, according to the Directions of a Law made in the
Five and Thirtieth Year of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, Entitled, An Act for
the keeping Her Majesty's Subjects in due OBEDIENCE.

Lastly. That we may never forget the infinite Mercies of Almighty God, in the
late Wonderful Deliverance of our Gracious KING, and His Dearest BROTHER, and
all His Loyal Subjects, (who were designed for a Massacre) from the Horrid
Conspiracy of the Phanaticks and their Accomplices; and that we may perpetuate
as well our own Thankfulness, as their Infamy, that the Generations to come may
know their Treachery, and avoid and never trust men of such Principles more;
and also, that we our selves may perform our public Duty to Almighty God,
before we enter upon the public Service of our Country: We Order, Resolve, and
Agree, with the Advice and Concurrence of the Right Reverend Father in God, our
much Honored and Worthy Lord BISHOP, to give and bestow for the Beautifying of
the Chapel in the Castle of EXON, and for the erecting of decent Seats there,
Ten pounds: And we will likewise give and continue Six pounds to be paid yearly
to any one of the Church of Exon, whom the said Lord BISHOP shall appoint, to
read the DIVINE SERVICE, with the Prayers lately appointed for the day of
Thanksgiving on the Ninth of September last, and to Preach a Sermon exhorting
to OBEDIENCE, in the said Chapel, on the first day of every General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace held in the said Castle, to begin precisely at
Eight of the Clock in the Morning.

And may the Mercies of Heaven (which are infinite) always protect our
Religious and Gracious KING, his Dearest BROTHER, and every Branc of that ROYAL
FAMILY; and may all the Treasonable Conspiracies of those Rebellious
Schischmaticks be always thus happily prevented.

That the continued Care of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
of DEVON, for the Safety of His Majesty's Sacred Person, the preservation of
the Public Peace, and advancement of true Religion, may be fuller known, and
have a better Effect; I do hereby Order and Require all the CLERGY of my
Diocese within the County of Devon, deliberately to publish this Order, the
next Sunday after it shall be tendered to them.

THO. EXON.
Hugo Vaughan, Cler. Pacis Com praed.

My LORD and GENTLEMEN,
YOu have taken the right measure for securing our Peace, and rendering unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, by rendering unto God the things that are
Gods in the first place. We all owe it to your Piety, R. R. Father, who have
loved our Nation, and built us another Synagogue: which with all thankfulness
we acknowledge; and may it ever reremain a House of Prayer for those ends to
which you have designed and reconsecrated it, by your presence and Devotion.
When I saw the Heads of our County following the Guide of their Souls, and like
Moses and Aaron on the Mount stretching out their hands with their hearts unto
God in Prayer, it seemed to me a good Omen of Success and Victory against those
Amalekites that are still conspiring against us in the Valleys. For such as
you, who make it your business to serve God and the King, are the Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: In you we may see Righteousness and Peace
embracing and kissing each other; and may they never prosper, that attempt to
put them or you asunder.

And now I beseech you, R. R. Father, and worthy Gentlemen, suffer a word of
Exhortation; which is, that you would bend your united Force against that
Profaneness and Debauchery, which, as it is an effect of our former Divisions
and War, so it will be the cause of new Confusions, and drawing down the Wrath
of God on the Land. For if such men of Belial as are still fighting against
God, blaspheming his Holy Name by accursed Oaths and damnable Imprecations;
that own no other Deity but the Lusts of their upper and nether bellies, and
sacrifice more of their time and Estates to Bacchus and Venus, than to their
God and Savior, and, Leviathan- like, sport themselves n the waters of the
Sanctuary, scoffing at all things that are Sacred, and think themselves so
great, that no man durst put a hook in their nostrils, or reprove them, though
never so friendly, and in the Name of God, be permitted to riot it in the
daytime, we may expect an approaching night of as much blackness and darkness,
as violent storms and tempests, as hitherto (God be thanked) has past over our
heads.

And because Tippling and Brothel-houses and the Nurseries of these mischievous
vices, where men sacrifice more of their time and Estates to their ungodly
Lusts, than to their God and Savior; let those Nests and Receptacles of
unclean Locusts and devouring Caterpillars, which do even cover the Land, and
though they have the faces of men, yet under them they carry the hearts of
beasts, and the stings of fiery Serpents, be suppressed. I know there may be
some Silver-smiths that will plead for these Shrines of the great Goddess
Diana, which bring no small gain to the Crafts-men: But certainly if the time
and Treasure which is spent and spilt by these Debaucheries in Idleness, and
upon their Lusts, were employed in their daily Labors and honest Callings the
King would have a far greater, as well as a better Revenue and Aid, than from
all those Augean Stables. These are those Devils Chapels, which in many places
he set up for himself, at the very entrance into God's House; where his
Chaplains daily attend his Service, but especially on those Holy Days which are
set apart for God's Worship; and from hence there are as many Oaths and
Imprecations for Vengeance and Damnation sent up against Heaven, as there are
Prayers and Supplications for Pardon and Salvation in the Churches of God.

And how great Provocations these are to our Holy God, your own experience of
the great and daily trouble occasioned by such Riots, may inform you: for from
hence proceed Thefts, Whoredoms, Bastardies, Brauls and Quarrels, which are
prosecuted by expensive and ruining Lawsuits, maiming of Limbs, and shedding
of innocent Blood. These are the Sanctuaries of Vagabonds and Robbers, the
Hospitals of incurable Fools and Madmen; where men are besotted, bereaved of
reason and strength, and made incapable of any good Employment: The very
Pesthouses of the Nation, where Diseases are propagated, and Infirmities
intailed on succeeding Generations. By these Circean Cups, men are transformed
into beasts; and by their looks and their language you may know them: for Vix
hominem sonant.

These were the Apollyons that destroyed the late Kings Armies, his Forts and
Garrisons, and reduced him to more straights than the Armies of his
Adversaries; who when they should be fighting against the Kings Enemies, were
fighting against God; and discharging Vollies of Oaths against Heaven, when
they should have been praying for mercy and forgiveness from thence. These
hardened the hearts of the Kings Enemies, and alienated the affections of his
Subjects as if the Cause could not be good, that was defended by such
Instruments: for they brought an evil Report on a righteous Cause, as if their
Prince were like that Party, or Gallio- like, cared for none of those things.
It was doubtless by and for the wickedness of these men, that so good a Prince,
and so just a Cause was overthrown: and if we still do wickedly, ( though as
yet we have no visible Enemies) the Mouth of the Lord, which is able to do it,
has said, Ye shall be destroyed, both you and your King.

Wherefore I beseech you who have Power and Authority from God and the King,
vigorously and unanimously to endeavor the Suppression of those Seminaries of
sin and uncleanness, which provoke God, and bring the Government into Contempt;
and then we may hope that God will still suppress our Enemies, and establish us
on the sure Foundations of Peace and Righteousness: which is and shall be the
hearty Prayer of,

Exon, Jan. 21. 1683. My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most humble and hearty
Servant, for God, his Church, and the King, THO. LONG.

St. JAMES 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even from your lusts which war in your members?


BEing to speak to so solemn an Audience, I could not think of a more
seasonable and proper Subject, than to commend unto you, especially R. R.
Father in God, and worthy Gentlemen who are in Commission for the PEACE, and
Enquiry into the Causes of WAR.

And the Text seems to be a Writ of Enquiry: -- From whence come wars? In the
due execution whereof, you may do God and the King, your selves and your
Country, most acceptable Service. For in this Text you have a discovery of the
first most secret motions that tend to War and Confusion: which, as it is said
of the Basilisk, being first seen, they die; but if they surprise us, we perish.

I shall therefore wave all formalities and delays, and become your humble
Solicitor to take immediate cognizance of the merits of the Cause; that OLD
CAUSE which has formerly involved the three Nations in War and Confusion, and
is like to set us all on a flame a second time. And I doubt not to produce such
clear and unquestionable evidence concerning the matter of fact, that not one
(though interessed and prejudiced person) shall return an Ignoramus, but agree
fully in the Verdict with St. James, That the wars and fightings among our
selves can proceed from no other cause, but those lusts that war in our
members. And in this I dare make every man a Juror, being as well under the
Oath of God in his Baptism, as the Oath of the King in his Allegiance: both
which oblige him to discover and bring to condign punishment those lusts that
fight against God, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
temporal and eternal Peace of our own Souls.

Three things the Text directs us to enquire into.

1. The matter of Fact: Wars and fightings. 2. The Persons engaged: Among you,
or between your selves, (viz.) the twelve Tribes to whom St. James writes this
Epistle. 3. The Original whence these Wars came; which our Apostle assures us,
was from no other cause, but those lusts which did war in their members.
First, of the matter of Fact; which was more than private Stirs and Heats, (as
some term them) there was some fire and flames; and Behold, says our Apostle,
how great a matter a little fire kindles! it proceeded to Open Hostility and
Murder. For although by Gods just Judgment upon them, they had been for above
an hundred years under the Power and Government of the Romans, and owned no
King but Caesar, by whom they were permitted the enjoyment of their Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, under the easy tribute of one penny yearly for each
person, which was the ordinary pay of a Labourer or Soldier for one days
service: yet did they not only often rebel against their lawful Governors on
the account of that Tribute, but frequently by more than Civil Wars did execute
most barbarous and bloody Fights among themselves, being divided into many
restless Factions, each striving to be uppermost, until they were all ruined.

This our Apostle plainly expresses, v. 2. Ye fight and war; and again, ye
kill, and desire to have; (i. e.) to get dominion and unlawful possessions:
(...) the word is, and it seems to refer to a Generation of men that called
themselves Zealots, who under a pretense of Justice and Religion, made it
lawful to kill and destroy all that opposed their engrossing the Power, Wealth,
and Trade of the Nation; for that was the Religion of those men. And thus began
those unnatural Wars: the People were persuaded by these Zealots, that their
Religion, Laws, and Liberties were invaded by their King, that Prince of Peace,
the anointed and Holy One of God. Against whom the great Council and some chief
Priests stirred up the People, and conspired to put him to death: And having
all the Factions at their beck against him, as their common Enemy, that would
let in the Romans upon them; and having by many intolerable affronts and
indignities driven him from his Royal City, and hunted him from place to place,
they corrupted a Judas to betray him for a sum of money; and by Subornation of
false Witnesses, and a Pagan Judge, and mockery of Justice, they murdered him
as it were at the Gates of his great City Jerusalem; whose thirst of blood he
had a little before endeavored to quench by a flood of tears: O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, etc. This our Apostle observes, chapter 5.
6. Ye have condemned and killed, (...), that Just One; Parallel to Acts 3.14.
Ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a Murderer to be granted unto
you. And now that the Royal sense was dug down, what could be expected but a
deluge of Blood, even the days of Vengeance, wherein all things that were
written were to be fulfilled? Luke 21.22.

And Judgment was to begin first at the house of God. Accordingly we find, Acts
6.9. that Some of the Synagogue of the Libertines and Cyrenians, etc. accused
St. Stephen the Proto-Martyr. For they being not able to resist the wisdom and
the spirit by which he spoke; and by his sharp but just reproofs, chapter 7. 5.
being cut to the heart, v. 54. the People Elders and Scribes caught him, and
brought him to the Council; and set up false witnesses, which said, that he had
spoke blasphemous words against Moses and against God, and would change their
customs, chapter 6. 11. And him they prosecuted with a rage that reached up to
Heaven: for they gnashed on him with their teeth, and cried with a loud voice
for his blood; and stopped their ears to all sober counsels; and ran upon him
with one accord, and stoned him, calling upon God, and praying for his enemies:
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7.60.

Then Herod their usurping king vexed the whole church; imprisoned St. Peter,
and slew James the Brother of our Lord with the sword. And those men of whom
the world was not worthy, were counted worthy to die; and die they did like
worthy men: for they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and had trial
of cruel mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonment; and being tempted to
deny the faith, chose rather to be sawn asunder and slain with the sword.

What havoc was made of the Flock of Christ by these grievous Wolves, after
that the chief Shepherds were smitten, is too large to be repeated: Only as
Geographers are wont to describe great Countries and Cities, Battles and
Devastations, in a little Map; I shall present you with a prospect of those
Wars as it was delineated by our Saviors own hand; whereof it was impossible
but every tittle should be true. Mark 13.9. He says, They should deliver one
another to the council, and beat them in their synagogues: That brother should
betray brother to death, and the father the son; and children should rise up
against their parents, and cause them to be put to death: that a man's foes
should be those of his own house; and whoever did kill his disciples, should
think that he did God good service: That there should follow those wars great
afflictions pestilences and famines, such as had not been from the beginning of
the world: That they should fall by the edge of the sword, and be led captive
into all Nations; and Jerusalem should be trodden down of the Gentiles. Luke
21.23. for their enemies should cast a trench about them, and keep them in on
every side, and lay them even with the ground, and her children within her,
until there were not one stone left upon another.

And shortly after our Saviors death, began these troubles; of which we have
some account in the Acts, chapter 5. 36. Theudas boasting himself to be an
extraordinary person (as it was foretold that false Christ's and false Prophets
should arise and deceive many) began a Rebellion with 400 men, whom he
dissuaded to pay Tribute to Caesar; who was slain, and all that obeyed him were
brought to naught. Then Judas of Galilee on the same occasion drew much people
after him and he and his party perished, Acts 5.36, 37. Then Bar-Jesus a false
Prophet sought to discredit our Saviors Miracles by his Sorcery, Acts 13.6.
Another false Prophet led out 4000 men into the wilderness who were Murderers,
Acts 21.38. these, as Josephus says, increased to 30000, but were overthrown by
Felix. 8400 were slain at Joppa, 20000 at Cesarea, not one escaping; 50000 at
Delta, and a great slaughter was made of them that followed Simon a Galilean,
by Coponius. See Josephus l. 2. 19. 22. etc. And another great Massacre on
Eleazar and his Party, who refused to sacrifice and pray for the welfare of
Caesar.

So that these turbulent Jews finding no success in their attempts against the
Romans, turned their Swords against each other; and they who boasted most of
being true Israelites, were true Ishmaelites, that had their hands lifted up
against every man, and every man's hand against them. The tribe of Ephraim
against Manasse, and both against Judah; City against City, and Brother against
Brother: they who called themselves the Religious and Zealous, threw off their
Cloaks, and appeared to be Sicarii, very Thieves and Cutthroats, as Josephus
calls them. Jerusalem, that had been a City at unity within her self, was by
these men crumbled into to Factions, and made an Aceldema, or field of blood,
which was shed as water on every side of Jerusalem. Mount Sion, the glory of
the whole earth, was like Mount Sinai, surrounded with blackness and tempests,
and the sounds of trumpets. The holy lamps were extinguished, and NEW LIGHTS
set up on every Turret, which burnt them to the ground. The Temple had no other
Sacrifices but heaps of slain men, and the blood of the Priest shed before the
Altar, whom the Zealots slew with as little regret, as the Priests were wont to
slay the beasts for Sacrifice. All sacred things were profaned, and profane
things accounted sacred. Having neither King nor Priest left, every one did
what seemed good in his own eyes; and like Cain that had slain his Brother,
thought every one he met would slay him; and therefore dealt with him as an
enemy. Here you might see three Independent Armies struggling in the bowels of
their common mother Jerusalem, and putting her into so many throws and pangs,
as caused her dissolution: John the Priest against Eleazar the Religious, and
both against Simon the Zealot; who being defeated, slew his Wife and Children
first, and then himself. Here the Soldiers eat their leathern girdles for
hunger, and women their Children of a span-long; the aged and young dying for
Famine; the rich and the Nobles slain with the Sword, and none to make
lamentation over them, or to bury the dead. This was the condition of that Holy
land, when the Kingdom of Israel degenerated into a Commonwealth.

If any man's heart be not affected with this short relation of the Jewish Wars,
let him read those larger Commentaries which their Countryman Josephus, who was
an eyewitness of those confusions, transcribed from the Originals written with
their Swords in Blood. And he must have a heart harder than those Swords, or
the Adamant it self, that is not mollified by so much humane blood, but still
retains an edge and appetite for War; which none can relish, but they who have
surfeited on too much Plenty, and too long Peace; and being displeased with
themselves, by their insatiable lusts, and distracted Consciences, seek to find
ease and diversions, as the Devils do, by drawing others into the same
condemnation; like those unhappy Princes, who being disturbed by frequent
Seditions of their Subjects at home, do invade the Dominions of their
Neighbors, and make their Territories the Seat of War.

Thus the lusts that did war in their members, carried on the war against the
head and heart of the Nation; which minds us of

The second particular to be enquired of: Vnde bella inter vos?

For this was no necessitous people, no Highlanders, or Inhabitants of the
Deserts of Arabia Petrea, but of Canaan which flowed with milk and honey for
the poorest; they were fed with the flower of the kidneys of wheat to
strengthen them, and drank of the generous blood of the grape to comfort their
hearts, and Rivers of Oil to make them of a cheerful countenance. God rained
flesh among them as thick as dust, and feathered fowl as the sand of the Sea.
Heaven and earth contributed all their Treasures, to make them a happy people.

But the provision that God gave them for the comfort of their lives, they used
as provocations to their lusts; and as Jesurun of old, they waxed fat and
kicked: they forsook God that made them, and lightly esteemed the rock of their
Salvation. And from hence came those Wars. -- He delivered their power into
captivity, and their beauty to the enemies hands: he gave his people over to
the Sword, and was wroth with his inheritance. The Surfeit of a long-continued
Peace and Plenty, is fatal unto sensual men; it puts them into such Feavourish
Distempers, and freaks of madness, that they can neither endure the disease nor
the remedy, but seek to destroy those that come to save them.

2. Whence come these Wars among you? Who had as often felt the dismal
consequences of war, as they had provoked God by their murmurings, their
ingratitude for good, and lusting after evil things. They could not forget
their sore bondage in Egypt, and their miserable captivity under the insulting
Babylonians, who cried, Down with them even to the ground, ROOT and BRANCH,
that the name of Israel may no more be had in remembrance: and they were scarce
recovered out of those confusions which Antiochus Epiphanes had brought upon
them, (see 1 Maccab. 1.11.) who drew them into a Rebellious Covenant, and
proudly entered into their Sanctuary, and took away the golden Ornaments, and
the Crown, and the hidden treasures; and made great Massacres, and covered all
the house of Jacob with confusion: he laid waste their Sanctuaries as a
wilderness, and shed innocent blood on every side of Jerusalem: he forbad their
offerings and sacrifices in the Temple, polluted their Sabbaths, and Festival
days; set up Altars and Chapels of Idols: lest their Children uncircumcised,
to the end that they might forget the Law; and changed all the Ordinances. He
murdered the Priests of the most high God, and ruled all according to his own
ungodly lusts; driving the Israelites into secret places, wheresoever they
could flee for succor.

But God had by many miracles of mercy restored them out of all these
Calamities, to a good degree of happiness; their Temple was rebuilt, their Laws
preserved; the uniform worship of God at Jerusalem established, whither the
Tribes went up to Worship, and to give thanks to the Name of the Lord. God
fixed his Shekinah, and dwelt among them again; he met them in the beauty of
holiness, and made them joyful in his house of prayer. And to all this glory he
added a defense; for during all the time of the Maccabees, as long as they
sought the Lord, he made them to prosper. No Nation had a God so great, Laws
and Statutes so good, a Land so fruitful, Victories so signal and frequent;
that the dread and terror of them was fallen upon the Nations round about
them; and every man might sit under his own Vine, and under Gods Vine too, and
sing the Song of David: Happy are the people that are in such a case, yea
blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God.

What possible imagination could men at such a height of felicity (if the very
height had not made them giddy) conceive of bettering their condition by Wars
and Fightings? Or what in reason could they think of, but to secure their
present enjoyments by Thankfulness to God, Obedience to their Governors, and
Peace and Unity among themselves? But this unhappiness we have all derived from
Adam, that Paradise it self will not content us, unless we may eat of the
forbidden fruit: we nauseate Manna it self, unless we may have somewhat to
gratify our Lusts, which war against our Souls. And hence come wars and
fightings among us, even from our lusts, which war in our members. Which is the
last branch of our Enquiry, (viz.) That the Original of all our Wars, is those
lusts that war in our members.

The method to effect a Cure, as in the natural, so in the body politic, is
first to find out the true cause: which in this of War is like that of the
Hectic Fever, which at first is hard to be known, but easily cured; but at
length is easily discerned, and difficultly cured. For as in those lingering
Fevers there are little indiscernable (...) lurking in the blood, and
circulating with it, which in time ferment the whole mass, and set the whole
course of Nature on fire: So those lusts which war in our members, and the
faculties of our Souls, have a secret, and to our selves at least, if not to
others, an indiscernable motion, until Temptations and Opportunities are
presented; and then the sensual appetite is in a Commotion, and offers violence
to his Reason, Religion, and Conscience. And thus, as St. James describes it,
chapter 1. 14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lusts, and
enticed. There is a secret bent of our Spirits after evil things, which forces
us; and there are flattering allurements in the Objects, which entice us; such
as the lusts of the flesh, unclean pleasures; the lusts of the eyes, riches and
large possessions; and the pride of life, power, dominion, and applause: and
between our lusts and these objects sin is brought forth. So that all lust is
seated in our inordinate desires: I had not known lust, says St. Paul, except
the law had said, Thou shall not covet. For the irascible faculties of the Soul
are but as so many Ruffians, (such as Anger and Malice, Envy and Revenge) to
execute the wills of the flesh: but by these the sinner is put into a state of
war with himself: (...), there is a Seditious Party that wars in our members;
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and
these two (...), are set in battle array against each other, Gal. 5.17. And the
law of the members, (...), warreth against the law of the mind. So impetuous
and subtle are these lusts, that they too often surprise even good men, as St.
Paul complains of himself, leading him captive; hindering him from doing the
good that he would, and hurrying him on to do the evil he would not, Romans 7.23.
Hence it is that the Philosopher calls these lusts (...), beastly lusts, not
only from their uncleanness and sensuality, their unreasonableness and
ungovernableness, but their ravenous cruelty, and ferine qualities; overturning
and renting all that stands in their way, breaking all bonds of Reason and
Religion, Law and Conscience; sacrificing not only the welfare of others, but
their own health and peace, yea those very members in which they war, to the
satisfaction of these lusts: as Theotimus, when his Physician told him he must
leave his intemperance, or lose his eyes, cried, Vale amicum lumen; Farewell,
dear eyes; as if his lusts were more dear. So true is that of the Prophet,
Isai. 57.20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea that cannot rest: there is no
peace to the wicked, says my God.

The man that gives up the reins to his lusts, is no longer Sui juris, but
under the most absolute Tyrants, whose Will is their only Law; where that bids
them go, they go; and what that bids them do, they do, though to their utter
undoing. In vain does Conscience take on it the Office of a Monitor, or Reason
of a Speaker, to give their Reprimands; they do but provoke the rage and
outcires of the multitude of Lusts that can endure no control. Reason is
dethroned, Conscience silenced; the usurping Vice is got into the Chair, and
establishes Iniquity by the Law of Sic volo, sic jubeo; and all the five
Senses, like so many officious members, are ready to execute the Commands of
those unruly Lusts.

Who can wonder that the man who lives in opposition to the express Commands of
God, and slights his own apprehensions of Gods everlasting wrath, for every
trifling lust, should, when the greater temptations of Dominion and Power, of
killing and taking possession of Crowns and Kingdoms are presented, be the
Contrivers and Prosecutors of Sedition and Rebellion against their King? That
man cannot truly love or fear the King, who bears the Sword that can only
kill the body, who neither loves nor fears God, who is able to destroy body and
soul in hell. Hence it is that Solomon observes, Prove. 17.11. The wicked man
seeks only Rebellion. For having lost the peace of his own Conscience by
fighting against God, and having sinned away the use of Reason and sober
counsels by his contumacy, like the evil spirit that was cast out of the man,
he finds no rest, but roves up and down, to associate Legions of others as
bad as himself, to disturb the peace of others. And hence come wars and
fightings among us.

And now it is easy to turn the Scene, and from the Vnde inter vos, to enquire
Vnde inter nos? From whence come wars and fightings among us? For as to matter
of fact, if the Wars of any Nation under Heaven can parallel those of the Jews,
ours do; and in some respects (considering that we are Christians) have outdone
them. For have not we as obstinately resisted and fought against the God of
Heaven, though he have placed us in a fruitful Land, and fed us with Manna?
Have not we still murmured, and tempted him, requiring meat for our lusts? Have
we not refused all those means and overtures of salvation which the Son of God
has offered us? and do we not still refuse to do the things belonging to our
peace? Yea, with the filthy Gadarens, we have even forced him to depart out of
our coast, and preferred our Swine before our Savior. We have made our great
Lord to serve under our basest lusts: We have ridiculed him by false Prophets
and false Christ's, saying, Behold, he is in the desert fields, or in the secret
chambers, when he taught openly in the Temple. We have falsely accused him as an
enemy to Caesar, and Patron of Rebellion; and so have crucified afresh to our
selves the Son of God, and put him to open shame: which if the Jews had known,
as we profess to know him, they would not have done, 1 Cor. 2.8. for had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. These were the grand
causes of the final destruction of the Jewish Nation, and these provocations
had brought us so nigh to utter confusion, that nothing but a Miracle of Mercy
could prevent us from falling into it. It is therefore high time to search out
those Sacrilegious Achans, and disobedient Jonahs that have raised such Storms
and Wars among us: and we shall find them within our own breasts, even those
lusts that war in our members: for our Savior has assured us, that from
within, out of the heart of man proceed evil thoughts first, and then murders;
yea those very thougts are accounted as murder by our Savior; and if there be
bitter envying and strife in our hearts, our Apostle tells us, that
notwithstanding our pretenses to Wisdom and Holiness, we are earthly, sensual,
and devilish, Jam. 3.15.

To make this Enquiry more plain, I shall only premise, That in a Church and
State so well established as ours are, where we have all things necessary to
Salvation in the one, all things necessary to preserve our Liberty and Property
in the other, all desirable Peace and Plenty for our Persons and Families, it
must be our lusting after evil things that causes wicked men to disquiet
themselves and others: Of which this may serve as a Demonstration, that they
who would put us into a state of War and Confusion, having no present or real
grievances to amuse the people withal, do raise up their old Goblins of fears
and jealousies of Popery and Tyranny. But as it is a folly to trouble our
selves with what may be, when it is more probable that it may not be; so it is
the character of a wicked man, to fear where no fear is, and a great degree of
madness, to fall on our own Swords, when we are pursued only by our own
Shadows. And the experience which we our selves have had, as well as the Jewish
Nation, may convince us, that those very persons that frighted both them and us
with a Venient Romani, The Romans will come and take away our place and Nation,
and change our Laws and Religion, were those very men that did what they
suggested the Romans would do.

It Is our Savior's advice, that we take no thoughts for the morrow, (i. e.)
that we be not too sollicitous about future events which are not in our power,
but carefully do the duties of the present day; and be content with such things
as we have, and commit our selves to him in well-doing: for God has said, he
will never leave nor forsake such. But if after Gods redeeming of us out of all
our troubles by an Almighty hand, we shall return again to our old follies and
ungodly lusts, against his express Precepts and Threats, we may in vain expect
that God should work another Miracle for us, that have made so little
improvement of the former.

I shall therefore proceed with my Evidence, that it is only from our lusts
that war in our members, whence wars and fightings come among us.

For first, we are not under the power of a Heathen or Foreign Prince, that
rules us by armed Legions, as the Romans did the Jews, that we should attempt
by wars and fightings to shake off that Iron yoke. God himself has ruled us by
such a Succession of Pious and peaceable Princes, ever since the Marian days,
as the whole world cannot parallel: and to raise tumults and wars to alter such
a Succession, is to take the power out of Gods hands, who rules in the
Kingdoms of the earth, and appoints over them whomsoever he will, Dan. 5.21.
And that dear experience of disputing the Succession by the Sword between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, between whom were fought Seventeen pitched
Battles, in which perished Eight Kings and Princes, Forty Dukes, Marquesses and
Earls, Two hundred thousand of the people, besides Barons and Gentlemen, and
the Treasure and Devastions not to be valued, should forever affright us from
the like attempts, lest we be found to fight against God, as well as against
one another.

2. Nor is there any pretense of a Superior or coordinate power that may rival
the Crown, the King being acknowledged the only Supreme Potentate, etc he
bears the Sword by Gods Commission, and by the Law of the Land has the
disposing of the Militia: to him belongs the jus belli and pacis: nor Pope nor
Prelate, Presbyter or People, or their Representatives, have any share in the
Supremacy. And yet on such Paradoxes have some men grounded the late Wars:
Prove (says one) that the King was the only Supreme, and I will yield my neck
to the block. I think neither the Neck nor Head of that man was far from the
Block, that presumed to vent such a Treasonable position.

3. Nor can any complaint of Tyranny or oppression justify a War among us; no
Nation under Heaven enjoying more Liberty and Property, Temporal or Spiritual
Privileges than we. Although if we did suffer under some miscarriages in
Government, some passions and excesses in our Governors, neither Scripture nor
Reason will warrant any resistance; and experience the Mistress of Fools, may
instruct us, that the remedy would be worse than the disease; and that they who
by fears and jealousies of Arbitrary Government, and promises of liberty, and
redress of grievances, steal the hearts of the people from their Prince, as
Absolon did, do prove their greatest Oppressors. There have been but few
Tyrants under whom their peaceable Subjects have not been much happier, than
under a state of Anarchy and Confusion. More innocent blood was shed, more
Estates confiscate, more Temples, Castles, and Houses ruined, more Orphans and
Widows made in one year during our Civil Wars, than in all the Reigns of the
Kings of England by any Tyrannical acts of theirs in 500 years. The Persians
therefore after the death of their Kings, allowed the liberty of five days,
wherein every one might do as when there was no King in Israel, to convince
them that submission to the worst Governors is better than to have none.

4. Nor can any plea from Religion warrant wars and fightings among us: for we
are Christians, and not Jews; and we are under such obligations to peace, that
unless we can produce as clear warrant from Scripture for war and fightings
among our selves, we act more like Pagans than Christians. Peace is the last
legacy that our Savior left us, and by his Apostle he enjoined us, if it be
possible, and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men: and he
makes peace a condition equal with Holiness, without which we can never see
God. On which grounds the Primitive Christians thought it unlawful to exercise
war on any pretense whatsoever; they were enjoined to take up the Cross, and
not the Sword; they were to love their enemies, and not to hate their friends:
they prayed for those that persecuted them, but did not persecute those who
prayed with and for them. The Apostles of our Lord did by preaching the Gospel
subdue Kingdoms, but they wrought righteousness too, and did more for the
securing the Imperial Crowns, than all their own Laws could do. And this was
one argument by which Tertullian recommended the Christians to the clemency of
the Roman Emperors, That none of them were Nigriani or Cassiani, they never
abetted the Rebellions of Niger or Cassius. And this should for ever endear the
Communion of the Church of England, that as it teaches, That it is not lawful
on any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King; so it was the
testimony of the Royal Martyr to our present Sovereign, that scarce any one who
was a beginner or active prosecutor of the late war, was a true lover,
embracer, or practiser of the Protestant Religion established in England, which
neither gave such rules, or set such examples. And on the contrary, ever since
those twin-Monsters of Jesuitism and Fanaticism were born into the world
together, there has not been one considerable League, Covenant, or Association
of people against their Prince, any single Assassination of Kings, or Massacre
of the people, any Consults for Division, War, and Confusion; but one or more
of the Conclave of Rome, or Conventicles of Separatists, and both under a
pretense of zeal for Religion, have been the first contrivers and executioners
of them.

Ob. But it has been objected, that the Primitive Christians had no Laws to
confirm their Religion and Worship, as we have; and therefore it was not so
lawful for them to defend their Religion by Arms as it is for us.

Ans. 1. It is strange that our Laws should be made a pretense for Resistance,
which declare that it is not lawful to resist on any pretense whatsoever.

2. The Primitive Christians, who never bore Arms against their persecuting
Princes, would much more abhor to do it against Christian Governors that
favored and protected them; they would never turn the Laws against the
Lawmakers and use them as Forts and Sanctuaries to secure and protect Rebels.

3. If this plea might be admitted, the best Princes would be in most danger:
for by this rule, if we lived under a Pagan and persecuting Prince, that never
favored us with one good Law, we might not resist him; but if under a Prince
that made it his business to secure Religion by the best Laws, such as presume
they are of a better Religion than their Prince, and can judge of the Laws
better than the Lawgiver, might justify a Rebellion against him; and so the
best Prince would be most miserable; and the same Laws that secure our
Religion, would destroy his Crown. On such a principle, when Queen Elizabeth
came to the Crown, and found Popery established by a Law, her Popish Subjects,
which were then the greatest number, might have rebelled against her; which yet
they durst not do on this false principle of some true Protestants.

4. If Subjects may resist as often as discontented and designing men shall
tell them that the King does not favor that Religion which the Laws do, and
shall influence the people with fears and jealousies that their Religion is in
danger, and make them Judges of the Actions and Conduct of their Governors; the
best of Princes, who certainly ought to have some allowance for humane passions
and infirmities as well as other men, would daily forfeit their Crowns.

But lastly, when the Religion and worship which we profess is established by
Law, how vile and absurd is the pretense of those men for Resistance, who live
in open defiance of those Laws, and in opposition to that Religion and worship
which is established by them! to which if they did with Christian meekness
conform, there would be no hurting nor destroying in all the Land. And if
neither Religion nor Law will warrant wars and fightings among us, then the
pretense of Conscience will vanish: for Conscience is nothing else but a
conformity of our actions to the known Laws of God, and of our Superiors not
contrary to the Laws of God. Now when the Law of God says we must obey our
Superiors for Conscience sake, and our Superiors command nothing contrary to
those Laws, which Laws forbid us to resist on any pretense whatsoever, there
can be neither Law nor Conscience to justify Resistance; but it proceeds from
the lusts of ungodly men: whereof this is a certain proof, that when such
Pretenders to Religion and Conscience do succeed in their Rebellion, the Cloak
is thrown off, and those lusts which seemed dormant or couchant, appear
rampant; and grievous Wolves creep out from under the Sheeps clothing, which
spare neither Sheep nor Shepherds, nor those that helped to run down the Prey
with them, so they may kill and take possession.

Having thus proved our Apostles assertion in general, That Wars and Fightings
among us can proceed from no other cause but our Lusts, I shall only point you
to a few of those Lusts that are the principal Incendiaries.

The first and chieftain of which, is that Pride and Vainglory which abounds in
the hearts of Pharisaical men, who seek to have their Persons had in
admiration, because of advantage; and for want of ordinary qualifications, and
honest means, pretend to extraordinary gifts and revelations of the Spirit, and
speak great words of vanity, or by fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple; and speak perverse things contrary to the Doctrine received from the
Apostles, to draw away Disciples after them.

When Josephus relates the miserable Wars of the Jews, he gives us an account
of the several Factions and Sects among them that acted in those Wars; such as
the Pharisees and Sadduces, the Essenes and the Zealous, who were the chief
Boutefeus. And our Savior and his Apostles observe the like method,
forewarning us of false Prophets, and Separatists or Sect-makers, as St. Jude
calls them. Beware (says our Savior) of false prophets, which come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravenous wolves, Mat. 7.15. And Acts
20.30. I know that after my departure grievous wolves shall enter among you,
not sparing the flock. St. Peter also (2 Epist. 2.1.) says, There were false
prophets among the people, as there shall also be among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable Doctrines, denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction: and many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of: and through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you. Now that
these men served their own bellies, and not the Laws of Christ, St. Paul
assures us, Romans 16.17, 18. I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, and avoid them: for such serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies. And in the second to Tim. 3.1, 2, 3. he tells
us, that in the last days some that had a form of Godliness, Schemes and
Systems, Confessions and Sermons of purer Divinity, should cause perilous
times; for they should be covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, -- Traitors,
heady, and high minded. From such he advises us to turn away. St. Jude also in
his Epistle gives the like character of some that made great pretenses to the
Spirit, as if they did preach and pray, and do all things by the Spirit; yet
they did walk after their own ungodly lusts, despised Dominions, and spoke evil
of Dignities; against whom St. Jude denounces a woe: Woe unto them, for they
have gone in the way of Cain, who was a Murderer, and run greedily after the
error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core; who
brought such railing accusations against Moses and Aaron, as the Devil himself
durst not do. These are they (says the Apostle) who separate themselves;
sensual, having not the spirit, v. 19.

These Scriptures are sufficient to remove the prejudice which some people
conceive against their Superiors for suppressing of such false Prophets as
they find seducing the People. The only difficulty is, how we may discern
false Prophets, seeing our Savior says they shall come in Sheeps clothing, and
transform themselves into Angels of light. Yet our Savior's rule is
infallible, By their fruits ye shall know them: for first, they shall come to
you, come privily, creep into your houses; come with fair words and feigned
speeches; come without a Call or Commission from God or Man; come against the
established Laws, and severest penalties of Fines and Imprisonment, and Death
it self. Thus the Romish Wolves come clothed with the Name of the immaculate
Lamb of God; Jesuits they call themselves, but grievous Wolves the Scripture
terms such, who assassinate the chief Shepherds in Church and State, and
massacre whole Flocks; that with Elymas the Sorcerer seek to turn our Deputies
from the Faith, and as the Pharisees, compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes,
and to make them twofold more the children of wrath and malice than themselves.
These persuade their Disciples that they are of that holy Church in which alone
Salvation is to be had; that all others out of their Communion are Heretics
and Schismatics, fit only for a fiery Purgatory: but if they return to the
Lap of their Mother, they are as sure of Salvation as if they were in Abraham's
Bosom.

But as our Savior says, By their fruits (i. e.) their Doctrines and their
Practices, ye shall know them. One General Rule we have in Deuteronomy. 13.1. That if
a prophet should arise that should show signs and wonders that should come to
pass, yet if that prophet should entice the people to idolatry (and by
consequence to any iniquity) thou shall not hearken to that prophet. When
therefore these Emissaries of Rome shall teach contrary to what we have
received from Christ and his Apostles; when they persuade us to worship the
Creature with that Worship which is due only to the Creator, be they Saints,
or Angels, or the Virgin Mary, who all abhor to have God robbed of his Honor,
of which he is a jealous God; when they add new Articles of Faith, and Rules
of Obedience, besides and contrary to what God in his Word has required, and
prefer their own Traditions and Inventions above his express Commands and
Institutions: when they sow Tares in Christ's field, and seek to divide his
Flock; when they seek to advance the Interest of the Pope, above the Supremacy
of the King, and withdraw that Obedience and Subjection from him, which every
Soul is required to yield unto him; when they teach the Doctrine of
Infallibility in the Pope, though he decree things contrary to Christ, as in
taking the Cup from the Laity, with a Non Obstante that Christ said, Drink ye
all of this: when they decree what is contrary to Sense, as well as the
Scriptures, in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and other things contrary to
Reason, as in Prayers in an unknown Tongue, and denying the use of the
Scriptures to the People, whom God commands to search the Scriptures, because
in them we have eternal life: In a word, when they practice Rebellion and
Cruelty, and stir up Strife, and foment Divisions, and plot for Wars and
Fightings amongst us; let them boast of Miracles and Revelations, of Tradition
and Succession, of Grandeur and Prosperity; let them appear not only as
Jesuits, but Angels of Light, yet if their Doctrine and Practices be such as
these, we must resist them steadfast in the Faith; unless we will exchange our
Faith and Knowledge for a blind Obedience, our Scripture for Traditions, our
Liturgy for Legends, our Loyalty for Rebellion, and our Peace for War and
Fightings, or Fire and Faggot.

There is another sort of pernicious Creatures among our selves, but of a
soreign breed; whose clothing is a Cloak of Zeal for Religion, with broad
Phylacteries, and sentences of Scripture; their discourse is of soft Murmurings
and Complaints against the Government, and loud Outcries against the Romish
Wolves, that we may not suspect danger from any other quarter. And the better
to draw away Disciples after them, they come with demure looks, and dejected
Countenances, and, as the Gnostics, pretend to great Mysteries and
Revelations, extraordinary and immediate assistances of the Spirit, and purer
Ordinances; that with them is the Scepter of Christ's holy Discipline, to which
all Kings and People must bow, or shall be broken in pieces; for God will
reprove even Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm.

But by their fruits we shall know these men also: for how opposite soever they
seem to be to the Romish Wolves in their Professions, they are coupled as
Sampson's foxes with firebrarnds in their tails, by destructive Principles and
Practices against the established Church and Government. As Herod the Jew, and
Pontius Pilate the Roman, were against Christ. It would fill a Volume to
discover the Intrigues of these two Factions; how mutually they assist each
other with Arms and Arguments against their common Enemy. They are conscious
that they are too weak singly to encounter the established Government; and
therefore will not suffer either to be utterly suppressed; nor will the
Jealousy of either Party suffer the other to be uppermost, lest they should
carry away the whole Prey. So that we are kept as good Grain between two
Millstones of an equal size, till we are ground to dust; and then they will
grind the faces of each other.

Now I take those, and only those, who do agree with the Jesuits in preaching
and propagating seditious and traitorous Principles and Practices, such as The
lawfulness of Resistance, and taking up Arms in defense of Religion against the
Supreme Magistrate; That the Original of the Magistrates power is in the
people, who may call them to an account, and depose or murder them as they see
cause; That would erect another Supremacy in the Pope, Parliament, or
Presbytery; that secretly conspire the death of their Prince, or raise Open
Wars to effect the same; those who have murdered one King already, and use the
same methods to destroy another; that oppose, defame, and condemn men of
Peaceable, Loyal, and Christian Principles, and Canonize Traitors and Regicides
as Saints and Martyrs; and in a word, all such as will not declare that it is
unlawful to take up Arms against the King on any pretense whatsoever, or that
they will not endeavor any alteration of the established Government; they
whose Sermons are Satyrs against their Governors; whose Preaching is of
Cursing and Lies, and their Practice to raise Wars and Fightings among us, for
such false Prophets as our Savior bids us to beware of.

If these men do indeed abhor the name and doom of false Prophets, let them do
what they can and ought to do to clear themselves: let them expunge out of
their Books such traitorous Principles, and anathematize them in their
Conventicles; let them follow that worthy Example of the University of Oxford,
and that of the Converts, Acts 19.19. bring those conjuring Books together,
that can raise up Legions of Evil Spirits, and without counting the value of
them, though it be 50000 pieces of silver, publicly burn them: And they will
make as comfortable a Bonfire as ever the Nation saw, except that of New Market.

But if they will still go on as those false Prophets, Jer. 23.14. to
strengthen the hands of evil doers, that none does return from their
wickedness: if they will publicly despise Dominions, and speak evil of
Dignities; and one Party condemn Prince and People as Heretics and
Schismatics, fit to be destroyed by the Sword, or to pass through a Fiery
Purgatory; and the other accuse us as Popish and Antichristian, though they
know not whether God or Magog, the Christianissimus or Antichristianissimus be
the Antichrist; but whoever he be, they are more ready to be reconciled to him,
than to the Religion and Government established; they shall never be able to
wipe off the guilt, or escape the doom of false Prophets, as long as they teach
such Damnable Doctrines: for so the Scripture has determined it, They that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.

And yet, as if the Genius of the Nation inclined them to Wars and Fightings,
how do we (like children) in every City and Market Town flock after these Drums
and Trumpets that sound an Alarm to Wars, and instead of the Gospel of peace,
propagate an Evangelium Armatum, the Law of the Sword; that maintain unlawful
meetings for the mustering of their Forces, and make their Exercises like those
of the Artilleries, to discipline the People for War; and can, as by a word of
command, lead them from their Folds into the Field, and arm them with Zeal
enough to murder their Brethren, their Bishop, their Prince, and in a little
time one another!

It is not, certainly, the Gospel of peace which these men preach; that would
transform Lions into Lambs, but their Harangues transform Lambs into Lions and
Tigers: that would teach men to beat their Swords into Plowshares, this
teaches them to beat up their Plowshares and silver Bodkins and Thimbles into
Swords and Pistols. And between the Faux's of this Age, who with their dark
Lanthorns and lighted Firebrarnds, are ready to give fire to their subterranean
Mines, and are sorry for nothing but their disappointment; and those
Blunderbusses, who being full charged to the very mouths with Powder and
Bullet, and have Zeal enough, though their hearts be as hard as Flint or Steel,
to give fire in the face of Majesty it self; we are still between the Jaws of
those roaring Lions, that go about seeking how they may devour us. And had not
the Almighty hand of God restrained these Sons of Violence, and kept them back
with more than Bit and Bridle, they would have long since fallen on us, and
rent us in pieces.

But blessed be God, even the God of our Salvation, our Deliverer and Defender,
who has hewn the Snares of those ungodly men in pieces; and though they have
often assaulted us from our youth up, ye he has not delivered us over as a
prey unto their teeth. And may we never provoke him by our murmurings and
discontent, our hypocrisy and profaneness, our divisions and lusting after
evil things, to repent him of all the loving kindness and wonders of mercy
which he has wrought for us; which if they lead us not to repentance and
amendment of life, will render us more fit for destruction; and then in vain
may we hope for another miracle, to deliver us from those fiery furnaces which
these lurking firebrands have prepared for us; and by their indignation since
our miraculous deliverance from the Lions den, and their as wonderful
disappointments, are heated seven times hotter than ever: for their wickedness
still burns like fire, and is like that worst sort of fire, which goes not
out, though never so many waters of clemency and favors be poured on it: they
have the effect of Oil and Fuel, to increase, rather than to extinguish the
flame. For they have provided that their malice may survive themselves, and be
immortal; they have enclosed their Seminaries for Briers, and Thorns, and
Brambles, out of which a fire may come in time, to burn up all the Cedars in
Lebanon; and they have fitted their Nurseries for another generation of Vipers,
who suck in their poisonous principles, and are armed with invincible
prejudices against that Christian Religion and Loyalty which is established
among us: like some plodding Spaniards at their game at Chess, who having not
time or success sufficient to blow off their Bishops, and give check to their
Kings, leave the game to be played out by their Successors. For from the
poisonous principles that fall from their lips, as from the Serpents teeth in
the Poet, there spring up a numerous brood of armed men, who are as deaf to
sober counsels and arguments for peace and unity, as the very Adders, and as
ready as so many Swine to turn on them and rent them who cast those Pearls
before them.

It is said, that few men dye without a Fever; and as certain it is, that
there was not one of those who were Executed for the late horrid Conspiracy,
whom the prejudices which fermented their spirits from their Childhood, did not
swell and make sower, and animate them to those desperate designs which brought
them to those untimely ends. Thus that degenerate Gentleman Mr. SIDNEY, had no
other Apology for himself, than that he had been managed from his youth in that
OLD CAUSE, which was begun in Treason, and carried on with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood. And another as unfortunate as himself, had those
principles of the lawfulness of Resistance in case of Religion, infused to him
by false Teachers from his youth, which were the venomous ingredients to his
death. The Author of the Life of Julian had (it seems) confirmed him in the
belief of what Dr Manton had long before instructed him in; who on this very
Text raises the Question, Whether Religion may be defended by Arms? to which,
among other things, he answers, That sometime the outward exercise of
Religion and Worship may be established and secured by Laws; and among other
privileges and rights, the liberty of pure worship may be one; which being
invaded by violence, may be defended by Arms -- The Estates of a Kingdom may
maintain their Religion against the tyranny and malice of the Prince. And on
these prejudices dyed the whole College of the late Conspirators; whose blood
may be required at their hands that corrupted their hearts with such
blood-guilty principles. For from hence come wars and fightings among us.

2. Next to the lusts of Pride and vainglory, St. James does arraign those of
envy and malice, as the cause of wars: for he tells us, That the spirit that
dwells in us lusts to envy, v. 5. and where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil thing, Jam. 3.16. And if there be bitter zeal or
envyings and strife among us, that it proceeds from the devil, who was a
murderer from the beginning, and is restless till he draw others under the
same condemnation with himself: for the envious man is felo de se; he seeds on
his own blood and bowels, and leaves no bowels of pity for any that he thinks
in a better condition than himself: it is this that is the rottenness of the
bones, Prove. 14.30. This slays those silly ones that entertain it, Job 5.2.
and none is able to stand before it, Prove. 27.4. And next to Envy follows
Murder, Romans 1.29. Gal. 5.21. The first Murder in the world was committed
through Envy against a Brother. Wherefore did Cain slay Abel, but through envy,
his own works being evil, and his Brothers righteous?

Acts 7.9. the Patriarchs moved with envy sold Joseph to Egypt. As soon as they
understood he was to be preferred above them, they could not speak peaceably to
him, Genesis 37.4. because his Father loved him more than them: and v. 20. they
conspire against him: Come, let us slay him, and cast him into a pit. It was
for Envy that the chief Priests and people of the Jews delivered our Savior,
Matthew. 27.18. and pursued him with outcries, Crucify him, Crucify him; and,
let his blood be upon us and our Children: by which impiety they showed
themselves to be the children of them that had slain the Prophets, and filled
up the measure of their iniquities; and drew down on themselves and the whole
Nation all those Judgments of which I have told you, when God visited on them
all the righteous blood that had been shed from the blood of Abel to the blood
of Christ himself; which brought them to a (...) utter desolation; which
Josephus their Countryman calls (...) a Judgment worthy of God.

The shedding of blood, though of his own and Gods enemies, so displeased the
Lord, that he would not permit David to build him a Temple; that work was
reserved for a peaceable Solomon: and if any man's hands be defiled with blood,
though he make never so many prayers he will not hear, till he have cleansed
his heart, and washed his hands in innocence; and not till then, may he have
access to Gods Altar. The blood-guiltiness of a few, draws down the wrath of
God on a whole Nation. There was a Famine on Israel three years together in the
time of David; and when he inquired the cause of it, it was revealed to be for
Saul and for his bloody house, that slew the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1. And if
the blood of the Gibeonites was avenged not only sevenfold on the house of
Saul; by hanging up seven of his Sons, but upon all Israel by three years
famine; we may justly impute the consuming Pestilence and Fires that have been
among us, to the shedding of much more innocent blood. And we may justly fear,
that the inquisition for that blood is not yet ended: for blood defiles the
land; and it cannot be cleansed but by the blood of them that shed it, unless
it be prevented by a deep and timely repentance, and the avenging it on our
selves, by a hearty sorrow, by a serious mortification of those lusts that
provoked us thereunto, and a through reformation and amendment of our sinful
ways and doings; except we cry mightily to God for pardon, and the blood of
Christ, which speaks better things than that of Abel, be joined with our
Cries and Tears. Without shedding of more blood, there will be no remission:
for the cry of innocent blood is not to be silenced by any earthly thing, but
will enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath with an Vsque quo Domine? How
long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth? Revel. 6.10.

And when we see Rebellion to be like the sin of witchcraft, which seldom or
never admits repentance: when not one of the old Regicides or new Conspirators,
though they confessed the fact for which they died, professed any Regret or
Repentance for it (which yet in the Case of Christ Judas and Pontius Pilate
did, and every common Murderer is wont to do:) when there are still so many
among us that approve of those horrid Impieties of their Forefathers, and only
want Opportunities to act over the same Tragedies again: when men are ready to
cast Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death, and think it a Sport: when God infatuates
a People, and delivers them up to such strong delusions, and fascinations, that
not all the Oracles of God, nor all the Examples of Divine Vengeance and Humane
Justice can awaken them, and reduce them to a sounder mind; neither if one
should arise from the dead, will they repent. And whether it be that God has
given up such Offenders to a reprobate mind, or with Cain they apprehend their
sins greater than can be forgiven, or that God delivered them up to the furies
of their guilty Consciences, and has sentenced them to those Chains of
impenitence and darkness to the judgment of the last day; it is to me the most
certain and sad Omen, that God has yet fuller vials of wrath to be poured out
on such men, at least, if not on the whole Nation, against whom his hand is not
yet withdrawn, but his arm is stretched out still.

We have a day of Humiliation appointed for the barbarous Parricide of our
Royal Martyr, and we have had a day of Thanksgiving for the miraculous
Deliverance of our present Sovereign, which you have this day religiously
commemorated. But while some mourn, and make the first a day of Lamentation for
the Anointed of the Lord; who was taken in the pits of deceitful and
bloodthirsty men; others applaud that execrable Fact, and nourish their hearts
as in a day of slaughter, or such a Sacrifice wherewith God was well pleased:
And when the second is a day of Joy and Gladness to see Jerusalem in Peace and
Prosperity, and the King and his Crown flourish; others mourn that their Babel
is fallen: if while some bless God that has preserved the King and his People,
others curse the King and People whom God has preserved; and while these are
persuading to peace, they make them ready for War: what can a People so divided
expect, but to be destroyed?

Another cause of War is the Amor habendi, the immoderate desire of having
things that are superfluous and unlawful, whether power, pleasures, or
possessions. For when men can set no bounds to their Lusts, they consider not
whether the end be necessary, or the means lawful, but they must have the Rem
quocunque modo rem. And so S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich, fall
into a snare and temptations, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, that drown
men in perdition; and they that are greedy of gain, will not stick to take away
the life of the owners thereof. This our Apostle observes, when he joins the
desire of having with killing. And our Savior makes this the reason of the
Jews killing the heir, that the inheritance might be theirs. Thus Solomon
brings in ungodly men conspiring together, Prove. 1.13. We shall find all
precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil: and then, Come, let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause. This
Lust warreth first in our own members. Prove. 15.27. He that is greedy of gain,
troubles his own house, disquieteth himself; and his desire of having is not
quenched, but with the blood of those from whom he takes. Thus Ahab was sick at
the heart for Naboth's Vineyard, and nothing could cure him but Jezabel's
Receipt of killing and taking possession. Yet this was to be gilded over with a
show of Religion; a solemn Fast must be proclaimed, and Naboth accused of
blaspheming God and the King.

That our Wars and Fightings were begun for the satisfaction of such covetous
Lusts, the same method of killing and taking possession plainly demonstrate.
The Royal Martyr, shortly after his Coronation in Scotland, makes a Revocation
of such Lands as were taken from the Crown in his Fathers Minority. Also some
Noblemen and others called Lords of the Erection, or Impropriators, who had
engrossed almost all the Tithes of the Nation, allowing the Ministers an
inconsiderable Pittance or Stipend, and these Lay-patrons, so oppressed the
Country, that no man durst to take home his nine parts, until the Impropriators
had set out their tenth; by means whereof, the generality had their dependence
on these Lords, against whom the King received frequent Petitions from the
Gentry and their Farmers, as also the Ministers, complaining of this
Oppression. Whereupon his Majesty grants a Commission of Surrendry of
Superiority and Tithes, in which some of the interessed Lords were made
Commissioners; and so fairly and equally was it executed, that the Lords
received a competent satisfaction, and the Ministers, Gentry, and Commons being
freed from that Vassalage, thankfully acknowledged the benefit. But the Lords
perceiving they should lose the dependence of the People, suggested that this
was done in favor of Episcopacy, and to the prejudice of Religion; and taking
advantage of some other Accidents, they begin to associate, and enter into a
Covenant for defense of their Religion: and hence came those Wars and
Fightings. For the success of the Scots against their Bishops, stirred up the
like lusts in some Members of our Nation, who under the like pretense of
Religion, and clamours of Popery and Idolatry, armed themselves to commit
Sacrilege, and (as soon as they had power) to kill and take possession: and
with such ample Dividends of Church and Crown Lands did those Reformers
gratify the lusts that warred in their several members, that they proved a
Snare not to themselves only, but to their Posterity, who applaud their
Fathers doings; and though they proved sour Grapes unto them, yet their
childrens teeth and appetites are set on edge to devour things that are holy.
And so just do they still think their Title to those Lands, that they think it
lawful to vindicate it by a second Rebellion. And hence come wars and
fightings, etc.

The last cause of War which I shall mention, is the want of a due
consideration of the Mischief and evil Consequences of War, that Pandora's Box,
whence all manner of Plagues do issue; pestilential Fevers, bloody Fluxes,
Famines, Conflagrations of Towns and Cities, demolishing of Castles and
Temples, devastation of whole Countries, and introducing of Atheism and
Barbarity: of all which this Nation has had sad experience: which made the
Orator to say, Quem discordiae, quem Caedes Civium, quem bellum civil
delectat, eum ex finibus humanae naturae exterminandum puto, Phil. 13. They who
delight to live in a state of War, are not fit to live in any state of Mankind.

Some among us have heard to what great honor the Dregs of the Nation have
been advanced; how Cobblers have been translated to Colonels, and Clowns to
Counselors of State; how Bankrupts have become Bankers, and Apprentices
Preachers; and the Saint-like Soldiers have had the honor to bind Kings in
Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of iron: and hence it is, that such as are in
debt and distress, such as dissent from the established Worship, and like Corah
and his Confederates think themselves more fit than Moses and Aaron, aspire to
the Magistracy and Ministry by Rebellion and Bloodshed. But these silly men
consider not who it is that by the Chains of these Lusts is leading them
Captive to Death and Damnation: they think not what Dogs-heads they may prove,
as Hazael did (who had as good a conceit of himself as they) to slay their
brethren with the sword, and set on fire the strong holds of Israel, to dash
their children, and rip up the women with child, 2 Kings 8.13. Nor do they
consider how short and troublesome their reign may be, and how for three
transgressions and for four (i. e.) the manifold iniquities whereby they
threshed their Country with instruments of iron, what a fire God sent into the
house of Hazael, Amos 1.4.

I therefore beseech those that delight in making Divisions and War among our
selves, to consider, first, how many things are necessarily required to make a
War lawful. It is not every Offense or Oppression of our Governors can warrant
it; but there must be a sufficient Authority; and after all possible
endeavors, overtures, and condescentions for Peace, none but lawful means must
be used, and those prosecuted with Equity and Moderation, and all intended to a
good end: which circumstances cannot meet to justify such as endeavor Wars
and Fightings among us: and therefore as Grotius does determine it, lib. 3.
cap. 10. de Jure belli, All the Plunder and Rapine, all the Cries and Tears of
Widows and Orphans, and the louder Cries of Innocent Blood, will God require at
their hands who have been the Contrivers and Actors in unlawful Wars. So that
whether they are Conquerors or conquered, whether they survive the Rebellion,
or die in it, they are like to be utterly undone, if they live and prosper in
their Rebellion: they live in impenitence, and never think of making that
restitution and satisfaction for all the Plunder and Rapine committed by them;
without which there is no remission: and if they die, they die in those sins to
which the Scriptures have threatened Damnation. From which, and all the causes
thereof, especially From all Sedition, privy Conspiracy, and Rebellion; from
all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt
of Gods Word and Commandments, let us jointly and heartily pray, The Lord to
deliver us.

And now I shall not add any thing to your own Religious and Loyal Resolutions
for the preservation of your Country from Wars and Confusions. Only give me
leave to mind you of a Saying of the Lord Verulam: We have many good Laws, but
there wants one great one more, to enforce the execution of all the rest. And
it is certain, that many go to Hell with good intentions, for want of executing
them in due season. Let us therefore beware, lest while we are folding our
hands in security, or are but putting on our Harness, our Confusions come upon
us as an armed man. And though we have a prospect of Peace and Settlement, let
us also look back on the Causes of War; and while others are united and
industrious to destroy us, let us unanimously and vigorously pursue the things
that belong to our peace. And first let us suppress those lusts that war in our
own members, against God and our own Souls: All Intemperance and Uncleanness,
Profaneness and Hypocrisy, Covetousness and Ambition; all Envy, Pride, and
Malice, and whatever Lusts may separate between God and us, or divide us from
one another; and readily sacrifice all our private Animosities and Interests to
the public Religion, Peace, and Prosperity of the Nation.

It after all that has been said, there be any that still delight in War, let
them war that good warfare in which they have been engaged from their Baptism,
Tanquam Sacramento Militari, to fight under their Saviors Banner against sin,
the world, and the devil. Here we want not Enemies that are constantly
assaulting us; nor, if we behave our selves manfully, can we want a complete
Victory over them: it is but to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and though
the Devil himself lead them on, we may by a stout resistance put them to
flight, and shall be more than Conquerors. In these Conflicts we may outdo
Alexander himself, who having subdued many Kingdoms, was overcome by his own
lusts; Fortior est qui se. Every one that fights the good fight of faith,
overcomes the world, and shall receive a kingdom that cannot be moved, as the
Kingdoms of this World may; and a crown that fades not away, reserved for us
in heaven, and ready to be revealed: for, Behold, says our Savior, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me. Even so come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.

