THE Lord Craven's CASE.
THE Lord Craven by leave of Parliament granted in May, 1641. went beyond Sea,
to attend his Charge in Holland, and returned not into any of these three
Nations till April 1659.

Upon the sixth of March, 1650. in the Lord Cravens absence, the Parliament
that then sat (without Hearing Charge or Summons, and upon the Testimony of
Richard Faulconer extrajudicially taken, who falsely swore that the Lord Craven
promoted a Petition to the King of Scots at Breda) did Confiscate his Estate,
declaring the Lord Craven to to be an Offender, Within an Irish Resolve of
Parliament of the 24th. of Aug. 1649. grounded upon Letters from Ireland,
Ordered to be sent into Ireland, there to be put in Execution, and which
concerned only such English and Scotch as had been employed by the Parliament
in Ireland, and had revolted and betrayed their Trust there. Or such who had or
should adhere to them there.

Shortly after the said Votes of Confiscation, the Lord Cravens friends in
England applied themselves to that Parliament, Acquainting them that the Lord
Craven was beyond the Seas, and knew nothing of the proceedings against him
here, and therefore desired leave to send an Express unto the Lord Craven to
give him notice thereof. And in the mean time to suspend the Execution of their
Vote of Confiscation. Which Petition was read in Parliament; but leave was not
granted.

Afterward (viz.) July 3, 1651. (being about four months after Confiscation)
That Parliament was pleased to pass some Votes in Nature of a Summons,
requiring the Lord Craven personally to appear before the Parliament the third
of September following to answer such things as should be objected against him.
And Ordered the Summons to be printed and published; Of which the Lord Craven
was to take Notice at his Peril, though leave as aforesaid was denied to send
to him, the Lord Craven being then in High Germany, distant from London near
500. Miles, Neither was the said Summons directed according to the Law of the
Land to be served upon his person; Nor was there any Charge then or at any time
after, during the sitting of that Parliament drawn up against the Lord Craven
to which he might give Answer, in case he had personally appeared.

That before the Bill of Sale did pass, the L. Craven had several Petitions,
which he sent from beyond Seas, subscribed with his own hand, presented to and
read in Parliament. As also several Petitions in the name of his friends on his
behalf, were likewise presenetd to, and read in Parliament before the said Bill
of Sale did pass. Thereby informing the Parliament that they could make it
appear, that the Information given by the said Faulconer was altogether false.
That they could prove it by sufficient Witnesses, then in and about London,
ready to be produced in Parliament, and by the Original Draught of the Petition
mentioned to be presented at Breda, of Faulconers own hand writing, further
informing the Parliament, that there were Examinations taken at Whitehall which
tended to clear the Lord Craven, but those only were transmitted to the
Parliament, which seemed to make against the L. Craven. The Petitioners praying
also that those Examinations might likewise be transmitted to, and be read in
Parliament as well as those have been which seem to make against the Lord
Craven. And that the Lord Craven might be heard in his Defense before the Bill
of Sale did pass; But all this could not prevail to have the Lord Cravens
Case heard before his Estate was exposed to Sale; which Original Examinations
so concealed and timely made known unto the Parliament as aforesaid, are since
brought to light and ready to be produced in Parliament.

Nevertheless before the said Bill did pass (no answer being given to the said
Petitions) the Lord Cravens friends did (sitting the Parliament) Indict the
said Richard Faulconer of Perjury committed by him in that very information of
his against the Lord Craven, and the Grand Jury found the indictment, whereupon
the Lords Cravens friends did again petition the Parliament before the said
Bill of Sale did pass. And did thereby acquaint them, that the said Faulconer
was Indicted of Perjury, and that the Grand Jury had found the Indictment. And
beseeched them that (yet) they would be pleased to hear the Lord Cravens Case
before the said Bill of Sale did pass (As by the Petition read in Parliament,
and remaining upon record there may appear) But could not prevail to be heard.

That the said Bill of Sale afterward being passed, the Lord Cravens friends
did vigorously prosecute the Indictment against the said Faulconer to clear
the Lord Cravens Innocence, though it could not save his Estate, and the said
Faulconer was accordingly brought to his Trial. And after five hours hearing
of evidence in the Upper Bench, in the presence of as great an Auditory as has
been known in Westminster Hall; the said Faulconer was convicted of wilful
Perjury for that very Deposition of his against the Lord Craven. At which trial
the said Original draught of the Petition of Faulconers own handwriting was
then produced and read in Court in the presence of Faulconer, and several of
the Witnesses, who subscribed the same, were also examined in Court, clearing
the Lord Cravens Innocence of the matter charged against him by Faulconer, and
also it was proved in the presence of Faulconer at the same time by several
Witnesses of what a wicked life and conversation he was, viz.

(1.) That he drank a health to the Devil on his Knees. (2.) That he said the
Virgin Mary was a Whore, and our Savior Christ a Bastard. (3.) That he had
been in Alisbury Goal, and Newgate for Robbery and Felony, and several other
horrid things were then proved against him, here forborne to be mentioned.
And afterward the said Faulconer upon his Deathbed, with great Terror and
Horror of conscience confessed publicly to several people then present with
him in his sickness, the VVilfulnesse of his Perjury in that information of his
against the Lord Craven, and manifested his sorrow for the same, and declared
how he was prompted thereunto, and also acknowledged that Penury and Want was a
great cause to draw him to commit so horrid a Perjury; The truth of which
Confession upon his deathbed has been already attested at the Bar of a late
Parliament, which sat Anno 1656. where the Original Confession under Faulconers
own hand was then produced, and still remains upon Record in Parliament.

That after such time as the Lord Cravens Estate was exposed to Sale, several
Members of that Parliament, which were his Judges, and condemned him unheard,
were the first that stepped in to buy the Lord Cravens Estate, and had amongst
them to the value of 5000. li. per annum, and upwards; there being then in
Parliament, when the said Bill of Sale did pass, but forty three Members,
twenty whereof were against the sale of the Lord Cravens Estate, as appears by
the Journal of Parliament upon the Division of the House, whether the Lord
Cravens Name should pass in that Bill.

Notwithstanding all these discouragements; the Lord Craven, though he had lost
his Estate, was resolved to pursue the recovery thereof with Hue and Cry by his
constant appeals for Justice to all subsequent Powers and Authorities, and
therefore no sooner was that Parliament which confiscated his Estate
interrupted by the Army, but he appealed by Petition to the Convention, which
afterward was styled by the Name of a Parliament. After that to the Parliament
which met Anno 1654. And after that to the Parliament in 1656. and also to the
Parliament Anno 1658/59. All which Authorities did admit of the Lords Cravens
Petition of Appeal, and put the same in a way of Examination* But by reason of
their untimely dissolutions, he could get no relief upon the respective
Addresses which he made unto those Parliaments.

And lastly, After that Parliament which confiscated the Lord Cravens Estate
unheard, was restored to sit again after five years interruption, the Lord
Craven in the close pursuit of his Appeal, and to clear his innocence, did also
present his humble Petition unto them, which was read in that Parliament,
desiring that he might be now heard at the Bar of their House. But they were
not pleased to grant that liberty to the Lord Craven, only appointed a
Committee to consider of a comfortable Subsistence out of what remained unsold
of his Estate (which was very inconsiderable in possession being little above
200 li. a year) But that Parliament shortly after the making of that Order, was
the second time interrupted by the Army, and the Lord Craven was not relieved
in the least upon his Petition: Nor has he ever since his Estate was first
confiscated in March 1650. had any Allowance out of the same for his
subsistence.

Observe upon the whole MATTER.
(1) That there is not any Crime objected against the Lord Craven for which by
any Law his Estate ought to be confiscated (the pretended Crime against him
being only made by a Bare Vote not reduced into a Law, nor grounded upon any
Charge, Impeachment, Indictment or Hearing.) (2) That the Lord Craven is not
within that Vote, it relating merely to Actings in Ireland, and the Lord Craven
never having been in Ireland, for acting any thing related to it. (3.) That
there is no other proof of his supposed Crime concerning the promoting of a
Petition at Breda; but the Oath of one single Witness extrajudicially taken;
for which Oath that VVitness was found guily of Perjury. (4.) The putting of
his Name into a Bill of Sale without a Charge or Offense by Order in Parliament
was unparliamentary and without President. (5.) That the Vote for Summons of
the Lord Craven was about four Months after Confiscation, he had no personal
Notice of it, and Leave was denied to be given to send him notice: Neither was
there any Charge against him to answer, if he had come. (6.) The Lord Craven
often petitioned to be heard long before the Bill of Sale did pass, but was not
admitted to be heard. (7.) That a great part of the Lord Cravens Estate has
been bought upon very easy terms by those that were his Judges, and by others
very nearly related to them, Who by their Beneficial Bargains, Sales of Woods,
and pulling down of Houses, and selling the Materials and other profits made,
have for the most part reinbursed themselves their purchase-Money.
For all which Reasons the Lord Craven sues for a Repeal of the Votes and Acts
made against him, and Reparation for his losses, as this Parliament in their
Wisdom shall think fit.

Dated April the 25. 1660.

