^MPRIMATUR,

GVIL. JANE.
Nov. 24. 1677.
Mr. HALES's TREATISE OF SCHISM Examined and Censured.

By THOMAS LONG, B. D. and Prebendary of EXETER.

To which are Added, Mr. BAXTER's ARGUMENTS FOR Conformity, WHEREIN The most
Material Passages OF THE TREATISE of SCHISM ARE ANSWERED.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

Mr. HALES's TRACT OF SCHISM AND Schismatics, (Printed by the Original Copy)
EXAMINED AND CENSURED.

Who is it can think to gain acceptance and credit with reasonable Men, by
opposing not only the present Church conversing in Earth, but the uniform
consent of the Church in all Ages?

Mr. Hales in his Miscellanies set forth by Mr. Garthwait, Anno 1673. p. 260.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD THOMAS LORD BISHOP OF EXETER.
IT was prophesied of our Savior, that the Government should be upon his
shoulders, Is. 9. 6. and though he have devolved that burden upon mortal men,
which is Angelicis humeris formidandum, yet does he (...), put under his
shoulder and help them to bear it, or they would soon sink under it. For
however it fares with the Church, whether it be under persecution, none are so
much exposed to a fiery trial as they; or whether it enjoy peace and plenty.
Pride and contention swells up some corrupt members to the daily vexation of
their Heads and Governors. And how blameless soever their Persons be, their
Office is made a Crime.

Better things might have been expected from the Author of the Treatise
hereafter considered, wherein there is so much contempt poured out upon the
Episcopal Office, and on all Church authority and administrations, that the Ink
is not more black than the Calumny. But where should the impetus of discontent
and faction vent it self, but against those rocks that are set by God Himself
to give check and bounds unto it?

Now that in the Apostles days this sacred Order was appointed (among other
great ends) as a remedy against Schism, is acknowledged by such as are its
reputed Adversaries: In the Church of Alexandria from the time of St. Mark the
Evangelist they were continued as a bulwork against Schism, says St. Hierom in
his Epistle to Evagrius. And in the Church of Corinth, when Men begun to say, I
am of Paul and I of Apollo, this Office was appointed, that the seeds of Schism
might be taken away, says the same Father on the first Chap. to Titus. And he
tells the Luciferians in a Dialogue with them, That unless an eminent and
uninterrupted power be by all given to the chief Pastors, there will be as many
schisms as there are Priests. In all this St. Hierom follows the more ancient
Fathers -- Passibus aequis, for Ignatius advised the Trallians to do nothing
without their Bishop. Which advice he repeating again, tells them: It is not my
word, but the Word of God; and if ye suspect me to say this, as understanding
that there are Divisions among you, he is my witness for whom I am in bonds,
that it was not man, but the Spirit that declared this to me. St. Clemens in
his Epistle to the Corinth. p. 57. says, That the Apostles foreseeing that
Divisions would arise as Christ had foretold, did establish Bishops. And the
32. Canon of the Apostles ordained, That if any Presbyter or Deacon should make
conventions without his Bishop, he should be deposed. In the 4th. Ecumenical
Council of Calcedon consisting of 630. Fathers, there was read an Ancient Canon
of the Council of Antioch to this effect: If any Presbyter or Deacon contemning
his Bishop shall separate and erect another Altar, and will not obey the
Bishop, calling him home once and again, we do utterly condemn such a one.
Which Canon being read by Aetius an Archdeacon, the Fathers with one consent
proclaimed This is a righteous Canon of the Holy Fathers. In the Second Council
of Carthage by the Eighth Canon it was provided, That if any Presbyter lifted
up with pride should make a Schism against his Bishop, let him be accursed. But
in defiance of all these Canons and curses they have been accounted the only
blessed Men in our times, who have most vehemently decryed this holy Order, and
successfully maintained a Faction against them. To whom, if they are yet
capable of any Counsel, I would commend the moderation of Mr. Calvin, who
speaking of Popish Bishops, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. S. 6. says, If they were true
Bishops, I would yield them though not so much authority as they do require,
yet as much as is requisite for the well-ordering of Ecclesiastical Government.
And what he means by true Bishops he explaineth, S. 1. The form of the Ancient
Church sets before our eyes a pattern of the Divine institution for the order
of governing his Church. For though the Bishops of those times did set forth
many Canons, in which they seemed to express more than was expressed in the
Holy Scripture; yet they composed their whole Economy with such caution,
according to that only rule of God's Word, that you may easily perceive that
they held nothing in this respect differing from the Word of God. And in S. 4.
he repeats the same: Si rem intuemur, reperiemus veteres Episcopos non alium
regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere ab ea quam Deus verbo suo
praescripsit. With how much truth and reverence does this Learned man speak of
those ancient Bishops, of whom he says not only that they did not actually
swerve from God's Word as to their Government, but that they would not. This
Candor is much wanting in such as pretend to be Mr. Calvin's Disciples, with
whom this Sacred Function and all its Administrations are defamed as
Antichristian and Popish, and a Covenant for extirpating them root and branch
is still pertinaciously adhered to. But though the authority of these men be
despised, yet methinks that of our Savior who has made them his Ambassadors,
(and Apostolus cujusque is est quisque) and has told us, Luke 10. 16. He that
hears you, hears me; he that despises you, despises me, and he that
despises me despises him that sent me] should not be rejected, nor those
severe penalties under which he exacts our obedience to his Officers be
slighted. For whoever will not hear the Church, is to be accounted as a Heathen
or Publican: and Mark 6. 11. Whosoever shall not receive you nor hear you -- It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment than for
them. And though wicked men do securely despise the censures of the Church, yet
has Christ said, Matthew. 18. 18. of his Officers, Whatsoever ye shall bind on
Earth shall be bound in Heaven; which authority the Church of God would not
have exercised in the purest and most primitive times by so many and dreadful
Anathema's, if their great Lord had not authorized them, or if they had not
experienced the good effects of them. Did the Apostle in vain derive a power to
the Church of Corinth, 1 Epist chapter 5. v. 5. In the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ to deliver such a one (as the Incestuous person) unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord
Jesus? Or can we think the Records of the several Churches in those first Ages,
which relate the diverse painful and languishing Distempers of Body, as well as
the anguish and trouble of Mind, which seized on such as by the Censures of the
Church were cast out of Christian communion into the power of Satan, to be
false or forged? The Divine Judgments which pursue such as in our times have
been deservedly ejected, or do wilfully depart from the Church Communion, who
are for the most part given up to a reprobate sense, and being possessed with a
spirit of Giddiness and perverseness do as Cain run up and down from the
Presence of God in his Public Worship, like Vagabonds from one Faction to
another, till they fall into unnatural and diabolical practices, and straying
from Christ's Fold are made a Prey unto the Devil, do evidently demonstrate
that the Church Censures are not bruta fulmina, but have powerful effects for
the conversion or confusion of contumacious offenders.

But non tali Auxilio, That Sacred Function which your Lordship sustains in our
Church needs not so weak an Apology as I can make for it. I have only
endeavored (as I was able) to silence the reproaches and contradictions of
unreasonable Men, by whose strivings the burden of Government, which of it self
is weighty enough, is made to sit more uneasy on the shoulders of our
spiritual Guides. Against whom, it is no difficult work to maintain that
assertion of Dr. Hammond in his answer to the Catholic Gentleman, p. 134. That
as long as any particular Bishop remains in due subordination to his Canonical
Superiors, so long the departure of any Clergyman that is under his
Jurisdiction from that obedience which canonically he owes to him, is in him
that is thus guilty of it an act of Schism. But this comes not now under
consideration.

My present endeavors I do lay at your Lordships feet, as an acknowledgment of
that great happiness which we of your Lordships Diocese do enjoy under your
Government; in which, Authority and Meekness, Candor and Courage, Piety and
Prudence are so duly tempered, that though each of them be visible, yet it is
hardly discernable which is most prevalent. That free and favorable access
which your Lordship has vouchsafed me in more private concerns, has
encouraged me to this public Address for the service of the Church, hoping
that the Work may find the like gracious acceptance as the Author has: both
which, as they really need, so they humbly beg your Lordships pardon and
protection, which will be a sufficient Sanctuary against all Adversaries of the
truths which he defends, and therein of

EXON, New Years Day, 1677. Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant,
THO. LONG.

(...) when all other arguments have failed, to cut the Gordian knot of our
present peace and unity in pieces.

It is my endeavor by the following Exercitations to take this Sword out of
the Enemies hands, or at least to blunt the edge of it, and make it
unserviceable to evil designs. When I first apprehended it, I only let it fall
on the Anvil by its own weight, and every one may perceive how it yielded to
that gentle Examination: wherefore I was encouraged by a severer censure to lay
it on the Anvil again, and I hope with a few strokes I have so broken it, that
there is scarce an Artist among the Factions can so solder it, as to make it
hurtful or formidable again. I could wish they would at last turn this and
other such Swords into Plow-shares, as Men of Evangelical Spirits ought to do,
and study to be quiet, and do their own business.

But I think it not enough to deprive our Adversaries of this Weapon, I shall
attempt to vindicate the fame and reputation of the Venerable Mr. Hales, of
whose authority, the Churches adversaries do often make use to the maintenance
of Faction against her, as sometime they did of the King's for raising a
Rebellion against Him.

It is an aggravation of sorrow, that the Church, like the Eagle, should
receive its most dangerous wounds by the darts which are feathered from her own
wing. And that that learning and piety, which is wanting in the adverse party,
to enforce their own arguments, and support their cause, should be supplied by
the Revolt (as in the Apostates to Popery) or the Captivity (as in the case of
Mr. Hales) of some unsettled and unwary Sons of the Church, of whose parts and
reputation the Enemies on both sides have made more advantage than of their own.

This has been the beginning and growth of Errors and Schisms, when Men of
subtle parts, and popular esteem, raise doubts and arguments against the
truth, and instill them into weaker judgments, and unstable minds, who are apt
for want of understanding to take their Sophistry for solid reasoning, and
through affection to their Persons, to adhere to them, as to the most faithful
guides, and -- jurare in verba magistri. But it is a very preposterous method
to judge of the cause according to the reputation of such as espouse it. S.
Augustine gives us a safer rule, nec causa causae, nec persona personae
praejudicet, Let both causes, and persons, stand or fall according to their own
merit.

That little which I can gather concerning Mr. Hales (all which and a great
deal more, I charitably believe he did well deserve) is to this effect compiled
by Mr. Lloid in his Memoires p. 606. In writing of which it seems he consulted
the present Bishop of Chester, and Mr. Faringdon his familiar friends. Mr.
Hales was born in Kent, and bred Fellow of Merton College, where he was chosen
Greek Professor of Oxford. Sir Dudley Carleton made him his Chaplain, when he
was at the Hague; about the business of the Synod of Dort, whereof (being sent
thither to that purpose) he wrote a daily and exact account, completed, as
appears in his Remains, by Dr. Balcanquel. At which Synod, he hearing
Episcopius well pressing as he thought that of Saint John 3. 16. he said, There
I bad John Calvin good night. After this he was Fellow of Eaton, and then
Prebendary of Windsor, in the first of which places he was Treasurer, but
(which is strange) such was his integrity and charity) to his loss in point of
Estate; And Fellow (such his prudence in avoiding the Oaths of the times)
without any snare to his Conscience. A person of so large a capacity, so sharp,
quick, piercing and subtle a wit, of so serene and profound a judgment beyond
the ordinary reach, built upon unordinary notions, raised out of strange
observations, and comprehensive thoughts within himself, and of so astonishing
an industry, that he became the most absolute master of polite various and
universal learning, besides a deep insight into Religion: In the search after
which he was curious, and of the knowledge of it studious, as in the practice
of it he was sincere. And as strictly just in his dealings, so he was
extraordinarily kind, sweet, affable, communicative, humble and meek in
converse, and inimitably as well as unusually charitable, giving away all that
he had but his choice books, and was forced to sell them at last. He was as
good a man as he was a great Scholar, and as Bishop Pearson said of him, It was
near as easy a task for any one to become as knowing, as so obliging. He had
so long and with such advantage and impartiality judged of all books, things
and men, that he was the Oracle consulted by all the learned men of the Nation,
Dr. Hammond, Mr. Chillingworth, etc. in cases that concerned either. Whereupon
he used to say of learned men's letters, That they set up tops, and he must whip
them for them. There are no monuments of his learning (save the great Scholars
made by his directions and assistance) extant, but Sir Henry Savil's
Chrysostom, which he corrected with great pains in his younger days, and
illustrated with admirable notes, (for which he is often honorably mentioned
by Mr. Andrew Downs Greek Professor of Cambridge) and a Collection of some
choice Sermons and Letters made by Mr. Garthwait. He was very tender of judging
any but himself, and never spoke with complacency of any of his own works, but
his Sermon entitled Dixi, Custodiam, on Psalm 36. 1. (And indeed had he been as
good at the Custodiam, as he was at the Dixi, he had been an incomparable man.)
For Bishop Pearson in his Preface to his Remains says, He was a man of as
great sharpness, quickness and subtilty of wit, as ever this, or perhaps any
Nation bred. His Industry did strive if it were possible to equal the largeness
of his capacity. Proportionable to his reading was his meditation, which
furnished him with a judgment beyond the vulgar reach of man. So that he really
was a most prodigious example, of an acute and piercing wit, of a vast and
illimited knowledge, of a severe and profound judgment. Although this may seem,
as in it self it truly is, a grand Eulogium, yet I cannot esteem him less in
any thing which belongs to a good man, than in those intellectual perfections.
And had he never understood a Letter, he had other ornaments sufficient to
endear him. As a Christian, none ever more acquainted with the nature of the
Gospel, because none more studious of the knowledge of it, or more curious in
the search: which being strengthened by those great advantages before mentioned,
could not prove otherwise than highly effectual. He took indeed to himself a
liberty of judging not of others but for himself. And if ever any man might be
allowed in these matters to judge, it was he who had so long, so much, so
advantagiously considered, and which is more, never could be said to have the
least worldly design in his determinations. He was not only most truly and
strictly just in his secular transactions, most exemplary, meek and humble
notwithstanding his perfections, but beyond all example charitable, giving unto
all, preserving nothing but his books to continue his learning, and himself;
which when he had before digested, he was forced at last to feed upon; at the
same time the happiest and most unfortunate Helluo of books, the grand Exemplar
of learning, and of the envy and contempt which follows it. None was more
solicited to write, and thereby to teach the world, than he; yet none more
resolved against it; yet did he not hide his Talent, being so communicative,
that his Chamber was a Church and his Chair a Pulpit. So far Bishop Pearson,
who testifies also, that of all the Sermons, Miscellanies, etc. then published
for his, we may be confident they were his.

And now you see the reason, why Mr. Hales (the famed Author of such a work)
was so highly esteemed by the Brethren of the Factions, as that such, of either
the Presbyterian or Independent faction, as defended their divisions and
separations, made him their Coryphaeus, he being for parts and learning, head
and shoulders above the tallest of them. The Treatise was printed, as I find,
in an unhappy time, Anno 1642. and although I am of the mind, that by the
weakness of the Arguments, the Author intended rather to betray than defend the
Schism, yet the Separatists wanting better reasons, made a great noise with
these, as if they were justified in their Schism by this work, notwithstanding
the demerits of their own.

The fame of this and some other Opinions of our Author came to the cognizance
of that great Lover of learning, and learned men, Archbishop Laud, who sent
for him on purpose to admonish him of his faults; and he being come to the
Palace in the morning, the Archbishop presently gives order to delay Dinner,
(probably that he might have the more time for discourse with Mr. Hales) and
taking him to his Garden with him, they continued their conference for some
hours; after which they were very good friends, the Archbishop studying to
prefer him, and he praying for the Archbishop as his Chaplain. And whereas he
had been heard to say in his former days, that he thought he should never dye a
Martyr, yet he was known to live a Confessor, and if we will believe Mr.
Marvel, he dyed little less than a Martyr for the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, being by the enemies thereof deprived of all his
livelihood, and reduced to such extremities as did contribute to the shortning
of his days.

Dr. Heylen in the Life of the Archbishop, tells us of another Book, called
Disquisitio brevis, ascribed to Mr. Hales, in which some of the principal
Socinian Tenants were cunningly inserted, pretending them for the best
expedients to appease some controversies between us and Rome. And that the
Treatise of Schism not then Printed, was transmitted from hand to hand in
written Copies, intended chiefly for the encouragement of our great Masters of
wit and reason to despise the Authority of the Church, the dispersing of which
gave the Archbishop occasion to send for him to Lambeth. And that the
Archbishop knew his abilities while he lived in Oxon. For (Dr. Heylen says) he
was a man of infinite reading and no less ingenuity, free of discourse, and as
communicative of his knowledge as the celestial bodies of their light and
influences. And that after the discourse above intimated, which continued from
Nine of the Clock till the usual time of Dining, was past, and the Lord Conway,
and other Persons of Honor being there, some of the Servants thought it
necessary to give him notice how the time had passed away; and then coming in
high colored and almost panting for want of breath, enough to show there had
been some heats between them, Mr. Hales met with Dr. Heylen, with whom he was
acquainted, told him that he found the Archbishop (whom he knew before to be a
nimble Disputant) to be as well versed in Books as business; That he had been
ferreted by him from one hole to another, till there was none left to afford
him further shelter; That he was now resolved to be Orthodox, and to declare
himself a true Son of the Church of England both for Doctrine and Discipline,
p. 361, 362.

If it be demanded why our Author did not refute this Tract in his lifetime; I
answer 1. he did do it as effectually as the Philosopher confuted him that
denied motion, when he arose from his seat, and walked up and down before him;
for his long profession, and practice, contrary to what was there written, was
Protestatio contraria facto. 2. The Tract carried its confutation with it, as
appears in the examination. 3. It Is not impossible that he foresaw how it might
be serviceable to the Royal Party, whom their adversaries had begun to revile
and persecute as Arminians and Papists: and in some cases, poison well tempered
and rightly applied may become medicinal. 4. He might be confident such weak
arguments as he made use of, though they might please the factious multitude
who knew no better, yet they could do no great hurt among Judicious men. And
because we cannot guess at the Author's aim, which is secret, we ought to judge
by his actions which were public. The learned Bishop Tailor made use of a like
Stratagem to break the Presbyterian power, and to countenance Divisions between
the Factions, which were too much united against the Loyal Clergy: for in his
Liberty of Prophesying, he insists on the same Topics of Schism and Heresy,
of the incompetency of Councils and Fathers to determine our Ecclesiastical
controversies, and of scrupulous Consciences, and urges far more cogent
arguments than our Author did, but still he had prepared his (...), an Antidote
to prevent any dangerous effect of his discourse. Not unlike to some
Mountebanks (Pardon the Comparison) who to amuse the vulgar, and to effect
their own ends do administer to their Merry-Andrews a certain Dose of Poison,
but immediately give them such an Antidote as causes them to cast it up again,
and hinders the mischievous operation of it. For the Judicious Reader may
perceive such a reserve (though it lay in Ambuscado, and be compacted in a
narrow compass) as may easily rout those Troops, which began too soon to cry
Victoria, and thought of nothing else but dividing the Spoil. And if the
learned Bishop did this and was blameless, the goodness of the End in such
cases denominating the Action, I see no cause why our Author, whose ends (as we
ought in charity to believe, considering the integrity of the Person) were for
the restoring of peace, seeing he represented the causes of War so frivolous
and inconsiderable, ought to be represented as a Criminal or adversary.

And thus I have endeavored to rescue the Author's Person, as well as his
Papers from the Enemies tents, according to the advice of Tully in the case of
Muraena, Toll Catonem de Causa, that by any means he should take off Cato from
appearing as an Enemy, or an Evidence against him, lest the Opinion of Cato's
virtues should create him more prejudice, than the strength of his Arguments
were like to do.

I have only to acquaint the Reader that the reason why in the following
Censure I have sometime named the Author as distinct from Mr. Hales, is because
I believe it is applied by too many to such intents as the Author never thought
of; and as the Epigrammatist says of ill repeating, so shall I say of ill
applying other men's books, -- Male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.

I cannot certainly calculate the time when this Tract of Schism was first
penned, but I suppose it to be about Forty Years since, it being quoted by Mr.
Chillingworth in his Answer to Knott, which wants but little of that age. And
unless my conjecture, and credible information do both fail me, the occasion on
which it was written was this: Mr. Hales and Mr. Chillingworth were of intimate
acquaintance, and beside a constant correspondence by Letters they had frequent
converse with each other, but more especially when Mr. Chillingworth came so
far in his Answer as to Vindicate our Church from Schism which was charged on
her by Knott, He consulted with Mr. Hales concerning the nature of Schism, and
after discourse he desired Mr. Hales to write his thoughts about it, which he
did in this Tract, out of which Mr. Chillingworth urged some arguments, which I
think are the worst in all his Book. Sure I am that they caused ill reflections
not only on the private reputation of Mr. Hales and Mr. Chillingworth, but on
the Church of England, as if that did favor the Socinian Principles. The
Author of Infidelity Unmasked writing against Mr. Chillingworth, tells him that
his arguments concerning Schism were conceits borrowed from a Letter of Mr.
John Hales of Eaton written to a private Friend of his (as I am credibly
informed, says that Author, by a Person well known to them both at that time,
and who saw the Letter it self.) And he farther affirms, of his own certain
knowledge, that Mr. Hales was of a very inconstant judgment, One Year (for
Example says he) doubting of, or denying the blessed Trinity, and the next Year
professing and adoring the same. And another Person, in a Pamphlet called the
Total Sum, written against Mr. Chillingworth, reviles him on the same account
in these words. In this you show the Adamantinal hardness of your Socinian
forehead and Samosatenian Conscience. The truth is, that some arguments
borrowed. from the Socinians, and urged first by Mr. Hales, and from him by Mr.
Chillingworth, gave occasion to that imputation. But as for Mr. Chillingworth
he had sufficiently secured his reputation in the Preface of his Book, where he
thus professes: I believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of our
Savior, and all other Supernatural verities received in the Scripture, as
truly and as heartily as any man. And whereas he dyed in the Faith of the
Church of England, he has given assurance that he was then no Socinian. As for
Mr. Hales, whatever he was when he wrote this Tract of Schism, and some others,
yet as his Adversary says, he did afterward profess and adore the blessed
Trinity. And for the Reader's satisfaction, as well as for Mr. Hales his
Vindication, I shall transcribe that account which he gives of his Faith
concerning the Trinity in his Golden Remains.

Mr. HALES's Confession of the TRINITY.
The Sum of whatever either the Scriptures teach, or the Schools conclude
concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, is comprised in these few Lines.

GOD is One, numerically one, more one than any single Man is one, if Unity
could suscipere magis and minus: yet God is so One, that he admits of
distinction, and so admits of distinction that he still retains Unity. As he is
One, so we call him GOD, the Deity, the Divine Nature, and other Names of the
same signification; as he is distinguished, so we call him Trinity, Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In this Trinity there is One Essence, Two
Emanations, Three Persons or Relations, Four Properties, Five Notions. (A
Notion is that by which any Person is known or signified.) The One Essence is
GOD, which with this relation, that it does generate or beget, makes the Person
of the Father; The same Essence with this Relation, that it is begotten, makes
the Person of the Son; The same Essence with this relation, that it proceeds,
makes the Person of the Holy Ghost. The Two Emanations are, to be begotten,
and to proceed, or to be breathed out. The Four Properties are; First,
Innascibility and Inemanability; the second is to generate, these belong to the
Father; the third is to be begotten, this belongs to the Son; the fourth is to
proceed, or to be breathed out, this belongs to the Holy Spirit. The five
Notions are, first, Innascibility; the second is to beget; the third is to be
begotten; the fourth Spiratio passiva, to be breathed out; the fifth Spiratio
activa, or to breath; and this Notion belongs to the Father and the Son alike;
for Pater and filius spirant Spiritum sanctum. Hence it evidently follows, that
he who acknowledges thus much, can never possibly scruple the Eternal Deity of
the Son of God. And then he ingenuously concludes: If any Man think this
Confession to be defective (for I can conceive no more in this point necessary
to be known) let him supply what he conceives deficient, and I shall thank him
for his labor.

But to proceed: The confutation of this Treatise of Schism will appear to be
necessary not only to wipe off the aspersions of the Papists, but to silence
the Objections of Factious Persons, who often take Arguments from it to defend
themselves in their separation, as will appear by that which follows.

Mr. Hales had said, p. 207. That the Church might be in any number more or
less, in any place, Country or Nation, it may be in all, and for ought I know
it may be in none, without prejudice to the Definition of the Church, or the
truth of the Gospel. This strange notion is contrary to what Mr. Hales delivers
in his Golden Remains, p. 260. When we appeal (says he) to the Churches
Testimony, we content not our selves with any part of the Church actually
existent, but add unto it the perpetually successive testimony of the Church in
all Ages since the Apostles time. And, p. 186. This succession of the Church is
sufficient to prove where our Church was before Luther. This strange notion I
say, That the Church visible may totally decay, prevailed too far with Mr.
Chillingworth, who says, p. 239. It is not certain that the truth of the
Article [of the Holy Catholic Church] depends upon the Actual existence of a
Catholic Church, but rather upon the right that the Church of Christ, or
rather, to speak properly, that the Gospel of Christ has to be universally
believed; and therefore the Article may be true though there were no Church in
the World. Now though this were only a problem, which Mr. Chillingworth
defends not, but in the 14. p. of his Preface overthrows, saying, I believe
that our Savior ever since his Ascension has had in some place or other a
visible true Church on Earth, and that there will be such a Church to the
Worlds end: yet his Adversary, p. 779. of Infidelity Unmasked, falls heavily on
him, and tells him, that this notion is not only against the Scripture, Ephesians. 4.
11. but against all Protestants and all Christians; and sends him to Calvin 's
Institutions, l. 4. c. 1. and to Volkelius, whom he calls his Socinian Brother,
de vera Rel. l. 6. c. 5. who prove a Succession of Pastors and Doctors to have
been always in the Church. Remansit Doctorum Pastorumque officium, nec non alia
quaedam. And indeed Dr. Potter, whom Mr. Chillingworth defended, had said
truly, That it was an error in the nature, and matter of it properly Heretical
to say, the Church remained only in the party of Donatus, and that it was much
worse to say she remained no where; for this were to overthrow the Article of
the Catholic Church, and is little less than blasphemy, says Archbishop Laud.

Again, Mr. Hales, p. 218. said, It is alike unlawful to make profession of
known or suspected falsehoods, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected
actions. This argument Mr. Chillingworth improveth, p. penult. of his Preface
to Charity maintained. If a Church (says he) supposed to want nothing
necessary, require me to profess against my Conscience, that I believe some
error though never so small and innocent, which I do not believe, and will not
allow me her communion but upon this condition; in this case the Church for
requiring this condition is Schismatical, and not I for separating from the
Church. Mr. Baxter speaks much more like a Conformist in this case, than either
Mr. Hales, or Mr. Chillingworth: If a Church (says he, p. 464. of Reasons for
Christ. Relig. S. 15.) which in all other respects is purest and best, will
impose any sin upon all that will have any local communion with it, though we
must not separate from that Church as no Church, yet must we not commit that
sin, but patiently suffer them to exclude us from their communion. And I think
it is more rational peaceably to dissent until we are actually excluded, than
presently to pronounce that Church Schismatical, which requires such conditions
of our communion. For if that which I believe to be an error, (being, if an
error, but small and innocent) be required of me by a Church which maintains
all necessary things, I ought rather to submit to, or at least peaceably
withold my communion from that Church, than to violate its communion by my
separation; because that Church which GOD has preserved in all necessary
truths, may probably know that which I believe to be an error (and but a small
one, if an error) to be an important truth; or if she be mistaken in such small
things, it is not schismatical in her to require my profession, who may well be
resolved of my doubt, when so many wiser and better than my self after mature
deliberation think fit to require it.

For as Mr. Hooker says, p. 100. In all right and equity that which the Church
has so long received and held for good, that which public approbation has
ratified, must carry the benefit of presumption with it to be accounted meet
and convenient. And, p. 55. This Opinion, That the Authority of Man
affirmatively in matters Divine is nothing worth, being once inserted into the
minds of the vulgar sort, GOD knows what it may grow unto. Thus much we see, It
has already made Thousands so headstrong, even in gross and palpable Errors,
that a Man whose capacity will scarce serve him to utter five words in sensible
manner, blusheth not in any doubt concerning matter of Scripture, to think his
own bare Yea as good as the Nay of all the Wise, Grave and Learned Judgments
that are in the whole World; which insolency must be represt, or it will be the
very bane of Christian Religion. And therefore he concludes: The certain
commands of the Church must be obeyed in all things not certainly unlawful. And
page 144. That which the Church by her Authority shall probably think and
define to be true and good, must in congruity of reason overruled all other
inferior judgments whatsoever. And as to Orders established (by the Church)
since equity and season favor that which is in being till orderly judgment of
Decision be given against it, it is but Justice to Exact of you, and
perverseness in you it would be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Not
that I judge it a thing allowable for Men to observe those Laws which in their
hearts they are steadfastly persuaded to be against the Laws of God; but your
persuasion in this case ye are all bound for the time to suspend, and in
otherwise doing ye offend against GOD by troubling his Church without any just
or necessary cause. Be it that there are some Reasons inducing you to think
hardly of our Laws, are those Reasons demonstrative, are they necessary, or but
mere probabilities only? An argument necessary and demonstrative is such, as
being proposed unto any Man and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly
assent. -- But if the skilfullest among you can show that all the Books ye have
hitherto written be able to afford any one Argument of this nature, let the
instance be given. As for probabilities, what thing was there ever set down so
agreeable with sound reason, but some probable show against it might be made?
Is it meet that when publicly things are received and have taken place,
general obedience thereunto shall cease to be exacted, in case this or that
private person, led with some probable conceit, should make open protestation,
Peter or John disallow them, and pronounce them naught? -- So that of peace and
quietness there is not any way possible, unless the probable voice of every
entire Society or Body Politic over rule all private of like nature in the
same Body. Which thing effectually proves, that GOD being Author of Peace and
not of confusion in the Church, must needs be Author of those Men's peaceable
resolutions, who concerning these things have determined with themselves to
think and do as the Church they are of Decrees, till they see Necessary cause
enforcing them to the contrary. And p. 144, 145. Mr. Hooker says, That which
the Church by her Authority shall probably think and define to be true and
good, must in congruity of reason overruled all other inferior judgments
whatsoever. And -- where our duty is Submission, weak oppositions betoken Pride.

Now as the Name of Mr. Hales prevailed with Mr. Chillingworth to embrace some
unsound Opinions of his, so has it done with others of great note. The Author
of the Irenicum, p. 108. repeats the first and part of the second Page of this
Tract, with this Commendation: It is well observed by a Learned and Judicious
Divine, That Heresy and Schism, etc. And p. 120. I shall subjoyn the judgment
of as Learned and Judicious a Divine as most our Nation has bred in his
Excellent though little Tract of Schism. And then he repeats, p. 210. In those
Schisms, etc. to p. 212. And in p. 120, and 121. of the Irenicum, he quotes Mr.
Hales, from p. 215. And were Liturgies, etc. to p. 218. and adds, So far that
Excellent Person, whose words I have taken the pains to transcribe because of
the great wisdom, judgment and moderation contained in them, and the
seasonableness of his Counsel and Advice to the present posture of Affairs
among us. And p. 394. Thus that incomparable Man, Mr. Hales, in his often
quoted Tract of Schism, p. 223. to p. 225. adding, Thus that grave and wise
Person, whose words savor of a more than ordinary tincture of a true spirit of
Christianity, that scorns to make Religion a footstool to pride and ambition.

The Author of the Rehearsal Transprosed, speaks marvellously of Him I shall
conclude ( says he) with a Villainous Pamphlet, of which a great Wit was the
Author; and whereas Mr. Bays is always defying the Non-conformists with Mr.
Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, and the Friendly Debate, I am of Opinion,
though I have a great reverence for Mr. Hooker, that this little Book of not
full Eight Leaves has shut that Ecclesiastical Polity, and Mr. Beyes too our
of Doors: It is one Mr. Hales of Eaton, a most Learned Divine, and one of the
Church of England, and most remarkable for his sufferings in the late times,
and for his Christian patience under them. And I reckon it not one of the least
ignominies of that Age, that so eminent a Person should have been by the
iniquity of the times reduced to those necessities, under which he lived. As I
account it no small honor to have grown up into some part of his acquaintance,
and conversed a while with the living Remains of one of the clearest Heads and
best prepared Breasts in Christendom. I hope it will not be tedious though I
write some few (and yet whatsoever I omit I shall have left behind more)
material passages. ( And then he fills up near Eight Pages of his Book, out of
Mr. Hales his Eight Leaves.) -- It was not amiss in the Scribes and Pharisees
to build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish their Sepulchers; but to
persecute their Successors, and Christ himself under pretense of honoring the
Ancients, was an impiety, full fraught with malice and envy. And a usual thing
it is for such as intend to trample on such Worthies as are present and stand
in their way, to express great respect to those that are removed out of it: --
Sed nisi quae terris semota suisque
Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit and odit.
Yet by that Author's leave I have quoted much less out of the Reverend Mr.
Hooker in this Parergon, yet enough to confute all that he or Mr. Hales have
said in Defense of Schism.

There is another late Pamphlet called Separation no Schism, which in p. 40.
tells us, That a mere suspicion of sin is a sufficient ground for withdrawing
Communion, in the judgment of very learned Men; and then quotes Mr. Hales -- So
says that Universally admired Man, p. 210. and p. 216, 217, 218. and infers,
These Testimonies are so clear, and backed with such Unanswerable Reasons, that
not only where the Commission of Sin, but the doing any thing that is suspected
to be sinful, is required as a condition of Communion, there a withdrawing is
lawful, and not at all Schismatical.

Now when Men of so much Learning, and Judgment, as some of those whom I have
mentioned, have upon the reputation of the Venerable Mr. Hales improved such
Notions and Arguments as are destructive to the Government and Peace of the
Church of England, it is not strange that Men of little Learning and great
Prejudices should assume them, whereby (as far as they are able) to justify
their Schismatical practices; nor that the Skeptic of this Age should be fond
of such Notions as may tend to the Subversion of what has been so long, and so
well established among us. We may rather wonder, how so Villainous a Pamphlet
(as the Rehearsal calls it; yet) so obnoxious to just exceptions, should have
continued so long in Vogue without a Confutation from some more Learned Hand,
that the Infection of it might proceed no farther, but its weakness be made
manifest to all Men.

As for Doctor Parker, he has no less judiciously and successfully acquitted
Himself against any thing objected by Master Hales, or Marvel, than Master
Hooker. To instance in that one particular, of pretending Scruples of
Conscience against the Commands of Public Authority; he faith more in One
Page, than all the Objectors will be able to Answer.

Though this pretense (says he) might be allowed of in the Days of Queen
Elizabeth, when it was first started, yet after so long time, and so much
enquiry, it is intolerable. For if after all their search and examination they
have not been able to descry, the evils they suspected, this is a sufficient
Principle of Presumption that their Jealousies are ungrounded: so that if they
are now able to object any certain crime against them, then this Plea of a
Doubtful Conscience cease, and the Certainty is to be pleaded in stead of the
Doubt; if not, an Hundred and Fifty Years is a sufficient time to satisfy or
to cancel scruples, -- And a scrupulous Conscience is of a modest, yielding,
and pliable temper, as arising from a diffidence and distrust of it self. And
Doubts and Scruples are rarely employed, but upon trifling and inconsiderable
matters, the material parts of Duty being too plain and easy to be liable to
so much uncertainty; And therefore obedience to Authority, being one of the
greatest and most indispensable Duties of Mankind, in that it is so absolutely
necessary to their well being, and enjoined upon them by the most Positive
Precepts and severest Penalties of the Gospel:

Nor is it fit that in Doubtful cases of a Public concern Men should talk too
peremptorily of their private Persuasions, because they are incompetent Judges
of the Public good, and therefore are to be determined and overruled by the
Judgment of those to whose care the management of Public Affairs is entrusted,
unless in case of certain and unquestionable Disobedience to the Law of GOD:
For we are no otherway free from the Supreme Authority on Earth, but as we are
subject to a Superior in Heaven.

AN EXAMINATION OF Mr. HALES's TREATISE of SCHISM.
Q. WHat is the benefit of Communion?

Answ. Communion is the strength and ground of all society, Sacred and Civil:
whoever therefore causes a breach, if in civil occasions, is guilty of
Sedition, or Rebellion; if in Ecclesiastical differences, is guilty of Schism:
so that Schism is an Ecclesiastical Sedition, as Sedition is a Layschisme, p.
193.

Q. What is the definition of Schism?

Answ. Schism is an unnecessary separation of Christians, p. 195.
from that part of the visible Church of which they were once Members.

Q. When is Separation necessary?

Answ. Separation is then necessary, when nothing will save us from the guilt
of Conscience, but open separation, p. 195.

Q. When is Schism complete?

Answ. These two things make Schism complete. First, The choice of a Bishop in
opposition to the former. 2ly, The erecting a new Church and Oratory, p. 196.
for the dividing Party to meet in publicly. As in the late famous
controversy in Holland, de Praedestinatione, as long as the disagreeing
Parties went no further than disputes, the Schism was unhatched; but as soon
as one Party swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a
Church (by putting a new Pulpit in it) for the separating Party to meet in,
what before was a Controversy became a formal Schism, p. 197.

Q. What is the danger of Schism?

Answ. What the Ancients spoke by way of censure of Schism in general, is most
true, p. 198.
(and they spoke most strange things of it) for they saw, that unadvisedly, and
upon fancy, to break the knot of union betwixt man and man (especially among
Christians, upon whom the tie of love and communion does especially rest) was a
crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing absolves a Man from the guilt of it,
but true and unpretended Conscience. And p. 192. Heresy and Schism are things
of great moment, the one offending against Truth, the other against Charity,
and both are deadly.

Q. Was the Schism of the Donatists any way excusable?

Answ. No, they were complete Schismatics, p. 196.
upon the grounds before mentioned, nor was there any necessary cause for their
Separation, for the occasion of the Schism was an Opinion, that where good and
bad were mixed, there could be no Church, p. 205.
by reason of pollution evaporating (as it were) from sinners, which blasted
the righteous, and made all unclean, whereas in his Congregations, he pretended
that wicked persons found no shelter, p. 206.

Q. How was this Schism of the Donatists refuted?

Answ. By this one maxim of Saint Augustine (which was irrefragably asserted)
Unitatem Ecclesiae per totum orbem dispersae propter nonnullorum peccata non
esse deserendam, That the unity of the Catholic Church is not to be forsaken,
for the sins of some that are within it, p. 206.

Q. Though in this Schism the Donatist was the Schismatic, p. 208.
yet might not any one communicate with them, if occasion so required? if so be
they did not flatter them in their Schism; for why might it not be lawful to
go to Church with the Donatist, if occasion so required, since neither Nature,
nor Religion suggest the contrary? why may I not be present at such public
Meetings as pretend Holiness, p. 209.
so there be nothing done but what true Devotion and Piety brook? p. 215.
Yea, why may I not go to an Arian Church, if occasion require, so there be no
Arianism expressed in the Liturgy?

Answ. 1. You may not communicate with such, because of the danger of Schism
before mentioned. 2ly, Because it is not lawful, no not for prayer, hearing,
conference, or any other religious office whatsoever, for People to Assemble,
otherwise than by public order is allowed; for, why should Men desire to do
that suspiciously, in private, which may be performed warrantably in public?
p. 229, 230.

Q. But what if they to whose care the execution of the public service is
committed, p. 209.
do some things unseemly, suspicious, or unlawful? if their Garments be
censured as, or indeed be superstitious? what if the Gesture of Adoration be
used at the Altar? what if the Homilist or Preacher deliver any Doctrine, of
the truth of which we are not well persuaded?

Answ. Yet for all this, we may not separate, except we be constrained to bear
a part in them our selves: p. 210.
The Priests under Eli had so ill demeaned themselves about the daily
Sacrifice, that they made it to stink, yet the People refused not to come to
the Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifices to the Priests; for in Schisms
which concern fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusal of Communion, but
only the requiring of the execution of some unlawful or suspected Act.

Q. What may we do when some Persons in a Church teach erroneous Doctrines, p.
214.
suppose of Arius and Nestorius, concerning the Trinity, or the Person of our
Savior?

Answ. What to do in this case is not a point of any great depth of
understanding to discover, p. 215.
so be it distemper and partiality do not intervene. I do not see, that
Opinionum varietas and Opinantium unitas are (...), or that Men of different
Opinions in Christian Religion, may not hold communion ( in Sacris) in the
public Worship: (This Argument holds, a fortiori, if I may keep communion with
such as teach false Doctrines, much more with such as practice only suspected
Ceremonies.) p. 226.

Q. What is your Opinion of Conventicles?

Answ. It evidently appears that all Meetings upon unnecessary occasions of
Separation, are to be so styled; so that in this sense a Conventicle is nothing
else but a Congregation of Schismatics. p. 227.


Q. Is not this name sometime fixed upon good and honest Meetings? p. 227.

Answ. It is, and that perchance, not without good reason; For first, it has
been at all times confessed necessary, that God should have, not only inward
and private devotion, p. 227.
when Men either in their Hearts, or Closets, or within their private Walls,
pray, praise, confess, and acknowledge: but that all these things should be
done in public, by troops and shoals of Men, from whence proceeded public
Temples, Altars, Forms of Service, appointed Times, and the like, which are
required for open Assemblies.

Q. What is the reason of the severe Censures and Laws against private Meetings?

Answ. When it was espied that ill affected persons abused private Meetings,
whether religious, or civil, to evil ends, p. 228.
religiousness to gross impiety (and the Meetings of Christians under Pagan
Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open view, were charged
with soul imputations, as by the report of Christians themselves it plainly
appears: as also civil Meetings under pretense of Friendship, and neighbourly
visits, sheltered treasonable attempts against Princes, p. 229.
and Common-weals) Hence both Church and State joined, and jointly gave order
for forms, times, places of public Concourse, whether for civil or religious
ends; and all other Meetings whatsoever besides those, of which both time and
place were limited, they censured for routs, and riots, and unlawful Assemblies
in the State, and in the Church, for Conventicles.

Q. Is it not lawful then, for Prayer, hearing, conference, and other religious
Offices, p. 229.
for People to Assemble, otherwise than by public Order is allowed?

Answ. No; for why should Men desire to do that suspiciously in private, which
warrantably may be performed in public? p. 230.

Q. I pray you Sir, What general Rules are fit to be observed for the
discovering and avoiding of Schism.

Answ. Take heed of entertaining scruples of Conscience, about things of little
moment; for when scruples of Conscience began to be made, or pretended, then
Schisms began to break in, p. 217.

Q. What other Rule is necessary to be observed?

Answ. That you do not endeavor to advance one Bishop against another, (much
more a Presbyter against the Bishop) which in St. Cyprian's language, p. 222.
is Erigere Altar contra Altar, to set up Altar against Altar, to which he
imputes the Original of all Church disorders, and if you read him, you would
think he thought no other Church-tumult to be a Schism, but this; p. 221.
For the general practice of the Church, was, never to admit more than one
Bishop at once in one See, but it fell out among the Ancients, sometime by
occasion of difference in Opinion, sometimes because of difference among those
who were interessed in the choice of Bishops, that two Bishops, and sometime
more were set up, and all Parties striving to maintain their own Bishop, made
themselves several Congregations and Churches, each refusing to participate
with others. p. 223.
And seeing it is a thing very convenient for the peace of the Church, to have
but one Bishop in a See, at once; Their punishment sleeps not, who
unnecessarily or wantonly go about to infringe it.

HAving by a brief Analysis of the Treatise of Schism extracted the genuine
sense of the Author, who, as the Transproser says, p. 175. was one of the
Church of England, (and as such I have endeavored to represent him) it is
obvious to every one that shall read that Tract, that instead of Answering Mr.
Hooker's or Mr. Parker's Tracts of Ecclesiastical Polity, it has fully refuted
it self and all other cavils of the Schismatics, who by these two assertions
of his will for ever lie under a just condemnation. The One is, p. 209. What if
those to whose care the Execution of the public service is committed, do
something either unseemly or suspicious, or peradventure unlawful? what if the
Garments they wear be censured as, nay indeed be Superstitious? what if the
gesture of Adoration be used at the Altar? what if the Homilist or Preacher
deliver any doctrine, of the truth of which we be not well persuaded? yet for
all this we may not separate, except we be constrained personally to bear a
part in them our selves -- Then may not any of the Laity who are not required
to bear a part in such things, separate from our Congregations, and by
consequence neither may their Leaders draw them into a separation.

The second Assertion is, p. 229. -- It is not lawful, no not for prayer, for
hearing, for conference, for any other religious office whatsoever, for people
to assemble, otherwise than by public order is allowed. This conclusion our
Author infers from substantial premises.

I confess I was so tender of the reputation and memory of Mr. Hales, who, as
the Transproser says, was not only one of the Church of England, but most
remarkable for his sufferings in the late times, and for his Christian patience
under them, which befell him, as Mr. Parker observes, p. 148. when he had
declared himself of another Opinion, and obtained leave of Archbishop Laud
(who converted him) to call himself his Grace's Chaplain, that naming him in
his public prayers, the greater notice might be taken of the Alteration:
(which doubtless was the cause why so eminent a person was by the iniquity of
those times reduced to those necessities under which (the Transposer observes)
he lived, p. 176.) that I resolved at first not to make any reflection on such
passages as discovered the Author to be guilty of so many Passions, infirmities
and contradictions. I shall not deal therefore with Mr. Hales in this
posthumous piece, but with that inimicus homo, whoever he be, that has sown
tares among the good seed, and wrapped up poison in his Golden Remains. And
necessary it is that such noxious and unsavory weeds should be rooted out, and
not suffered to defile the grave of so Candid a person, or made use of as a
shelter for unclean creatures to hide themselves and croak under them, as the
Transproser does, who having raked a heap of them together, from p. 175. to p.
183. fancieth himself as secure on that dunghill, as if he were in some
enchanted Castle.

The first thing that is obnoxious in the Treatise of Schism, is p. 191. of the
Posthumous works, where it is said, that Heresy and Schism, as they are in
common use, are two Theological Mormo's or Scarcrows: And what the Author means
by common use, you may be informed, p. 213. where he says, Arrianism,
Eutychianism, Nestorianism, Photinianism, Sabellianism, and many more (you may
add Socinianism too, which is but a compound of those) are but names of Schism,
howsoever in the common Language of the Fathers they were called heresies. So
that our Author explodes the Judgment of all the Fathers who condemned those
things for Heresies, which he thinks do scarce deserve the name of Schisms. And
a new notion of Heresies is brought in by him, p. 214. Indeed Manicheism,
Valentinanism, Marcionism, Mahometanism are truly and properly heresies, for we
know that the Authors of them received them not but minted them themselves, and
so knew that which they taught to be a lie; but can any man avouch (says our
Author) that Arrius and Nestorius, and others that taught erroneously
concerning the Trinity, or the person of our Savior, did maliciously invent
what they taught, and not rather fall upon it by error and mistake? Till that
be done, and that upon good evidence, we will think no worse of all parties
than needs we must, and take these Rents in the Church to be but Schisms upon
matter of Opinion. If this be true, in vain did the Bishops of the Primitive
Church assemble in the Councils of Nice, Ephesus, and other places, to condemn
and suppress the Opinions of Arrius, Nestorius and other Heresiarcha's. And the
fears and jealousies of the present Church concerning the growth of heresies
are groundless; for though the erring spirits of this age should revive all the
dangerous tenets of Arrius, Eutychius, Nestorius, Photinus, and Sabellius, and
all the blasphemies of Manes, Valentinian, Marcion, or Mahomet himself, yet
seeing they did not invent these errors themselves, but fell on them by mistake
(though they adhere to them never so tenaciously, and wilfully defend them)
they deserve but the name of Schismatics. And until some such persons, as
Simon Magus, Montanus, or Mahomet shall set up for a new God, or a Holy Ghost,
or a Messiah, in direct opposition to the Gospel of our Lord and Savior, we
need not trouble the world with the odious names of Heretic, or Schismatic,
which are but Theological Scarcrows. For p. 215. we are told that the Rents in
the Church (occasioned by those heresies) were at the worst but Schisms upon
matter of Opinion. In which case (says our Author) it is not a point of any
great depth of Understanding to discover what we are to do, so be it distemper
and partiality do not intervene; I do not yet see that opinionum varietas and
Opinantium unitas are (...), or that men of different Opinions in Christian
Religion may not hold communion in Sacris, and if occasion require I may go to
an Arrian Church, if there be no Arrianism expressed in their Liturgy.

This is expressly contrary to what I quoted from p. 229. It is not lawful for
prayer, hearing, etc. and as contrary to the Holy Scriptures, Romans 16. 17.
Titus 3. 10. Ephesians. 5. 11.

What error and confusion would these wild notions bring into the Church, if
false Prophets and Deceivers should be permitted to teach, and the People not
restrained from hearing them, although they should teach such damnable
Doctrines as denied the Lord that bought them? I shall appeal therefore from
the Author to Mr. Hales; who tells us, p. 192. However Heresy and Schism are
but ridiculous terms in the common manage, yet the things in themselves are of
very considerable moment, the one offending against truth, the other against
Charity, and therefore both deadly. So deadly, that I cannot compare them
better than to that Italian, who designed to kill his enemy, body and soul: for
Truth being the very Soul of the Church, and Peace and Unity the great organ or
instrument by which it becomes visible and prosperous, the toleration of
Heresy and Schism will be as destructive to the Church here, as they will
certainly be to the Authors of them without repentance hereafter.

There is a lesser mistake in our Author's definition of Schism, p. 195. by
which he excuses all such from the guilt of Schism, as do separate from that
part of the visible Church whereof they were not once members. On which account
all such children as were born of Schismatical Parents (though they defend the
schism never so obstinately) are not guilty: whereas it is the duty of all
Christians to live in communion with that part of the Catholic Church in which
they reside, and not to suffer themselves (as our Author expresses it) like
beasts of burden to be imposed upon by their Predecessors. The Schism of the
Donatists is by our Author acknowledged to be a complete Schism upon the
grounds mentioned p. 196. I demand therefore, whether such children, as were
born to the Donatists, Optatus lib. 1. contra Parmen. says, Parmenianus whose
grandfather was Majorinus, that departed from the Chair of Cecilian and S.
Cyprian, was an heir of the Schismatics.
and persisting in the opinions and practices of their Forefathers troubled
the Churches of Africa 300. years together, were guilty of Schism or no? or
whether such as among us were born of Anabaptistical or Quaking Parents, and
still persist in and propagate Church-divisions, are complete Schismatics or
not? And if we should try them by our Author's own rules, I am sure they will
be found guilty.

The next error of our Author is his allowing of Separation upon Scruples, and
suspicions, as p. 194. he says, When either Acts unlawful, or ministering just
Scruple, are required of us to be performed, consent were conspiracy, and open
contestation is not faction or schism, but due Christian animosity. This just
Scruple he calls, p. 201. a strong suspicion, and p. 218. Where suspected
Opinions are made a piece of the Church-Liturgy, he that separates is not the
Schismatic. It is like our Author forgot what he said a little before, p. 217.
that when Scruples of conscience began to be made or pretended, then Schisms
began to break in; as also what is said, p. 209. What if the Preacher deliver
any Doctrine of the truth of which we are not well persuaded? yet for all this
we may not separate, except we be constrained personally to bear a part in some
suspected Act. Against this error of our Authors I affirm, That the Scruples
and suspicions of private Christians, concerning the lawfulness of Actions
required by their Superiors, cannot warrant their separation, Because their
obedience to Superiors in things not unlawful is their duty, and to omit a
certain duty, upon a bare suspicion, is dangerous and sinful. And for a full
answer to this error, I desire it may be considered what a scrupulous
Conscience is, which I take to be such an act of the practical understanding as
resolves what is, or what is not to be done, but with some fear and anxiety
lest its determination be amiss. And it differs from a doubting Conscience,
which assents to neither part of the question, but remains unresolved, as
doubting of the true sense of the rule; in which case it is resolved, that in
all things doubtful we are to take the safest course. And doubtless that
wherein the generality of wise and good Men as well Ancient as Modern are
agreed, is much more safe than that, in which a few less knowing, prejudicated
and guilty persons pretend to be doubtful. But where there are only groundless
fears and scruples concerning some circumstance annexed to a known duty, it is
the sense even of our Non-conformists, That if we cannot upon serious
endeavors get rid of our Scruples, we ought to act against them; And this is
so lawful and necessary, that we cannot otherwise have either grace or peace.
See more to this purpose in a Sermon at Cripplegate on Acts 24. 26. p. 18, and
19. And if scruple and suspicion were a just plea for Separation, then every
discontented Person that is resolved to contemn his Superiors, every one that
is affectedly ignorant, and lazy, or refractory to better information, every
one that has melancholy humors and temptations, or wants true Christian
Humility, or Charity, may make separation, and yet be guiltless. So that this
Opinion of our Author's would be an Apology for all Separatists; which being
allowed, there neither was nor can be any such sin as Schism. For I suppose it
is sufficiently known, that neither the Doctrine, or Worship of any Church is
so well constituted, but some unquiet spirits have raised scruples and
suspicions concerning them. And unless the Church have power to command things
lawful and no way repugnant to the Word of God (though some giddy Persons may
scruple at them) it is impossible that it should preserve it self from
confusion. The Apostles I am sure did practice this in the Synod at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. And St. Paul silenceth the objections of contentious and scrupulous
Persons with the Custom of the Churches of God, 1 Corinthians. 11. 16. Every
Congregation that pretends to have the face of a Church requires the obedience
of its Members to all Orders for public Worship, as well as their consent to
their Articles of Faith, and without this it could not subsist.

I shall conclude this with Mr. Baxter's advice in his Dispute of Ceremonies,
Chapter 15. S. 3. That the Duty of obeying being certain, and the sinfulness of the
thing commanded being uncertain and only Suspected, we must go on the surer
side. And the Author of the Sermon on Acts 24. 16. gives a good reason for it,
saying, If a Christian should forbear praying or receiving the Sacrament every
time his scrupulous conscience tells him he had better wholly omit the duty,
than perform it in such a manner, he would soon find to his sorrow the mischief
of his scruples. And he advises -- In all known necessary duties always do
what you can, when you cannot do what you would.

Our Author, p. 202. falls on an Ancient controversy concerning the
observation of Easter, of which he gives us this imperfect account, That it
being upon error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be kept, and upon
worse than Error (if I may so speak) for it was no less than a point of Judaism
forced upon the Church) thought further necessary that the ground for the
keeping the time of that Feast must be the rule left by Moses to the Jews,
there arose a stout question whether we ought to Celebrate with the Jews on the
14th. of the Moon, or the Sunday following. This matter though most
unnecessary, most vain, yet caused as great a combustion as ever was in the
Church, the West separating from and refusing Communion with the East for many
years together.

An impartial relation of the ground of this controversy as it lies in Church
History will sufficiently discover how odiously it is represented. First then,
whereas he says, it was upon error taken for necessary that an Easter must be
kept: I answer, if it were an error, the Church had it from the Apostles
themselves; for although the contending parties differed among themselves in
the day, yet both agreed on the necessity of observing Easter in Commemoration
of our Savior's Resurrection: And the Controversy concerning the day puts it
out of controversy that there ought to be a day observed. Some learned men
have thought the setting apart of an Easter day to be grounded on 1 Cor. 5. 8.
where S. Paul speaking of the Christian Passover, says, Let us keep the Feast;
and Grotius observes that the word (...) answers to the Hebrew, (...), which
signifies to abstain from all work for the offering up of holy things to God.
If the observation of any day be necessary unto Christians, this of Easter is,
because it is the Mother and ground of our weekly Sabbath, and is supposed to
be the same which S. John calls the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. But we need not seek
express authority from Scripture to make it necessary; the practice of the
Apostles testified by such early and authentic witnesses, and the continued
celebration of it in all the Churches of God do evince that it was not taken up
on an Error, no more than the observation of the Weekly Sabbath. Mr. Hales says
enough to resolve this objection in his Golden Remains set forth by Mr.
Garthwait 1673. p. 260. on the question, how we may know the Scriptures to be
the word of God. When (says he) we appeal to the Churches testimony, we
content not our selves with any part of the Church actually existent, but add
unto it the perpetually successive testimony of the Church in all Ages since
the Apostles times ( viz.) since its first beginning, and out of both these
draw an argument in this question, of that force as that from it not the
subtilest Disputer can find an escape. For who is it that can think to find
acceptance and credit with reasonable men by opposing not only the present
Church conversing in earth, but the uniform consent of the Church in all ages?
-- So that the Church in all Ages agreeing that an Easter must be kept, it was
not taken up upon Error.

Nor, secondly, was it upon worse than error, ( i. e.) as our Author affirms, a
point of Judaism grounded on the Law of Moses to the Jews, that the observation
thereof was by some Churches solemnized on the 14th. day of the Moon. For the
Eastern Churches alleging the practice of S. John and Philip for the 14th.
day, had a better ground for it than a Jewish custom, namely that of Christian
Charity; and Baronius notes it as worthy of our observation, that the Apostles
had anciently appointed, that though Easter were observed on the Lords day by
the generality of Christians, yet they should gently tolerate the Judaizing
Converts, which were of the circumcision, and were in great numbers in the
Eastern parts. See Baronius's Annals ad Ann. 167. p. 168. Now the Western
Churches pleaded for their practice (which was the observation of the Sunday
following) the Authority of S. Peter, and S. Paul, who had fully convinced the
Gentile converts, that all Jewish rites were to be laid aside, as having had
their full completion in Christ; but yet, as in other like cases, they were
instructed to bear with the Jews, as for some time they did; for the first time
that this controversy was agitated was between Anicetus Bishop of Rome, and
Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna who according to the custom of other Asian Churches
celebrated Easter day on the 14th. of the Moon.

For which practice Polycarp alleged the Authority of S. John. And Irenaeus in
an Epistle mentioned by Eusebius l. 5. c. 18. tells us, that Polycarp came to
Rome to discourse with Anicetus concerning this and other different
observations between the Eastern and Western Churches; and having after some
conference amicably agreed other controversies, they still differed about this
observation, but without any violation of the bond of Charity, for they
communicated together, Anicetus giving leave to Polycarp to perform the offices
of Divine Worship in his Church; and it was then concluded, That both Churches
should be at liberty to observe the Ancient customs delivered to them from
their Predecessors. But about the year of Christ, 198. Victor Bishop of Rome
revives the controversy with Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who was then 65
years old and came within a little time of S. John, being cotemporary with
Polycarp. Victor pleads that the custom of his Church was derived from the
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and that all his Predecessors had celebrated
Easter on the Lords day. See Eusebius lib. 5. chapter 21, 22, 23. And Nicephorus l.
4. c. 36. Polycrates in his Epistle mentioned by Eusebius, l. 5. c. 24.
replies, That all the Provinces of Asia observed it according to an Ancient
tradition received long before ( i. e. before the second Century) from S. John
and S. Philip, from Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, from Thraseas Bishop of Eumenia,
Sagaris of Laodicea, Papirius and Melito Bishops of Sardis, who always
practiced according to the same Canon, and all the Bishops of Asia then living
consented to and subscribed his Epistle. Upon this, Victor begins to storm,
and threatens to Excommunicate the Bishops of Asia as Heterodox, and to that
end he assembleth the Bishops under his Jurisdiction, who with one consent
declared for peace, desiring his forbearance, and disliking his too great
severity. The Epistle of Irenaeus to Victor on this occasion is yet extant, in
which he declares, That although for his part he was resolved to observe the
Feast of Easter on the Sunday according to the practice of the Western Church
in which he lived, yet he could not approve that the Eastern Church should be
Excommunicated for observing an Ancient custom; and minds Victor that the
Bishops before him had never broken the Churches peace on this occasion. But no
mediation would prevail; Victor was Victor still, and proceeds to denounce an
impotent sentence against the Asian Churches. Baronius says something to excuse
the severity of Victor (viz.) That as long as those Churches were Catholic and
incorrupt, they of Rome thought it expedient to tolerate that custom; but when
from that custom, Schism and Heresy brake in upon the Asian Churches, (for
Montanus having diffused his Heresy through Asia, those Asians began to plead
that they had received this Tradition from their Paraclete, that the Pascha
ought to be celebrated on the 14th. of the Moon and on no other day, and that
all such as practiced otherwise were in an error) then Victor thought it his
duty to restrain this error. Tit. 1. 10, 11.
2. This Opinion of keeping Easter after the Asian manner was taken up by many
Heretics, and so spread it self that it invaded the very bosom of the Roman
Church, and plucked thence one Blastus who in the face of that Church maintained
the Asian against the Roman Custom. Tertullian speaks of this Blastus in his
book de Praescriptionibus, c. 53. saying, that he endeavored to bring in
Judaism, affirming that the Christian Pascha was not to be kept otherwise than
was prescribed by the Law of Moses. And this opinion of Blastus drew away so
many after him, that Irenaeus wrote a book of Schism directed purposely against
Blastus, but could not recall him. And now let the indifferent Reader judge
whether the subject of this controversy were most unnecessary, most vain (as
our Author declaims.) Victor indeed did prosecute it with too much heat,
insomuch that the Cardinal knows not what to say in his excuse. An vero quod
potestate, jure faciebat, rectene fecerit dubitatum est, says the Cardinal.
Doubtless the Asian Churches were ( sui juris) not under the jurisdiction of
Victor, or if they had been, yet was he not unblameable in Excommunicating all
the Churches of Asia for the fault of some few that had crept in among them,
whom in due time they would have restrained by their own authority. He was also
too precipitate in not yielding to the mediation of his own Bishops in behalf
of those Churches. And lastly, he was much more culpable for imposing this
observation on the Asian Churches as a matter of Faith, and judged them to be
heterodox and excommunicate that would not submit. Baronius his words ad annum
Christi 198. p. 191. of the Antwerp edition are, Totius Asia Ecclesias cum
aliis finit imis tanquam alterius fidei and opinionis a communi unitate
Ecclesia amputare conatur. Nor were the Asian Churches without fault for
yielding so long to a Jewish Ceremony, which might long ere that time have been
decently buried as other Jewish customs had been: And also for suffering some
among them to teach a necessity of observing the Christian Pascha on the 14th.
day and no other. So that (to conclude) though the Roman Church was in this
particular stronger in the Faith, yet (as our Author says) they should have
born with the imbecility of their weaker Brethren, a thing which (he observes)
S. Paul would not refuse to do, p. 218. To which I say, that S. Paul did comply
for a while with the Jewish Converts in the Case of Circumcision, but when some
of them pleaded for a necessity of Circumcision, he thunders against that
Opinion as loudly as Victor did against this, saying, That if they were
Circumcised (i. e. with an Opinion of the necessity of it) Christ should profit
them nothing, Gal. 5. 2.

Now from this History (as our Author had contrived it) he drew several wild
inferences: As first p. 203. In this fantastical Hurry I cannot see (says he)
but all the World were Schismatics. To which I reply. That all the World were
not concerned in it, there being some Nations that differed from both these in
the observation of Easter, as Socrates, l. 5. c. 21. has observed: for even
among the Jewish Converts, some that agreed on the 14th. day differed in the
Moon, and Venerable Bede observes that our Nation (which the Pope pretends to
have been his Converts) did in those primitive times observe their Easter on
the 14th. day (which by the way is an argument that we at first received the
Christian Faith, not from the Church of Rome who exploded this custom, but
more Anciently from Joseph of Arimathea, or from St. Philip, who, as many good
Authors affirm, planted the Christian Religion in our neighbor Nation of
France, and as the Asian Churches affirm, was one of them that taught them this
custom) nor do we read that they were condemned for Heretics for so doing.
Neither did those Eastern Churches who differed in the Month anathematize each
other; and Socrates (ubi supra) gives this reason for it, They that agree in
the same Faith may differ from each other in respect of Rites. (as the Reformed
Churches do at this day) And though the Roman Church did excommunicate the
Asian, yet were they never the more Schismatics for that, being they were (
sui Juris) not under the Roman power. And according to our Authors definition
of schism, they being never members of that Church from which they were
excommunicate, could not be guilty of schism notwithstanding Victors rigor. We
say therefore they were still members of the Catholic Church. And as for the
Roman Church what should make them Schismatics? For though Victor did arrogate
too much as to the manner of his proceedings, yet as to the matter, his
prosecution against a Jewish ceremony when it grew into an Opinion of being
necessary to be observed, was his duty, and approved by the practice of St.
Paul himself. Gal. 5. 2.
And while there was a controversy between their Governors, the People and
Clergy too of both Parties continued in due subjection to their Superiors, and
in mutual charity to one another. So that the Separatists of our Age can have
no excuse for their Schism from this instance.

But our Author infers, Secondly, that this fell out through the ignorance or (
which he mentions also) the malice of their Governors, and that through the
just judgment of God on the People, because through sloth and blind obedience
they examined not the things which they were taught, but like beasts of burden
patiently couched down and indifferently underwent whatsoever their Superiors
laid upon them. To which I Answer. It does not appear there was any charge of
ignorance to be imputed to Victor, or his People, for the reasons above
mentioned; much less of malice. Our present Sectaries do call their opposition
to Ceremonies (more innocent than that) by the name of zeal, and love to the
cause of God. Nor was there any thing imposed on the Churches of either side,
that concerned their Faith, nor any custom or rite ( de novo) but only the
Asian Churches were desired to translate the custom of observing Easter, from
a day which gave offense not only to the Church of Rome, but several other
Churches. Petavius says, the difference was not de Catholico dogmate, sed de
Ritu, seu Ritus potius tempore. And if the Superiors in the Asian Churches had
thought the Alteration fit, (as shortly after they did) it had doubtless been
the Peoples duty to submit; for every Church has power in those things which
are indifferent, and much more in such things as give offense to other
Churches, to appoint and alter rites and ceremonies for the public Worship of
God; and the People show themselves not beasts of burden but Christ's
Freemen, in submitting to their Governors as far as Christian liberty does
permit. If Victor had imposed new Articles of Faith, as Pius Quintus did in the
Council of Trent, doubtless those Primitive Christians would have resisted even
to blood; of which they gave too many instances when they constantly endured
all manner of torments rather than they would renounce the Faith once delivered
to them.

Our Author therefore needed to ask pardon for wounding the reputation of these
Ancient Worthies in cool blood, as well as for massacring at once the authority
of all the Fathers in the heat of a temptation, p. 204. where he says thus: You
may plainly see the danger of our appeal to Antiquity for resolution in
controversies of Faith, and how small relief we are to expect from thence; for
if the discretion of the chiefest Guides of the Church did in a point so
trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly fail them, as not to see the truth in a
subject wherein it is the greatest marvel, how they could avoid the sight of
it; Can we without the imputation of extreme grossness and folly, think so poor
spirited persons competent Judges of the questions now on foot in the Churches?
Pardon me, I know not what temptation drew that note from me. To this I reply:
1. Whoever he be that so contemptuously rejects the Authority, and trampleth on
the reputation of the Fathers, has sufficiently excused those that shall
slight his own. This is the Author's own sense, Golden Remains, p. 260. 2. I
refer it to the judgment of the Reader whether Victor Bishop of Rome condemning
some of the Asian Churches for adhering too tenaciously to a Jewish ceremony
which was of ill consequence to those and other neighboring Churches, were not
more excusable than a private person, living many hundred years after the fact,
(and never rightly knowing, or else wrongfully representing it) insolently and
causlesly condemning the Ancient Fathers, not of one or two Ages or parts of
the Church, but all in general; as if the failing of one man in a point so
trivial and inconsiderable (as our Author calls it) were sufficient reason to
condemn them all for indiscreet and poor spirited persons; And to impute
extreme grossness and folly to all that should think them competent Judges of
our differences. This is a (...) beyond that of Abailardus, who was wont to
say, that the Fathers for the most part did think this or that to be right, but
I think otherwise, as if his single authority could outweigh all theirs. 3. He
must pretend to have some new light for his guide, and be either an Enthusiast,
or Socinian, that can see any danger in appealing to Antiquity for resolution
in controverted points of Faith. For seeing there is scarce any point of Faith
but some unhappy Wits have controverted it, and in defense of their Opinions
have put the Scriptures on the rack to make them speak their own sense; how can
points of Faith delivered in the Scriptures be better understood and confirmed
than by the joint consent of such Ancient Doctors who conversed with the
Apostles or their immediate Successors, and are rightly called Apostolici, many
of which were Persons of great Learning and Eloquence, and so could not be
charged with ignorance? And doubtless they were very industrious in inquiring
into the grounds of the Christian Faith, for which they forsook all temporal
accommodations, and most of them their lives, and against all opposition have
not only handed down to us the Scriptures themselves pure and incorrupt, but
the proper and genuine sense of them. We do not make them Judices but Indices
fidei, not the Authors but the witnesses to confirm and give evidence in
matters of Faith. 4. The Papists do calumniate the Reformed Divines as if they
rejected the judgment of the Fathers; whereas they do with one consent (and
none more readily than they of the Church of England) appeal to their Authority
for confirmation of the Faith which they profess. I could easily fill a Volume
with the testimonies of our Modern Divines concerning the authority of the
Ancients, how competent Judges they are of the questions now on foot. The
naming of some few will resolve us whether our Author's Opinion or theirs
deserves the imputation of grosness and folly. Calvin in his controversy with
Pighius, de libero Arbitrio, says, The controversy between me and Pighius
would soon be ended if he would declare the tradition of the Church in the
certain and perpetual consent of the Holy and Orthodox. Bucer says as much on
Matthew. 1. concerning the consent of the Church about the perpetual Virginity of
the Holy Virgin Mary. That to doubt of that consent, unless some plain Oracle
of Scripture does enforce it, is not the part of them that have learned what
the Church of Christ is. When Zanchy was 70. Years old, and had long studied
the point, He tells us in these words: Hoc ego ingenue profiteor talem esse
meam conscientiam, ut a veterum Patrum sive dogmatibus, sive scripturarum
interpretationibus, non facile nisi manifestis scripturarum testimoniis vel
necessariis consequentiis apertisque demonstrationibus convictus atque coactus
discedere queam; Sic enim acquiescat mea conscientia, and in hac mentis quiet
cupio etiam mori. Epistola ad Confess. fidei, p. 47. Gualter in his Preface to
Peter Martyr's common places, says, From hence come all kinds of evils, the
pest of disputatiousness, the violation of all bonds of Charity, and shaking
the fundamentals of Faith, because we do not reverence the Ancients as much as
we ought. Nor fear I to affirm, that the chief cause of the Contentions of our
Age, is, because most Divines insist on the Opinions of their present Masters,
and read their Books, not enquiring what learned Antiquity did think, or what
errors and heresies were condemned by it. As for the Divines of our own Church,
it may be sufficient to mention Bishop Jewel's Chalengee, and how well he
discharged it. If any learned man of our adversaries (said that learned Bishop)
or all the learned men that be alive, be able to bring any one sufficient
sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor or Father, or out of any old General
Council, or out of the Holy Scriptures of God, or any one example of the
Primitive Church, whereby it may be clearly and plainly proved, that there was
any private Mass in the world for 600 years after Christ, or that, etc. (to the
number of 27. Articles now in controversy between us and the Church of Rome) I
am content to yield and to subscribe. And in his Apology for the Church of
England he says, We came as nigh as possibly we could to the Apostolical
Churches and the Ancient Bishops, neither did we direct our Doctrine only, but
our Sacraments and form of Public Prayers to their rites and institutions. And
after him the Church provided by her constitutions, Anno 1571.
Imprimis videant Concionatores, ne quid unquam pro concione doceant quod a
populo religiose teneri and credi volunt, nisi quod consentaneum sit Veteri and
Novo Testamento, quodque ex iis docuerint Antiqui Patres and veteres Episcopi
collegerint. I add only that of the Royal Martyr in his discourse with
Henderson, 3d. paper. When you and I differ about the sense of the Scriptures,
and I appeal to the unanimous consent of the Fathers and the Primitive Church,
you ought to find a more competent Judge, or to rest in him that is proposed by
me. And this shall serve to assoil that question which our Author says,
carries fire in the tail of it, and brings with it a piece of Doctrine which
is seldom pleasing to Superiors, p. 200. But the fire proves an Ignis fatuus,
and our Author himself brings water enough to extinguish it; for in p. 65. he
says, If Aristotle and Aphrodiseus, and Galen, and the rest of those excellent
men whom God has endued with extraordinary portions of natural knowledge, have
with all thankful and ingenious men throughout all generations retained their
credit entire, notwithstanding it is acknowledged that they have all of them in
many things swerved from the Truth; Then why should not Christians express the
same ingenuity to those who have labored before us in the exposition of the
Christian Faith, and highly esteem them for their works sake, their many
infirmities notwithstanding?

From this general contempt of the Fathers our Author proceeds, p. 206. to cast
a slurr on S. Augustine. For having mentioned S. Augustines argument which he
maintained against the Donatists, which was, Unitatem Ecclesiae per totum Orbem
dispersae propter nonnullorum peccata non esse deserendam; (i. e.) that the
Unity of the Church spread over the whole world ought not to be forsaken for
the sins of some few that were in its communion, he adds, that though it were
de facto false, that Donatus his party shut up in Africa, was the only Orthodox
party; yet it might have been true notwithstanding any thing S. Augustine
brings to confute it. And contrarily though it were de facto true that the part
of Christians dispersed over the face of the Earth were the Orthodox, yet it
might have been false notwithstanding any thing S. Augustine brings to confirm
it. As if that learned Father who was as close and exact a disputant as the
Church has enjoyed ever since, had wholly mistaken the question, or were
unable to urge one argument pro or con, (i.e.) either for confutation of that
wretched Schism, or for defense of the Catholic Church. That learned Father
wrote a very large Volume against those Schismatics, which contains so much
both of wit and Argument, that there would not need any thing else to be said
for the confutation of Schismatics to the worlds end if his arguments were
well understood and applied. And when our Author proves the Donatists in two
lines to be complete Schismatics, first for choosing a Bishop in opposition to
the former, secondly, for erecting new places for the dividing party to meet in
publicly, I wonder with what confidence he could deny that S. Augustine had
done so much in so many writings and disputations. But when I consider how
palpably this Author contradicts himself; I cease to wonder that he should
oppose and contemn that Great man. For, p. 208. he seems with some passion to
interrogate, Why might it not be lawful to go to Church with the Donatists? and
p. 215. why may I not go if occasion require to an Arrian Church? when p. 229.
he says expressly that it is not lawful no not for prayer, hearing, conference,
etc. to assemble otherwise than by public order is allowed. And if our Author
knew not that as well the Schism of the Donatists as the heresy of the Arrians
was often condemned and forbidden by the Emperors and Councils of that age, he
was very ignorant indeed.

But the reason which our Author gives, why S. Augustine said nothing to the
question, is as strange as any thing else. S. Augustine (says our Author)
brought nothing to prove that the Orthodox were the true Church, or the
Donatists were Schismatics. For the Church may be in any number, in any place,
country or nation, it may be in all, and for ought I know it may be in none,
without prejudice to the definition of a Church or the Truth of the Gospel. He
might as well have told us of a Church in Utopia, which is the same with a
Church in no place, country or nation. What Idea of the Church our Author
conceived I cannot imagine, but that which he expresses concerning it is as
contrary to the truth of all the Prophecies of the Old Testament, as well as
the description of it in the New, from whence the definition is taken, as light
is to darkness. For Acts 2. 41. ad finem, the Church is described to be a
number of men (not all nor none) called out of the world by the preaching of
the Apostles, and joining themselves to their Spiritual guides by Baptism and
breaking of Bread, by public Prayers, and hearing the Word. These in verse 47.
are expressly called the Church, and to this Church the Lord added daily such as
should be saved. Now such Churches were by Christ's commissions to be planted
in all Nations, which we believe was really effected; and the truth thereof is
still apparent, that God has given his Son the heathen for his inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth for hs possession: and therefore to say that
a Church may be in none, either number or place, (for I suppose the Author
intends both, because if it may exist in no place, it must not consist of any
number, nor so much as admit of one) as contrary to sense and Reason as to the
Truth of the Gospel. And is such a fancy as that of Mrs. Trask, who having
shifted from one Conventicle to another in New England; and at last on pretense
of impurity in their ordinances and members, separated from them all, affirmed,
that she alone was the Church and Spouse of Christ. But I think Mr. Hales
himself sufficiently refutes this fancy of our Author. Page 185, and 186. of
his Golden Remains he tells us, that to prove the existence of our Church
before Luther, all that is necessary to be proved in the case is nothing else
but this; that there has been from the Apostles times a perpetual succession
of the Ministry to preach and to baptize, of which by the providence of God
there remains very good evidence to the world, and shall remain.

Having told us that the Church may be in no place, that is in effect that
there may be no Church, he does with the more confidence affirm, p. 213. That
Church Authority is none, and tradition for the most part but figment. Answ. As
to traditions in general I defend them not, nor can any man else; but for such
as bear the Characters, which Vincentius Lirinensis describes, quod ubique,
quod semper, quod ab omnibus, we have all reason imaginable to enforce the
embracing of such traditions as have been received and delivered to us by all
the Churches of Christ, in all ages and in all places, unless we were of the
Authors opinion, that Church authority is none; and this can never be made good
but by proof of our Authors fiction of a Church in Utopia. For if our Savior
did out of mankind redeem a Church by his own blood; if he planted it by his
Apostles, and promised his presence with it to the end of the world; if he made
it the ground and Pillar of Truth, and promised to hear her prayers, and to
bind in heaven what they bound on earth, and that the gates of Hell, i.e.
neither persecutions, nor heresies, nor schisms should prevail against it:
doubtless there is a Church, and that Church has some authority granted to her
by her dear Redeemer, to defend that peace and unity, as well as those truths,
which he bequeathed to her. Did our Savior take care for the Church of the
Jews only, or did he not also mind the Christian Church, when Matt. 18. 17. he
enjoins us even in private differences among our selves, much more in those
which concern the public peace of the Church, as in the case of scandals
mentioned in the context, v. 7. to go tell the Church; and if any should
neglect to hear the Church, that he should be unto us as an heathen man and a
Publican, i.e. Excommunicate from that holy Society; which punishment being
spiritual does clearly evince, that the causes submitted to the judgment of the
Church were spiritual also. But I demand farther, did the Apostles usurp more
authority than was given them, when they assembled together, Acts 15. 6. about
the case of Circumcision; and after the difference had been fully debated by
Peter, Paul, Barnabas and S. James in the presence of the Elders and the
multitude, they all agreed, and that by the approbation of the Holy Ghost, v.
28. to impose upon the Churches certain constitutions as necessary to be
observed at that time for the peace of the Church? If they did not, then the
Church had some authority. And so when S. Paul pleaded the custom of the
Churches of God against contentious persons in the Church of Corinth, 1 Epist.
c. 11. v. 16. And does not the same Apostle tell us, that when our Savior
ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4. 11. he placed rulers and governors in his Church,
whose care it should be to provide that the people should not be thenceforth as
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
v. 14. If Church authority be none, to what end did S. Paul enjoin Timothy to
see that women should keep silence in the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 12. not only to
teach but command, 1 Timothy 4. 11. to give charge concerning widows, 1 Timothy 5. 1,
7. how to receive accusations against Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 19. how to ordain, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and see that they held fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
to suppress striving about vain words and profane bablings, such as were the
discourses of Hymenaeus and Philetus, which did eat as a canker and overthrew
the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 16. to rebuke (authoritatively) such as would
not endure sound doctrine, but agreeably to their own lusts did heap up
teachers to themselves, having itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3. And in like manner
that Titus should suffer no man to despise his authority, Titus 2. 15. but
diligently discharge the duties for which the Apostle settled him in Crete, i.
e. to set in order things which were wanting, and to ordain Elders in every
City, Titus 1. 5. and to reject heretics after a second admonition, Titus 3.
10. Besides we find the Spirit of God commending the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus for showing her hatred against the Nicolaitans, and blaming the Angel
of the Church of Pergamus for tolerating the Doctrines of Balaam and the
Nicolaitans, and the Angel of Thyatira for permitting the Doctrine and practice
of Jezebel, Rev. 2. 6. etc. Nor did I ever hear yet of any Conventicle that
pretended to have the face of a Church, that did not exercise some authority
over their members: for as the Synod of Dort declared, No order nor peace can
be preserved in the Church, if it should not be lawful for it so to judge of
its own members, as to restrain within bounds wavering and unsettled spirits.
This has been the practice of the Churches of all Ages; the particulars to
which their authority did extend are not now to be reckoned, nor the arguments
for vindication thereof necessary to be insisted on: I shall shut up this with
that of Beza, de pace Ecclesiae: Neque enim Dei gratia ignoro Ecclesiam esse
veritatis testem, extra quam non sit salus, and Orthodoxorum consensum in
Synodis adversus Haereticos plurimi fieri par est, and Patrum in interpretandis
Scripturis, in refutandis erroribus, in admonendis populis, labores adeo non
contemni oportet, ut secundo a Scripturis loco merito habeantur. These things
do certainly infer, that Church Authority is something. However our Author, p.
224. dares to tell us, that They do but abuse themselves and others that would
persuade us, that Bishops by Christ's institution have any superiority above
other Men further than of Reverence. And the reason which he gives for it is
this, For we have believed him that told us, that in Jesus Christ there is
neither high nor low, and that in giving honor every Man should be ready to
prefer another before himself. Which reasons do as certainly conclude against
Magistrates as Bishops, viz. that there is no obedience, no tribute or homage
due to them by Christ's institution, nothing further than an airy superiority
of reverence, which if the other were denied would be but a mockery; Like that
wherewith the late Royal Martyr was Reverenced, when the Usurpers robbed him of
all that God and the Laws invested him withal, and gave him only the
superiority of reverence in a Noble Death. But as to Bishops, let our Author's
Assertion Answer it self: For first, It grants that Bishops were by Christ's
institution, because by his institution they had a superiority of reverence
above other Men. 2ly, This superiority was grounded on their Office as Bishops,
that is, Overseers of the Flock committed to their charge, which Office was
assigned to them by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. And now I would have the
Reader consider whether those that by the institution of Christ and of the Holy
Ghost were made Rulers and Governors of the Church, have no other superiority
above other Men beside that of reverence? There is more expressed, Hebr. 13.
17. in these words, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves. And when St. Paul instructs Timothy in the office of a Bishop, he tells
him how he should learn to rule the House of God, 1 Timothy 3. 4. by ruling well
his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity. Again, when
he charge Timothy, 1 Ep. 5. 17. to provide that those Presbyters that did not
only rule well but labored (above others) in the Word and Doctrine, should be
counted worthy of double honor, he intended somewhat more than a superiority
of Reverence, namely an Honorary maintenance, such as was the portion of the
elder Brother under the Law, not a precarious Eleemosynary stipend, but that
which was as due to them as the hire is to the labourer; and I suppose that
this is by Christ's institution, the Apostle assuring us, that as it was settled
by a Divine institution under the Law, Even so has the Lord ordained that they
which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 14. Besides, the
Apostle grounds the superiority of Reverence on that of the office of
governing, laboring and watching for the Souls of the People. So 1 Thessal. 5.
12, 13. We besseech you Brethren to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake. And that the Apostles were superior in office not only to
the People, but to the 72. Disciples, and to the Deacons, is clearly evinced by
the Scriptures; for upon the miscarriage of Judas another being to take his
office, Acts 1. 20. the Apostles met together, and in a solemn assembly after
prayer and supplication the lot fell on Matthias, who was one of the 72.
Disciples, and had accompanied the Apostles all the time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out among them. And this method was to continue, by Saint Paul's
advice to Timothy, 1. Ep. 3. 13. where such as had used the office of a Deacon
well, are said to purchase to themselves a good degree, i. e. as the Assembly
expound it, does deservedly purchase to himself the honor of a higher office
in the Church. And whereas we read, Acts 1. 3. that our Savior Christ after
his Resurrection conversed 40. days with his Apostles, speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, i. e. the teaching and governing of his
Church; and when he ascended up on high he gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
etc. not only for the work of the Ministry, but preventing of false Doctrines
and Schisms, Ephesians. 4. 11-14. compared with 1 Cor. 12. 25, 28, 29. it is
evident there was a superiority of office as well as of reverence given to the
Teachers and Governors of the Church. For God has set these several orders in
his Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. all are not Apostles,
nor all Prophets, nor all Teachers, there were some even by God's institution
above others in place and office as well as in reverence; whereof we cannot
expect a better proof than the Universal practice of the Churches of Christ
even in the Apostles days, and immediately after their decease. For unless we
could conceive that all the Churches should even in those Primitive times
conspire together to cast off some other government appointed by Christ, and
admit of this to which they could have no temptation or inclination, the People
and Bishops both, being then as sheep appointed to the slaughter, we must needs
conclude, that a superiority of office and government, as well as of reverence
was their due. Now not only the Persons that were set over the Churches, and
had the Characters of Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction, are plainly recorded in
the Writings of the Ancients; but their power and superiority over Presbyters
and Deacons, their supreme care and inspection of the affairs of the Church are
so fully explained, as if they had been written on purpose to prevent the
objections of these later days. For instance, we read in Authentic Authors of
St. James at Jerusalem, St. Mark at Alexandria, Timothy at Ephesus, Titus at
Crete, Crescens at Galatia, Archippus at Caloss, Epaphroditus at Philippi,
Gaius at Thessalonica, Apollos at Corinth, Linus and Anacletus at Rome,
Ignatius at Antioch, Papias at Hierapolis, Dionysius Areopagita at Athens:
Yea the Ancients tell us particularly who were those seven Angels of the Asian
Churches that are either approved or reprehended for their government, Viz.
Antipas at Pergamus, Polycarp at Smyrna, Carpus at Thyatira, Sagaris at
Laodicea, Melito at Sardis, Onesimus at Ephesus:
And Ignatius gives the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia the like character
as the Spirit of God does, though I find not his name. It were no great
difficulty to set down the Successors of diverse of these Bishops through many
ages of the Church, together with the dignity and power they had as well over
Presbyters as People: Ignatius and Clemens, Tertullian and Irenaeus; Eusebius
and Clemens Alexandrinus speak largely of them. I shall hope to satisfy the
Reader with a passage or two out of St. Hierome, who is thought no Friend of
Episcopacy, yet in his Epistle to Evagrius, he says, Whatever Aaron and his
Sons and the Levites could vindicate to themselves in the Temple, the same may
Bishops, and Presbyters and Deacons challenge to themselves in the (Christian)
Church. Here you have a plain distinction of Orders. And in his Epistle to
Riparius you have a distinction of Power, for speaking of Vigilantius an
Heretical Presbyter, he says, Miror sanctum Episcopum in cujus parochia esse
Presbyter dicitur, acquiescere ejus furori, and non virga Apostolica, virgaque
ferrea confringere vas inutile, and tradere in interitum carnis, ut spiritus
salvus fiat; I wonder the holy Bishop in whose Diocese the Heretical Presbyter
is said to be, does not restrain his madness, and with his Apostolical rod as
with an Iron rod break that unprofitable Vessel, and deliver him for the
destruction of the flesh, that his Soul may be saved. So that there was a sub
and supra by Christ's institution, it did not all come from composition and
agreement of Men among themselves, as Mr. Hobs and our Author do affirm.

But if there were indeed a superiority of reverence due to Bishops by Christ's
institution, I fear the Author sinned against that institution when he spoke so
irreverently of them, as in Page 226. speaking of contentions between Bishops;
Private and indifferent Persons may as securely be spectators of those
contentions in respect of any peril of conscience, as at a Cock-fight where
Serpents fight, who cares who has the better? the best Wish is that both may
perish in the fight. Ita convitiis debacchatur ut plusculum in eo modestiae
desiderare cogor; utinam argumentis tantum egisset, and a convitiis
temperasset. Eras. in praefat. Epist. Hieron. ad Vigilantium.
I know not under what temptation the Author was when he wrote this, nor did he
himself consider from what spirit it came. St. Jude tells us, v. 9. that
Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the
body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation: but this
Author (whether Aerius revived, or the Ghost of that Monster Smectymnuus become
incarnate, (no Archangel I am sure) does not only despise Dominions, and speak
evil of Dignities, but breaths out fire and utter destruction, against
Episcopacy root and branch. Who the contending Bishops were of whom he speaks,
I have told you in the controversy between Victor and Polycrates, the one
contending too violently for a truth, the other too tenaciously defending an
ancient but erroneous custom. The errors of both would extract pity and
prayers from any Christian spirit, that were sensible of humane infirmities.
When there arose a contention among Christ's own Disciples, Luke 9. 46. which
should be the greatest; And when the dispute about circumcision somewhat like
this arose between Paul and Barnabas, and them that came down from Judaea, did
Christ or his Apostles think themselves as unconcerned at these contentions, as
at a Cock-fight? or had it been a fit option to wish that they might all
perish? How destructive are the curses of such men, when their prayers, their
best wishes are for destruction? There appears more of the Serpent in this rash
vote, than in all Victor's contention.

But our Author thinks he may be well excused for this uncharitable vote
against Bishops, seeing they had so little charity as by their frequent
contests to make butter and cheese of one another, p. 220.

It is a sad story to read the great violences acted by some Bishops, and the
indignities and tortures endured by others in that period of time to which
Socrates confines his History: for in the close of it he says, it contained the
History of 140. Years from the beginning of Constantine's Empire unto the 17.
consulship of Theodosius: In all which time Socrates relates with as much
sorrow, as our Author seems to do with merriment, what agonies and convulsions
the Arian Heresy made in some Churches, and the Schism of the Donatists in
others, where the Factions (being cruel and implacable) as often as they got
any power, did not only make butter and cheese but shed the blood of the
Orthodox and more peaceable Bishops. There are still some such as would gladly
reduce them again to butter and cheese, and like vermin corrode and devour them
too. If any be of the Authors mind, I hope and pray that God would give them
repentance, that they may live so peaceably under the Bishops of the Church
here, that they may live eternally with the Bishop of their Souls hereafter: Or
if they shall despise my advice, I entreat them to consider that of Mr. Hales,
p. 223. It being a thing very convenient for the peace of the Church, (to have
but one Bishop in one See, at one time) neither does it any way savor of vice
or misdemeanor, their punishment sleeps not who unnecessarily and wantonly go
about to infringe it.

I meet with one observation more fit to be animadverted on under this head
which is in page 218, etc. The third thing I noted for matter of Schism, was,
Ambition, I mean Episcopal ambition, showing it self in two heads; one
concerning Plurality of Bishops in the same See, another the Superiority of
Bishops in diverse Sees. Aristotle tells us, that necessity causes but small
faults, but Avarice and Ambition were the mothers of great crimes. He
instanceth in the Sees of Alexandria, Constantinople, Antioch and Rome.

I am glad our Author found no instances of Episcopal ambition nearer home; if
there had been any, in all probability he would have told us of them. If he had
been a friend to the Episcopal Order, he would rather have done as Constantine
said he was ready to do with his Bishops, make his royal robes a covering for
their infirmities, than like a Cham discover the nakedness of those Fathers.
The best of Bishops are but men, and so are subject to the like passions and
infirmities as other men. I have already instanced in the Apostles and other
disciples of Christ; and certainly it is not christianly done so to aggravate
the faults of particular persons as to reflect upon the whole office. Besides,
our Author might have mentioned as many and as dangerous Schisms made by
covetous and ambitious Presbyters as by the Bishops; Novatus and Novatian, See
the Hist. of Donatists.
Aerius and Arrius, Donatus and his fellow Presbyters, who assumed the
Episcopal power to themselves, and shed more blood, and committed more outrages
than were done under any instance of Episcopal ambition.

I will not insist on any foreign comparisons, our late Schism at home is so
fresh in our memories, and the wounds made by it are yet so open, that there
needs no other Rhetoric than our own experience, to teach us that the little
finger of the Presbyterians was heavier than the Episcopal loins. Let any
person sum up together the mischiefs occasioned by the avarice and ambition of
Bishops for 500 years together in this Nation of ours, and I dare engage to
demonstrate, that for wickedness in contriving, for malice and cruelty in
executing, for pride and arrogance in usurping, for obstinacy and
implacableness in continuing and endeavoring still to perpetuate our
unparalleled confusions; though many Bishops have done wickedly, yet our
Presbyterians have exceeded them all. For let me be informed whether for a
Juncto of Presbyters, who had often sworn obedience to their lawful Ordinaries,
as well as allegiance to their Prince, to cast off all those sacred
obligations, and dethroning one incomparable Prince, to advance many Tyrants,
and by covenanting against one Bishop in a Diocese, erect 100, or 200, in the
same See, and expose all to contempt and misery that would not partake with
them in their sins, whose tender mercies Mr. Hales himself found to be cruel,
being deprived of that plentiful estate which he enjoyed under the Episcopal
Government, and reduced to that extremity that he was forced to sell his books
for the supply of his necessities: let me be informed I pray, whether this be
not more than any Bishop ever did or could be guilty of? Such indignities,
perjuries, usurpations and cruelties against an Equal, as these men have acted
against their just, lawful and excellent Governors both in Church and State, I
believe have not been acted since Judas betrayed his Master.

P. 225. Our Author infers from the Scriptures before mentioned, That those
sayings cut off most certainly all claim to superiority by title of
Christianity, except men can think that these things were spoken only to poor
and private men. Nature and Religion agree in this, that neither of them has a
hand in this heraldry of Secundum Sub and Supra. All this comes from
composition and agreement of men amongst themselves. The first Scripture
referred to by our Author is, I suppose, Gal. 3. 28. There is neither Jew nor
Greek, bond nor free, male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Here
is not a word of high nor low in this nor any other Scripture that I can find
in our authors sense; for the Apostle only shows, that as to our acceptance by
God in Christ there is no respect of persons; but as he had said, verse 26. ye
are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, No difference from
country, relation, sex or condition, but as the King's Manuscript, (...), ye
are all Christ's: i. e. of his mystical body, utcunque alia sunt diversa, as
Calvin observes, the relation of King and subject, Parent and child, Husband
and wife, Master and servant notwithstanding. Not that these relations are
destroyed, for then Christian Religion would be of all factions the most
intolerable. Estius on this place intimates, that lest the Galatians should
think they got advantages by being in Christ, he tells them the Jew if he
believed was as good as the Gentile, the bond as the free, which is therefore
first named. And if this sense could be applied to this Scripture which our
Author gives, then might the Quakers use it to defend all their rudeness,
because there is neither high nor low; and the Family of love for all their
carnality, because there is neither male nor female in Christ Jesus.

The second Scripture is Romans 12. 10. In giving honor let every one prefer
another before himself: which place is so far from licensing any Christians to
deny honor to those Superiors to whom it is due, and strictly enjoined in the
next chapter, that it obliges them to give it to equals and inferiors, as S.
Bernard says, The first degree of Christian humility is, Inferiorem se exhibere
Aequali; secundus, Aequalem se exhibere Inferiori; tertius, Inferiorem se
exhibere Inferiori, in all which the giving honor to our Superiors, is not
mentioned, being a duty that nature it self does teach. The Assembly gives a
right sense of this Scripture: Christian humility teaches us not only not to
prefer our selves above our equals, nor to equal our selves to our betters, but
in some cases to equal our selves to our Inferiors. So that we need not think
these things were spoken to poor and private men, but were to be the common
duties of all Christians without prejudice to their particular relations, all
which Christianity provides for. S. Paul instructs Timothy, as the Servant of
the Lord to be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing those that opposed themselves. But withal he incourageth him to
teach and to command, to rebuke and reprove, to see that no man did despise
him, and leaves to him the government and care of the Church of God at Ephesus.
Where there is true Christianity, there will be as much humility and meekness
in the hearts and lives of Kings and Princes, Bishops and Priests, as of the
meanest Peasant. And therefore the Monks of Bangor were not advised amiss; That
they should know whether Austin that was sent by Gregory the Great to be an
Archbishop, was a servant of God or no, if he did meekly salute them, and
behave himself humbly toward them as to his Brethren.

Secondly, Both Nature and Religion agree in this Heraldry, that all Families
and Societies of men, and therefore the Church of God also, have ever born
something in chief; the Father was ever above the Son, and the Priest, who for
a long time was the Father of the Family, was superior to the people: All did
not come by composition and agreement. To evince this, I shall assert these
three propositions: 1. That God is to be Worshipped, is a dictate of the law of
Nature. 2. That men ought to gather themselves into assemblies for the Worship
of God, is a result of the same Law. 3. That in those Societies there should be
a power and government for the preservation of it self is from the Law of
Nature, and by consequence from the Law of God, both which have directed a Sub
and Supra in all Societies, and engraven the principles of it in the Souls of
men.

First, That Nature teaches us that God is to be Worshipped. This impression
we find in Adam, not only before, but after the fall, who taught his Sons, as
well Cain as Abel, to honor God with their substance. And we read, Genesis 4. 3.
That in process of time, that is say some, at the revolution of a determined
time, which being described to be (in the Original) at the end of days, others
think it to be meant of the Seventh or Sabbath day, Cain brought of the fruit
of the ground an offering to the Lord, and Abel also brought of the firstlings
of his flock and the fat thereof. Whether they brought it to a designed place,
or to their father Adam as their Priest, I shall not now enquire. I shall only
give you an observation of the learned Doctor Outram on this place: That the
period of days whereon Cain brought his offering, was at the end of Harvest,
and the time of Abels offering was when his flocks were increased, at which
seasons both of them being instructed by natural reason (for no command does
appear) thought it meet to return to God some part of the blessing given them
by God. And whereas it is said, Hebr. 11. 4. that by faith Abel offered unto
God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, which some think could not be said to
be done in faith unless it had been in obedience to some command of God; He
consents with some others, that this place does evince the contrary, because
if Abel had sacrificed according to some express command, we cannot conceive
but Cain offered upon the same command also, and so might be said to have done
it by faith as well as Abel, which is contrary to that text which implies that
Cain did not. Whence it may be concluded, that they did neither of them present
their offerings by virtue of any command, but according to a dictate of nature
imprinted on their Souls as an acknowledgment of their several blessings
received from him: which if Cain a wicked man was inclined to do by the light
of nature, how much better may it be said of Abel who was a good man? But it
will be demanded, wherein that faith of Abel which is so commended did consist?
And the Answer is, in that he had so great a respect to the Dominion, power and
goodness of God the author and giver of all blessings, and Lord of life and
death, that he thought himself obliged to offer the best of his flocks in
testimony of the Worship of his Creator, and of a thankful mind toward him.
And indeed the light of nature might serve not only to direct the family of
Adam who had so much of the knowledge of God, but others also that were removed
into a greater darkness and ignorance, That as the invisible God had manifested
his eternal power and Godhead to them by things visible, so they ought to
agnize and honor their invisible Creator and benefactor by offering him some
portion of those visible and sensible blessings which he had vouchsafed them.
These and such like arguments says Dr. Outram, p. 7. did so prevail with the
Ancients, that they were of opinion that men did first offer sacrifice from an
instinct of natural reason and not from any command of God, for which he
quoteth many learned Authors, and concludes with the Opinion of Eusebius de
demonstratione Evangelica, l. 1. c. 10. That Cain did of his own accord offer
the fruits of the ground, but every good man as Abel, Noah and Abraham did by
Divine reasoning or understanding sacrifice living creatures ((...),) which as
the learned Doctor proves, cannot be understood of a Divine Command. I shall
add but this one medium more for the proof of my first proposition, That the
general instinct and inclination of Mankind to worship some thing as God, does
argue that the Light of Nature does direct them that God is to be worshipped;
only through the decay and weakness of Reason they mistake the Object, and are
become ignorant of the right manner of serving him, which has been the cause
of all Idolatry. And it is very observable that whereas other dictates of
Nature have been obliterated and disused among diverse Nations, this has been
constantly and universally observed by all with great solemnity: which is the
second Proposition, viz.

That God must be worshipped by Men in Society, is according to the Law of
Nature, which I suppose our Author does grant, p. 227. where he says, It has
been at all times confessed necessary, that God requires not only inward and
private Devotion, when Men either in their hearts and closets, or within their
private walls pray, praise, confess and acknowledge; but he further requires
all those things to be done in public, by Troops and Shoals of Men. If this
was always necessary, then sure before there was any positive command for it,
God requiring it by the Law of Nature, which does not only teach us that God is
to be worshipped, but in such a manner as may best display his excellencies,
and manifest that he is glorious in praises, which cannot be done in a corner
but in the great Congregations, and therefore God so graciously accepted the
intention of David and Solomon's devotion in building him that great Temple at
Jerusalem, where all the Tribes of Israel at Solemn times should meet together
to offer up their prayers, and to give thanks to the Name of the Lord. And
before we read of any precept for this purpose, we find, Genesis 4. 26. that in
the days of Enos the Grandson of Adam by Seth, that is, as soon as there was a
competent number to make a Solemn Assembly, Men began to call upon the Name of
the Lord, viz. in Public Assemblies, as the best Expositors do interpret it.
Which farther appears, in that all Nations have built Temples, set apart
solemn Festival days, and instituted Priests, and mysterious Rites, for the
honor of their Gods; which they have done without any previous command or
commerce with more civilized or religious Nations. As therefore it is said of
the rise of Nile, which in plentiful streams spreads it self over Egypt, and
yet the Origin of it cannot be found, that it comes from Heaven: so these
solemnities of Assemblies and sacred Rites for the Worship of God being found
to abound every where, and no humane institution can be alleged as the rise of
them, we may conclude them to flow from Heaven into the Souls and Consciences
of Men. But St. Chrysostom on Hebrews 10. asks how God came to command it? and
he answers, by condescending only, and submitting himself to humane
infirmities; which condescension Oecumenius thus expresses: Because men had a
conceit, that it was convenient to offer up some part of their substance unto
God, and they were so strongly possessed with this conceit, that if they
offered it not to him, they would have offered it up to Idols; God (says he)
rather than they should offer unto Idols, required them to offer unto himself.

The third Proposition is, That it is a result of the Law of Nature, that such
Societies should have a power to preserve themselves. For seeing God nor Nature
do any thing in vain, and without this power all Societies will soon be
dissolved and perish, it follows, that both by the Law of God and Nature those
Societies that are assembled for the Worship of God, should have a power to
maintain and preserve themselves. This Sermon. on Joh. 18. 36. p. 146.
Mr. Hales affirms: There is a necessity of disproportion or inequality between
Men; for were all persons equal, the World could not subsist. Now this
inequality and power implie a superiority in some, and a subordination in
others; for, par in parem non habet potestatem: if every one were left at his
own liberty, as none could rule, so none would obey: That therefore there
should be both sub and supra is of the same Law of Nature, without which there
could be no government or order at all either in Civil or Ecclesiastical
Societies. And seeing, as Aristotle observed, that the Paternal power was the
Original of all Government, Pol. l. 1. c. 2. every Father governing his Family
both as a Prince and as a Priest in the most ancient times; it is evident, that
both by Nature, and Religion, there ought to be a sub, and supra; and if so,
our Savior never did nor intended to alter such Laws, but to reinforce and to
confirm them; which that he did has been already proved. However whether this
power shall be exercised by one or more Persons, and be derived by Succession,
or applied by election, this is to be regulated according to some positive
determination either Divine or Humane. And if the Law of God, or where that is
silent (which I think it is not in the case of sub and supra, in Ecclesiastical
officers) the Law of Man shall set up one or more Governors for the government
of the Church, the Persons advanced by such authority ought to have more than a
Superiority of Reverence, namely of obedience and a willing submission in all
lawful and honest commands. I conclude therefore with my Author, p. 193.
Communion is the strength and ground of all Society, whether Sacred or Civil:
whoever therefore they be that offend against this common Society, and
Friendliness of men, and cause separation and breach among them, if it be in
Civil occasions, are guilty of Sedition or Rebellion; if it be by Occasion of
Ecclesiastical differences, they are guilty of Schism. And it shall always be a
part of my Litany, From all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion, from all
false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism, from hardness of heart and contempt of thy
Word and Commandments, good Lord deliver us.

I shall consider only one instance more of the Author's too great indulgence
to Schism and Heresy; and then leave it to the Reader to judge, Whether the
opinion of the Ancients, as it is generally received by our Modern Divines, or
the fond conceptions of the Author, be more agreeable to the nature of the
things, or conducing to the peace and prosperity of the Church. The instance is
that of the second Council of Nice, of which he says, p. 211. That until that
Rout did set up Image Worship, there was not any remarkable Schism upon just
occasion of fact. To this our Author gives an Answer himself, page 201. where
he describes Schism on matter of fact to be such a separation as is occasioned
by requiring something to be done by us, which either we know or strongly
suspect to be unlawful; and concludes, p. 202. that the first notable Schism of
which we read in the Church ( viz. that concerning the observation of Easter)
did contain in it matter of fact. Now how can these two assertions be
reconciled? That until the Schism occasioned by setting up Image Worship there
was not any remarkable Schism upon just occasion of fact; Anno 787.
And that the first notable Schism that we read of in the Church, ( viz. that
about Easter) did contain matter of fact, Anno 168.
and it was 600. Years before a Schism so notable, as that our Author thinks,
p. 203. all the World were Schismatics. And if our Author be right, the
occasion of fact was just; for he determines it to be so, when something is
required to be done by us which either we know or strongly suspect to be
unlawful. And the Asian Churches thought it unlawful for them to submit to the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, who would impose on them a rite contrary to an
ancient custom of theirs, to be received as a matter of faith: of which
before. Again, he instanceth in the Schism of the Donatists which was a
complete Schism by our Author's own rules; for they did not only erigere Altar
contra Altar, set up Bishop against Bishop (to which, our Author observes,
that St. Cyprian imputed the Original of all Church-disorders, page 222.) but
they erected also new Churches and Oratories for the dividing Party to meet in
publicly, which serves to make a Schism complete, p. 196. so that there were
notable Schisms long before that occasioned by setting up Image Worship. To
that which follows in our Author, p. 211. concerning Image Worship set up by
the second Council of Nice I fully accord, That in this the Schismatical party
was the Synod it self and such as conspired with it. For concerning the use of
Images in Sacris, first it is acknowledged by All, That it is not a thing
necessary; 2. That it is by most suspected; 3. It is by many held utterly
unlawful; and that the injoining of such a thing can be nothing but abuse: And
the refusal of communion here cannot be thought any other thing than duty. All
this is true; but our Author speaks not the whole truth: he calls that only
schism which was heresy in a fundamental point concerning the Worship of God
according to his express will in the second Commandment. And when that Council
had the confidence to condemn them as Heretics that were the Iconoclastae or
adversaries to the worshipping of Images, we may with more truth account them
who were Iconolatrae, worshippers of Images, Heretics, if not Idolaters. By
the way let me observe, that if it be my duty to withhold communion from such
as set up a false way of worshipping God, as this Council did, it is my duty
also to withdraw from the Communion of such as profess false opinions of the
true God, as the Arrians, etc. did, to whose assemblies the Author sees no
reason but we may join our selves, p. 215. Though this be contrary to his own
rule, p. 218. It is alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected
falsehoods, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected Actions.

I hope the Reader will not think his patience injured, if on this occasion I
give him a brief account how Images were first brought into the Church of God,
and what reception they found in the Primitive times; of both which I shall
speak briefly. They were first brought in by lewd heretics, and simple
Christians newly converted from Paganism, the customs whereof they had not
fully unlearned. Bishop Usher in his Answer to Maloon, p. 508. gives this
particular, that the Gnostick heretics had some Images painted in colors,
others framed of gold, silver and other matter, which they said were the
representations of Christ, made while he was in the power of Pontius Pilate.
The Collyridians, who at certain times offered Cakes to the Virgin Mary, did
also cause Images of her to be made. Carpocrates and Marcellina his companion
brought the Images of Jesus and Paul to Rome in the time of Anicetus, and
worshipped them. But the more plentiful seeds of this Idolatrous worship were
sown by the heathen converts, as Epiphanius observes. We have seen the pictures
of Peter and Paul and of Christ himself (says he) for that of old they have
been wont by a heathenish custom thus to honor them whom they counted their
benefactors or Saviors. And the Arrians and Donatists having for a long time
rent the Church of God and pulled down the Fences both of Church and State,
they made way for vast numbers of Infidels to enter, among whom the Christians
being mixed and living in subjection to them in diverse places, they learned
this custom also of making and honoring the Images of those whom they
accounted their Patrons and benefactors. Men of heretical persuasions were the
first that were tainted, worshipping the Graves and Pictures of their Leaders,
then these painted toys ensnared the vulgar, and at Rome under Gregory the
Second the worship of them is first practiced and defended, but at the same
time opposed by Leo Isauricus and his successors. And in a Council at
Constantinople 338 Bishops condemned it, Anno 754. the primitive Fathers having
before that time constantly disputed against the very making and painting of
Images as well as worshipping them, whose testimonies against Images it will be
in vain to heap up here. I think it enough to observe, that since Bishop Jewel
challenged the Church of Rome to show but one authority out of the Ancients for
setting up of Images in the Churches and worshipping them, during the first 600
years, there has not yet been any tolerable reply made. But in the year 787.
Hadrian being Bishop of Rome, and Tharasius of Constantinople, like Herod and
Pilate were reconciled in this mischievous design, and having the opportunity
of a female Governess (for Dux foemina facti) they prevailed with Irene the
Mother of Constantine to assemble a Council at Nice (which the Papists call the
seventh Ecumenical Council, but by the Ancients was condemned as a
Pseudo-synod.) This Irene was a Pagan, the daughter of a Tartarian King, and an
Imperious tyrannical woman, who in despite to the Council of Constantinople
that had decreed against Images, summoned this Synod, which she so far
defended, that she caused the eyes of her own son Constantine to be pulled out
because he would not consent to the Idolatrous having of Images, as Bp. Jewel
observes in the Article of Images, where you may see more of the ignorance and
impiety of this Synod. This was the woman that called this meeting of the
Bishops, and you may guess under what fears they were of the cruelty of that
woman who was so unnatural to her Son. He that will be satisfied more fully
concerning the Ignorance of this Synod, may read it in their Acts mentioned by
Binius or Surius, or in Bishop Jewel concerning the Worshipping of Images ( ubi
supra.) Mittens Irene convocavit omnes Episcopos, says Baronius ad annum 787.
(so that the Pope had not then the power of calling Councils by the Cardinals
own confession.) There was great intercourse of Letters between Hadrian and
Tharasius before this Council was assembled, which was done at last by
Tharasius persuading of Irene, and then there met 350 Bishops, who agreed in
this base decree for the adoration of Images, as Bishop Usher calls it. In this
Synod the question for admission of lapsed Bishops and Presbyters was first
proposed, and although the Bishops that were readmitted were tainted with
Arrianism, as appears by the Synods demand, that they should in the first place
make an acknowledgment of the blessed Trinity; yet Baronius slightly passes
over that, and makes mention only of their submission to that point, which as
well the Cardinal as that Synod chiefly designed to advance, i.e. the
worshipping of images. Basilius of Ancyra, Theodorus of Myrene, and Theodosius
Bishop of Amorium are first called, and these three post confessionem
Sanctissimae Trinitatis (of which the Cardinal says nothing more) make a large
profession of their sorrow for having adhered so long to the Iconoclastae or
oppugners of Image Worship, and present a confession of the Orthodox Faith (as
he calls it) in opposition to those errors and heretics to which they had
adhered. Now what that Orthodox faith was, appears by the Confessions mentioned
by Baronius, wherein they did Anathematize them that broke down the images, as
Calumniators of Christians, and such as did assume the sentences that are in
the Scriptures against Idols, and apply them to the venerable Images; with much
more to the like purpose. But concerning their reception into the Church, the
question is greatly agitated; and the books being produced by which it did
appear that Athanasius, Cyril and other ancient Pillars of the Church had
received notorious heretics into the Church, a Bishop of the Province of
Sicilia objects, that the Canons of the Fathers which had been produced were
enacted against the Novatians, Encratists and Arrians, hujus autem haeresis
magistros quo loco habebimus? but in what rank (says he) shall we place the
Masters of this heresy? To which it was replied by a Deacon of the same
Province, that it should be considered, Minorne est quae nunc novata est
haeresis, an major illis quae hactenus fuere, whether this new-sprung heresy
were greater or less than those that were before it. This is resolved by
Tharasius, malum perpetuo idem est and aequale, That evil is always the same,
which sounding too Stoical, one Epiphanius a Deacon and representative of
Thomas Archbishop of Sardinia, solves it by saying, That it held true,
especially in causes Ecclesiastical (Aquibus decretis cum parvis, tum magnis
errare idem est, siquidem in utrisque lex divina violatur,) for to err from
such decrees whether in small matters, or great is a contempt of the Divine
law. But John a Monk Deputy for the Oriental thrones pronounces this heresy
worse than all other heresies, and of all evils the worst, as disturbing the
whole Economy of Christ. However their penitents being but few, for we find
not above three or four mentioned, they restore three of them to their
dignities, and one other, Gregory Bishop of Neocaesareae, who was judged to be
a chief Leader of the Iconoclastae was admitted only to the Communion of the
Church, not to his Bishopric although he declared for Image Worship. But the
Anathema is denounced against many others who abhorred this Idolatrous
practice, (professing they did reject all images made by the hands of men, and
worshipped that only, Qua filius Dei in Sacramento panis and vini ante
passionem seipsum expressit,) as did the whole Council of Frementum, Theodosius
Bishop of Ephesus, Sisinnius of Pastilla, Basilius and others. And shortly
after Charles the Great assembleth a Council of the Bishops of Italy, France,
and Germany at Francfort, Anno 792. of the transactions whereof we have four
books yet extant, in which we have not only the Canons of that Council, but
many Imperial Edicts for the taking away of Images, and forbidding any worship
to be given them. Sir Henry Spelman, p. 305. of his first Volume of Councils
acquaints us that Charles the Great sent a book to Offa King of the Mercians,
wherein Images were decreed to be worshipped by this Synod of Nice: of which he
tell us from Hoveden, That in that book many things disagreeing and contrary to
the true faith were found, especially that Images ought to be worshipped, which
the Church of God does utterly condemn. And that Alcuinus, Master to Charles
the Great, but by birth a Britan, in an Epistle written in the name of the
Bishops and Princes of England, and sent back to Charles the Great, did
wonderfully overthrow that opinion of the Nicene Council by testimonies of Holy
Scripture, which moved him to call that Synod of Francfort consisting of 300
Fathers, who refuted and condemned this decree of worshipping Images: which is
the cause (says that Author) why the Monuments of that Synod are suppressed.
And I suppose that all the Reformed Churches, especially the Church of England;
cannot but abhor those that established so great an iniquity by a Law. I
remember the learned Doctor Jackson, p. 113. of his Treatise of the Church,
says, that by the self same stroke, by which this Council did de facto thrust
all other out of the visible Church that would not worship Images, they
declared themselves to be excommunicated de Jure, from the Holy Catholic
Church, and by consequence from Salvation. When therefore our Author endeavors
by his Rhetorical flourishes to make such destructive errors to dwindle into
schisms, and allows only the names of schism, p. 213. to Arrianism,
Eutychianism, etc. I thought I had just cause to except against his first
Paragraph, especially when I found how much it took not only with the Fanatics
and some witty men of our days, but with persons of real worth and learning,
one of which (whom I forbear to name) repeats the whole clause in a book of
good note in these words: It is very well observed by a learned and judicious
Divine (quoting the Tract of Schism, which he calls that little but excellent
Tract of Schism) that heresy and schism as they are commonly used, are two
Theological Scar crows with which they who use to uphold a party in Religion
use to fright away such, as making inquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and
oppose it, if it appear either erroneous or suspicious. For as Plutarch reports
of a Painter, who having unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all cocks and
hens, that so the imperfection of his Art might not appear by comparison with
nature: so men willing for ends, to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavor
to hinder an enquiry into it, by way of comparison of somewhat with it,
peradventure truer, that so the deformity of their own might not appear. This
story of a Cock I shall Answer with another of a Hen; for I have seen a
Countreyman with the picture of a Hen Pheasant artificially drawn on a stained
cloth, and a little Pipe to call the Cock-pheasants, to draw them from place to
place, until in pursuit of their pleasures they have been taken in a Snare. The
reputation of the Author is as a Pipe which calls unwary Persons to view the
Pictures on that stained cloth, whereof they that grow too fond may follow them
to their own destruction.

Our Author, page 215. gives his advice for the composing of Liturgies: Were
Liturgies and public forms of service so framed, as that they admitted not of
particular and private fancies, but contained only such things as in which all
Christians do agree, schisms on opinion were utterly vanished. For consider of
all Liturgies that are or ever have been, and remove from them whatsoever is
scandalous to any Party, and leave nothing but what all agree on, and the event
shall be that the public service and honor of God shall no way suffer.
Whereas to load our public forms with the private fancies upon which we
differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate Schism to the Worlds end.
Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of Scriptures, Exposition of
Scripture, Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and simplest manner,
were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either
of private opinion, or of Church-pomp of Garments, of prescribed Gestures, of
Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of many superfluities which
creep into the Churches under the Name of Order and Decency did interpose it
self: for to charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary was the
first beginning of all Superstition.

We have a Devonshire Proverb --
He that builds his house by every ones chop
Shall never see his Ouice drop.
If every Man's fancy should be complied with, It is impossible to propound any
form of Liturgy wherein both parts can hold it lawful to communicate.
Infidelity unmasked* p. 216.
in the framing of a Liturgy, it is most certain we should never have any;
seeing as there is scarce any part against which some do not except, so others
are offended at the very form, as being a stinting of the Spirit; and the
opposing of a Directory to the Ancient Liturgy, shows that this was the sense
of the Presbyterians themselves, which appears also by this, that when they had
in the Grand Debate given in their Objections to the Liturgy, some of the
Brotherhood had prepared another form, but a great part of their Brethren
objected many things against that, and never as yet did (that I hear of) agree
upon any other, nor I think ever will. For let it be considered that there is
scarce any part of our Liturgy which some have not excepted against, and you
will find our Author's advice impracticable. He himself would have no
Absolution, as appears, not only by his omission of that Office, when he
enumerates the parts of a Liturgy, but by telling us, that the power of the
Keys belongs to every one, Clergy or Lay, Male or Female, not only for himself,
but for the benefit of others, p. 172. and p. 183. that you may as well make
your Muletter your Confessor, as your Parish Priest; Others will have no
confession; Some are displeased at the Responses, others cannot be reconciled
to the Lord's Prayer, against the use of which as the Leaders of one Faction
have Printed, so the Grandees of another have often preached. The Reader knows
what sort of People cannot join in the Gloria Patri, the Nicene and Athanasian
Creeds, and it is well if they will stand to the Apostles. The Te Deum and
Magnificat are displeasing to some; the Collects, because they are too short,
and the Litany because it is too long, to others. Some are angry at the Prayer
for Bishops, others not very well pleased with those for the King. If you read
what our Author says, p. 60. concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
(as 1. that in the Communion there is nothing given but Bread and Wine; 2. The
Bread and Wine are signs indeed, but not of any thing there exhibited, but of
something given long before; 3. That Jesus Christ is eaten at the
Communion Table in no sense neither spiritually by virtue of any thing done
there, nor really nor metaphorically nor literally. 4. The Spiritual eating of
Christ of common to all places, as well as the Lords Table:) you may see the
Author was no friend to the Office for Administration of the Lord's Supper. And
it is well known who are enemies to that of Baptism. Our Author dislikes the
consecration of Bishops, to whom he denies any Superiority but that of
reverence, others oppose the Ordination of Priests. It is sad to consider at
what a Distance many of our People yet keep themselves and children from the
Catechism and Confirmation, and the burial of the Dead; only that of Marriage
they are pretty well reconciled to. So that I say, our Author's Proposals are
impracticable if not impossible to be observed, either to remove from our
Liturgies whatever is ( i.e. seems) scandalous to every Party, or to leave
nothing but what all agree on; and I think we shall all agree sooner in an
Universal character and language too, than in such a Liturgy.

Our first Reformers have given us undeniable Proofs that they were very
learned and very good Men, and Bishop ubi supra.
Jewel in their name professes that they did consult the ancient Liturgies of
the purest times, and adapted ours to them. The Papists condemn us for
castrating as much as was thought sinful, must we be still condemned for
retaining what is decent? If any thing in our Liturgy had been contrary to the
Word of God, I am confident the Church would have expunged it as soon as its
adversaries had discovered it: but if it be quarrelled at for requiring us to
worship God according to the Apostolical injunction in Decency and order, we
had rather be accounted beasts of burden in submitting to the lawful Ordinances
of our Superiors, than wild Asses for kicking against our Masters. It has
always been the practice of the Church of God, conform to the practice of the
Holy Apostles, Acts 15. when any opinions or practices contrary to Faith or
Unity began to prevail, to assemble in Councils and Synods, that by conference
and consulting with the Scriptures and Primitive customs, they might raise a
fence against the growing torrent, and as well confirm their own, as confute
the opinions and practices of their adversaries: as may be seen in the Decrees
and Canons made in the first 600 Years. And when by general consent and
subscription these Decrees were approved, they did as occasion required insert
sometimes into the Liturgy such passages out of their own or former Articles,
as might help to instruct the People in the true Faith, and be an antidote
against those poisonous errors that were become Epidemical. Hence first the
Apostles Creed, and the Gloria Patri, etc. and those being not express enough
against prevailing errors, the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds were inserted, and
some whole Articles were added to the Apostles Creed. And if, as our Author
says, a man may go to an Arrian Church, so there be no Arrianism expressed in
their Liturgy, why may not* our Superiors require our communion in the Liturgy
which is free from that and all other Doctrinal errors? And whereas our Liturgy
is in all things conform to our Articles of Doctrine, which are so free from
the exceptions either of Calvinists or Arminians, as that both Parties appeal
to it as to the standard whereby they would have their Opinions tried, as
appears in the late quiquarticular controversies between Doctor Heylin and Mr.
Hickman; I see no reason why they may not upon our Author's grounds conform
much rather to ours than unto Arrian Liturgies. A Liturgy that has past many
fiery Trials, first in the Marian days, when the Composers of it embraced it at
their Martyrdom, after which it appeared so inoffensive to the Papists
themselves, which I account no small commendation, that for some Years after
Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, they omitted not to frequent the use of it,
and in the beginning of our troubles when the Smectymnuans heated the Irons,
and made it pass the trial Ordeal, its innocence was such that it came off
untoucht. And when in the Grand Debate their Successors thought to have blown
it up by the fuel which they had heaped together in a mock-liturgy, their plot
was so confused and imperfect, that a great part of the Brotherhood were of the
Opinion that the old was better. And I am still persuaded, if it were put to
the vote whether this Liturgy should be retained, or any other formerly used in
the Primitive, or now in use among the Reformed Churches brought into its room,
they would give the like suffrage as I have heard Sr. Harry Martyne did when
some of Cromwels Confidents had moved the question, whether They should have a
King or no King, that if they must have a King, they had rather have the Old
Gentleman (meaning King Charles of blessed memory) than any other in the Nation.

Our Author begins to treat of Conventicles from p. 226. and continues it to
the end. The substance of which I shall present to the Reader in these several
and diverse Periods.

First, he says truly, that all meetings upon unnecessary occasions of
Separation are to be so styled, so that in this sense a Conventicle is nothing
else but a congregation of schismatics. And he had before, p. 196. determined
them to be schismatics, 1. That do choose a Bishop in opposition to the former,
and 2. That do erect a new Church and Oratory for the dividing party to meet in
publicly. Now our Author, p. 200. moves the question, Who shall judge what is
a necessary occasion of separation? which question, he says, has been often
made but never truly Answered; not because it is a point of great depth or
difficulty truly to assoil it, but because the true solution carries fire in
the tail of it; for it brings with it a piece of Doctrine which is seldom
pleasing to Superiors. To you for the present this shall suffice, if so be you
be Animo defaecato, if you have cleared your self from froth and grounds, if
neither sloth nor fears nor ambition nor any tempting spirits of that nature
abuse you (for these and such as these are the true impediments why both that
and other questions of the like danger are not truly Answered) if all this be
and yet you see not how to frame your resolution and settle your self for that
doubt, I will say no more of you than was said of Papias S. John's own Scholar,
you are (...), your abilities are not so good as I presumed.

This question is so easy to be resolved, that (as our Author thinks) every
person may settle himself, and resolve what to do in it, if he be Animo
defaecato, and have cleared himself from froth and grounds, if neither sloth
nor fears nor Ambition nor any tempting spirits of that nature abuse him.

One or more of these impediments it is probable prevailed with our Author not
to determine the question so plainly as he ought, and most likely that of fear;
because he says it would be displeasing to Superiors, and would carry fire in
the tail of it. And doubtless his fears were just, it could not do otherwise
than provoke his Superiors in a high degree, if he had peremptorily delivered
what he intimates in diverse parts of the Treatise to be his Opinion, and when
I shall collect them you will see they carry wild fire and powder-plots in
their tails enough to blow up all Government.

The Question is, who should judge what is a necessary Occasion of Separation?
Which question he intends not to leave to the judgment of Governors, whom he
supposes to give the Occasion and to whom the resolution would not be
pleasing, but to those that take the occasion; and indeed he leaves it to
private persons to judge of the Laws of their Superiors, who if they cannot
find will easily seign some occasion to excuse their separation. And our Author
has fitted it to their hands, for he informs them, p. 194. That when either
false or uncertain conclusions are obtruded for truth, and acts either unlawful
or ministering just scruple are required of us to be performed, in these cases
consent were conspiracy; and open contestation is not faction or schism, but
due Christian Animosity. And p. 201. He makes it a just occasion of separation,
when something is required to be done by us which either we know or strongly
suspect, (which in our Authors phrase is the same with just scruple) to be
unlawful. And again, p. 218. Wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a
piece of the Church Liturgy, he that separates is not the schismatic. So that
now there needs no Oedipus to unriddle the mystery. For 1. if our Governors
shall at any time obtrude uncertain conclusions for truth (how certain soever
they be to our Governors, if they appear not so to us:) Or 2. if they require
something to be done by us, which we may justly scruple or strongly suspect:
Or, 3. if they shall make suspected Opinions a piece of Church Liturgy; this is
indeed sufficient not only to justify a separation, but to entitle the
Separatists to due Christian Animosity. And our Author needed not the spirit of
Prophecy to foretell that this would be displeasing to Governors and carry fire
in its tail; for it strikes directly at the foundation of all Government both
in Church and State. For in both Governments when such things are by solemn
Edicts commanded or forbidden as are apparently good or evil, we are to obey
for Gods sake; but where things neither good nor evil by any natural or
positive law of God are enjoined by our superiors, it is undoubtedly our duty
to submit to them. A scrupling Conscience, or the dissent of private judgments
to the deliberate determinations of Superiors in these cases can be no
supersedeas to the obedience that is due from subjects, as has been already
proved from the Nonconformists own confessions, and will yet more clearly
appear.

To which end I shall premise out of Dr. Owens concessions, p. 408. of his
survey of Ecclesiastical Polity. Those pretended errors in our case (says he)
are not in matters of faith, nor for the most part in or about the Worship of
God, or that which is acknowledged so to be; but in or about those things which
some think it convenient to add unto it or conjoyn with it. And what peace,
what quietness is like to be in the world, when the sword of vengeance must be
drawn about these things? To which I only reply, Let them that draw the sword
in such quarrels perish with the sword. God has put a sword into the
Magistrates hand, to be a terror to evil works, and if unpeaceable men will not
be subject, neither for fear of wrath, nor for Conscience sake, but will raise
tumults and seditious Factions against their lawful Rulers upon scruples and
punctilio's, they are the Aggressors; and unless the Magistrate will suffer the
sword which God has put into his hands, to be wrested from him, he ought to be
an Avenger to execute wrath upon evil doers, their scruples concerning the
lawfulness of such external acts of Worship notwithstanding.

2. I premise, that such men as are sound as to the foundation of faith, and
careful thereupon to build a holy life, and keep a Conscience void of offense
toward God and man, (though in such things as Dr. Owen has mentioned, they
should not be able through their weakness of judgment, after serious endeavors
to get resolution of their scruples) if they do yield obedience to them that
God has set over them, though they should be mistaken, yet their errors would
not prejudice their Salvation. And on this ground many of the Reformed Divines
hope well, of multitudes under the Roman tyranny, and I doubt not but the
Nonconformists have so much Charity as to have as good hopes of such honest
Christians as die in the Communion of our Church.

3. If it should happen that some good and honest men who are both sound in the
faith and unblamable in life, do after serious inquiry remain scrupulous still,
it is their duty to take the safest way, and that is the way of obedience to
their Lawful Governors, which being a moral duty and strictly enjoined by the
word of God, cannot be dispensed with by scruples about the lawfulness of rites
and ceremonies in the external worship of God. And I may safely add,

4. That if honest and well meaning men shall so far indulge to such scruples
as to live in disobedience to the Laws and constitutions of their Superiors,
their Superiors may justly punish them for so doing, or the frame of their
Government will soon be turned off its hinges: The taste of liberty is so
sweet, that except Kings maintain their Authority with as great violence as the
People affect their Liberty, all things will run to confusion. Golden Remains,
p. 149.
And Governors not being able to discern the hearts of men, may equally
animadvert upon all refractory persons, or they must let all go unpunished; and
if they should resolve on this later, farewell all Government. And seeing the
wisdom of Man cannot prevent it, it is better that a few mistaken Innocents
should be punished, than the peace and foundation of a Church or Nation be
overturned. Melius pereat unus quam unitas. Better is a private inconvenience
than a public mischief. This is a foundation necessary to the settlement of
all humane Laws and Constitutions. Thus in matters of common right and
interest, when the several Courts of a Nation have established and published
rules and orders for the appearances and proceedings of Persons litigant, they
who omit the time, or mistake the right methods of pleading, and thereupon
suffer damage, though as to the merits of their cause they be severely dealt
with, yet the proceedings of the Law are right and justifiable, because it is
more for the public peace and establishment that some persons should sustain
loss for their unwilling neglects and errors, than that all wilful Offenders
should go unpunished, and public Orders of Court be contemned and disobeyed.
And this Rule holds much stronger in such Ecclesiastical cases as are now under
our consideration; because the controversy is not here between private
persons, but between Superiors and Subjects. If therefore one or more private
Persons purely on mistake, and after humble and serious inquiry for
satisfaction (though I think few sober persons using such means can remain
unsatisfied in so plain a case, Whether Scruples concerning ancient and
innocent rites in the external Worship of God can justify disobedience to the
constitutions of lawful Governors) should still judge contrary to their
Governors, who impose such things as lawful and convenient, to be unlawful and
superstitious, and thereupon refuse to appear at their Courts and be ordered by
them; It is agreeable to the Laws of all Societies that such Persons should not
go unpunished. If a Child or Servant shall neglect to obey his Father or Master
because he has some Scruples against his commands, I think such Father or
Master may without Scruple correct that Child or Servant, or within a short
time they will become incorrigible. And the Case is almost the same as if the
debauched part of the Nation, who are morally vicious, should pretend scruples
of conscience against such Laws of the Land as restrain their enormities,
suppose of Sabbath-breaking and neglecting the Public Worship, which yet I
think the Nonconformists would not judge to be a tolerable plea.

I have insisted so long on this argument not only because our Author
mentions it so often, and ever makes it a ground for separation, telling us
that Not only in Reason but in Religion too this Maxim admits of no release,
Cautissimi cujusque praeceptum quod dubitas ne feceris; Non enim ne dubium
malum eveniat, certum and liquidum officium nostrum des^rere debemus, nec vel
sanctissimos fines per illicitae media consectari. Dissert. de pace, p. 77.
Quis erit Schismatum modus, si promiscua dissentio ad secessionem sufficit? p.
91.
but often insinuates them to be guilty of Schism that do require any suspected
thing, as you may see, p. 194. and p. 218.

After this Pipe all the Factions do dance. The Presbyterians in their
Commissioners Papers suggest it frequently, whether Ecclesiastical
constitutions concerning things which are or may become matter of dispute and
opposition, are to be allowed. See the Reasons for Necessity of Reformation, p.
36.
And John Owen for the Independents would have some warrant from Scripture for
every thing that is required in the Worship of God. But minding my Reader of
Dr. Owen's concessions before mentioned, to which I shall only add the
confessions of the Presbyterians, who from the beginning opposed our Rites and
Ceremonies not as unlawful, but only as inconvenient, as Mr. Cartwright did in
his second Reply, p. 262. and therefore persuaded Ministers rather to wear the
Garments required by Law than cease their Ministry. And in his Evangelical
Harmony on Luke 22. a versu 14. ad 19. says, That kneeling in receiving the
Sacrament being incommodious in its own nature, and made more incommodious by
Popish superstition, is not so to be rejected, that for the sake thereof we
should abstain from the Sacrament: (His words are these, Geniculatio in
participatione sua natura incommoda, superstitione pontificia long facta est
incommodior; Nec tamen propterea ita rejicienda, ut ejus nomine a Sacramento
abstineamus, si ejus caeteroquin participes esse nequimus, quia res sua natura
non est pure illicita) because the thing is not in its own nature utterly
unlawful. From whence we may conclude, that such things as are not purely
unlawful in their own nature, though they are incommodiously applied and have
been grossly abused by Popish superstition, are not a sufficient cause to hinder
our participation of Divine Ordinances. And yet to what mischievous ends is
this forlorn scruple, of receiving that blessed Sacrament on our Knees, made
use of by Fanatic Persons as a Bar against the receiving of it at all? though
it be a posture sanctified by the Son of God when in the days of his being in
the flesh he offered up Prayers to God, and has been used by all sober
Christians in their public and private Devotions, and therefore most agreeable
to that Solemn Office, wherein we cannot with sufficient humility and reverence
receive at the hands of God such an ineffable blessing, nor worthily express
our humble acknowledgment of thankfulness to God. And in the act of receiving
besides our secret supplication to God to pardon and absolve us from all our
sins for Christ's sake, we join with the Minister to pray, that the Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ which was given for us may preserve our Bodies and Souls to
Eternal life; though the Church has used as plain and effectual a mean to
prevent our being scandalized, and scrupled at it (by declaring in the Rubric
that no adoration is intended or ought to be done either to the Sacramental
Bread and Wine there bodily received, or to any corporal presence of Christ's
natural flesh and blood; for the Sacramental bread and wine remain still in
their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, for that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all Christians. And that it was intended for a
signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of
Christ therein given to all worthy receivers, and for avoiding such disorder
and profanation in the holy Communion as might otherwise ensue) as the wisdom
of Men can invent; yet the outcry of Superstition, Will Worship, and Idolizing
the Creatures of Bread and Wine is kept up, and the hearts of the People filled
with invincible prejudices and scruples, to the neglect and contempt of this
necessary duty which by Christ's institution and by Primitive practice ought to
be frequently performed, and by the Constitutions of the Church at least three
times every Year, but has been totally omitted by some very adult Christians
all their lives; contrary to the advice and practice of former Nonconformists
as well as to the commands of God and his Church. And what can the end of these
things be, but hardening the People in their disobedience and ignorance, in
uncharitable prejudices and distances from their more pious and peaceable
Brethren, and provoking their Superiors to Acts of rigor and severity, unless
they will permit all things to run to confusion? And whereas upon the late Test
all Persons that had any public office or employment were required to receive
this Holy Sacrament according to the Custom of the Church of England, or to
forfeit that employment, not one of an Hundred of those scrupulous Persons that
were concerned continued a Recusant: I suppose they have sufficiently convinced
the Magistrates that the best way of removing these Scruples is to require the
more frequent practice of that duty under the like penalties.

And now I hope the frivolousness of our Author's position, p. 218. That
wheresoever false or suspected Opinions (and he asserts the same of practicing
suspected Actions in the same period) are made a piece of the Liturgy, he that
separates is not the Schismatic, does evidently appear.

And if he that separates be not the Schismatic, then they that require the
performance of a suspected action are so, and by consequence it will be in the
power of every scrupulous faction to denominate their Governors to be the
Schismatics. As our Author determines the case, a man may as innocently
disbelieve any Article of his Christian faith upon this pretense of scruples
against them, as disobey the command of his Superiors. For (says he, p. 194.)
when uncertain conclusions are obtruded for truth, or acts ministering just
scruples are required to be performed, consent were conspiracy and open
contestation is not faction or schism, etc. And p. 218. he gives this Reason
for it, It is alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected
falsehoods, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected Now suppose a subtle
Socinian should meet with a scrupulous person and tell him, that he does well
indeed to suspend his Communion from that Church which imposes those things to
be practiced in the worship of God, which have no warrant from thence, but are
rather condemned as Will Worship and Superstition; but yet while he strains at
a Gnat he swallows a Camel, and suffers his Conscience to be imposed upon in
matters of Faith which are of greater concern: and then insinuate, that there
is no express text in Scripture nor any good Argument from Reason for a Trinity
of persons in the Unity of the Godhead, but both Scripture and Reason affirm
there can be but one Supreme eternal God; and then by wresting the Scriptures,
and persuading him that the Doctrine of the Trinity had its rise from
Ecclesiastical Tradition not from the Scriptures, and they that require the
belief of it do teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men: suppose, I say, by
this leaven the scrupulous humor is fermented and swells up into a strong
suspicion, and he begins to grow sour and discontented with his Teachers, and
likes the Arrian and Socinian Doctors better; Does not this man proceed upon
the Authors grounds, and may be as much justified by them if he turn Heretic,
as if he become a Schismatic? And indeed there is not one Article of our Faith
but cunning Sophisters may work upon persons disposed to scruples to have
strong suspicions of them. For Mr. Baxter tells us in his Saints everlasting
rest, Part 1. chapter 7. Sect. 14. That Professors of Religion did oppose almost
all the Worship of God out of Conscience, which others did out of Profaneness.
Upon this very pretense some will not hear of Infant Baptism, nor others of the
Lord's day, but turn Anabaptists and Sabbatarians, and for ought I know others
may justify rebellion, and not only the Omission of moral duties, but the
Commission of any vice or impiety. Experience has evidently taught us, that
those persons who have been prone to entertain scruples in matters of Religion
first, have fallen next into sedition and rebellion, and then to impiety and
immoralities, to Quakerism, Atheism, unnatural affection to Parents, and acts
and practices of as great cruelty and barbarity against themselves as against
others.

But our Author grounds his Objection on Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin; and He that doubts is damned if he eat. And this objection
seems to be enforced by the Authority of Bishop Sanderson, who p. 228. de
Obligatione Conscientiae* says thus: If any one through some fast rooted error
of judgment do think the Law to be unjust which is not so, the obligation of
the Law does remain, notwithstanding that error of mind, so that he is not free
from sin if he do not obey; yet that he sins more grievously if he should
obey, before that error be laid aside. Which ease the Reverend Casuist intended
to speak of more at large when he should come to treat of the comparison of
both obligations, viz. (as I suppose) the authority of the Magistrate and of
Conscience. For I perceive the question to which he makes this an Answer was,
What assurance that any Law is unjust, is required to secure a subject in point
of Conscience that he is not bound by that Law? But the good Bishop never came
to that point under which we might have expected his farther judgment in that
case; and therefore I shall take a little pains in finding out his resolution,
in some other parts of his writings.

Answer. The Bishop says: If a subject, because that probable reasons do appear
on both sides, knows not nor can determine whether a Law be just or no, so
that his judgment hang in aequilibrio not knowing to which to incline; in this
case the subject is bound actually to obey; so that he sins if he do not
obey, and if he do obey he sins not. Now I observe, that when the Bishop
comes to give his reasons why a subject should obey against a scrupulous
Conscience, the same Reasons do require his obedience though his scruples he
inveterate and obfirmed, yea in things doubtful, as by these following Reasons
of his may appear.

His first Reason is, because by a Reason of Law, In dubiis potior est conditio
possidentis; therefore where there is a contest concerning a right betwixt the
Lawgiver and the subject, the right is always to be presumed to be on the
Lawgivers side, as being in possession of the right, unless some fit reason can
be given to the contrary: but in this case ( i. e. in things doubtful) no such
fit reason can be given, because it would destroy the supposition, which is,
that the things are equally doubted of.

A second reason is taken from another rule of Law, That in a doubtful case the
safer part is to be chosen: and it is certainly more safe to obey with a
doubting Conscience, than not to obey with a doubting Conscience; Because
secondly it is safer in giving honor to Superiors to exceed that measure which
we owe, than to be defective in it. Thirdly Because from the same rule it is
generally more safe that he who is free should think himself bound, than that
he who is bound should think himself free: for seeing through the natural
pravity of man's heart he sins more often through too much confidence than
through too much fear, and we are more prone to carnal licentiousness than is
fit, and we are all too impatient to bear the yoke; unless we do with full
purpose of mind resolve to obey such Laws as are not evidently unjust, the
wisdom of the flesh and the craft of the Serpent thereunto added, will often
suggest such excuses as will hinder us from doing our duty in this respect.

In his Sermon on Romans 14. 23. the Bishop first shows what a doubting
Conscience is, namely when the scales hang even, so as a man cannot well
resolve whether way he should rather take, Sect. 25. which he says, may be
because reasons seem to be probable pro and con, and there are learned men of
the one opinion as well as of the other; and Sect. 28. he says, If the liberty
of the agent be determined by some Superior power to whom he owes obedience so
as he is not sui juris ad hoc, to do or not to do at his own choice, but to do
what he is commanded; this one circumstance quite alters the whole case, and
now he is bound in Conscience to do the thing commanded, his doubtfulness of
mind whether that thing be lawful or no notwithstanding. And afterward he adds:
Truly it is a great wonder to me that any man endued with understanding, and
that is able in any measure to weigh the force of those precepts and reasons
which bind inferiors to yield obedience to their Superiors, should be otherwise
minded in cases of like nature. As for Orders established, since Equity and
Reason favor that which is in being, till orderly judgment of decision be
given against it, it is but justice to exact of you, and perverseness in you it
would be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Mr. Hooker's Preface, I
assert, that as to things in the judgment of the primitive and reformed
Churches left undetermined by the Law of God, and in matters of mere decency
and order, and wholly as to the form of Government, every one, notwithstanding
what his private judgment may be of them, is bound for the peace of the Church
of God to submit to the lawful determination of the lawful Governors of the
Church. Idem.
Whatever is commanded us by them whom God has set over us either in Church,
Commonwealth or Family ( quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo, says S.
Bernard) which is not evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought of
us to be received and obeyed no otherwise than if God himself had commanded,
because God himself has commanded us to obey the higher powers, and to submit
our selves to their Ordinances. And in the close of the 29 Sect. If the
Conscience be only doubtful whether the thing be lawful or no, but have not as
yet passed a peremptory judgment against it (yea although he rather incline to
think it unlawful) in that case if the Magistrate shall command it to be done,
the subject with a good Conscience may do it, nay he cannot with a good
Conscience refuse to do it though it be Dubitante Conscientia. And he is
positive, p. 240. de Obligatione Conscientiae, That there is no reason nor show
of reason yet given why the power of determining and appointing things
indifferent should not oblige in Ecclesiastical as well as in Civil affairs.

Pardon the repetition of the Arguments; because as Diamonds are not cut but by
Diamonds, so I could not presume of explaining his meaning but by himself. And
if the Reader will but add to this, what Mr. Falkner has said concerning this
objection from Romans 14. 23. he may easily perceive that neither that text nor
any conclusions to be drawn from it can be pressed for the service of our
Separatists. For as he says, p. 425. This rule must be applied to the special
case intended, which is, that wherever the omitting any action is certainly
free from sin, and the practice of it appears to any person doubtful, there
to do that action is a very evil and dangerous practice, because it contains
in it a choosing to run the hazard of Sin, which choice is always a sin. But the
case is much different when both acting and forbearing may be doubted of, where
the one of them is a duty, and it is impossible that both of them should be
forborne. For God having commanded Superiors to rule and Inferiors to obey, to
suspend all action here is to perform an inward moral action of choice about a
matter of duty, which if it be not regularly managed is a sin. And in this case
so far as concerns the obedience of a Child, Servant or Subject, they ought
to account their Superiors command to lay such an obligation upon them to duty,
that they must be guided thereby, unless they be able to prove themselves bound
to act the contrary.

Having thus removed the Objection concerning doubts and scruples, I may take
liberty to recreate my Reader with a known story of a Scrupling house erected
in Oxford by some of the Visitors, Anno 1646.

There was in S. Peter's the East a place set a part for all people that were
dissatisfied or troubled in mind to meet in every Tuesday, for resolution of
their doubts in a plain and familiar discourse. Many Sermons were preached to
commend the usefulness of that Ordinance, which they grounded on several places
of Scripture. One day while Hen. Wilkinson, Sen. was Chairman, and Mr.
Reynolds, Harris, Temple, Cornish, Lungly and Cheynel were set down with him,
some soldiers of the Independent party, Erbury, Grymes, Hewson and others came
to visit the Visitors, and after a while Erbury proposes his doubt, whether in
the Church of Christ the Ministry was committed to certain select men, for he
thought all the gifted Brethren might preach; and declared his readiness to
dispute it with them: but the (...) pretending an Order, agreed upon for
delaying the resolution of Scruples a week after the first proposal, put off
the dispute until the next meeting. Which being noised through the University,
a great concourse of Gentlemen, Scholars and Soldiers attended it. And Erbury
who had been sometime of Brasennose College, after a bold Prologue begun the
Comedy, affirming, That in the Church of Christ there was no Commission given
to Select men for preaching the Gospel. And after some discourse about stating
the Question, Erbury urges, that if they had such a commission it was either
Ordinary or Extraordinary. The Answer was, that it was Ordinary. He replies,
then they had it from the Bishops, or some others. At which the Doctores
Resoluti were unresolved what to Answer; for if they should say from the
Bishops, they feared to displease the people to whom they had often preached
that they were Antichristian, and yet they could not deny it, they having been
all Episcopally Ordained. And so being put into some confusion, and not
replying directly, but seeking subterfuges, the soldiers were with great
acclamations proclaimed Victors, and the scrupling house shut up, and the
Comedy ended. But nondum finitus Orestes. I wish the Tragedies occasioned by
these scruples were ended also. But Quousque tandem? How long will these
Scrupulists halt between God and Baal, between the reasonable service of God in
his Public Worship, and the unreasonable suggestions of those imperious
masters that Lord it over their Consciences? They that inject these Scruples to
the minds of younger and weaker persons are for the most part men of age and
competent understanding, and in so long a time as they have been in travel with
them, and knowing that as well their own temporal and eternal happiness as the
establishment of the Church and State depends on the resolution of them, it may
rationally be expected that after their mutual conference with one another in
diverse Assemblies to that end, and their solemn seeking of God, they should
have been able to discover where the sinfulness of these things which they
scruple at does lie; or, that not being yet done, nor I think possible for
wiser Men than themselves to do, they should deliver the Nation and themselves
from those throws and pangs which such false conceptions have occasioned. And
when the Inventors of State fears and jealousies have been ashamed and
confounded upon the discovery and punishment of their villainous designs, it is
strange that Men of such tender Consciences as our Church-reformers pretend to
be, should feel no regret for all those real mischiefs and confusions which
their fond suspicions and scruples have occasioned. Others may call this morose
humor, conscience and constancy, but in truth it is nothing else but a
stubborn contumacy and a proud contempt of Superiors. For a grand principle on
which Government does subsist, is, That Inferiors do submit their own judgments
to the Decrees of their Superiors in order to public peace, which the Apostle
plainly requires, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, so that
nothing can excuse our disobedience to Governors but their requiring something
contrary to the Command of God. When therefore they enjoin some things that are
not unlawful in themselves, and by reason of some scruples we refuse to obey
them; our very scrupling manifests that we know not, but they may be agreeable
to God's will, and therefore our not obeying is a violation of the Law of God
as well as of our Superiors. The greater authority always makes void the less.
A Master cannot oblige his Servant against the command of his Prince, nor a
Prince against the command of God; nor can our private Consciences in any thing
for which we have not a command from God, oblige us against the Decrees of our
Prince. And when in all other things we submit our selves to the determinations
of others that are wiser than our selves, as in matter of health to the
prescripts of Physicians, in matters of right to counsel of Lawyers; I see not
any reason why we should not in the externals of Religion submit our selves to
them that have the rule over us as God has commanded: unless we will give this
as a Reason, that we think our selves wiser and better than they, and that
every Man should be left to his own liberty, which is as much as in us lies to
make void the Ordinance of God.

Besides, the nature of those things that come in competition ought to be
considered. The Magistrate injoyns such things for decency and uniformity in
the Worship of God, as after mature deliberation consulting the Word of God and
the precedents of the most pure and primitive times he has found to be most
for edification; and the things which he injoyneth others he practices
himself, which he would not do if he had not found them to be the best. Now if
he be mistaken, it is but in an indifferent or disputable thing, the observance
of which by himself or his Subjects, provided they be Men that follow peace and
holiness, will not prejudice their Salvation. Now on the Subjects side there
lies at stake the great duty of Obedience to Governors, of reverence and
decency in the public Worship of God, of Charity and Unity with their
Brethren, wherein if they be peccant, they withhold from Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and from God the things that are God's, and from their
Brethren the duties which they owe to all Men, with whom as far as it is
possible, and as much as in them lies they ought to live peaceably. And can a
little mistake or irregularity in external Worship, if such should happen, be
thought so great an evil, that for avoiding of it, we should throw our selves
over the precipices of disobedience to Rulers, a contempt of God's solemn
Worship, and living in debate, contention and perpetual vexation of our
Brethren? Those things that are immutably and essentially good or evil ought
more to be heeded than those which are such uncertainly and by accident or
circumstance only; and no good Man to avoid a doubtful scruple will run himself
into a certain sin. In such things therefore as I have now discoursed of, it is
certainly more safe to err with our Rulers than to be in the right against
them.

And thus I have discarded that Maxim of our Authors, which he says not only
in Reason but in Religion too admits of no release.

Page 228. our Author says -- While Men were truly pious, all Meetings of Men
for mutual help of Piety and Devotion, wheresoever and by whomsoever
celebrated, were permitted without exception.

It is great pity but it had been so, yet that it was so will not appear. For I
suppose our Author does not mean by Men truly pious, those that were Governors;
for the more pious they were, the more care they always had of the public
Worship, and such as would not join in it, gave occasion to have their piety
questioned. For why, says our Author, should Men desire to do that
suspiciously in private which warrantably may be performed in public, p. 230.
He must therefore be understood of pious Christians that met for the Worship of
God in times of Corruptions and Persecutions, as he expresses it. Now that
such Meetings wheresoever and by whomsoever celebrated were permitted without
exception, whoever shall but run over the Ecclesiastical History will find
exceptions enough against it. Were not Christ and his Apostles and such
Converts as met with them truly pious, and Acts 26. 12.
yet their Meetings were in great fear of being disturbed, and they were
persecuted as no Friends to Caesar, Acts 12. 12.
but such as turned the World upside down. And did not our Savior foretell his
Disciples how they should be hated and persecuted for his sake? Never were
there more pious and peaceable Christians than under the Emperors of Rome that
preceded Constantine, yet they did generally by them, as Pilate by the
Galileans whose blood he mingled with their Sacrifices, and haled all such to
torments as would not deny Christ and burn their Bibles, and offer Incense to
the Pagan Gods. Trajan was one of the mildest of those Emperors, and Pliny the
Younger being required to certify the practices and behavior of the
Christians in his days, acquainted the Emperor, that they did meet together in
the Night and sung Hymns to Christ as to their God, which was their only crime;
for as to other things, They bound themselves by an Oath not to run into any
wickedness, not to commit Thefts, Murders or Adulteries, not to break their
promises or withhold any thing committed to their trust, l. 10. Epist. 97. And
yet besides those famous Bishops, Ignatius, Clemens, Anicetus, Plures efficimur
quoties metimur a vobis; Crudelitas vestra est gloria nostra. Tertul. Apol.
many Thousands of pious Christians were martyred; the Heathen were so far from
permitting their Meetings howsoever and by whomsoever celebrated, that they
hunted out private Christians, and upon their confessions that they were so
they were instantly condemned. If a Legion of Witnesses will suffice, I shall
produce that of the Noble Thebean Legion, consisting of 6666. Soldiers, who
when Maximinus was Emperor and prepared to fight his Enemies, though they had
often given testimony both of their valor and fidelity to his Predecessors,
and had by the accustomed Oaths sworn the same to him, (which Oaths Vegetius de
Re militari, l. 2. sets down in these words, Jurant per Deum, Christum and
Sanctum Spiritum, and per majestatem Imperatoris, quae secundum Deum generi
humano diligenda est and colenda, omnia se strenue facturos quae praeceperit
Imperator, nunquam deserturos militiam, nec mortem recusaturos pro Romana
Republica) were yet required to lustrate or expiate themselves by offering
sacrifice to the Heathen Gods; which they refusing to do, jointly professing
themselves to be Christians, he decimates the whole Legion, and slays every
Tenth Man with the Sword, and afterward requires the same impiety from the
rest; but their chief Commanders who deserve serve to be mentioned in all
Histories, Mauritius Tribune of the Legion, Exuperius their Standard Bearer,
and Candidus one of the Senatorian Order, exhorting them to constancy in the
Christian Faith, being required to bring their Legion to the Emperor at
Octodurus, and there perform those Pagan rites, answered, That they were ready
in all things to obey the Emperors commands in fighting against his Enemies,
only being Christians they could by no means Sacrifice to his Gods. Whereupon
they suffered another Decimation; at which the remainder of the Legion were so
far from being daunted, that they all professed themselves of the same
resolution, and should rejoice to obtain the same honor of Martyrdom.
Whereupon the Emperor Ordered his Army to fall on them, and cut them in pieces,
which was accordingly done, not one of them seeking an escape. Baronius ad
Annum 297. Nor were these Massacres only committed in the times of the ten
persecutions, but afterward when some Christian Emperors infected with
Arrianism had the power, they made havoc of the peaceable and Orthodox
Christians, and denied them the privilege of public or private meetings. And
our Author himself observes, p. 228. That Christian meetings under Pagan
Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open view, were charged
with foul imputations, as by the report of Christians themselves plainly
appears. And again, p. 227. That time had taken leave to fix this name (of
Conventicles) upon good and honest meetings, and that perchance not altogether
without good reason. Which reason he expresses, p. 228. it was espied that ill
affected persons abused private meetings for Religion to gross impiety, and
therefore both Church and State jointly gave order for Forms, times and places
of public Concourse, and all other meetings besides those of which both time
and place were limited, they censured for routs and riots and unlawful
assemblies in the State, and in the Church for Conventicles. Upon which our
Author concludes, p. 229. It is not lawful no not for prayer, hearing, etc. for
people to Assemble otherwise than by public order is allowed.

But notwithstanding this concession our Author having distinguis^ed between
times of corruption and incorruption, he says, p. 230. That in times of
manifest corruptions and persecutions, wherein Religious assembling is
dangerous, private meetings, however besides public Order, are not only lawful
but they are of necessity and duty. And this he supposes a competent Plea as
well for the Papists in our days as for the Protestants in Queen Mary's days:
For else (says he) how shall we excuse the meetings of Christians for public
service in time of danger and persecutions, and of our selves in Queen Mary's
days? and how will those of the Roman Church amongst us put off the imputation
of Conventicling, who are known amongst us privately to assemble for Religious
exercise against all established order both in Church and State? -- Now I
willingly grant that in times of manifest corruptions and persecutions, such as
the Roman and Marian were, private meetings are lawful and necessary duties;
because, if men do forbid what God has commanded, it is better to obey God
than man: But this rule will not hold with that Latitude which our Author
annexeth to it, that such meetings are lawful however besides public order:
and p. 231. however practiced. For suppose that Dioclesian or Queen Mary had
published their Edicts that on such days such a number of Christians or
Protestants should meet and worship God in public places allowed them for that
purpose, or as by the late Act of Parliament, any Family not admitting above
five for Religious exercises were tolerated; it had been their duty to
acquiesce in such an Indulgence, and not by meeting in greater numbers and in
places and times prohibited to provoke their Governors. For certainly God has
committed to the Sovereign authority a power of regulating the External
exercise of Divine Worship, nor can the irregularity of good men make void that
Ordinance of God. And therefore our Author concludes amiss when he says, That
all pious Assemblies in times of persecution and corruption, however practiced,
are indeed or rather alone the lawful congregations: and public Assemblies
though according to form of Law are indeed nothing else but Riots and
Conventicles, if they be stained with corruption and superstition. A Doctrine
that is very pleasing both to the Papists and other Sectaries, who being
persuaded that we are corrupted and they are persecuted, may be encouraged once
again to set up the good old Cause, that is, the overthrow of Monarchy and
Episcopacy in this Nation, and the setting up of Popery and Anarchy in their
rooms. Mr. Hales tells us in his Sermon on Luke 18. 1. p. 134. of his Golden
Remains, that Tully observed that Antony the Orator being to defend a person
who was accused of Faction and Sedition, bent his wits to maintain that
Sedition was good, and not to be objected as a fault: our Author has strained
his wits to do the like by Schism, and so far to excuse separation as
ordinarily to lay the blame thereof upon Superiors, and to make them the
Schismatics as often as they endeavor to vindicate their authority in lawful
things against such, as find any Scruples against obedience to their commands.
Which Mr. Hales shall Answer for me: The taste of Liberty is so sweet, that
except Kings maintain their Authority with as great violence, as the people
affect their Liberty, all things will run to confusion. Sermon on John 18. 36.
p. 149.

THE END.
Mr. BAXTER's ARGUMENTS FOR Conformity, AGAINST SEPARATION: BY WHICH The most
Material Parts OF Mr. HALES's TRACT of SCHISM ARE CONFVTED.

Every tender Conscience should be as tender of Church-division and real
Schism, as of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or such other enormous Sins, James 3. 14,
15, 16, 17.

Mr. Baxter 's Reasons for Christian Religion, p. 485. S. 34. LONDON, Printed
for Walter Kettilby, 1678.

Imprimatur,

C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

TO THE READER Concerning the Pretense OF Conscience for Separation.
THE Conscience of Man is a very sacred thing; the great King has made it his
Chancellor to determine of such cases as are not plainly determinable by his
Law, and has given it a large Empire and Power to absolve or condemn. Of this
Seneca divinely informs his Lucilius (Epist. 41. Ita dico, mi Lucili, sacer
intra nos spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque nostrorum observator, and custos
hic prout a nobis tractatus est, nos tractat) There is a Sacred spirit residing
within us observing and recording all our good and evil actions, and as this is
dealt with by us, so it deals with us. If our Consciences be first rightly
informed, and then duly consulted with and obeyed, there is not a safer Guide,
a better Comforter, nor a more impartial Judge: for (it is magni illius Judicii
praejudicium) as that acquits or condemns us, so have we confidence toward
God, 1 Jo. 3. 20.

It ought therefore to be our great care that our hearts do not reproach us for
any wilful transgression of the Laws of God, or such as he has set over us,
whom he has required us to obey for Conscience sake.

And in the next place it is our duty tenderly to commiserate such weak
Brethren whose Consciences being really doubtful of the lawfulness of those
actions which are required of them, dare not obey till they obtain a fiat from
them; but while they suspend their duties are peaceable and faithful in the
Land, and humbly and industriously seek for satisfaction from them whom God
has set over them. And truly I have not more Charity for many through
Conformists, than for such meek and teachable Dissenters. And I doubt not but
their Rulers and Spiritual Fathers would deal with them in all gentleness and
long-suffering, with familiar and easy methods to inform their judgments, and
reconcile their affections to the knowledge and practice of the truth. But
alas! how small is the number of such, among them that pretend conscience, not
in things doubtful and undetermined, but against plain and express commands in
the Laws of God and their Superiors, and under that pretense seek to be
justified in notorious and scandalous impieties? Who can without indignation
recount the horrible villainies and mischiefs that have been acted in our
Generation under this pretense? or who can sufficiently deplore the contumacy
and opposition of such as pretend Conscience against the means which God has
appointed for their information? The case seems to be well represented in the
entertainment of the Angels among the Sodomites: (for Conscience as an Angel of
God is with a Commission to save or to destroy) And in Genesis 19. we read only
of Lot who with great humility and respect met them, and bowing his Face to the
ground, with great importunity pressed them to take their repose with him; and
he washed their Feet and feasted them, and they delivered him from that great
overthrow. But the Men of Sodom, old and young, from all quarters offered
violence to them, and would have prostituted them to their unnatural lusts. And
do not they declare their sin to be like that of Sodom, who stifle the good
motions of this Guardian-Angel, and make it an instrument and Pander to their
carnal lusts? incessantly abusing it as the Gibeathites did the Levites
Concubine, even to Death, Judges 19. And if a righteous Lot intercede for it,
how do they reply as the Sodomites did, This fellow is come to sojourn, and he
will needs be a Judge. Now will we deal worse, with thee than with them, Genesis
19. 9. But the punishment of the one should make the other to tremble and do no
more so wickedly, lest those Angels of Light leave them in darkness, and rain
something most like to fire and brimstone, even horror and despair into their
Souls.

But beside these wilful persons there is a sort of weak people among us, who
have so entangled themselves in nets of their own weaving, partly through
ignorance, prejudice and evil education, and partly by melancholy and
superstitious apprehensions, fearing where no fear is, and taking their own
fancies and shadows for Ghosts and specter, and lastly by the dark suggestions
of seducing spirits who despair of making any to be of their persuasion till
they have frighted them out of their wits, that it is with them as sometime it
was with the people of Rome (nec far vulnera possunt, nec remedia) they can
neither endure their wounds nor suffer the remedies. By their long striving
against their Prince, their Priests and their own Reason, they are so wounded
and ensnared, that though their grievances be almost intolerable, yet they
dread to disclose them or to use the advice of such Physicians as upon their
submission might through God's blessing heal and restore them. Every Quack that
can administer Opium, or stupifie the part affected, is more acceptable to them
than a College of able Physicians who discerning the cause could with more
easy methods and at a cheaper rate cure their distempers. For the Nets that
entangle most of these, are but like the spiders webs, strong enough to
captivate them out of whose bowels they were spun: But a man of reason may
dissipate them with the breath of his mouth. The Lion in the Fable was once
thus entangled, and all his struggling did but involve him more: yet when he was
toyled and lay quiet, a very little Animal came and corroding the threads set
the Royal Captive at liberty. There needs no great art if they would be patient
and follow regular prescripts, to reduce such men to a sense and enjoyment of
their Christian Liberty. If they would but follow the best of their own
Leaders, two of which I have hereafter proposed to them, their Arguments and
practices might soon undeceive them. For in truth it is not Conscience but nice
scruples, false opinions and prejudice and disaffection to the Lawful Guides
and Physicians of their Souls, and a fond admiration of some cunning persons
that lay in wait to ensnare them, and keep them in bondage, that they may make
merchandise of them, which have so perplexed them. Can that be Conscience that
causes men to strain at a Gnat and swallow Camels? to start at a shadow and
throw themselves over Precipices? so to abhor a Ceremony as to commit
Sacrilege, and rob the Church of Christ of his last and best Legacy, that of
Peace? Can Conscience persuade a man who confesses his own ignorance (by his
doubting) to judge of the things in controversy, to conclude that his
Superiors are in an error, and that they who disobey and oppose them are in the
right? or can we think that they did cast themselves out of their own Cures on
a principle of Conscience, who against all good Conscience intruded upon other
men's and still invade their rights? Is it Conscience that teaches them to
interpret the actions and constitutions of their Superiors in the worse sense,
and by their corrupt glosses to make faults where they can find none? Is it
conscience that causes men who are under Oaths and obligations of obedience
and peace, to withdraw causelessly into factious and seditious assemblies to the
disturbance of the Church and State, where they might lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty? Is it conscience that teaches men to
scruple at Ceremonies, and to omit the weighty matters of the Law? Or can we
think that they do really believe in their Consciences that to live in
Conformity to the Church of England is a sin, who do educate their children
(the care of whose Souls next to that of their own is incumbent on them,) in
such professions as will necessarily engage them to be Conformists? The Ancient
Nonconformists thought themselves bound in Conscience to use their utmost
endeavors to prevent separation from the Church of England, and to engage
their people to frequent the public Worship. And can it be a point of
Conscience in the present Nonconformists so industriously to promote
Separation, and as much as in them lies to bring the public Worship into
contempt? Or can they pretend conscience for despising the prayers of the
Church, who at the same time reject our Lords prayer also? Is it conscience
that makes private and illiterate men to think themselves wiser and better than
their Rulers and spiritual Guides, whom God has set over them? Is it
conscience that does dispense with the same men to conform and communicate with
the Church when they are required to do so under some present and severe
penalty (as on the late Test) and to shun it at other times? Lastly, who can
believe that they err through weakness or doubtfulness of Conscience, who
refuse to make use of those obvious and probable means for their satisfaction,
which God has appointed for them? That is, in such doubtful cases which their
own son cannot determine, to consult with those to whom God has committed the
conduct of their Souls. For what is Conscience but a man's judgment concerning
things and actions according to Gods Word, and Right Reason enlightened and
directed thereby? For, seeing the Word of God has not particularly determined
of all things and actions, we ought by our Reason comparing one place of
Scripture with another and drawing conclusions from them, to be guided and
acted in such things as are not determined in Scripture: and if our own Reason
be too short-sighted and dull, to apprehend the nature of the things doubted
of; we ought to use such Instruments and helps as God has provided, who has
said by his Prophet, that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the
people should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts, Mal. 2. 7. where the peoples duty is plainly asserted. And by his
Apostle, that we should know them that are over us in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.
And Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves,
for they watch for your Souls as they that must give account, etc. But as Mr.
Baxter complains, p. 570. of his Saints Rest, Few of the Godly themselves do
understand the Authority that their Teachers have over them from Christ, they
know how to value the Ministers Gifts but not how they are bound to learn of
him and obey him because of his office. -- People are bound to obey and learn
of their Teachers, as Scholars of their Masters. And if the people were as
willing to do their own duties, and as apt to learn of their Ministers as they
are forward to teach them, or blame them for not doing theirs, they might soon
ease their Consciences of much guilt as well as of many doubts and scruples,
whereby for want of an humble and teachable spirit they so much trouble
themselves and others. And it is but reasonable, that the established Clergy of
the Church of England should expect as great a submission from their people as
the Worcester Ministers who required their people to acknowledge in these
words: I... do consent to be a Member of the particular Church of Christ at....
whereof.... is Teacher and Overseer, and to submit to his teaching and
ministerial guidance and oversight according to God's Word.

Those Men therefore whose Consciences are truly tender, ought in doubtful
cases, to apply themselves to the means which God has instituted (and will
therefore most probably bless) for their information; as first, their own
Pastor; or if he be thought defective, some neighbor Minister, of whom the
doubting Person has a good opinion for his parts and piety; if no such can
remove his doubts, he seems to me to be a Person capable to read the Works of
Learned men that have written of the things in controversy, and he may take in
the help of Foreign Divines, and perhaps inquire into the practice of the
Church in the most pure and primitive Ages. And if he find that they do all
agree, as Mr. Hooker and Mr. Baxter say, That the certain commands of the
Church we live in, are to be obeyed in all things not certainly unlawful, I
cannot think that such as will still pretend doubts, and espouse Parties, and
disobey their Governors, and promote Schism and Divisions, do err out of
weakness of Conscience, but out of pride, and stubbornness, through great
prejudices or for some little interests and concerns of their own, which they
value more than the Peace of the Church.

Now that Man does judge extremely uncharitably of his Rulers, whose
Consciences are as tender, and their Judgments better informed than his own,
and who being at liberty to choose and propose what may most conduce, as well
to their own, as the Peoples salvation, shall upon mature deliberation in
solemn Assemblies appoint such a Discipline and Rites as they think most
agreeable to the Word of God and the practice of the purest Churches in all
Ages; that Man, I say, must judge most uncharitably of them who should think
that they impose on him any thing that is unlawful, (without a very clear
evidence of its unlawfulness) seeing that therein they should not only wound
their own Consciences and hazard their own Salvation, but draw upon themselves
the guilt of the Peoples sins, by establishing iniquity by a Law, and
encouraging the People to comply with it by their examples, and so like
Jeroboam make the Israel of God to Sin.

But if in a deed done by a doubting Person, at the command of one that is
endued with lawful authority, there be a sin, it must go on his score that
requires it wrongfully, not on his that does but his duty in obeying; nor is
the Salvation of an obedient subject hazarded by a peaceable compliance with
his Superiors commands in such doubtful and disputable actions. Bishop
Sanderson resolves a case that will put this out of doubt, Sermon on Romans 14.
23. p. 92. A Prince commands his Subjects to serve in his Wars, it may be the
quarrel is unjust, it may be there may appear to the understanding of the
Subject great likelihoods of such injustice, yet may the subject for all that
fight in the quarrel, yea he is bound in Conscience so to do, nay he is deep in
disloyalty and treason if he refuse the service, whatsoever pretensions of
Conscience he may make for such refusal. Mr. Baxter speaks almost as much, p.
461. of his Five Disputations: Every War that is unlawfully undertaken by the
Prince, is not unlawful in all his Soldiers. Some of them that have not
opportunity to know the evil of his undertaking, may be bound to obey; the case
of others I determine not. But a greater than he (as I have shown) has
determined it, and the practice of the Primitive Christians, which stoutly
fought the Battles of Heathen Emperors, have confirmed that determination. Now
it is worthy of our consideration, to think what manner of Soldiers such
scrupulous Persons would make in case of a War begun against a just Prince by
some of his Subjects, that should pretend a Reformation of the Laws, and arm
themselves to redress abuses in the administration of Justice, can we think,
that they who are apt to disobey upon I know not what scruples of the
lawfulness of innocent Rites and Ceremonies enjoined by his authority, will be
ready to fight against their Brethren (that herein agree with them?) would they
not rather side against him, (as their Predecessors have done?) I suppose there
are very few that are scrupulously factious in the Church, but would in such a
case be seditious and rebellious in the State. I am sure they would find more
plausible pretenses, as, That the Prince commands such things as are to their
Consciences unlawful, and that they durst not engage with him, lest they draw
innocent blood upon their heads; they think they are rather bound to help the
Lord's People against the Mighty, to rebuke even Kings for their sakes, and if
they see it meet; to bind their Kings with Chains and their Nobles with fetters
of Iron, and to execute upon them the Judgment written: This Honor have all
his Saints. And yet that learned Casuist says, that the fears of such
scrupulous Persons need not trouble them, no not in this grand case, lest they
should bring upon themselves the guilt of innocent blood; for the blood that is
unrighteously shed in such a quarrel, he must answer for, that set them on
work, not he that spilt it. Is damnum dat, qui jubet dare; ejus vero nulla
culpa est, cui parere necesse est: He does the wrong that commands it to be
done, not he whose obedience is a necessary duty. And truly (says the same
Casuist) it is a great wonder to me, that any Man endued with understanding,
and that is able in any measure to weigh the force of those precepts and
reasons which bind inferiors to yield obedience to their Superiors, should be
otherwise minded in cases of like nature. For whatsoever is commanded us by
those whom God has set over us either in Church, Commonwealth or Family (
quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo, as says St. Bernard) which is not
evidently contrary to the Law and Will of God, ought of us to be received and
obeyed no otherwise than as if God himself had commanded it; because God
himself has commanded us to obey the higher Powers, and to submit our selves
to their Ordinances. And if these things should not be so, either Government or
Christianity would in a short time be rooted out as incompetent one with the
other, for by such Men Christ is really represented as an enemy to Caesar; and
the event will be, to have him crucified again in his members, and put to open
shame.

THE PREFACE TO Mr. BAXTER's ARGUMENTS.
THe same wise and Gracious Providence of Almighty God which overruled the
Actions of those Armies that had kept us long in confusion and made them
instrumental for the settling of peace in the State, has so directed the
consultations and public transactions of such as intruded on the affairs of
the Church, that if they would practice according to their own principles, and
acquiesce in their own arguments, we might see peace and unity established also
in the Church. For besides the Arguments of the Non-conformists before 1642.
who both by example and public writings showed their abhorrence of open
Separation, I do confidently affirm, that if there were a collection made of
those reasons which were urged by the Presbyterians to prevent the other
Factions from separating from them, as well in their Annotations, Assemblies,
public debates, Sermons, books of Schism, Separation, etc. there needed no
other security to the people of this Nation, that they might with good
Conscience conform to the public Worship of God as it is now established. I
have formerly published Mr. Calvin's arguments to this purpose, and now I
present the Reader with Mr. Baxter's, not only because I thought them most
rational and persuasive, but because I believe he was not acted by (a studium
partium) any ambitious or private design, but intended them as an Irenicum to
persuade peace and reconciliation between all sober dissenters. And I hope he
will pardon me for prosecuting his own design, while I do it in his own words
published in several Treatises since he first set forth his Saints everlasting
Rest, in the Epistle to which he tells us he should fear of being a firebrand
in Hell, if he should be a firebrand in the Church. I was much moved to see
what odium he contracted from some of his Brethren, of whom he deserved better
things, for endeavoring to heal our divisions; yet was he not ashamed to write
himself in the title page of his second admonition to Bagshaw, a long-maligned
and resisted endeavourer of the Churches unity and peace; and in page 11. of
that book, he thus declares his Christian temper and resolution. If injuries or
interest would excuse any sin, I think there are few Ministers in England who
have more inducement to the Angry separating way than I have; But shall I
therefore wrong the truth and Church of God and my own and others Souls? God
forbid! And page 52. he farther tells us -- I repent that I no more discouraged
the spirit of peevish quarrelling with Superiors and Church-orders, and (though
I ever disliked and opposed it, yet) that I sometimes did too much encourage
such as were of their temper, by speaking too sharply against those things
which I thought to be Church corruptions, and was too loath to displease the
contentious for fear of being incapable to do them good, (knowing the profane
to be much worse than they) and meeting with too few religious persons, that
were not too much pleased with such invectives. And as an Argument of his
repentance, he defends himself against Bagshaw, who objected that he chose on
Easter day to communicate in a very populous Church purposely that it might be
known, saying, p. 76. If a man by many years forbearing all public prayers and
Sacrament should tempt others to think that he is against them or counts them
needless, how should he cure that scandal but by doing that openly pleading for
it, which he is supposed to be against? Ministers being bound to teach the
people by Example as well as Doctrine, p. 78. And what he practiced himself he
carefully persuaded the people, to avoid separation and hold communion in the
parochial Churches. For the Question which he maintained against Bagshaw was --
It is lawful to hold communion with such Christian Churches as have worthy or
tolerable Pastors, notwithstanding the Parochial order of them, and the
Ministers conformity and use of the Common Prayer Book: and with two
limitations concludes, p. 89. That we ought to do so when some special reasons
(as from Authority, scandal, etc.) do require it. And whereas by these actions
and writings, Mr. Baxter had so provoked the dissenting parties, that it was
objected, as himself intimates in a second objection, in the Preface of his
Christian Directory, That his writings differing from the common judgment had
already caused offense to the Godly; in the fourth Answer, he says: If God
bless me with opportunity and help, I will offend such men much more, by
endeavoring further than ever I have done the quenching of that fire which
they are still blowing up, and detecting the folly and mischief of those
Logomachies by which they militate against Love and Concord, and inflame and
tear the Church of God, and let them know that I am about it.

These are resolutions becoming a Minister of Christ, an Ambassador of the
Prince of Peace, taken up after long and serious deliberation, well rooted and
fixed in his judgment and Conscience, by reason whereof he was enabled through
the Grace of God to withstand manifold temptations and violent oppositions to
the contrary. Nor can I think that such a man as Mr. Baxter can flee and desert
so good a cause, and after Vows to make enquiry, and render himself guilty of
all those calumnies and reproaches which his enemies have endeavored to fix
upon him: Nor can I think, that having brought our present controversies to so
narrow a compass of ground, he will contribute to the building of a Babel upon
it. This were to make good those hard speeches of Mr. Bagshaw against him, who
tells us, p. 152. That one worthy of Credit told him that the Learned and
Judicious Mr. Herle having read that cried up book of his, said, It had been
happy for the Church of God if Mr. Baxter's friends had never sent him to
School; and that Mr. Cawdry had the same opinion of it. And that another person
as knowing in the Mystery of Godliness as either of them told a friend of his,
that notwithstanding the noise about him, Mr. Baxter would end in flesh and
blood. And in a word, this would set home his own fears upon his spirit, that
he might be a fire brand in hell for being a firebrand in the Church.

I shall therefore charitably believe, that though he seem to look another way,
yet he is laboring to bring the people that adhere to him, to the harbor of
Ecclesiastical peace and unity; that he does still preach up not holiness only,
but peace too, without which he knows no man shall see God; nor can I think
that he does now practice in contempt of Authority, what himself had condemned
in others; or that he intends to harden the people in such a Separation, as he
had so long, so passionately, so rationally declaimed against. I rather hope
that he has some dispensation from his Lawful Superiors, and that by a pia
fraus having greater advantages of doing good put into his hands, he will by
degrees improve them to the glory of God and the peace of this distracted
Church.

If he drive any other design, I would desire him to consider, first, how he
can Answer his own Arguments unto men; and secondly, how to give an account to
God for his contrary practices.

But I have a very great confidence, that he who has with great industry and
faithfulness provided so many solid materials from the Scriptures and right
reason for the supporting and beautifying a Temple of peace, having carved and
gilded them over with serious Protestations of his own pacifick intentions,
and variety of Rhetoric to persuade others, will not be a Leader of that
rabble, which shall first break down the carved works with axes and hammers,
and at last (though sore against his will) raze the very foundations, and cry
Down with it, down with it even to the ground.

Of the Church.
Mr. Baxter in his Reasons for the Christian Religion, p. 464.
S. 2. THE Church of Christ being his Body is but one, and has many parts, but
should have no Parties, but unity and concord without Division.

S. 3. Therefore no Christian must be of a Party or Sect as such, that is, as
dividing it self from the rest, causing Schism or Contention in the Body, or
making a rent unnecessarily in any particular Church which is a part.

S. 8. Nothing will warrant us to separate from a Church as no Church, but the
want of something essential to a Church.

S. 11. It is essential to particular Political Churches, that they be
constituted of true Bishops or Pastors and of Flocks of baptized or professed
Christians, united for holy Communion in the worshipping of God, and the
promoting of the Salvation of the several Members.

S. 12. It is essential to a true Bishop or Pastor of the Church to be in
office (that is in authority and obligation) appointed by Christ in
Subordination to him in the three parts of his offices, Prophetical, Priestly
and Kingly. That is, to teach the People, to stand between them and God in
Worship, and to guide or govern them by the Paternal exercise of the Keys of
his Church.

S. 15. If a Church which in all other respects is purest and best, will impose
any sin upon all that will have any local Communion with it, though we must not
separate from that Church as no Church, yet must we not commit that sin, but
patiently suffer them to exclude us from their Communion.

Of the Doctrine of the Church of England.
As for the Doctrine of the Church of England, Preface to ^. Disput. p. 6.
the Bishops and their Followers from the first Reformation begun by King
Edward the Sixth, were sound in Doctrine, adhering to the Augustane method
expressed now in the Articles and Homilies; they differed not in any
considerable point from those whom they called Puritans, but it was in the form
of Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies that the difference lay.

The Independents as well as the Presbyterians offer to Subscribe the XXXIX
Articles as distinct from Prelacy and Ceremony. Defense of principles of love.
p. 64.
And when I was in the Country, I knew not of one Minister to ten that are now
silenced, that was not in the main of the same Principles with my self.

Mr. Baxter's Reasons for Obedience in Lawful things, page 483. of his five
Disputations.
. 1. LEST Men that are apt to run from one extreme into another, should make an
ill use of that which I have before written, I shall here annex some Reasons to
persuade Men to just obedience, and preserve them from any sinful nonconformity
to the commands of their Governors, and the evil effects that are like to
follow thereupon.

. 2. But first I will lay together some Propositions for decision of the
Controversy; How far we are bound to obey Men's Precepts about Religion?
Especially in case we doubt of the lawfulness of obeying them? and so cannot
obey them in faith?

. 3. Briefly: 1. We must obey both Magistrates and Pastors in all things lawful
which belong to their offices to command. 2. It belongs not to their office to
make God a new worship; But to command the Mode and Circumstances of worship
belongs to their office: for guiding them wherein God has given them general
rules. 3. We must not take the Lawful commands of our Governors to be
unlawful. 4. If we do through weakness or perverseness take Lawful things to be
unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience. Our error is our sin,
and one sin will not excuse another sin. Even as on the other side, if we judge
things unlawful to be lawful, that will not excuse us for our disobedience to
God in obeying men. 5. As I have before showed, many things that are
miscommanded, must be obeyed. 6. As an erroneous judgment will not excuse us
from Obedience to our Governors, so much less will a doubtfulness excuse us.
7. As such a doubting, erring judgment cannot obey in (plenary) faith, so much
less can he disobey in faith. For it is a known Command of God, that we obey
them that have the Rule over us: but they have no word of God against the act
of obedience now in question. It is their own erring judgment that intangleth
them in a necessity of sinning (till it be changed.) 7. In doubtful cases, it
is our duty to use God's means for our information: and one means is to consult
with our Teachers, and hear their words with teachableness and meekness. 8. If
upon advising with them we remain in doubt about the lawfulness of some
Circumstance of order, if it be such as may be dispensed with, they should
dispense with us: if it may not be dispensed with without a greater injury to
the Church or cause of God, than our dispensation will countervail, then is it
our duty to obey our Teachers, notwithstanding such doubts: For it being their
office to Teach us, it must be our duty to believe them with a humane faith, in
cases where we have no Evidences to the contrary:
And the Duty of Obeying them being certain, and the sinfulness of the thing
commanded being uncertain and unknown, and only suspected, we must go on the
surer side. 9. Yet must we in great and doubtful cases, not take up with the
suspected judgment of a single Pastor, but apply our selves to the unanimous
Pastors of other Churches* 10.
Christians should not be over-busie in prying into the work of their
Governors, nor too forward to suspect their determinations: But when they know
that it is their Rulers work to guide them by determining of due Circumstances
of worship, they should without causless scruples readily obey, till they see
just reason to stop them in their obedience; They must not go out of their own
places to search into the Actions of another Man's office, to trouble
themselves without any cause.

. 4. And now I entreat all humble Christians readily to obey both Magistrates
and Pastors in all lawful things; and to consider, to that end, of these
Reasons following. Reas. 1. If you will not obey in Lawful things, you deny
authority, or overthrow Government it self, which is a great ordinance of God,
established in the fifth Commandment with promise: And as that commandment
respecting societies and common good, is greater than the following commands,
as they respect the private good of our neighbors, or are but particular means
to that Public good, whose foundation is laid in the fifth commandment; so
accordingly the sin against this fifth commandment must be greater than that
against the rest.

. 5. Reas. 2. In disobeying the lawful commands of our Superiors, we disobey
Christ, who rules by them as his officers. Even as the disobeying a Justice of
Peace or Judge is a disobeying of the sovereign Power; yea in some cases when
their sentence is unjust. Some of the ancient Doctors thought that the fifth
commandment was the last of the first Table of the Decalogue; and that the
Honoring of Governors is part of our Honor to God, they being mentioned there
as his officers, with whom he himself is honored or dishonored, obeyed or
disobeyed: For it is God's Authority that the Magistrate, Parent, and Pastor is
endued with, and empowred by to rule those that are put under them.

. 6. Reas. 3. What confusion will be brought into the Church if Pastors be not
obeyed in things lawful? For instance: If the Pastors appoint the Congregation
to Assemble at one hour, and the People will scruple the time, and say, it is
unlawful, and so will choose some of them one time, and some another, what
disorder will here be? and worse, if the Pastors appoint a Place of worship,
and any of the People scruple obeying them, and will come to another place,
what confusion will here be? People are many, and the Pastors are few: and
therefore there may be some unity if the People be Ruled by the Pastors; but
there can be none, if the Pastors must be ruled by the People, for the People
will not agree among themselves: and therefore if we obey one part of them, we
must disobey and displease the rest. And their ignorance makes them unfit to
rule.

. 7. Reas. 4. Moreover, disobedience in matters of Circumstance, will exclude
and overthrow the substance of the worship it self. God commands us to pray:
If one part of the Church will not join with a stinted form of Prayer, and the
other part will not join without it, both Parties cannot be pleased, and so one
part must cast off Prayer it self, or separate from the rest. God commands
the reading, and preaching, and hearing of the Scripture, and the singing of
Psalms: but he has left it to Man to make or choose the best Translation of
Scripture, or version of the Psalms. Now if the Pastor appoint one version and
Translation, and the Church join in the use of it, if any members will scruple
joining in this Translation or version, they must needs forbear the whole duty
of Hearing the Scripture, and singing Psalms in that Congregation. If they
pretend a scruple against the appointed time or place of worship, they will
thereby cast off the worship it self. For if they avoid our Time or Place, they
cannot meet with us, nor worship with us.

. 8. Reas. 5. And when they are thus carried to separate from the Congregation,
upon such grounds as these, they will be no where fixed, but may be still
subdividing, and separating from one another, till they are resolved into
individuals, and have left no such thing as a Church among them. For they can
have no assurance or probability, that some of themselves will not dissent from
the rest in one Circumstance or other, as they did from their Pastors and the
Church that they were of before.

. 9. Reas. 6. By this means the wicked that are disobedient to their Teachers,
and reject the worship of God it self, will be hardened in their sin, and
taught by Professors to defend their ungodliness: For the very same course that
you take will serve their turns. They need not deny any Duty in the substance,
but deny the circumstance, and so put off the substance of the Duty. If a
wicked man will not hear the word preached, he may say [I am not against
preaching; but I am unsatisfied of the lawfulness of your Time or Place, I am
in judgment against coming to your Steeple-house, or against the Lords Day.]
And so he shall never hear, though he say he is for hearing. If a wicked man
will not be personally instructed, or admonished, or be accountable to the
Church or Pastors for any scandals of his life, nor submit to any discipline,
he may say [I am for discipline, I know it is my duty to be instructed: but I
am not satisfied that I am bound to come to you when you send for me, or to
appear at such a place as you appoint: the word of God names no time or place,
and you shall not deprive me of my liberty.] If a wicked Man would not hear or
read the Scripture, or sing Psalms, he may say that he is for the duty, but he
is only against this and that Translation and version: And so while every
version is excepted against, the duty is as much evaded as if it were denied it
self. By this device it is that the Rebellion of unruly People is defended:
They run to the circumstances of the duty, and ask, [Where are they bound to
come to a Minister? or to be examined by him in order to a baptism or Lords
supper? or to speak their consent to be Church Members, or to subscribe to a
Profession, or to read an English Bible, or to hear in a Steeple-house, with
many such like.] Thus also it is that they put off Family Prayer, and ask,
[Where are they bound to pray in their Family Morning and Evening?] and so keep
no constancy in Family Prayer at all, under pretense of denying only the
circumstances.

. 10. Reas. 7. By this disobedience in things lawful, the members of the Church
will be involved in contentions, and so engaged in bitter uncharitableness, and
censures, and persecutions, and reproaches of one another: which scandalous
courses will nourish vice, dishonor God, rejoice the enemies, grieve the Godly
that are peaceable and judicious, and wound the consciences of the contenders.
We see the beginning of such fires are small, but whither they tend, and what
will be the end of them, we see not.

. 11. Reas. 8. By these means also Magistrates will be provoked to take men of
tender consciences for factious, unruly, and unreasonable men, and to turn
their enemies, and use violence against them, to the great injury of the
Church: when they see them so self-conceited, and refusing obedience in lawful
circumstances.

. 12. Reas. 9. By this means also the conversion and establishment of souls
will be much hindered, and people possessed with prejudice against the Church
and ordinances, when they take us to be but humorous people, and see us in such
contentions among our selves. To my knowledge, our late difference about some
such lesser things, has turned off, or hindered abundance of people from
liking the holy doctrine and life which we profess.

. 13. Reas. 10. It will seem to the wisest, to savor of no small measure of
Pride, when people on the account of lawful circumstances, dare set themselves
against their Governors and Teachers, and quarrel with the Ordinances of God,
and with the Churches: Humble men would sooner suspect themselves, and quarrel
with their own distempers, and submit to those that are wiser than themselves,
and that are set over them for their guidance by the Lord. There may more
dangerous Pride be manifested in these matters, than in Apparel, and such lower
trifles.

. 14. Reas. 11. Consider also what yielding in things lawful the Scripture
recommendeth to us? How far yielded Paul when he circumcised Timothy? Act 16.
3. And when he [took the men, and purified himself with them in the Temple, to
signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering
should be offered for every one of them] and this for almost seven days, Acts
21. 26, 27. with the foregoing verses.

. 15. So 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20. [For though I be free from all men, yet have I made
my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as
under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them that are
without Law, as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak I became as
weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I
might, by all means save some, and this I do for the Gospels sake, etc.] Study
this example.

. 16. Read also Romans 14. and 15. Chapters, how much condescension the Apostle
requires even among equals, about meats and days. And 1 Cor. 8. 13. the
Apostle would tie up himself from eating any flesh while the world stands,
rather than make a weak brother to offend. Many other passages of Scripture
require a condescension in things of this indifferent nature, and show that the
Kingdom of God does not consist in them.

. 17. And Matthew 12. 1, 2, to 9. you find that hunger justified the Disciples
of Christ for plucking and rubbing the ears of Corn on the Sabbath days. And
hunger justified David and those that were with him, for entering into the house
of God, and eating the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for
them which were with him, but only for the Priests: And the Priests in the
Temple were blameless for profaning the Sabbath day.] Now if things before
accidentally evil, may by this much Necessity become lawful and a duty, then
may the commands of Magistrates or Pastors, and the Unity of the Church, and
the avoiding of contention, and offense, and other evils, be also sufficient to
warrant us in obeying, even in inconvenient Circumstantials of the worship of
God, that otherwise could not be justified.

. 18. Reas. 12. Lastly consider, how much God has expressed himself in his
word to be pleased in the Obedience of believers. Not only in their Obedience
to Christ immediately, but also to him in his officers, 1 Samuel 15. 22. [Behold
to obey is better than Sacrifice, etc.] Col. 3. 20, 22. [Children obey your
Parents in all things (that is, all lawful things) for this is well-pleasing to
the Lord] [Servants Obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh,
etc.] And Obedience to Pastors is as much commanded, 1. These. 5. 12, 13. [We
beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly, etc.] Heb. 13. 17.
[Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your souls as they that must give account, etc.] So Verse 7. and 24. 1 Timothy
5. 17, etc.

. 19. As the General Commission to a Parent, or Master, or Magistrate to Govern
their inferior relations, does authorize them to many particular acts belonging
to their office, that were never named in their commission: so your general
command to obey them, obliges you to obey them in the said particulars. And so
it is also betwixt the Pastors and the flock, in matters belonging to the
office of a Pastor.

. 20. If a Child shall ask a Parent, [Where does Gods word allow you to command
me to learn this Catechism, or read this Divines writings, or repeat this
Sermon, or write it? etc.] does not the question deserve to be answered with
the rod? The General Commission for Parents to Govern their children is
sufficient. So if a Schoolmaster command his Scholars to come to such a place
to School, and to take their places in such an Order, and to learn such books,
and do such exercises, etc. the General Commission that he has to teach and
Govern them, will allow him to do all this. (Though it will not allow him to
set his Scholars to any Artifice or Manual Operation alien to his profession.)
So if a Minister determine of the variable Circumstances of worship, as what
place the people shall come to, and at what time, to be Catechized, examined,
instructed, etc. what Translation or Version of Psalms to use, what Utensils to
make use of about Gods service, or such like, he is warranted for this by his
General Commission. And if he miss it in the manner, by choosing inconvenient
circumstances, or by unnecessary determination of points that should rather be
left undetermined to liberty, though this be his own sin, it will not excuse
the people from obedience; unless the error of his directions be so great as
would frustrate the Ordinance it self, or do more harm than our disobedience
would do; which in Circumstantials is rarely found.

By long experience I am assured, Freface to Christian Direct. ad finem.
that practical religion, will afford both to Church, State, and Conscience
more certain, and more solid peace, than contending disputers, with all their
pretenses of Orthodoxness, and zeal against errors, for the truth, will ever
bring, or did ever attain to. Wherefore let us consider in the next place,

The Mischief of Separation.
The mischief of Separation lies not in the bare error of judgment, Epistle
Dedicatory to Saints Rest.
but in the unchristian and Church-dissolving division and alienation, which
thence follows; contrary to that humility and love, which is the visible
character of Christians, and to that Oneness, which is still in Scripture
ascribed to the visible Church. Alas, that pride and ignorance should have such
power among believers, that men cannot be of several judgments in lesser
points, but they must needs be of several Churches. God will make us value
peace and union a little more, before we shall taste of the perfect everlasting
peace and union; yea before we shall see the blessing of union in the Church.
Wounding is a dividing, healing is a re-uniting; a Building is of many stones
or pieces orderly conjoined; a Church is an aggregation of individuals, an
association of Believers: what then is it to demolish, but to separate and
disjoyn? and what is it to dissolve Churches, but to break their association,
to reduce them to individuals, to cut them into shreds?

As for the differences in way of Government, between the moderate
Presbyterians, Independants, Episcopal, and Erastian, I make no doubt, but if
men's spirits stood not at a greater distance than their principles, they would
quickly be united. But of all the four sorts there are some that run so high in
their principles, that they run out of the hearing of peace or truth. -- For
Anabaptism and Antinomianism God spoke effectually against them, by those
wondrous Monsters in New England; but wonders are over-lookt, where the heart
is hardened, and God intends to get his justice a name. The fearful dolusions,
that God has formerly given them over to, and the horrid confusion which they
have introduced where they have sprung, has spoken fully against both these
later Sects. The weeping eyes, the bleeding sides, the lacerated members of
these Churches, the reproach of the Gospel, the disappointed Reformation, the
hideous doctrines, and unheard of wickedness that has followed them, the
contemned ordinances, the reproached, slandered, and ejected Ministers, the
weak that are scandalized, the Professors apostatized, the wicked hardened, and
the open enemies of the Gospel, that now insult; all these do describe them
more plainly to England, than words can do, and cry loud in the ears of God,
and man. What will be the Answer, time will show: but from Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16,
etc. we may probably conjecture.

He that is not a Son of peace, is not a Son of God. All other sins destroy the
Church consequentially, but division and Separation demolish it directly.
Building the Church is but an orderly joining of the materials, and what then
is disjoyning but pulling down? Many doctrial differences must be tolerated in
a Church, and why, but for unity and peace? therefore disunion and separation
is utterly intolerable. Believe not those to be the Churches friends, that
would cure and reform her by cutting her throat. Those that say, no truth must
be concealed for peace, have usually as little of the one as the other. Study
Gal. 2. 22. Romans 14. 1. Acts 21. 24, 26. 1 Timothy 1. 4. and 6. 4. Titus 3. 8, 9.
I hope, sad experience speaks this lesson to your very hearts, if I should say
nothing. Do not your hearts bleed to look upon the State of England, and to
think how few Towns, or Cities there be (where is any forwardness in Religion)
that are not cut into shreds and crumbled as to dust, by separations and
divisions? to think what a wound we have hereby given to the very Christian
name, how we have hardened the ignorant, confirmed the Papists, and are our
selves become the scorn of our enemies, and the grief of our friends, and how
many of our dearest best esteemed friends, have fallen to notorious pride or
impiety, yea, some, to be worse than open Infidels? These are pillars of Salt,
see that you remember them. Though of your own selves, men should arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them, Acts 20. 30. yea though
an Angel from Heaven should draw you to divisions, see that you follow him not.
If there be erroneous practices in the Church, keep your selves innocent, with
moderation, and peace. It must be no small error, that must force a Separation.
Justin Martyr professed, that if a Jew should keep the ceremonial law, so he
did not persuade the Gentiles to it, as necessary, yet if he acknowledged
Christ, he judges that he might be saved, and he would embrace him and have
communion with him. Paul would have him received, that is weak in the faith,
and not un-church whole parishes of those that we know not, nor were ever
brought to a just trial. I ever loved a godly peaceable Conformist, better than
a turbulent Nonconformist. I differ from many, in several things of
considerable moment, yet if I should zealously press my judgment on others, so
as to disturb the peace of the Church, and separate from my brethren that are
contrary minded, I should fear, lest I should prove a firebrand in hell, for
being a firebrand in the Church. And for all the interest I have in your
judgments and affections, I here charge you, that if God should give me up, to
any factious, Church-rending course, (against which I daily pray) that you
forsake me, and follow me not a step. And for peace with one another, follow it
with all your might, if it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12. 18. (mark this.) When you feel any sparks of discontent
in your breasts, take them as kindled by the Devil, from hell, and take heed
you cherish them not. If the flames begin to break forth, in censoriousness,
reproaches, and hard speeches of others, be as speedy and busy in quenching
it, as if it were fire in the thatch of your houses. For why should your houses
be dearer to you, than the Church, which is the house of God? or your Souls,
which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? Has God spoke more against any sin
than unpeaceableness? If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you: which Lodovicus Crocius says, is the measure, and
essential property of the least degree of true faith; if you love not one
another, you are not disciples of Christ.

Public wars and private quarrels usually pretend the Reformation of the
Church, Saints Rest p. 551.
the vindicating of the Truth, and the welfare of Souls; but they as usually
prove in the issue, the greatest means to the overthrow of all. It is as
natural for both wars and private contentions to produce errors, schisms,
contempt of Magistracy, Ministry, and Ordinances, as it is for a dead Carrion
to breed worms and vermin. Believe it from one, that has too many years
experience of it; it is as hard a thing to maintain even in your people, a
sound understanding, a tender Conscience, a lively, gracious, heavenly frame of
spirit, and an upright life in a way of war and contention, as to keep your
Candle lighted in the greatest storms, or under the waters. The like I may say
of perverse and fierce disputings about the circumstantials of discipline, or
other questions, that are far from the foundation; they oftener lose the truth
than find it. Woe to those Ministers, that make unnecessary divisions, and
parties among the people, that so they may get themselves a name, and be cried
up by many followers. The way to prosper your labors is to quench all flames
of contention, to your power. Study the peace and unity of your Congregations,
keep out all occasions of divisions, especially the doctrine of Separation, and
popular Church Government, the apparent Seminary of faction, and perpetual
contentions. If once the people be taught, that it belongs to them to govern
themselves, and those the Scripture calls their Guides and Rulers, we shall
have mad work. They that would pluck up the hedge of Government, as if the
vineyard could not be fruitful, except it lay waste, to the pleasure of all the
beasts of the forest, are like the pond, that grudged at the banks and damm,
and thought it injurious to be restrained of its liberty, and therefore
combined with the winds, to raise a tempest, and so assault and beat down the
banks in their rage; and now where is that peaceable association of waters? We
feel now, how those are mistaken that thought the way for the Churches unity,
was to dig up the banks and let all loose, that every man in Religion might do
what he list.

They are, p. 666.
usually, men least acquainted with a heavenly life, who are the violent
disputers about the circumstantials of Religion. As the body does languish in
consuming Fevers, when the native heat abates within, and unnatural heat
inflaming the external parts succeeds: so when the zeal of a Christian does
leave the internals of Religion, and fly to ceremonials, externals, or inferior
things, the Soul must needs consume and languish.

Of Conformity.
For Conformity, p. 55.
though to Ministers it be another thing, by reason of the new impositions,
than it was to our Predecessors; yet to the People, Conformity is the same, if
not easier, (especially to them that I now speak to:) for it is the Liturgy,
Ceremonies, and Ministry, that most alienate them. And the Liturgy is a little
amended, as to them, by the change of the translation, and some little words,
and by some longer Prayers; and the Ceremonies are the same; and thirty years
ago, there were many bare reading, not preaching Ministers, for one that is
now. Therefore our case of Separation being the same as of old, I take it to be
fully confuted, by the Ancient Non-conformists: and I have so great a
veneration for the worthy Names, much more an estimation of the reasonings, of
Mr. Cartwright, Egerton, Hildersham, Dod, Amesius, Parker, Baines, Brightman,
Ball, Bradshaw, Paget, Langley, Nicols, Herring, etc. that I shall not think,
they knew not why they chose this subject, and wrote more against Separation,
than the Conformists did. I am very glad that the pious Lectures of Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. R. Rogers, and such old Non-conformists, are in so good esteem
among good People, where they will read them, urging the People, not only
against Separation, but to come to the very beginning of the public Worship,
and preferring it before their private duties.

When I think what holy Learned Men the old Conformists were, p. 57.
my heart rises against the thoughts of separating from them. If I had come to
their Churches, when they used the Common Prayer, and administered the
Sacrament, could I have departed and said, It is not lawful for any Christian
here to communicate with you? What! to such Men, as Mr. Bolton, Whateley,
Fenner, Dent, Crook, Dike, Stock, Smith, Dr. Preston, Sibbs, Stoughton, Tailor,
and abundance other such? yea such as Bishop Jewel, Grindal, Hall, Potter,
Davenant, Carleton, etc. Dr. Field, Smith, Jo. White, Willet, etc. yea and the
Martyrs too? as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper himself, Farrar, Bradford, Fillpot,
Sanders, etc. Could I separate from all these on the Reasons now in question?
Yea Calvin himself and the Churches of his way were all separated from by the
Separatists of their times.

And though ministerial Conformity is now much altered, p. 12, 13.
(as to engagements) many (of the Assembly of Divines) that are yet living, do
conform again; nor would I shun communion with the Reverend members of that
Assembly, Twiss, Gataker, Whitaker, and the rest, if again they used the
Liturgy among us. And if the old Conformists, such as Bolton, etc. were alive,
and used now the same Liturgy and Ceremonies as they did then, (which was worse
than now) I could not think their communion in Prayer and Sacraments, unlawful,
nor censure that man as injurious to the Church, who should write to persuade
others, not to separate from them.

Read over some of the old Non-conformists Books against Separation, Defense*
p. 89.
as Mr. Jacobs, the Independent, against Johnson, and Mr. Bradshaw, and Mr.
Gataker's defense against Cann, Mr. Gifford, Darrell, Paget, etc. and fullest
of all, (at the beginning of our troubles) Mr. John Ball in three Books: In
these you will find the same objections answered, or more, and greater. And I
profess my judgment, That our ordinary boasters, that think they know more in
this controversy than the old Non-conformists did, as far as I am able to
discern, are as far below them almost as they are below either Chamier, Sadeel,
Whitaker, or such other in dealing with a Papist.

Objections Answered.
But what if there be gross and scandalous sinners are members of the Church?
Christian Directory, p. 747.
Answ. If you be wanting in your duty to reform it, it is your sin; but if bare
presence made their sin to be ours, it would also make all the sins of the
Assembly ours.

But what if they are sins committed in the open Assembly, even by the Minister
himself in his praying, preaching, and other administrations? Answ. 1. A
Ministers personal faults may damn himself, and must be matter of lamentation
to the Church, who ought to do their best to reform them, or get better, by any
lawful means; But in case they cannot, his sin is none of theirs, nor does it
make his administration null, or ineffectual, nor will it allow you to separate
from the Worship which he administreth. -- You may not separate from him,
unless you can prove him, or his ministry, utterly intolerable, by such faults
as these: 1. An utter insufficiency in knowledge, or utterance, for the
necessary parts of the ministerial work: As if he be not able to teach the
necessary points of Christian Religion, nor to administer the Sacraments, and
other parts of public Worship. 2. If he set himself to oppose the ends of his
Ministry, and preach down godliness, or any part of it, that is necessary to
Salvation: Or be a Preacher of heresy, preaching up any damning error, or
preaching down any necessary, saving truth. 3. If he so deprave the public
Worship, as to destroy the substance of it, as in putting up blasphemy for
prayer or praise, or commit idolatry, or set up new Sacraments, or impose any
actual sin on the People.

But there are other ministerial faults, See Christ. Direct. p. 606.
which warrant not our Separation; as 1. Some tolerable errors of judgment, or
envy, and pettish opposition to others, Phil. 1. 15. 2. It is not unlawful to
join with a Minister, that has many defects in his ministration, or manner of
Worship; as if he preach with some ignorance, disorder, unfit expressions, or
gestures, and the like in Prayer and Sacraments. 3. It is not unlawful to join
with a Minister, that has some material error or untruth in preaching or
praying, so be it we be not called to approve it, and so it be not pernicious
and destructive to the ends of his ministry. If we run away from all that vent
any untruth or mistake in public or private worship, we shall scarce know,
what Church or Person we may hold communion with. For 1. A small sin may no
more be done or owned, than a greater. 2. And then another man's weakness, may
disoblige me, and discharge me from my duty.

Of Subscription with Assent and consent, particularly concerning Infants
baptized.
Q. 152. Is it lawful to subscribe or profess full assent and consent to any
religious books, Christ. Direct. p. 902.
beside the Bible, seeing all are fallible? 3. Answ. It is lawful to profess or
subscribe our assent and consent to any humane writing, which we judge to be
true and good, according to the measure of its truth and goodness. As if
Church-confessions, that are sound, be offered us, for our consent, we may say,
or subscribe, I hold all the Doctrine in this book to be true and good.

Q. 35. Is it certain by the Word of God, p. 807.
that all Infants baptized, and dying before actual sin, are undoubtedly saved?
Answ. I think that all the children of true Christians do by baptism receive a
public investiture, p. 810.
by God's appointment, into a state of remission, adoption, and right to
salvation, at present; sent; though I dare not say, I am undoubtedly certain of
it. -- But I say, as the Synod of Dort, Art. 1. That believing Parents have no
cause to doubt of the salvation of their children, that dye in infancy, before
they commit actual sin; that is, not to trouble themselves with fears about it.
For if such Infants were admitted to outward privileges only, Ibid.
then (which is my 2d. Reason) we have no promise, or certainty or ground of
Faith for the pardon and salvation of any individual Infants in the World: and
if there be no promise, there is no faith of it, nor no baptism to seal it, and
so we make Antipaedobaptism unavoidable.

Whereas some mis-interpret the words of the old Rubric of Confirmation in the
English Liturgy, p. 812.
as if it spoke of all that are baptized, whether they have right or not, the
words themselves may serve to rectify that mistake: [And that no man shall
think any detriment shall come to children by deferring of their confirmation,
he shall know for truth, that it is certain by Gods word, that children being
baptized have all things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly
saved.] where it is plain, they mean, they have all things necessary ex part
Ecclesiae, or all Gods applying Ordinances necessary, though they should die
unconfirmed, supposing, they have all things necessary to just baptism on their
own part: which is but what the Ancients were wont to say of the baptized
adult; but they never meant, that the infidel and impenitent were in a state of
life, because he was baptized, but that all that truly consent to the Covenant,
and signify this by being baptized are saved. So the Church of England says,
that they receive no detriment by delaying confirmation; but it never said,
that they received no detriment by their Parents or Responses infidelity or
Hypocrisy, or by their want of true right, coram Deo, to be baptized.

Q. 39. What is the true meaning of Sponsors or Godfathers, P. 814.
and is it lawful to make use of them? Answ. My Opinion is, that they did both
witness the probability of the Parents fidelity, and also promised, that if
they should either Apostatize, or dye, they would see, p. 815.
that the children were piously educated. If you take them, but as the ancient
Churches did, for such as do attest the Parents fidelity, (in their persuasion)
and do promise, first, to mind you of your duty, and next to take care of their
pious education, if you die; I know no reason you have to scruple this much;
yea more, it is in your power to agree with the Godfathers, that they shall
represent your own persons, and speak and promise what they do, as your
deputies, only in your names: and what have you against this? Object. When the
Churchmen mean another thing, this is but to juggle with the world. Answ. How
can you prove, that the authority, that made, or imposed the Liturgy, meant any
other thing? 2. If the Imposers had meant ill, in a thing that may be done
well, you may discharge your Conscience, by doing it well, and making a
sufficient profession of your better sense.

Q. 42. How is the Holy Ghost given to Infants in Baptism? whether all the
children of true Christians have inward sanctifying grace, (...).
etc. Ans. My judgment agrees more in this with Davenant's, than any others;
saving that he does not appropriate the benefits of Baptism to the children of
true Believers, so much as I do. And though, by a Letter impleading Davenant's
cause, I was the occasion of printing good Mr. Gataker's Answer to him; yet I
am still most inclined to his judgment, Not, that all the baptized, but that
all the baptized seed of true Christians are pardoned, justified, adopted, and
have a title to the spirit, and Salvation. And we must choose great
inconveniences, if this opinion be forsaken, viz. that all infants must be
taken to be out of Covenant with God, and to have no promise of Salvation;
whereas, surely, the law of Grace, as well as the Covenant of works included
all the seed in their capacity.

Of the Responses.
Q. 83. May the people bear a vocal part in Worship, and do any more than say
Amen? P. 856.
Answ. The people bear an equal part in singing the Psalms, which are prayer,
and praise, and instruction: if they may do so in the Psalms in meter, there
can be no reason given, but they may lawfully do so in Psalms in Prose; for
saying them, and singing them, are but modes of utterance, and the Ancient
singing was liker our Saying, than our tunes. The Primitive Christians were so
full of zeal, and love to Christ, that they would have taken it for an injury,
and a quenching of the Spirit, to have been wholly restrained from bearing
their part in the praises of the Church. The use of the tongue keeps awake
the mind, and stirs up God's graces, in his servants. It was the decay of
zeal in the people, that first shut out the Responses: while they kept up the
ancient zeal, they were inclined to take their part vocally in the Worship. And
this was seconded by the pride and usurpation of the Priests thereupon; who
thought the people of God too profane to speak in the Assemblies, and meddle
so much with holy things. Yet the very remembrance of former zeal caused most
Churches to retain many of the words of their predecessors, even when they lost
the life and spirit which should animate them; and so the same words came into
the Liturgies, and were used by too many, customarily, and in formality, which
their Ancestors had used in the fervor of their Souls. And if it were not,
that a dead-hearted, formal people, by speaking the Responses carelessly and
hypocritically, do bring them into disgrace with many, that see the necessity
of seriousness, I think, few good people would be against them now. -- It is
here the duty of every Christian, to labor to restore the life and spirit to
the words, that they may again be used in a serious and holy manner, as
heretofore. Exodus 19. 8. In as solemn an Assembly as any of ours, when God gave
Moses a form of words to preach to the people, all the people answered
together, and said, All that the Lord has spoken, we will do. So Exodus 24. 3.
and Deuter. 5. 27. which God approved of, v. 28, 29. See Levit. 9. 24. 2 Kings
23. 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 1. 35, 36. P. 857.
It is a command, Ps. 67. 3, 5. Let all the people praise thee, O God, etc. And
he that will limit this to single persons, or say that it must not be, vocally,
in the Church, or, it must be in meter only, and never in prose, must prove it,
lest he be proved one, that adds to Gods word.

Q. 84. Is it not a Sin for our Clerks, to make themselves the mouth of the
people? P. 857.
Answ. The Clerks are not appointed to be the mouth of the people, but each
Clerk is one of the people, commanded to do that which all should do, lest it
should be wholly left undone. If all the congregation will speak all that the
Clerk does, it will answer the primary desire of the Church Governors who bid
the people do it.

Of Bowing at the name Jesus -- And of Priests, Altars, etc.
Q. 86. Is it lawful to bow at the name of Jesus? P. 85^.
Answ. That we may lawfully express our reverence, when the names ( God,
Jehovah, Jesus, Christ, etc.) are uttered, I have met with few Christians who
deny; nor know I any reason to deny it. If I live and join in a Church where it
is commanded, and peremptorily urged, to bow at the name of Jesus, and where my
not doing it, would be divisive, scandalous, or offensive; I will bow at the
name of God, Jehovah, Jesus, Christ, Lord, etc. My judgment of standing at the
Gospel, and kneeling at the Decalogue, 859.
(when it is commanded) is the same.

Q. 122. May the name, Priests, Sacrifice and Altars, be lawfully used? Answ.
882.
The New Testament uses all the Greek names, which we translate Priests,
Sacrifice and Altars; and our translation is not intolerable, if Priest come
from Presbyter (I need not prove that) if it do not, yet all Ministers are
subordinate to Christ in his Priestly office. And the word Sacrifice is used of
us, and our offered Worship, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Hebr. 13. 15, 16. Phil. 4. 18. Ephesians.
5. 2. To. 12. 1. And Hebr. 13. 10. says we have an Altar, which word is
frequently used in the Revelations, in relation to Gospeltimes. We must not
therefore be quarrelsome against the bare names, unless they be abused to some
ill use. The Ancient Fathers and Churches did ever use all these words so
familiarly, without any question or scruple raised by the Orthodox, or
Heretics about them, that we should be wary, how we condemn these words, lest
we give advantage to the Papists to tell their followers, that all antiquity is
on their side. The Lords Supper is by Protestants truly called a Commemorative
Sacrifice.

Of the Communion table, etc.
Qu. 123. May the Communion Tables be turned Altarwise? P. 882.
and railed in? and is it lawful to come up to the rails to communicate? Answ.
1. God has not given a particular command, or prohibition about these
circumstances, but only general rules for edification, unity, decency and
order. 2. They that do it out of a design to draw men to Popery, or to
encourage men in it, do sin. 3. So do they, that rail in the Table, to
signify, that Lay-Christians must not come to it, but be kept at a distance.
4. But where there are no such ends, but only to imitate the Ancients, that did
thus, and to show reverence to the Table on the account of the Sacrament, by
keeping away dogs, keeping boys from sitting on it; and the professed doctrine
of the Church condemns Transubstantiation, the real corporal-presence, etc.
in this case Christians should take these, for such as they are, indifferent
things, and not censure or condemn each other for them. 5. And to communicate,
is not only lawful in this case, where we cannot prove, that the Minister
sins, but even, when we suspect an ill design in him, which we cannot prove,
yea, or when we can prove that his personal interpretation of the place, name,
situation; and rail, is unsound; for we assemble there to communicate in, and
according to the professed doctrine of Christianity, and the Churches, and our
own open profession, and not after every private opinion, and error of the
Minister.

Of the Creed.
Qu. 139. What is the use and authority of the Creed? is it of the Apostles
framing or not? P. 896.
Answ. Its use is, to be a plain explication of the Faith professed in the
baptismal covenant; And for the satisfaction of the Church, that men indeed
understand what they did in Baptism, and professed to believe. 2. It is the
Word of God, as to the matter of it, whatever it be as to the order, or
composition of the words. 3. It is not to be doubted, but the Apostles did use
a Creed commonly in their days, which was the same with that, now called the
Apostles, and the Nicene, in the main. 4. And it is easily probable, that
Christ composed a Creed, when he made his Covenant, and instituted baptism,
Matthew. 28. 19. 5. That the Apostles did cause the baptizable; to understand the
three Articles of Christ's own Creed and Covenant, and used many explicatory
words to make them understand it. 6. It is more than probable, that the matter
opened by them, was still the same when the words were not the same. 7. And it
is also more than probable, that they did not needlessly vary the words, lest it
should teach men to vary the matter. And lastly, no doubt but this practice of
the Apostles was imitated by the Churches, and that thus the essentials of
Religion were by the tradition of the Creed, and Baptism, delivered by
themselves, as far as Christianity went, long before any book of the New
Testament was written. And the following Churches, using the same Creed; might
so far well call it the Apostles Creed.

Of the Apocrypha.
Qu. 150. Is it lawful to read the Apocrypha or Homilies? P. 901.
Answ. It is lawful, so be it they be sound doctrine, and fitted to the peoples
edification. 2. So be it they be not read scandalously, without sufficient
differencing them from God's book. 3. So they be not read to exclude, or hinder
the reading of the Scriptures, or other necessary Church duty. 4. So they be
not read to keep up an ignorant, lazy Ministry, that can, or will do no better.
5. And especially, if Authority command it, and the Churches agreement require
it.

Of the Oath of Canonical Obedience.
Qu. 153. May we lawfully swear obedience, in all things lawful and honest,
either to Usurpers, or to our lawful Pastors? 902.
Answ. If the King shall command us, it is lawful. So the old Nonconformists,
who thought the English Prelacy an unlawful office, yet maintained that it is
lawful to take the Oath of Canonical obedience, because they thought it was
imposed by the King, and Laws, and that we swear to them, not as Officers
claiming a divine right in the spiritual Government, but as Ordinaries or
Officers, made by the King, according to the Oath of Supremacy.

Of the Holiness of Churches.
Qu. 170. Are Temples, Fonts, Utensils, Church Lands, much more Ministers holy?
and what reverence is due to them, as Holy? P. 915.
Answ. Temples, Utensils, Lands, etc. devoted, and lawfully separated by man,
for holy uses, are holy, as justly related to God by that lawful separation.
Ministers are more holy than Temples, Lands, or Utensils, as being nearlier
related to holy things; and things separated by God, are more holy than those
justly separated by man. And so of Days, every thing should be reverenced
according to the measure of its holiness: And this expressed by such signs,
gestures, actions, as are fittest to honor God, to whom they are related. And
so to be uncovered in Church, and use reverent carriage and gestures there,
does tend to preserve due reverence to God, and to his Worship, 1 Cor. 16. 20.

Of the power of the Magistrate in Circumstantials.
Those modes or circumstances of Worship, Five Disp. p. 361.
which are necessary in genere, but left undetermined by God, in specie, are
left by God to humane, prudential determination, (else an impossibility should
be necessary.) It is left to humane determination what Place the public
Assemblies shall be held in. p. 401.
And to determine of the time, except where God has determined already, and
what Utensils to employ about the public Worship. Some decent Habit is
necessary; p. 409.
either the Magistrate, or the Minister, or associated Pastors must determine
what. I think, neither Magistrate, nor Synod, should do more than hinder
indecency; if they do, and tie all to one habit (and suppose it were an
indecent habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of power, it is a thing within
the Magistrates reach, he does not an aliene work, but his own work amiss, and
therefore the thing in it self being lawful, I would obey him, and use that
garment, if I could not be dispensed with. Yea though, secondarily, the
whiteness be to signify purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet would I
obey. And I see no reason to scruple the lawfulness of the Ring in marriage; p.
411.
for, though the Papists make a Sacrament of marriage, yet we have no reason to
take it for any Ordinance of Divine Worship, more than the solemnizing a
contract between a Prince and People. All things are sanctified and pure to the
pure. And, for Organs or other Instruments of music in God's worship, 412.
they being a help, partly natural, and partly artificial to the exhilarating
the Spirits, for the praise of God, I know no argument to prove them simply
unlawful, but what would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the tune and meter
and melody of singing unlawful. Christian Direct. p. 884.


Of Holy Days.
Nor do I scruple to keep a day in remembrance of any eminent Servant of
Christ, Five Disp. p. 412.
or Martyr, to praise God for their Doctrine or Example, and honor their
memorial. I am resolved, if I live where such Holy Days, 416.
(Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting, Transfiguration, ascension, and
such like) are observed, to censure no man for observing them. p. 117.
But, if I lived under a government, that peremptorily commanded it, See
Christian Directory. p. 885.
I would observe the outward rest of such a Holy Day, and I would preach on it,
and join with the Assemblies in God's Worship, yea I would thus observe the
day, rather than offend a weak Brother, or hinder any man's salvation; much
more rather than I would make any division in the Church.

Of the Cross in Baptism.
I dare not peremptorily say, p. 418.
that the Cross in Baptism is unlawful; nor will I condemn Ancients or Moderns
that use it, nor will I make any disturbance in the Church about it, more than
my own forbearance will make. I presume not to censure them that judge it
lawful, but only give the reasons that make me doubt, and rather think it to be
unlawful, though still with a suspicion of my own understanding.

Of Ceremonies.
Certain things commonly called Ceremonies, p. 398.
may lawfully be used in the Church, upon Humane imposition; and when it is not
against the Law of God, no Person should disobey the commands of their lawful
Governors in such things. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies,
which may lawfully, yea must in duty be used, by the Subject, when they are
commanded.

Mr. Baxter's judgment concerning Confirmation agreeable to the practice of the
Church of England, Of Confirmation, p. 207, 220, 230.
may be seen in a particular Treatise on that Subject.

Of Conventicles.
Q. 172. Are all religious and private Meetings forbidden by Rulers, Christ.
Direct. p. 916.
unlawful Coventicles? Answ. 1. It is more to the Honor of the Church, and of
Religion, and of God, and more to our safety and edification, to have God's
worship performed solemnly, publicly, and in great Assemblies, than in a
corner, secretly and with few. 2. It is a great mercy, where Rulers allow the
Church such public Worship. 3. Caeteris paribus, all Christians should prefer
such public Worship before private, and no private Meetings should be kept up,
which are opposite, or prejudicial to such public Meetings. And therefore, if
such Meetings, (or any that are unnecessary, to the ends of the Ministry, the
service of God, and good of Souls) be forbidden by lawful Rulers, they must be
forborne. And it must be remembered, that Rulers, that are Infidels, Papists,
Heretics, or Persecutors, that restrain Church meetings, to the injury of men's
Souls, must be distinguished from pious Princes, that only restrain Heretics,
and real Schismatics, for the Churches good. 2. And that times of heresy and
schism may make private meetings more dangerous, than quiet times. And so even
the Scottish Church forbad private meetings, in the Separatists days of late.
And when they do more hurt than good, and are justly forbidden, no doubt, in
that case, it is a duty to obey, and to forbear them.

It is a dangerous thing, Christ. Direct. p. 49.
to be ensnared in a Sect, it will, before you are aware, possess you with a
seaverish, sinful zeal for the Opinions, and interest of that Sect; it will
make you bold, in bitter invectives and censures, against those that differ
from you; it will corrupt your Church Communion, and fill your very Prayers
with partiality, and humane passions; it will secretly bring malice, under the
name of Zeal, into your minds and words. In a word, it is a secret, but deadly
enemy to Christian love and peace. Let them that are wiser, and more Orthodox,
and godly than others, show (as the Holy Ghost directs them, James 3. 13, 14,
etc.) out of a good conversation their works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye
have bitter envying, (or zeal) and strife in your hearts, Glory not, and lie
not against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, Devilish.

Of Communion in the Lords Supper.
Qu. 2. May we communicate with unworthy persons? Christian Director. p. 616.
Answ. It is your duty to communicate with that Church which has a true
Pastor, and where the denominating part of the members are capable of
Church Communion, though there may some Infidels, or Heathen, or incapable
Persons violently intrude, or scandalous Persons are admitted, through the
neglect of Discipline, in case you have not your choice to hold personal
communion with a better Church, and in case also you be not guilty of the
corruption, but by seasonable and modest professing your dissent, do clear your
self of the guilt of such intrusion and corruption.

Qu. 3. But what if I cannot communicate, unless I conform to an imposed
gesture, as kneeling? Answ. I never yet heard any thing to prove kneeling
unlawful; there is no Word of God, for, or against, any gesture. Christ's
example cannot be proved to oblige us in this, and his gesture was not such a
sitting as ours. The nature of the Ordinance is mixed. And if it be lawful to
take a Pardon from the King upon our Knees, I know not what can make it
unlawful to take a Sealed Pardon from Christ, by his Ambassador, upon our
Knees. Five Disp. p. 411.
As for this Ceremony of kneeling at the Sacrament especially, since the
Rubric is inserted, which disclaimeth, both all Bread-worship, and the bodily
real-presence, my judgment was ever for it. God having made some gesture
necessary, and confined us to none, but left it to humane determination, I
shall submit to Magistrates, in their proper work. I am not sure, that Christ
intended the example of himself in this as obligatory; but I am sure, Defense,
p. 177.
he has commanded me obedience, and peace. Mr. Perkins was for kneeling, and
Mr. Baines in his Letters writes for it, and answers objections against it.

Qu. 4. But what if I cannot communicate, Christ. Direct. p. 607.
but according to the administration of the Common Prayer book? Answ. 1. That
it is not unlawful to receive according to the administration of the
Common Prayer book, because it is a form, needs no proof to any, that is
judicious. 2. Nor yet, for any evil in this particular form, for in this part
the Common Prayer is generally approved. 3. Nor yet, because it is imposed; for
a command makes not that unlawful to us, which is lawful before, but it makes
many things lawful, and duties, that else would have been unlawful
accidentally. 4. And the intentions of the Commanders we have little to do
with. And for the consequents, they must be weighed on both sides, and the
consequents of our refusal will not be found light. In general, I must here
tell the People of God, in the bitter sorrow of my Soul, that at last it is
time for them to discern that temptation, that has in all ages of the Church
almost, made this Sacrament of our union, to be the grand occasion or
instrument of our divisions. And that, true humility, and acquaintance with our
selves, and love to Christ, and one another, would show some men that it was
but their pride and prejudice, and ignorance, that made them think so heinously
of other men's manner of worship. And that, on all sides, among true Christians,
the manner of their worship is not so odious, as prejudice, and faction, and
partiality represents it. And that God accepts that, which they reject. And
they should see, how the Devil has undone the common People, by this means, by
teaching them every one to expect salvation for being of that Party which he
takes to be the right Church, and for worshipping in that manner which he, and
his Party, thinks best. And so wonderful a thing is prejudice, that every
Party, by this, is brought to think that ridiculous and vile, which the other
party accounts best. Christian Direct. p. 48.
But to magnify any one Church or Party, so as to deny due love and communion
to the rest, is Schism. To limit all the Church to your party, and deny all, or
any of the rest, to be Christians, and parts of the Universal Church, is
Schism, by a dangerous breach of Charity. It is Schism also, to condemn
unjustly any particular Church, as no Church. And it is Schism, to withdraw
your bodily communion from a Church that you were bound to hold communion with,
upon a false supposition that it is no Church, or is not lawfully to be
communicated with. And it is Schism, to make Divisions or Parties in a Church,
though you divide not from that Church. The holiness of the Party that men
adhere to, p. 49.
is made a pretense to excuse Schism; but this must make but a gradual
difference in our esteem and love to some Christians above others. If really
they are most holy, I must love them most, and labor to be as holy as they:
But I must not therefore, unjustly deny communion, or due respect to other
Christians, that are less holy, nor cleave to them as a Sect, or divided Party,
whom I esteem most holy. For the holiest are most Charitable, and most against
the divisions among Christians, and tenderest of their unity and peace. Own the
best, as best, but none, as a divided Sect; espouse not their dividing
interest; confine not your especial love to a party, but extend it to all the
members of Christ. Deny not local communion when there is occasion for it, to
any Church, that has the Substance of true worship, and forces you not to
sin. Love them as true Christians, and Churches, even when they drive you from
their Communion. Baxter of Confirmation, p. 3.
I have found that Reformation is to be accomplished more by restoration of
Ordinances and administrations to their primitive nature and use, than by utter
abolition.

Of the Liturgy.
My Opinion as to Liturgy in general, Dispute the 4th. of Church Government. p.
358.
is, 1. That a stinted Liturgy is in it self lawful. 2. That a stinted Liturgy
in some parts of Public Service is necessary. 3. In the parts where it is not
necessary, it may not only be submitted to, but desired, when the peace of the
Church requires it. p. 359.
4. It is not of such necessity to take the matter, and words out of the Holy
Scriptures, but that we may join in a Liturgy, See Christian Direct. p. 847.
or use it, if the form of words be not from Scripture. This is thus proved: 1.
That which is not directly, or consequentially forbidden by God, remains
lawful. A stinted Liturgy is not directly, or consequentially forbidden of God:
Therefore it remains lawful. The major is undoubted, because nothing but a
prohibition can make a thing unlawful; where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. Yet I have heard very reverend men answer this, That it is
enough that it is not commanded, though not forbidden, which is plainly to deny
both Scripture and Civil principles. Now for the Minor, That a stinted Liturgy
is not forbidden, we need no other proof, than that no prohibition can be
produced. p. 36^.


If it be lawful for the people to use a stinted form of words, p. 364.
in Public prayer, then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors: But it is
lawful for the people, etc. for the Pastors prayer (which they must pray over
with him, and not only hear it) is a stinted form to them, even as much as if
he had learnt it out of a book.

It is lawful to use a form in preaching, therefore a stinted Liturgy is
lawful. 1. Because preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the reason
is the same for prayer as for that in the main.

That which has been the practice of the Church in Scripture times and down to
this day, and is yet the practice of almost all the Churches of Christ on
earth, is not like to be unlawful: But such is the use of some stinted forms,
etc.

I have showed, that it is was so in the Jewish Church. That it has been of
ancient use in the Church, since Christ, and at this day in Africa, Asia,
Europe, and the Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Geneva, etc. is so well
known that I need not stand to prove it: and those few that seem to disuse it,
do yet use it in Psalms and other parts of worship. As for the Common Prayer it
self, I never rejected it, because it was a form; or thought it simply
unlawful, because it was such a form; but have made use of it, and would do
again in the like case.

Object. But if a faulty manner of praying be prescribed, Christian Directory,
p. 748.
and imposed by a law, I know it beforehand and am guilty of it. Answ. If the
thing be sinful, either it is, 1. because the prayers are defective and faulty;
or, 2. because they are imposed, or, 3. because you knew the fault beforehand:
but none of these can prove your joining with them sinful. 1. Not because they
are faulty; for you may join with as faulty prayers (you confess) if not
imposed. 2. Not because imposed, for that is an extenuation, and not an
aggravation. See Christian Direct. p. 848.
For (1.) it proves the Minister less voluntary of the two, than those are
that do it without any command, through the error of their own judgments. (2.)
Because (though lawful things often become unlawful when Superiors forbid them,
yet) no reason can be given, why a lawful thing should become unlawful, because
a lawful Superior does command it; else Superiors might take away all our
Christian liberty, and make all things unlawful to us, by commanding them. You
would take it for a wild conceit in your children or servants, if they say,
when you bid them learn a Catechism, or use a form of prayer, It was lawful for
us to do it till you commanded us, but because you bid us do it, it is
unlawful. If it be a duty to obey Governors in all lawful things, then it is
not a sin to obey them. 3. It is not your knowing before hand, that makes it
unlawful: for 1. I know in general beforehand, that all imperfect men will do
imperfectly: and though I know not the particular, that makes it never the
lawfuller, if foreknowledge it self did make it unlawful. 2. If you know that (
e.g.) an Antinomian, or some mistaken Preacher, would constantly drop some
words for his error, in praying or preaching, that will not make it unlawful in
your own judgment, for you to join (if it be not a flat heresy.) 3. It is
another man's error or fault that you foreknow, and not your own. 4. God himself
does as an universal cause of nature concur with men in those acts which he
foreknoweth they will sinfully do, yet is not the Author or approver of the sin.

We (the Commissioners 1663.) all thought a Liturgy lawful, Defense, p. 38.
and diverse learned and reverend Nonconformists of London met to consider how
far it was their duty or lawful to communicate with the Parish Churches, where
they lived, in the Liturgy and Sacrament, and I proved four propositions: 1.
That it is lawful to use a form; 2. That it is lawful to join with some Parish
Churches in the use of the Liturgy; 3. That it is lawful to join with some
Parish Churches in the Lords Supper; 4. That it is to some a duty to join with
some Parish Churches three times a year in the Lords Supper: and none of the
Brethren seemed to dissent, but took the reasons to be valid.

Were I in Armenia, p. 176.
Abassia, or among the Greeks, I would join in a much more defective form than
our Liturgy, rather than none. And this is the judgment of many New England
Ministers, conform to the old Non-conformists, who did some of them read the
Common Prayer, and the most of them judged it lawful to join in it, or else Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. Rich. Rogers, etc. would not write so earnestly for coming to
the beginning, and preferring it before all private duties. p. 54.
And truly I am not able to bear the thoughts of separating from almost all
Christ's Churches upon earth; but he that separates from one, or many, upon a
reason common to almost all, does virtually separate from almost all; and he
that separates from all among us upon the account of the unlawfulness of our
Liturgy, and the badness of our Ministry, does separate from them upon a reason
common to almost all, or the far greatest part, as I conceive.

Those forms of Liturgy which now are most distasted, Cure of Divisions, p 200.
were brought in by the most zealous religious people at the first: the many
short invocations, versicles and responses, which the people use, were brought
in when the Souls of the faithful did abound with zeal* and in holy fervors
break out in such expressions, and could not well endure to be bare Auditors
and not vocally to bear their part in the praises of God and prayers of the
Church.

I have showed at large, p. 174.
How far God has given men power to prescribe, and impose forms for others,
and commanded others to obey them: when Christ said, When ye pray, say, Our
Father, p. 179.
etc. he bound the Disciples in duty to do as he bid them: How forms may be
imposed publicly on the congregations of Believers, p. 185.
and on the Ministers, yea though the forms imposed be worse than the exercise
of their own gifts, (though among us no man be forbidden to use his own gifts
in the Pulpit.) The Pharisees long Liturgy (it is like) was in many things
worse than ours; yet Christ and his Apostles often joined with them, and never
condemned them. I shall now only add that the Lord's prayer is a form directed
to God as in the third person, Five Disput p. 363.
and not to man only as a directory for prayer in the Second Person: it is not,
Pray to God your Father in heaven that his name may be Hallowed, his Kingdom
come, etc. But, Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. And
it seems by the disciples words that thus John taught his disciples to pray,
Luke 11. 1. and we have in the Scripture the mention of many Set forms of
Service to God, which therefore we may well use. And I desire the Reader again
to Note, that though Prayer was corrupted by the Pharisees, yet Christ usually
joined in their Synagogues, Luke 14. 17. and never meddled with our controversy
about the lawfulness of Set forms. [This Mr. Baxter infers from Calvin's note on
Matthew. 6. before the Preface to the Defense.]

Of Obedience to our Pastors.
We are endangered by divisions, principally because the self-conceited part of
Religious people will not be ruled by their Pastors, Sacrileg. Deserting, p.
103.
but must have their way, and will needs be rulers of the Church and them. But
pleasing the ignorant Professors humors, is a sin that shows us to be too
humane and carnal, and has always sad effects at last. It is a high degree of
pride for persons of ( ordinary) understandings, p 101, 102.
to conclude, that almost all Christ's Chruches in the world for thirteen
hundred years at least, have offered such worship to God, as that you are
obliged to avoid it, and all their communion in it; and that almost all the
Catholic Church on earth at this day is below your communion, for using forms.
Mark, Is it not more of the women and apprentices that are of this mind, than
of old experienced Christians?

I think till we have better taught, Baxter against Crandon, p. 83.
even our godly people, what credit and obedience is due to their teachers, and
spiritual guides, the Church of England shall never have peace, or any good or
established order. Cure of Divis. p. 393.
We are broken for want of the knowledge of this truth; till this be known we
shall never be well bound up and healed. The people of the new separation, so
much rule their Ministers, that many of them have been forced to forsake their
own judgments to comply with the violent.

Labor to maintain the Ordinances and Ministry in esteem. Saints Rest, p. 519.


The Church is bound to take many a man, Church Government, p. 131.
as a true Minister to them, and receive the Ordinances from him, in faith and
expectation of blessing, upon promise, who yet before God is a sinful invader
and usurper of the Ministry, and shall be condemned for it. (How much more then
to respect their lawful Bishops and Pastors?)

For Lay Elders, 5. Disput. Preface, p. 4.
As far as I understand, the greatest part, if not three for one of the English
Ministers, are of this mind, That unordained Elders wanting power to preach or
administer Sacraments, are not Officers in the Church of God's appointment: of
this number I am one, and Mr. Vines was another.

Of Bishops.
As for Bishops ( viz.) a Diocesan, Five Disp. p. 20.
ruling all the Presbyters, but leaving the Presbyters to rule the People, and
consequently taking to himself the sole, or chief power of Ordination, but
leaving censures and absolution to them, except in case of Appeal to himself; I
must needs say that this sort of Episcopacy is very ancient, and has been for
many Ages of very common reception through a great part of the Church -- And if
I lived in a place, where this government were established, and managed for
God, I would submit thereto, and live peaceably under it, and do nothing to the
disturbance, disgrace or discouragement of it. (You may see how far Mr. Vines
and Mr. Baxter did agree in the notion of a Bishop over many Presbyters.) p.
352.
Of which Grotius in his Commentary on the Acts, and particularly, chap. 17.
says, that as in every particular Synagogue, many of which were in some one
City (in Jerusalem 480.) there was (...), Sigonius de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 8.
such was the Primitive Bishop. And doubtless the first Bishops were over the
community of Presbyters, as Presbyters, in joint relation to one Church or
region; which region being upon the increase of believers divided into more
Churches, and in aftertimes, those Churches assigned to particular men; yet he
the Bishop, continued Bishop over them still. For that Mr. Baxter.
you say, he had a negative voice, that is more than ever I saw proved, or I
think ever shall, for the first 200. Years; and yet I have labored to enquire
into it. That makes him Angelus Princeps, not Angelus Praeses, as Dr. Reinolds
says. Calvin denies that, and makes him Consul in Senatu, or as the Speaker in
the House of Parliament, which, as I have heard that D. B. did say, was but to
make him foreman of the Jury. As touching the introduction of ruling Elders,
such as are modelled out by Parliament, my judgment is sufficiently known. I am
of your judgment in the point, There should be such Elders, as have power to
preach as well as rule. On this Mr. Baxter reflects, p. 353. Though Mr. Vines
here yield not the negative voice to have been de facto, in the first or second
age, nor to be de Jure; yet he without any question yielded to the stating of a
President, durante vita, if he prove not unworthy, which was one point that I
propounded to him; and I make no doubt, but he would have yielded to a
voluntary consent of Presbyters, de facto, not to ordain without the President.
And the difficulties that are before us, de facto, in setting up a Parochial
Episcopacy, which he mentions, I have cleared already in these Papers,
showing partly, that the thing is already existent, and partly how more fully
to accomplish it.

The Instances which he gives, are in the Episcopacy of the Protestant Churches
in Poland, from Adrian Regenvolscius, Hist. Eccles. Sclavon. l. 3. p. 424. N.
B. Whereas from the first reformation of the Churches in the Province of the
lesser Polonia, it has been received by use and custom, that out of the
Elders of all those ( Districtus) Divisions, which are 36. in Number, one
Primate, or Chief, in Order, who is commonly called Superintendent of the
Churches of lesser Poland, and does preside over the Provincial Synods, be
chosen by the Authority, consent, and suffrage of the Provincial Synod, and
that he be inaugurated, and declared, (not by imposition of hands, to avoid the
suspicion of Primacy, and the appearance of authority and power over the other
Elders) only by benediction, and fraternal Prayers, and by reading over the
offices, which concern this function, and the prayers of the whole Synod, for
the sake of government and good order in the Church of God, etc.

The other instance is of the Churches of the Bohemian Confession, who have
among the Pastors of the Churches, their Conseniors and Seniors, and one
President over all, related by the same Regenvolscius, p. 315. The Elders or
the Superintendents of the Bohemian and Moravian Churches, etc. are for the
most part, chosen out of their Fellow-Elders, and are ordained and consecrated
to the office of Seigniory by imposition of hands, and public inauguration,
etc.

Those that treated with the Bishops, 1660. did yield to such an Episcopacy,
Defense, p. 65.
as the old Non-conformists would scarce generally have consented to, i. e. to
Bishop Usher's model.

Episcopacy is not such an upstart thing, nor defended by such contemptible
reasons, as that the controversy is like to dye with this age; undoubtedly
there will be a godly and learned Party for it, while the World endures. And
it is a numerous party: all the Greek Church, the Armenian, Syrian, Abassine,
and all others, but a few of the Reformed. For Denmark, Sweden, part of
Germany, and Transylvania have a Superintendency, as high as that I plead for.
p. 11. If you know no godly persons of the Episcopal way, I do, and as my
acquaintance increases, I know more and more, and some I take to be much
better than my self, I will say a greater word, that I know those of them, whom
I think as godly, humble Ministers, as most of the Non-conformists, whom I
know. p. 12. and I believe, there are many hundred godly Ministers in the
Church of England, and that their Churches are true Churches. And I am
confident, most of the Ministers in England would be content to yield to such
an Episcopacy, as you may find in the published judgments of Bish. Hall, Usher,
Dr. Forbes, Hodsworth, and others. Preface to the Five Disputations, p. 9.

Of Sacrilege.
Qu. 171. What is Sacrilege? Christ. Direct p. 916.
Ans. It is a robbing God by the unjust alienation of Holy things. As deposing
Kings, silencing true Ministers, the unjust alienating of Temples, Utensils,
Lands, Days separated by God himself and justly consecrated by Man.

Mr. Vines his Letter to Mr. Baxter, p. 35. of the 5. Disput. concerning
Sacrilege.
As for your Question about Sacrilege, I am very near you in the present
Opinion. The point was never stated nor debated in the Isle of Wight; I did for
my part decline the dispute, for I could not maintain the cause as on the
Parliament side; And because, both I and others were unwilling, it was never
brought to open debate. The Commissioners did argue it with the King, but they
went upon grounds of Law and Polity, and it was only about Bishops Lands; for
they then averred the continuance of Dean and Chapter Lands to the use of the
Church. Some deny that there is any sin of Sacrilege under the Gospel, and if
there be any, they agree not in the definition. Some hold an Alienation of
Church-goods, in case of Necessity, and then make the necessity, what, and as
extensive, as they please. The most are of Opinion, that while the Church lies
so unprovided for, the donations are not alienable, sine Sacrilegio. If there
were a Surplusage above the competent maintenance, it were another matter. It
is clear enough, the Donors wills are frustrated, and that their general
intention, and the general use ( viz. the maintenance of God's Worship, and
Ministers) should stand, though the particular use might be superstitious. I
cited in my last Sermon before the Parliament a place out of Mr. Hildersham, on
Psalm. 51. touching Sacrilege. It did not please. If his description of it be
true, then you will still be of your own mind. I dare encourage no Purchasers,
etc.

Mr. Baxter's advice to separating Brethren.
As to separation: Cure of Divis. p. 80.
Be the backwardest to divide and separate, and do it not without a certain
warrant, and extreme necessity; resolve with Augustine, I will not be the
Chaff, and yet I will not go out of the Floor, though the Chaff be there. Never
give over your just desire and endeavor for Reformation, and yet as long as
you can possibly avoid it. Forsake not the Church that you desire to reform; as
Paul said to them, that were to forsake a shipwrackt Vessel, If these abide not
in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Many a one, by unlawful flying and shifting
for his own greater peace and safety, does much more hazard his own and others.

Of Raising Churches against Churches.
The interest of the Christian Protestant Religion in England, Defense, p. 36.
must be much kept up by keeping up as much of truth, piety and reputation as
is possible in the Parish-Churches. Therefore, -- In Parishes where all may
hear the Parish-Minister, Sacrilegious deserting, p. 92.
I would not have you, without necessity, to preach at the same hour of the
day, but at some middle time, that you may not seem to vie with him for
Auditors, nor to draw the People from him; but let them go with you to hear
him, and after come and hear you.

Do not meet together in opposition to the public meeting, Saints Rest, p. 518.
nor at the time of public worship, nor yet to make a groundless schism, or to
separate from the Church, whereof you are Members, nor to destroy the old, that
you may gather a new Church out of its ruins, as long as it has the
Essentials, and there is hope of reforming it; nor yet would I have you forward
to vent your own supposed gifts and parts in teaching, where there is no
necessity of it; nor as a separated Church, but as a part of the Church more
diligent than the rest in redeeming time. Let all your private meetings be in
subordination to the public, and by the approbation and consent of your
spiritual guides, remembering them which have the rule over you, Heb. 13. 7, 8,
9. And I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned and avoid them, etc. Romans 16.
17, 18. I would you would ponder every one of these words, for they are the
precious advice of the Spirit of God, and necessary now as well as then.

The great advantages that Satan has got upon the Church through the sin of
the Pastors, Preface to Confess.
in these later days, is by division. By this he has promoted all the rest of
his designs. Our division gratifieth the Papist, and greatly hazardeth the
Protestant Religion, Defense, p. 17.
more than most of you seem to believe or regard. It advantageth profaneness,
and greatly hinders the success of the Ministers; it pleases Satan and
builds up his kingdom.

The hand of God is apparently gone out against the Separatists; Epistle to
separate congregations.
you see you do but prepare persons for a further progress; Seekers, Ranters,
Quakers and too many professed Infidels, do spring up from among you, as if
this were the journeys end and perfection of your revolt. By such fearful
desertions did God formerly witness his detestation of those that withdrew from
the unity of the Church. And separation will ruin the separated Churches
themselves; Defense, p. 50.
it will admit of no consistency. Parties will arise in the separated Churches,
and separate again from them till they are dissolved. I beseech my Brethren to
open their eyes so far, as to regard experience. How few separated Churches do
now exist, that were in being an hundred years ago, can you name any? and would
you have all the Churches of Christ to be dissolved?

In the year 1634. Roger Williams of New England, Answ. to Exceptions p. 170.
an Assistant to Mr. Ralph Smith Pastor at Plymouth, where, having vented
diverse singular opinions, he was dismissed, went to Salem, which place in a
years time he filled with principles of rigid Separation, tending to
Anabaptistry, as, That it is not lawful for an unregenerate man to pray, or
take an Oath, in special not the Oath of fidelity to the Magistrate. He forbad
any of his Church Members to hear the godly Ministers of England when
occasionally they went thither. He taught that the Magistrate had nothing to do
in matters of the first Table; that there should be an unlimited toleration of
all Religions; that to punish any man for his Conscience was Persecution. He
separated not only from the Churches of Old, but of New England also, as
Antichristian. After that, he would not pray, or give thanks with his own wife
or family, because they went to the Church Assemblies. He kept private meetings
by way of separation from, and opposition to the Church-assembly; and being
banished as a disturber of the peace, he sat down at a place called
Providence, and there fell to Anabaptistry, renouncing Infant baptism. And
after a while he told his people, that he was out of the way himself, and had
misled them, for he could not find that any on earth had power to administer
baptism, and therefore their last baptism was a nullity as well as the first,
and that they must wait for the coming of new Apostles; and so they dissolved
and turned Seekers.

The case of the Summer Islands as related by Mr. Vaughan, a worthy Minister
come from thence upon discouragement, would make a Christian heart to bleed. To
hear how strict and regular, and hopeful that Plantation once was, and how one
godly Minister by Separation, selecting a few to be his Church, rejecting all
the rest from the Sacrament, the rejected party were dolefully estranged from
Religion, and the selected party turned Quakers. But our own case is yet a more
lamentable proof, what Separation has done against Religion; so that it is my
wonder that any good man can overlook it.

Above all things I entreat the dividing Brethren, Defense, p. 68.
if they can so long lay aside partiality, to judge of the reasons of their
separation. The defects of the Liturgy, and the faults of those by whom we
suffer, are easily heightened even beyond desert. But when many of us vent
untruths, and slanders against our Brethren, and multiply public untruths, we
never make scruple of communion with such. Suppose one should say, that a
people guilty of such sins, as are condemned, Exodus 23. 1, 2. Ps. 15. 3. Romans
1. 30, etc. (i. e. raising false reports, reproaching our neighbors, strife
and debates) should not be communicated with, especially when not one of these
offenders is called to repentance for it, what answer will you give to this
which will not confute your own objections against communion with many parish
Churches in this land?

As to Popery; Defense, p. 21.
The interest of the Protestant Religion must be much kept up, by the means of
the Parish Ministers, and by the doctrine and worship there performed; and they
that think and endeavor contrary to this, (of which side soever) shall have
the hearty thanks and concurrence of the Papists. p. 52.
Nor am I causelessly afraid, that if we suffer the principles and practices,
which I write against, to proceed without our contradiction, Popery will get by
it so great advantage as may hazard us all, and we may lose that which the
several parties do contend about.

Three ways especially Popery will grow out of our divisions, 1. By the odium
and scorn of our disagreements, inconsistency, and multiplied Sects, they will
persuade people, that we must either come for unity to them, or else all run
mad, and crumble into dust and individuals. Thousands have been drawn to
Popery, or confirmed in it, by this argument already: And I am persuaded, that
all the Arguments else in Bellarmine, and all other books that ever were
written, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the multitude of
Sects among our selves. Some Professors of Religious strictness and great
esteem for Godliness, having run from Sect to Sect, and finding no consistency
turned Papists themselves.

2. Who knows not how fair a game the Papists have to play by our divisions?
Methinks I hear them hissing on both parties, saying to one side, Lay more upon
them, and abate them nothing: And to the other, Stand it out, and yield to
nothing: hoping that our divisions will carry us to such practices, as shall
make us accounted seditious, rebellious, and dangerous to public peace, and so
they may pass for better subjects than we, or else, that they may get a
toleration together with us. And shall they use our hands to do their work? We
have already served them unspeakably, both in this, and in abating the odium of
the Gunpowder plot, and other Treasons.

3. It is not the least of our danger, lest by our follies, extremities and
rigors we so exasperate the common people, as to make them readier to join with
the Papists, than with us, in case of competitions, invasions or insurrections
against the King and kingdoms peace.

The Papists account, that if the Puritans get the day, Key for Cathol.
they shall make great advantage of it; for they will be unsettled, and all in
pieces, and not know how to settle the government. Factions and distractions
(say they) give us footing for continual attempts. To make all sure, we will
secretly have our party among Puritans also, that we may be sure to maintain
our interest.

Let the Magistrate cherish the disputations of the Teachers, Baxter's Holy
Commonwealth
and let him procure them often to debate together, and reprove one another;
for so, when all men see, that there is nothing certain among them, they will
easily yield, (says Contzen the Jesuit.)

Of Spiritual Pride.
Proud men will not grow in the same field, Epistle to Separate Congreg.
or Church, where tares do grow, but will transplant themselves, because God
will not pluck up the tares, especially if any ministerial neglect of
discipline be conjoined; and instead of blaming their own pride, lay the blame
on the corruptions of the Church. -- The Pharisees Liturgy is frequent in
separate Assemblies, God I thank thee, I am not as other men. But this is very
remarkable, that it is a pretense of our impurity, and a greater purity with
you that is pleaded by such as first turn over to you; and that this height of
all impieties should be the usual issue of a way, pretended so exact and clean,
doubtless it is not Gods mind, by this to discourage any from purity and true
reformation, but to show his detestation of that spiritual pride, which makes
men to have too high thoughts of themselves, and too much to contemn others,
and to desire to be further separated from them, than God in the day of grace
does allow of. Consider this, it is the judgment of some, that thousands are
gone to hell, and ten thousands on their march thither, that in all probability
had never come there, if they had not been tempted from the Parish Churches,
for enjoyment of communion in a purer Church.

He that causes differences of judgment and practice, Christian Direct. p. 733.
and contendings in the Church, does cause divisions, though none separate from
the Church. If you may not divide in the Church, nor from it, then you may not
causelessly divide from it your selves.

And commonly appearance, Cure of Divisions, p. 359.
advantage, interest, and a taking tone and voice do more with the most, than
solid evidence of truth. But they who desire to have a party follow them, and
are busy in persuading others to be of their mind, and speak perverse things,
etc. are guilty of Church divisions.

Do not you condemn a carnal state? Defense, p. 3.
Remember they are carnal, who are contentious dividers in the Churches, 1 Cor.
3. 1. You will disallow a fleshly mind and life; Remember then, that the works
of the flesh are these, As adultery, fornication, etc. so hatred, or enmity,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, Cure of Divis. p. 77.
seditions, (...), dividings into parties. -- When once parties are engaged by
their opinions in Anti-Churches, and fierce disputings, the flesh and Satan
will be working in them against all that is holy, sweet, and safe.

Of Superstition.
Do you not hate Superstition? p. 282.
Consider then, what superstition is; it is the making of any new parts of
Religion to our selves, and fathering them upon God. Of this there are two
sorts, positive, and negative. When we falsely say, This is a duty commanded by
God, or when we falsely say, This is a sin forbidden by God, take heed of both.
For instance, The Scripture tells us of no Church-Elders, p. 288.
but what were ordained, and of none but such as were of the same office with
the preaching Pastors or Elders, of none that had not authority to baptize and
administer the Lords Supper; nor does Church History tell us of any other, as a
divine office. But now we have concluded, that there is a distinct office of
Ruling Elders, who need not be ordained, and who have no power to baptize, or
to administer the Lords Supper. This I think is Superstition, for we feign God
to have made a Church-office which he never made. -- That it is simply unlawful
to use a form of prayer, 290.
or to read a prayer on a book; That if a Schoolmaster impose a form upon a
Scholar, or a Parent on a child, it makes it become unlawful; That our
presence makes us guilty of all the errors, or unmeet expressions of the
Minister, in public worship, at least if we before know of them, and therefore
that we must join with none, whose errors or mis-expression we know of before;
-- That we are guilty of the sins of all unworthy or scandalous Communicants,
if we communicate with them, though their admission is not by our fault; That
he whose judgment is against a Diocesan-Church may not lawfully join with a
Parish Church, if the Minister be but subject to the Diocesan; That whatsoever
is unlawfully commanded, is not lawful to be obeyed; That it is unlawful to do
any thing in the Worship of God, which is imposed by men, and is not commanded
in the Scripture: These and more such as these are Superstitions, which some
Religious people have brought in. p. 292.
And by all such inventions fathered upon God, and made a part of Religion, the
minds of men are corrupted, and disquieted, and the Churches disturbed and
divided.

Of Censoriousness.
Is not censoriousness and rash judging a sin? Preface to Cure of Divisions.
Yet one congregation of the division labors to make others odious and
contemptible, and that is called the preaching of truth and purer worshipping
of God. I have seen this grow up to the height of Ranters, in horrid
blasphemies; and then of Quakers, in disdainful pride and surliness, and into
Seekers, that were to seek for a Ministry, a Church, a Scripture, and
consequently a Christ. I have lived to see it put to the Question (in the
little Parliament) whether all the Ministers of the Parishes of England should
be put down at once. I have seen how confidently the killing of the King, the
rebellious demolishing of the Government of the Land, the killing of many
thousands of their Brethren, the turnings and overturnings of all kind of rule,
even that which themselves set up, have been committed, and justified, and
profanely fathered upon God; these with much more such fruits of love-killing
principles I have seen.

If you converse with censorious Separatists, Cure. p. 152.
you shall hear so many invectives against them that are truly Catholic and
sober, as will make you think, that love and peace and Catholic communion are
some sinful and mischievous things.

The experience of 26. Years in this Kingdom may convince the World, p. 24.
what crimes may stand with high professions; such as the generation springing
up will scarce believe. What high Professors were the proudest overturners of
all Government, and resisters and despisers of Ministry and holy order in the
Churches? The most railing Quakers, and most filthy blaspheming Ranters, to
warn the World to take heed of being proud of superficial gifts, and high
profession, and that he that stands in his own conceit should take heed lest he
fall.

I have much ado to forbear naming some high Professors known lately at
Worcester, p. 268.
Exeter, and other places, who dyed Apostate-Infidels, deriding Christianity,
and the Immortality of the Soul, who once were Separatists. And I have heard of
some Separatists, p. 188.
who when others of a contrary judgment were going to the Churches at London,
looked in at the Doors, saying, The Devil choke thee, art thou not out of thy
pottage yet?

I commend to all that of the Apostle, p. 22.
Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife and vain glory, but in
bowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves. Read this
Verse over on your Knees, and beg of God to write it on your Hearts. And I
would wish all Assemblies of dividers and unwarrantable Separtists, to write it
over the Doors of their Meeting-places, and join with it Romans 12. 10. but
especially study James 3. In a word, if God would cure the Church of religious
pride, the pride of wisdom, and the pride of piety and goodness, the Church
would have fewer heresies and contentions, and much more peace, true wisdom
and goodness.

The forwardness of many to keep open divisions, Preface to Confess.
and to affect communion with none, but such as say as they do, is a downright
mark of a Schismatic. And I know that dividing principles and dispositions do
tend directly to the ruin and damnation of those in whom they do prevail.

When Men fall into several Parties, Christian Director. p. 734.
burning in zeal against each other, abating charity, censuring and condemning
one another, backbiting and reviling each other, through envy and strife; when
they look strangely on each other, as being of several sides, as if they were
not children of the same Father, nor members of the same Body, or as if Christ
were divided, one being of Paul, and another of Apollo, etc. and every one of a
Faction, letting out their thoughts in jealousies and evil surmises of each
other, perverting the words and actions of each to an ugly sense; and snatching
occasions to present one another as fools, or odious to the hearers (as if you
should plainly say, I pray you hate, or despise these People, whom I hate and
despise:) This is the core of the Plague sore, it is schism in the bud. S. 16.
When People in the same Church do gather into private Meetings, not under the
guidance of their Pastors, to edify one another in holy exercises, in love and
peace, but in opposition to their lawful Pastors, or to one another, to
propagate their single opinions, and increase their Parties, and speak against
those that are not on their side, Schism is then ready to increase and
multiply, and the Swarm is ready to come forth, and be gone. S. 17. When these
People actually depart, and renounce or forsake the communion of the Church,
and cast off their faithful Pastors, and draw into a separated Body by
themselves, and choose them Pastors, and call themselves a Church, and all
without any just, sufficient cause; when thus Churches are gathered out of
Churches, before the old ones are dissolved, or they have any warrant to
depart; when thus Pastor is set up against Pastor, Church against Church, and
Altar against Altar, this is Schism ripe and fruitful, the Swarm is gone and
hived in another place. S. 19. If they shall also judge that Church to be no
Church from which they separated, and so cut off a part of the body of Christ
by an unrighteous censure, and condemn the innocent, and usurp authority over
their guides; this is disobedience and uncharitableness, with schism. A true
Christian that hates Fornication, Drunkenness, Lying, Perjury, because
forbidden in the Word of God, will hate Divisions also, which are so frequently
and vehemently forbidden, Jo. 17. 21, 22. To. 14. throughout. To. 15. 12. 1
Cor. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, etc. 1 Cor. 12. Phil. 3. 15. To. 16. 17, 18. 1 Timothy
1. 4. James 3. The mischief of Divisions may be seen at large, p. 739.

Q. May, Christian Direct. p. 854.
or must a Minister, silenced, or forbid to preach the Gospel, go on still to
preach it against the Law? Answ. He that is silenced by just power, though
unjustly, in a Country, that needs not his preaching, must forbear there, and
if he can, must go into another Country, where he may be more serviceable. We
must do any lawful thing to procure the Magistrates license to preach in his
Dominions.

How Humane Laws bind the Conscience.
Q. Whether the Laws of men do bind the Conscience? p. 36. part the 4th.
Answ. p. 37. Taking conscience in a stricter sense, as including essentially,
a relation to God's obligation, the full sense of the question is this, Whether
it be a sin against God to break the laws of man? Answ. It is a sin against God
to break such Laws, as Rulers are authorized by God to make: First, because God
commands us to obey our Rulers. God commands us to obey in general, and
their Law determines of the particular matter, therefore God obliges us (in
conscience of his Law) to obey them in that particular. 2. Because by making
them his Officers, by his commission, he has given them a certain beam of
authority, which is Divine, as derived from God; therefore they can command us
by a power derived from God: therefore to disobey is to sin against a power
derived from God. Man being God's officer, first his own Law lays on us an
obligation on derivatively Divine, (for it is no Law, which has no obligation,
and it is no authoritative obligation, which is not derived from God.) 2. God's
own Law binds us to obey Man's Laws, Romans 13.

And it may be a good reason to persuade obedience to our Ecclesiastical
Governors, (...)
because Preaching is a cheap and easy work, in comparison of
Church Government.

Take heed of engaging your selves in a Sect, Christ. Direct. part 4th. p. 73.
or Faction; a narrow Sectarian separating mind will make all the truths of God
give place to the opinions of his Party, and measure the prosperity of the
Gospel, by the prosperity of his Party; he will not stick to persecute all the
rest of the Church of Christ, if the interest of his Sect require it. Overvalue
not any private or singular opinions of your own, or others; for, if once
spiritual pride and ignorance of your own weakness make you espouse particular
opinions, as peculiarly your own, you will think your conceits more
illuminating and necessary, than they are, as if Men's sincerity lay in the
embracing of them, and their Salvation on the receiving of them; and think all
that are against your opinion, deserve to be cast out as enemies to
Reformation; and perhaps, Twenty Years after, experience may bring you to your
wits, and make you see the falsehood, or smalness of all those points, which you
made so great a matter of, and then what comfort will you have of your
persecutions?

O the deceitfulness of the heart of man! Cure of Divisions, p. 254.
Little do the many real Separatists, who cry out against Persecution, suspect,
that the same spirit is in them. Whence is Persecution, but from thinking ill
of others, and abhorring or not loving them? and do not you do so by those whom
you causlesly separate from? It is one and the same sin in the Persecutor and
Divider, 261.
or Separatist, which causes the one to smite their Brethren, and the other to
excommunicate them; the one to cast them into Prison as Schismatics, and the
other to cast them out of the Church as profane; the one to account them
intolerable in the Land, and the other to account them intolerable in the
Church: the inward thoughts of both are the same, that those whom they smite or
separate from, are bad and unlovely, and unfit for better usage.

But I have observed that Professors of Religion did oppose and deride almost
all that worship of God out of (pretended) conscience, which others did out of
profaness. Saints Rest, part 1. c. 7. Sect. 14.

It was none of the old cause, H. Commonwealth: Addit. to Pref. Prop.
that the People should have liberty, and the Magistrate should have no power,
in all matters of God's worship, faith and conscience: And as it is not the old
cause, so it is not the good cause. For first, it contradicts the express
revelation of the will of God in the Holy Scripture. Moses, as a Magistrate,
had to do in matters of Religion, and so had the Kings of Israel, and Judah. --
Law, and providence, are both quite changed, if toleration of false worship,
and other abuses of Religion tend not to the ruin of the Commonwealth. If
Magistrates must give liberty for all to propagate a false religion, then so
must Parents and Masters also, which would be a crime so horrid in the nature
and effects of it, as I am loath to name with its proper titles.

The Magistrates will quickly find that the distractions of the Church will
breed and feed such distractions in the Commonwealth, Of confir. p. 309.
as may make them wish they had quenched the fire, while it was yet quenchable.
-- Our unity is not only our strength, but their strength; and the fire that
begun in the Church, may, if let alone, reach the Court.

Page 423. of his 5. Disputations, he lays down this as the sum of what he had
said, That Man may determine of modes and circumstances of Worship, necessary
and commanded in genere, but not determined by God in specie, Sect. 65. and
then infers, Sect. 67. If the mischoosing of such circumstances by
Church-governors be but an inconvenience, and do not destroy the Ordinance it
self, or frustrate the ends of it, we are to obey. 1. For he is the Judge in
his own work, and not we. 2. The thing is not sinful though inconvenient. 3.
Obedience is commanded to our lawful Governors. Sect. 70. And when we do obey
in a case of miscommanding, it is not a doing evil that good may come of it, as
some do misconceive; but it is only a submitting to that which is
ill-commanded, but not evil in him that does submit. It is the determiner that
is the cause of the inconvenience, and not the obeyer. Nor is it inconvenient
for me to obey, though it be worse perhaps to him that commands: while he
sins in commanding, he may make it my duty to obey, p. 461. Sect. 6. The
reasons of this are obvious and clear, even because it is the office of the
Governors to determine of such circumstances: It is the Pastor's office to
guide and over-see the Flock, and when he determines these, he is but in his
own way, and does but his own work; and therefore he is therein the Judge, if
the case be controvertible. If none shall obey a Magistrate or Pastor in the
works of their own office, as long as they think he did them not the best way,
all Governors then would be presently overthrown, and obedience denied. We are
sure that God has commanded us to obey them that are ever us in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Hebr. 13. 7. 17, etc. And therefore a certain duty may not be
forborne on uncertain conjectures, or upon every miscarriage of them that we owe
it to. This would un-church all Churches (as they are Political Societies:) for
if Pastors be taken down, and the work of Pastors, the Church is taken down. S.
7. And the things in which the Pastor is now supposed to err, are not of
themselves unlawful, but only by such an accident as being overweighed by
another accident shall cease to make them unlawful. For instance, p. 461. Sect.
4. If of two Translations of Scripture or two Versions of the Psalms the Pastor
use the worser, (so it be tolerable) we must obey. And Sect. 7. If the Pastor
appoint a more imperfect Version of the Psalms to be sung in the Church (as is
commonly used in England) the obeying of him in the use of this will not bring
so much hurt to the Church, as the disobeying on that account would do. For
besides the sin of disobedience it self, the Church would be in a confusion if
they forsake his conduct that preserves the union; and some will be for this
and some for that, and so the Worship it self will be overthrown. And let it
still be remembered, that we allow both Magistrates and Pastors to see to the
execution of God's Laws, and to determine of circumstances in order thereto
that are necessary in genere, p. 482. Sect. 35. but not determined of God in
specie, p. 422.. 65. It may be very sinful to command some ceremonies which may
lawfully, yea must in duty be used by the subject when they are commanded, p.
398. Certain things commonly called ceremonies may lawfully be used in the
Church upon humane imposition, and when it is not against the Law of God; no
person should disobey the Laws of their lawful Governors in such things.

If there should be any Pastors of the Churches who instead of concurring Cure
of Divisions, p. 253.
to heal the flock of these dividing principles, shall rather join with
backbiters and encourage them in their misreports and slanders, because it
tends to the supposed interest of their party or themselves; Let them prepare
to Answer such unfaithfulness to their Consciences, which will be shortly
awakened; And to the great Shepherd of the flock, who is at the door, and who
told even the Devils Agents that, A house or kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand, but is brought to naught.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have proposed such Arguments for Conformity as I occasionally met with in
such books of Mr. Baxter's as came to my hands. If I had consulted others, I
doubt not but I might have found many more as cogent as these: but these being
satisfactory and of eternal verity, I humbly desire Mr. Baxter and others of
his persuasion to consider them, nor can I doubt but Mr. Baxter will charitably
accept of these my endeavors for peace, upon his own weighty arguments; and
the rather because I believe him by his writings to be a man of a great
experience in the temper of the people, of a quick and discerning judgment,
that can look through causes into the consequences and effects that will
naturally result from them, and moreover a person of so great sincerity that he
will by no means stray from, but readily defend his own principles, which are
sound and pacificatory. And seeing he has done as St. Paul did, (of whom
Tertullian notes he did persuade to peace, totis spiritus sancti viribus) I
believe he is one that longs to see the healing of our Churches, and that
tendered his Arguments to all sorts, charging them to do so much as appears to
be necessary, as they are true to Christ, to his Church and Gospel, to their
own and others Souls, and to the peace and welfare of the nations; And as they
will Answer the neglect to Christ at their peril. (In the Title of a Treatise
of Confirmation.) And in his Answer to Dr. Tully (title page) A Compassionate
Lamenter of the Churches wounds caused by hasty judging and undigested
conceptions, and by the Theological wars which are hereby raised, and managed,
by persuading the world that mere verbal, or notional differences are material,
and such as our love, concord and communion must be measured by, for want of an
equal discussion of the Ambiguity of words. One who (in the Epistle to the
Reader for Confirmation) exhorts to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, (because)
they shall prosper that love it, and to seek it of God and man, which was his
own daily though too defective practice, as a servant of the King of peace: To
him and all others as such I propose the following concessions, and the
conclusions inferred from them.

In his Christian Directory, p. 854.

1. He that is silenced by just power though unjustly (in a Country that
needs not his preaching) must forbear there. And p. 560. of the Saints Rest,
he tells us as to his particular, If God would dispense with me for my
ministerial services without any loss to his people, I should leap as lightly
as Bishop Ridley when he was stripped of his Pontificalia; and say as Paedaretus
the Laconian when he was not chosen into the number of the three hundred men, I
thank thee O God that thou have bestowed on this City so many men better than
my self.

2. That it is lawful to hold communion with our Churches having but tolerable
Pastors, notwithstanding the Parochial Order, and the Ministers conformity and
use of the Common Prayer book; And that we ought to do so when some special
reasons (as from Authority, scandal, etc.) do require it. Second Admonition to
Bagshaw, p. 78.

3. That when men are carried to separate on such (pretended) grounds, they
will be no where fixed, but may still be subdividing and separating from one
another till they are resolved into Individuals, and have left no such thing as
a Church among them, p. 486. Of the five disputations: and p. 487. By
disobedience in lawful things, the members of the Church will be involved in
Contentions, and so engaged in bitter uncharitableness, censures, persecutions,
and reproaches of one another.

4. Though Ministerial conformity is now much altered (as to engagements) many
of the Assembly of Divines yet living do conform again, nor would I shun
communion with the reverend Members of that Assembly, Twiss, Gataker, Whitaker,
and the rest, if again they used the Liturgy among us. And if the old
Non-Conformists, such as Bolton, etc. were alive, and used now the same Liturgy
and Ceremonies as they did then (which was worse than now) I could not think
their Communion in prayer and Sacraments unlawful, nor censure that man as
injurious to the Church who should write to persuade others not to separate
from them. Defense of principles of Love, p. 12, 13. And Mr. Baxter's practice
in receiving the Sacrament confirms the same.

5. If any Pastor instead of concurring to heal the flocks of dividing
principles shall rather join with backbiters and encourage them in their
misreports and slanders, because it tends to the supposed interest of their
party or themselves, let them prepare to Answer such unfaithfulness to their
Consciences which will be shortly awakened; and to the great Shepherd of the
flock who is at the door, and who told even the Devils Agents that a house or
kingdom divided cannot stand, etc. p. 253. H. C.

6. The Magistrate will quickly find that the distractions of the Church will
quickly breed and feed such distractions in the Commonwealth, as may make them
wish they had quenched the fire while it was yet quenchable. Our unity is not
only our strength but their strength, and the fire that begun in the Church,
may, if let alone, reach the Court. Of Confirmation, p. 309.

Now from these premises I suppose the conclusions following may be truly
inferred, a Conformity to which would be a great means to destroy Nonconformity
to the Church and public Worship, both in Ministers and people.

1. Those that are silenced by a just power (or rather have silenced themselves
and uncharitably deserted the established Worship of God) ought not to gather
congregations in place and manner distinct from the public Worship. By the
first proposition.

2. Communion with our Parish Churches being lawful, and the peoples duty by
the second proposition, They who by such dividing practices as tend to
undermine and deprave the reputation, and dissolve the very constitution of the
Parochial Worship, and to encourage and harden known Schismatics in their
separation, (for if the like should be generally practiced through the nation,
it would inevitably scandalize the established Ministry, alienate the
affections of their people, and renew divisions among them) do act very
irregularly and unlawfully.

3. Such practices do unfix the people and cause them to run into divisions and
subdivisions, reproaches and persecutions of one another, proposition 3. And
who knows into what confusions such practices may carry us?

4. Ministerial conformity being submitted to by many of the Assembly of
Divines, and no sinful act required to make it unlawful (which if there had
been, they or some others would and ought to have discovered it, and then I
doubt not it would by Authority have been taken away, but that being not done)
the Ministers ought to conform by the same rules as the people ought, which is
granted by proposition 4. and confirmed by Mr. Baxters practice in receiving
the Sacrament, etc. Such Pastors as instead of concurring to heal the flock of
dividing principles, do rather join with backbiters and encourage them in their
misreports and slanders, because it tends to the supposed interest of their
party or themselves, cannot Answer it to their Conscience nor to the great
Shepherd of the flock. Propos. 5.

5. If such Minister or people do continue the distractions of the Church, it
is the Magistrates duty and interest speedily to quench the fire which they are
kindling, or if may ruin both Church and State. By Propos. 6.

And let Ministers see that no Seducers creep in among the people, or it they
do, be diligent to countermine them and preserve their people from the
insection of heresies and schisms. Saints Rest. p. 543.

6. Let such men consider, whether any sober, rational or good men, that have
loved and followed them, can heartily respect them, or make them their
spiritual Guides, when it appears that they do ordinarily and considerately act
and practice contrary to their own irrefragable arguments, protestations and
persuasions.

And lastly, if such Ministers cannot fully conform themselves (which would be
an acceptable service to God and the Church, (they having opportunities* and
advantages to add many thousands to the public Assemblies and to confirm
others that are wavering through their examples) yet that they would conform in
what they may, and continue to teach by example as well as precept what may
help to repair our breaches, lest we be exposed again to a common ruin and
confusion.

And now methinks that Summons which troubled Quintilius Varus, should always
run in the minds of such men: Quintili Vare, read Legiones: you that have
intruded upon the cure of Souls committed to others, restore those Legions
which are withdrawn from Christ's fold, and remember, (what Mr. Baxter says as
to his own reputation, in a Preface to Mr. Caryl) Non remittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum.

Calvin's Epistle before the Geneva Catechism: Ubi ad summum illud tribunal
ventum fuerit, etc. When we shall come to that great tribunal where we are to
render an account of our Ministry, there shall be no question concerning
Ceremonies, neither shall this conformity in outward things be brought to
examination, but the lawful use of our liberty, and that shall be adjudged
lawful that conduces most to edification.

FINIS.

